W400 12246455 56954
OF EDUCATION. Especially of Young Gentlemen. IN TWO PARTS. The Second impression with additions. OXON. At the THEATER Ann. 1673.
THE PREFACE. IT is not the design of this Discourse to intrench up∣on any knowledg already disposed, and appropria∣ted into Arts and Sciences, as they are at this time delivered; but on∣ly to propose such things to consi∣deration and use, as, lying scatter∣ed and in common, are less culti∣vated and regarded. For this rea∣son 'tis in vain to expect accurate∣ness of method or stile; but the first part is almost wholly writ in manner of Essaies, the second of Aphorismes: the stiles most free, loose, and unscientifical.
The most useful knowledg is that, of a mans self: and this de∣pends upon that more universal consideration of, Quid homo potest; naturally, and artificially: i. e. what abilities are in us originally, by the gift of God; and what attain∣able by our own industry. And both these in order to Knowledg or Action. To advance this disco∣very, it is hoped that these papers may contribute some hints and steps; whereby others may pro∣ceed to perfect the whole building. Which who shall effect, or but considerably promote, shall perform a service as acceptable, as benefi∣cial, to Mankind. The perfecting of a young Man in Sciences and speculative Learning is the business of so many Books and Persons; that it seems superfluous to engage in that part of Instruction. It was therefore thought more use∣ful to furnish some rules and prin∣ciples
of Active life; as being that, whereto Gentlemen seem more dis∣posed both by their births, and ge∣neral inclinations; and whereto al∣so little assistance could be expected from our ordinary speculations. I have therefore rather chused to ga∣ther up disorderly, and bind toge∣ther, such scattered counsels and no∣tions, as have occurred either in ob∣servation, or in some Italian Wri∣ters, not ordinary amongst us. If any person shall hereby be any whit forwarded toward the attaining the great end of his Creation; 'tis all that is here aimed at. Almighty God give success according to the riches of his goodness. Amen.
A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS. IN THE FIRST PART. CHAP. I. Necessary to Learn∣ing. 1. Capacity. 2. Instru∣ction. 3. Practise. The two last of which are comprehended in Education. Pag. 1. CHAP. II. Of the Duty of Parents in educating their Children. p. 13. CHAP. III. Of the Educator. p. 25. CHAP. IV. Of the Educated. p. 29. CHAP. V. General directions to the Educator. p. 35. CHAP. VI. Of ordering the di∣spositions and manners of the Edu∣cated. p. 47.
CHAP. VII. Of frugality, or order∣ing his mony, and expences. p. 61. CHAP. VIII. Of the preservation of his health. p. 66. CHAP. IX. Of the divers passions, inclinations, and dispositions of Man, and the waies to rectifie and order them. p. 71. CHAP. X. Of parts or capacities in general, and of their diversity, and how to be ordered and recti∣fied. p. 98. CHAP. XI. Of Invention, Me∣mory, and Judgment; and how to help, better, and direct them. p. 124. CHAP. XII. Breif Directions for Elocution. p. 163. CHAP. XIII. Of bettering the Judgment. p. 174. CHAP. XIV. Of travelling into forreign Countries. p. 193. CHAP. XV. Of prudent chusing a calling, or state of life. 200.
PART. II. CHAP. I. Of Civility. Pag. 210. CHAP. II. Of Prudence. p. 232. CHAP. III. Of Prudence in con∣versation, and discourse. p. 244. CHAP. IV. Concerning Business. p. 259. CHAP. V. Of Servants. p. 273. CHAP. VI. Of giving, receiving, and promising. p. 277. CHAP. VII. Of Prudence in ac∣quiring emploiment, and prefer∣ment. p. 281.
OF EDUCATION. CHAP. I. Necessary to Learning. 1. Capacity. 2. Instruction. 3. Practice. The two last of which are comprehended in Education. 1. THAT a man may attain perfecti∣on in any Art, Science, or Virtue, three things are requisite. 1. A natural ability, power, or capa∣city. 2. Art, or instruction. 3. Exercise and practise. Capacity consists 1. in Fancy or Inventi∣on. 2. Memory. And 3. Judgment, of which we shall speak at large hereafter. And these in several per∣sons are very different. For granting, what some Philosophers say, that they are originally equal in all men, as being the soul it self; yet in reality, because every soul comes into a body endued with various dispositions; and the Organs, which the soul em∣ployeth, and are as necessary to the producing its operations as the soul it self, are not in all equally well-disposed, there ariseth great variety of capa∣cities, and abilities: God Almighty distributing these his Gifts of Nature to every one in what mea∣sure himself thinks fittest.
2. I know there are, who accuse the divine Providence, as more niggardly or sparing towards men, then other Animals; which without teach∣ing, know not onely what is sufficient for their subsistence, but some things also, which men learn by long imitation: As, to go, to swim, to express their passions and thoughts. Yea and some manual arts, which are in us the effects of Education, are in beasts the actions of sense, or instinct. But truely this complaint is without reason. For if we think Impotency to be an advantage, and those creatures to be in the best condition who have least to do; it is true that beasts are happier than men, and vegetables than Animals. But if every thing be made for action, and the more able it is to work, the more noble; if plus posse follows & argues nobilius & perfectius esse; then is our condition infinitely the better; as not only having more, but more various, more sublime, and more difficult Operations. It is ne∣cessary for beasts to be born with haire, feathers, scales, or shels, because they had not the ingeny to make themselves garments; which, to their very great convenience, they might alter according to the seasons: nor had they the knowledge of creating fire, building houses, and the like. Nature furnished them with beaks, claws, and horns, because they could never arrive to find out a stone, to be melted and framed into all sorts of instruments and utensils. Their knowledge ariseth no higher then of what is pleasant or painful; they apprehend not conveni∣ent, or inconvenient; just, or unjust; happy, or mise∣rable. God, as a Master of a family, gives the ser∣vants their set salary, and employs them; but his Children he educates and instructs to command and dispose, not their own onely, but even the faculties of all the other: therefore were beasts to live by
Nature, but man by Art. Beasts were to be perfect at first that they might be presently employed, man by habits of his own acqui∣ring. For beasts, besides their sustentation in this present life, were to expect no other recom∣pense; but man by his labour was to merit, and by wel-employing his abilities to inherit a reward, and that eternal. He made indeed no creature, which he endowed not with sufficient a∣bilities for the uses of their Creation: and most also with a power to better and advance them by assiduous practice; but the end of all inferior Crea∣tures was comprehended in their actions of life, for the conserving, and propagating that: But man he created capable of a supernatural employment; of a life to be continued infinitely beyond and above this small moment; and of operations sub∣limer then providing for the belly. And therefore he adorned him with faculties accordingly; an ability to discern betwixt good and bad, virtue and vice; reflection upon his own actions; an understand∣ing capable to know and comprehend the whole World; and more then that also, to be present to all past, and future, as well as present things; to mul∣tiply a small inconsiderable proposition to infinity; and to know him who exceedeth all knowledg. 3. NOR are these faculties even in infants (tho imperfect) altogether obscure. For as soon as they have strength (with which beasts are born) they do more then beasts; they exert greater testimonies of Natures bounty, framing in themselves human actions, whereas beasts work only according to their own kind. For even the nobler faculties shew themselves be∣times; Fancy in imitation of others; Memory in re∣taining
what is imitated; and Judgment in select∣ing certain actions, and parts of actions for their imitation, which are the principles and manner of all learning. I deny not, but sometimes there is such an impotency, or defect in the Organs (which also I doubt not most frequently, if not alwaies, to be a disease, and often curable by a discreet Physician) as renders the subjects, according to the degrees of the indisposition, unfit or uncapable of any Instruction; and that all labour bestowed upon them is lost: or at least so unapt are they, as it is not tanti to employ so much industry as is requisite to render them, indifferently, like other men. Neither is this exact difference of capacities alwaies (in childhood especially) so easily discern∣ed, as it may be with conversation and tryal. Let the Educator therefore think himself to be but as a Midwife, who cannot bring forth a child, where there is none; but where there is, can assist the birth, though the mother be sickly, and the child infirm. And as it is loss of labour to sow where there is no soil; and as where the parts are mea∣ner, the greater measure of cultivating by Instru∣ction and practice is requisite; by which even mean parts may be bettered: So where there is a greater measure of parts, less institution and exercise will advance in them a greater harvest, and great industry will raise them to admiration. Of these se∣veral degrees, it is diligently to be considered, that some have a bare capacity, sufficient to be instru∣cted, moving only as they are drawn; who, like Bottles, render no more then is just put into them. Others have a great inclination to knowledg, run∣ning, when once set in the way, either to any, or some one science in particular; and having the grounds and principles given, they are able to
raise Conclusions, gather Corollaries; and having the foundation laid, build up the rest themselves. Others (though few) are as automata, , their own Masters; and have a genius, or some∣what extraordinary, to assist them. Which who so have, and withal a probity of affection, and willingnes to take pains, they seem set out by God himself richly fraught for his glory, and the good of Mankind. It is also to be observed, that, where there is a great indisposition to one study, (as many times there is, some being by nature more inventive, others more retentive; some very a∣ctive, others slow, &c.) it is seldome worth the labour to strive to introduce the contrary to such inclination. Amended and bettered such persons may be, but totally cured they rarely are; and in their own way they may prosper excellently with less pains. I speak not here of inclination to virtue or vice; for there is no man so disposed, but he may be virtuous if he please, as shall be shewed hereafter. This of Capacities. 4. BUT the best Capacity, without Instruction by precepts and examples, to which are subser∣vient exhortations, admonitions, threatnings, cor∣rections, &c. is ready to spend it self upon low, mean, and many times vicious employments: as the best ground, except tilled and sowed with profitable seed, produceth only ranker weeds. Satis norunt prudentes (saith Pasch. in vitâ Py∣brach) virtutis & vitiorum semina cum nascendi origine copulata, vi educationis, in alteram partem necessario emicare: adeo ut bonum esse, non à na∣tura datum, sed arte sit quaesitum; ac proinde bene institui sit efficacius, quam feliciter nasci. His mean∣ing is; That parts are indifferent of themselves to
produce good or evil; and great parts (as The∣mistocles was told by his Master, fili, tu nihil me∣diocre eris, sed vel magnum patriae lumen, vel magna pestis) are fitted for great, whether good or bad, un∣dertakings; great errors and wickednesses proceed∣ing only from great Wits. Education and Disci∣pline form our manners; and that only every one knows which he is taught. The faculties of the soul can work of themselves; but as not except upon an external object; so neither to the utmost of their power, without imitation; nor in the best, i. e. the right and true manner, but by instruction. We are born with hands, feet, and tongue; and have by nature power to write, dance, and speak; yet none of these can we do, except assisted, su∣stained, and formed by either those, whom we see so to employ the same members; or by those by whom we are, as soon as strength permits, taught and moulded into such habits. So all men are born with reason, but have not the use of it at first. And when we begin to serve our selves of it, it is so weakly, that we are easily overcome by sense, which till then hath guided us. And, if at this dangerous conjuncture we be not assisted, 'tis much to be feared our reason will be but of small use to us: especially since we find great store of tracks and encouragements in the broad way of pleasure; and therefore shall be unwilling to leave it for the narrow, rough, and unbeaten routtes of Industry and labour. It is true, that persons of very great parts can, out of their own observation, (for so all Sci∣ences at first began) or when they arrive at years of discretion by the help of books, (that is, other mens experience) advance without a Teacher to a considerable perfection. As Lucullus is said to have come into Asia an excellent General, who de∣parted
from Rome an unexperienced Soldier. The same is also storied of the Lord Deputy Montjoy. Though, to confess the truth, these instances are not very rare: for (which seems strangely absurd) there is no Art, to obtain which less diligence is used, then this of Soldiership, though of the great∣est consequence. But we had lately a person, who without any experience in Navigation, by reading and study, at the very first essay of his Art, hap∣pily and discreetly commanded a Ship to the East-Indies. Some commend only practice: Others think reading sufficient; both to blame: joyned together they do best. Reading advanceth more, and sooner then practise alone. A Reader is more universal, better for many things; more accurate and observant in his practise: A Practisers know∣ledge is in a shorter compass, in ordinary cases, and is longer before it come to perfection. Reading is other mens experience, which by meditation and practise becomes our own; but it makes us some∣what too exact, and to expect all things should fall out according to our Imaginations; whereas the World in fancy is much different from that in reality; not clothed with those particularities, and circumstances, which are either parts of, or inseparable from it. Though reading however be good, yet 'tis best with those who have already had an Instructer; who can apply his precepts and advices to all accidents, supply defects, answer all doubts, retrench excesses, inculcate what is neglected, call to mind what is forgotten, and set his charge in the straightest and nearest way. 5. YET both Capacity and Instruction are effect∣les without practise and exercise; which con∣sists (according to the nature of the thing to be
learned) in Meditation, thinking, or contriving; observing others practises; and actually trying and working. Precepts serve very well for a guide; but advance not the guided, except himself fol∣low them; they facilitate the beginning and pro∣gress, but the person himself must set to his own endeavour, if ever he intends to attain perfection. Never have I seen parts, how great soever, with∣out industry and study to produce any good; much evil indeed I have known proceed from thence. Such persons may prove sometimes plausible discoursers, and of an agreable conversation in ordinary companies for a time, till their Stock be spent: but it is industry and exercise, that renders a man knowing and solid; that makes him not fear to be asked a question in what he professeth. And if industry be necessary to great, much more to mean parts; which it bettereth and advanceth to per∣fection and honour. And since to have great na∣tural parts is not in our power, but we must be con∣tented with those which God hath given us; we must set our rest upon our labour and industry, for correcting our bad, bettering our indifferent, and perfecting our good inclinations. And of this (the use and profit we make of our talents) must we give a severe account. Nothing changeth Nature, but another Nature, Custome; not force, not re∣ward, not passion. Our thoughts are according to our inclinations, our discours and speeches according to what we have learned, but our Actions accord∣ing to what we have bin accustomed. How of∣ten do we see men promise, vow, engage, yea and resolve to change v. g. an ill habit, and yet continue to do as they did before? How many see we daily who began well, and, as long as they took pains, profited exceedingly; but when tru∣sting
to the goodness of their parts, and that small stock of knowledge laid in before, not im∣proving it further, but giving themselves liberty of mirth and pleasure, have not only not profited, but bankerupted also, and lost their principal? Be∣sides, industry and exercise of themselves render us thinking, vigilant, attentive, provident for all cases, and accidents; lay up a treasury against all events; prevent surprizes; and make us famili∣ar, and ready to all that may happen. But by idleness, and pleasures, the spirit is relaxed, the understanding unbended, the fancy over-grown with rust and rubbish, and the memory perished. 6. THESE two last (Instruction, and Practise) are comprehended in Education. There is but one way and manner of learning, be the subject what ever it will. In manual Arts the Master first shew∣eth his Apprentice what he is to do; next works it himself in his presence, and gives him rules, and then sets him to work. The same is the way of breeding a Gentleman, or a Scholar. The Educator prescribeth his end; gives him rules and precepts; presents him examples and patterns; and then sets him to act according to what was before taught him. And if the Educated apply himself seriously to meditate, contrive, observe his copy, and be content to be admonished and corrected when faulty, he will, no doubt, arrive to the intended perfection; which is to perform his duty with ease, readiness, and delight; i. e. to advance his Art into another Nature. For in this Art equals Nature, that is, as she, works without deliberation, and is indisposed to the contrary; as a good Musicians hand consulteth not what string to touch, but runs to it as readily, as Nature doth to the proper
muscle, when she would move a finger. Only in this they differ, that Nature God hath given us, Art is of our own acquisition; Nature is perfect at the first moment, Art is not obtained without study and industry. And the earlier we begin, the better it is. For should we suffer young-men, as they say of Hercules, to chuse virtue or vice, labour or pleasure, when they come to years of Discretion; and in the interim let them spend their youth in the vanities, and follies, that age suggests to them; is not this that wherein the Devil tempted our first Parents, presenting them the excellency of the knowledge of good and evil? whereas it had bin much better to have known good only, and left evil to have been understood by the examples of such, as would not consider. But into what hazzards are these uninstructed persons cast, should it please God to cut them of in their youth? Is it not, as if they said; let them habituate them∣selves in vanity, idlenes and folly, that they may afterwards judg better of virtue, i. e. of that whereof they have no experience? How can they chuse good, since they know not what it is? and every one must follow and embrace what he knows. Shall we let them first vent their malice? but by practise it increaseth: let them defer their choice till they may make it with Discretion? but without teaching they will never come to Discre∣tion. For every habit, especially when accord∣ing to a natural inclination (as these are by rea∣son of the remainder of that evil, left in us for our exercise) hurries them violently, and at length irresistably also. At best; suppose a child should escape accidentally, i. e. by the care of parents, or his own naturally good disposition, this rock; yet those, who start late, are so far
behind, that when they should be ready for employ∣ment, they are learning the principles of it, and are surpriz'd and at a gaze where to begin. The great inclination of Youth is to pleasures; and that, ei∣ther to idlenes and sleep; whence proceed incon∣sideration, carelesnes, hatred of labour and think∣ing; or else to eating, drinking, or the other lusts of the flesh. And all these, indulged and accu∣stomed, grow stronger, and at last inextirpable. For they end in habitual sin, darknes of un∣derstanding, and extinguishing the light both of Gods spirit, and reason. Virtutem (saith Pasc. vit. Pibr.) nisi in primaeva germina, dum tenera sint & mollia, instilletur, frustra in adultis requi∣ras. The reason why we see so many old men fools, is because we see so many young men un∣learned. Those, who are employed in Missions for converting Nations to Christianity, find little fruit in treating with ancient men. It is also ne∣cessary to get an habitude of virtue and know∣ledg in Youth, that in that Age, when our un∣derstanding fails us, wee may do nothing unbe∣seeming us. But the force of Education is seen in nothing more, then that whole Nations, from age to age, continue in the very same customes and manners: and to change these, especially to the better, is a difficulty even beyond imagina∣tion. Those, who are brought up in Wars, are active, restles, violent, ungovernable but by force; brought up in peace, lazy, unexperien∣ced; in trade, subtil, interessed, covetous; amongst poor men, mean-spirited; amongst idle persons, good for nothing. Again, were there a City consisting of Subjects without Education, what a confusion would it be? without obedience, without break∣ing their own humors and passions, every one
following his own lusts, without regarding any other, without discretion, civility, even with∣out humanity it self. Tis good Education of Youth, that makes virtuous men and obedient Sub∣jects; that fills the Court with wise Councellers, and the Common-wealth with good Patriots. Even Trees, if not cultivated when young, change their nature into wildnes; and Beasts grow fierce and resty if not tamed and broken in youth. Na∣ture is bettered, and made useful by Education; and what our industry produceth in us contrary to Nature, is stronger, and converts Nature in∣to it self. To neglect instructions is to want other mens experience, and to begin again at the very foundation of every Art, or Science; which be∣ing by little and little advanced, and not yet perfected; he much hinders himself, that takes not advantage of the height they are already ar∣rived to. And not to exercise parts is to loose them; and not to use them to the best, is to debase and vilify them. For they, whose spirit suffers them not to be idle, and yet are not instructed to the best advantage, fall upon trifles, turning, watch∣making, hunting, or worse. One I have read of brought to Alexander, who by many years practise, had obtained the dexterity of throw∣ing a small seed through a needles eye. The King for a just reward gave him a sack full of those Seeds. But Math. Huniades the Warlike King of Hungary, was more severe with him, that brought him a wooden Coat of male, where∣in was not one ring wanting, a work of fifteen years; for he commanded him to prison for fif∣teen yeares more, to expiate for so much time and parts spent in so fruitles an employment.
CHAP. II. Of the Duty of Parents in educating their Children. 1 I desire Parents would seriously consider, that Education of their Children is not left to their pleasure, but a duty imposed on them. God, the great Father of us all, deposited the Children in the Fathers charge; and provided by his Laws, and threatnings, they should be reverenced and obey∣ed by them. They are part of your selves, and what you do for them is indeed for your selves. You expect honour by them at all times, & may some∣time also stand in need of their help. 'Tis what you either have enjoyed from your Parents, or lament your loss by their neglect. You have brought forth Children into this World of misery and trou∣ble, and will you so leave them? Will you not assist them in passing through it as well as they can? It is but reasonable they should by a speedy death be taken away from the future evil, if you refuse to fortify them against it. You provide them estates; to what purpose, if you also pro∣cure them not parts to use them? By that you ap∣pear to be their provident Parents, but by this you are paralleled to their good Angels, in taking care and watching over them. BUT I will speak no more of this: for though there be some inhuman and irrational Parents, that desire their Children should be like them∣selves; that think their own honour and respect eclipsed if their Sons be wiser, or worthier then
they; and are contented their Children be wicked, least their own actions be shamed: some also who for covetuousnes, neglect, or ig∣norance, will not bestow good Education upon them; yet there are so few of this sort, and their error so manifest, that it needs no further discovery. ANOTHER and not inferior error of Parents there is, that out of I know not what tendernes, they are unwilling their Children should undergo such hardships and severities as a good Education doth require. Which is, as if the mother should not suffer her new-born Infant to be molested with the pain of swathing, and binding, till it grows better able to endure that torment. Many Parents are afraid, their Childrens spirits, i. e. their obstinacy and pride, should be broken with due correction, and harsher chiding. BUT the greatest, and most general error of Pa∣rents is; that they desire their Children to be more plausible, then knowing; and to have a good mine, rather then a good understanding; or at least, to have both together: to employ the same time to acquire serious studies, and à-la∣modeness; to study gravity and levity; gallantry and Philosophy together. But (besides what I said before, if these come in competition, plea∣sure will certainly carry the cause; both more time bestowed and greater proficiency shall be made in that, then the other) it seems to me little less then impossible, that two things so un∣like, if not contrary, should be together attend∣ed (one hour of pleasure obliterating more, then three of study will imprint;) that two so diffe∣rently
commanding Masters should be obeyed. If the Soul can apply it self to such dissonant stu∣dies, why may not the eye also, at once, aime at two opposite marks? The Gallants chiefest study is to spend his time; the other's to save it: the one is for living in pleasure and mirth; the other, in labour and seriousnes. The one for adorning and trimming himself, to visit, game, play, &c. the other for watchfulnes, industry, devotion. In sum, the one placeth his design to be confor∣mable and acceptable to those, who understand least; to some such silly Women and Ladies, from whom if you take vanity, nothing re∣mains: the other strives to approve himself to God, his holy Angels, the example of all worthy and wise men of the past and present age. Why are rich clothes but to be shown; shown to them, who best understand them? They best understand them who mind nothing else, who can judg of every punctilio of the mode, and can read a lecture upon a knot of ruban. Besides gallantry is ridi∣culous, except accompanied with formality of conversation, punctuality in dancing, visiting, court∣ing; which inevitably engage them in loss of time, folly, and averting the understanding from serious and useful thoughts. And this is as con∣sentaneous to reason, as experience; for the Soul is fortified by introversion upon it self, continual meditation, and reflecting upon its operations, faculties, and the objects therein reserved: whereas all sensual pleasures call forth the forces of the Soul to the outward parts and members of the body: whence proceeds that continual combat, so much spoken of both by Philosophers and Divines, between sense and reason, the body and the soul, wisdome and pleasure.
METHINKS therefore Children should be educated to all severity of labour, and virtue; and to this outward politure, by the bye only; to make those their study and employment, and to regard these so much as not to be offensive to those they converse withal. Pleasure and recreation in∣deed is so far necessary, as to keep up the strength and alacrity of the bodily forces, without which the Soul cannot work; But I speak not of these at this time, but of that which is esteemed a part of busines, and employment. Cyrus and Da∣rius, great Captains and wise men, ruin'd their families and Monarchy, because they educated their Children after the Median fashion, i. e. a∣mongst their Wives and Women; who never suffering them to want any thing, nor to be con∣tradicted, their delicacy made them slothful and languid; the slavery and flattery of those about them rendred them haughty and imperious: so that they could neither labour wirh cheerfulnes, nor command without arrogancy: that made them contemptible, as effeminate; this odious, as insolent. I wish the Persians were the onely faulty in this matter. Whoever would educate a child to folly and ruine, must give him his own will; not suffer his humor to be contradicted; be careful that he never come in danger or hardship; that he be above labour and industry; and every days experience shews us, that Fortuna, quem fovet, fatuum facit. BUT it is very considerable, contrary to the Persians, that many great Princes have brought up their Children to industry and hardship. Egin∣artus saith of Charles the Great, Liberos suos it a censuit instituendos, ut tam filii, quem nepotes, pri∣mo
liberalibus studiis (quibus & ipse operam dabat) erudirentur. Tum filios, quamprimum aetas patie∣batur, more Francorum equitare, armis ac venatio∣nibus exerceri fecit. Filias lanificio assuescere, colo∣que ac fuso, ne per otium torperent, operam impen∣dere, atque ad omnem honestatem erudiri fecit. Au∣gustus wore the clothes spun and made by his Wife, Daughter, and Grand-children, as Suet. informs us. Monsieur de Rhodez thus describes the Education of Henry the Great of France. His Grand-father would not permit him to be brought up with that delicatnes, ordinarily used to persons of his quality; well knowing, that seldome lodgeth other then a mean and feeble spirit in an effeminate and tender body. Neither would he allow him rich habilements, and Childrens usual trifles: nor to be flattered or treated like a Prince. Because all these things are causers only of vanity, and rather raise pride in the hearts of Infants, then any sentiments of true generosity. But he commanded, he should be habited, and educated like the other Children of that country; that he should be accustomed to run, to leap, to climb the rocks and mountains; that by such means he might be inured to labour, &c. His ordinary food also was course Bread, Beef, Cheese, and Garlick; and he often went bare-foot, and bare∣headed. The same care was taken by whole Nations, especially such as were of a military constitution. The Lacedemonian and other an∣tient Nations Customs are to every one known. Olaus Magnus describes the manner of the Edu∣cation of the Nobility of the Warlike Nation of the Goths, l. 8. c. 4. They were accustomed to en∣dure beating and wounds, to change of heat into sudden cold, to suffering of fire and frost, to lying upon boards, course and uneasy clothing, strong, but
ordinary food, violent and wearisome exercises ac∣cording to every age; such as riding, darting, shooting, wearing heavy arms, especially helmets, sheilds, spears, boots and spurs, swimming on horseback, and in ar∣mor. I shall not instance in any more for fear of seeming to much to upbraid the present delicacy. 2. THE Duty of the Parents therefore is first to begin betimes; for very frequently the blan∣dishments of Nurses, and the foolish, vain, or evil conversation of those about them, leave such impressions even upon their Infancy, as are difficultly defaced, even when the child arrives to discretion, and maturity. Besides, the Nurses form the speech, the garbe, and much of the sentiments of the child. The ancient Romans (saith Quintilian) when a child was born, put him not out to an hired Nurse, but brought him up in his Mothers chamber, under the eye of some grave and virtuous Matron, chosen out of the Neighbourhood, who was to have him continually in her presence; Coram quâ neque dicere fas erat quod turpe di∣ctu, neque facere quod inhonestum factu vide∣retur: Ac non studia modo, sed remissiones e∣tiam, lususque puerorum sanctâ quâdam gravi∣tate ac verecundiâ temperabat, &c. And so con∣siderable was the Education of Children thought to be, that, as he saith, Cornelia the mother of the Gracchi, Aurelia, the mother of Augustus Caesar, were Governesses to great mens Children. 3. SECONDLY, though a discreet and care∣ful Nurse be provided, yet let not the Father remit his diligence to wean him betimes; nor permit tenderness to overcome his judgment, or his present false, the durable and perfect love;
but hinder, as much as is possible, the sowing of evil seeds, and prevent the very first begin∣nings, and sprowtings of bad actions. There is indeed no man that seeth not the vast diffe∣rence in Childrens inclinations to virtue or vice; how easy some are advised, how difficultly o∣thers restrained, even by correction. There re∣maining in every one somewhat of that pra∣vity derived to us from our first Parents, in∣clining us as much, if not more, to evil, then to good; yet some more violently then others: which inclinations, though they render us not guilty (the sin being washed away by Baptisme) yet our consenting to them is sin, as our resisting them is virtue, and our fight∣ing against and overcoming them, is the great em∣ployment of our life. And truely were it not for evil examples and councells, or at least for want of good ones, the victory would not be so diffi∣cult, as we commonly suppose, and find it; nor the difference of inclinations so manifest. For thus much must be acknowledged to the glory of our Maker; first that as every constitution hath a disposition to evil, so that very disposition is contrary to another evil, to which the indiffe∣rent would be more obnoxious; and Secondly, inclineth also to the neighbouring good; every defect, by the wise ordering of providence, be∣ing ballanced with another advantage; as proneness to anger prompts also to activenes, and hardiness to attempt difficulties; the slow, and phlegma∣tick, are also perseverant and constant in their resolutions; that which disposeth to lust, suggests also persuasivenes, plausibility, and cheerfulnes: desire produceth Industry, fear breeds quiet and cautiousnes. And by the way, let this be re∣membred,
that it is much easier to bend a na∣tural mis-inclination to its neighbour virtue, then to its opposite: as an angry person is ea∣silier perswaded to activenes, then meeknes; the tenacious, to frugality, rather then bounty; obsti∣nacy to constancy, fawningnes to complaisance, and ignorance to obedience. So that any one becomes evil rather then good, is not so much the fault of his constitution, as the perversnes of his will; following the suggestions of sense rather then the Dictates of reason. 'Tis pleasure in Children, that recommends the evil, and warps them from the good: 'tis inconsideration and folly more then the difficulty or unnaturalnes of virtue. And if there be any such man, as without delight or interest, pursues bad rather then good, he wanteth either the reason, or desires common to all Mankind. Nor did wise Law-makers in∣stitute reward and punishment to constrain men to doe against nature; but to equiponderate the prejudices of pleasure and interest, i. e. to coun∣tenance reason against sensuality. I cannot for∣bare setting down a notable saying of Quintilian cap. ult. Natura nos ad optimam mentem genuit, a∣deoque discere meliora volentibus promtum est; ut verè intuenti mirum sit illud magis, malos esse tam multos. And Seneca, Nihil est tam arduum & difficile, quod non humana mens vincat, & in fa∣miliaritatem producat assidua meditatio: nullique sunt tam feri & sui juris affectus, ut non disciplinâ domen∣tur. Quodcunque sibi imperavit animus, obtinuit. Sanabilibus aegrotamus malis, ipsaque nos in rectum genitos natura, si emendari voluerimus, juvat. Thus they out of the strength of their reason and experience: perhaps also they had learned so much from Socrates, who by his own exam∣ple,
shewed that even the worst dispositi∣on was conquerable by reason. And this is to the shame of so many pretended Christians. But how would they have glorified God, had they known the advantage given us by grace and his Holy Spirit, always ready to assist our good en∣deavours? Though Seneca seems to have discern∣ed some glimpse of that also. Ep. 41. Sacer intra nos spiritus sedet, malorum bonorumque nostrorum observator & custos. Bonus vir sine Deo nemo est. An potest aliquis supra fortunam, nisi ab ipso, sur∣gere? ille dat consilia erecta & magnifica. O pie Domine, O Salvator bone, saith Salvian l. 7. quan∣tum per te efficiunt studia Disciplinae, per quae mu∣tari possunt vitia Naturae! And speaking there of the Africans, he saith, Adeo exclusa naturae originalis sinceritas, ut aliam quodammodo in his naturam vitia fecerunt. The sum is, Though all Dispositions be not equally good, yet the worst may, by the industry of the Educators, and Gods grace, never wanting till refused, be so reform∣ed and bettered, as to be able to do God, his Prince, and family, honour and service. And the greatest frowardnes and worst inclinations, we find in Children, are conquerable; and when actually overcome, those very persons may better succeed, then the more facile and complying. Only as I said let them be taken betimes: and the ra∣ther, because it cannot be known but by expe∣rience, how any childs disposition may prove and shew it self. But if instead of rectifying his evil inclination, any one indulge it; and instead of bridling incourage it; he makes it his Master. Whence come those irregular and extravagant de∣sires, and actions, which we see in many persons, of stealing, drinking, inconstancy, and the like.
4 MY third advice is, that Parents would have their Children (as much as they can) un∣der their own eye and inspection. By this they shall be preserved from evil companions, imita∣tation of bad Superiors, their councel, discours, and such like; but more then all, from indis∣creet, impertinent, unmanaged Servants. For Youth not having the judgment to measure it self from its own actions, knows it only by reflection, from others relations; and thinks it self such re∣ally as a fawning servant represents him: and servants who are usually brought up in that low condition, and have their thoughts and speeches suitable, cannot be fit companions to a Gentle∣man. But above all, the example of the Father is of greatest force to educate a Son. O te bea∣tum Adolescentem (Plin. lib. 8. ep. 13.) qui-eum potissimum imitandum habes, cui natura te similli∣mum esse voluit. The Father's actions authorise the same in the Child; nor can the Father cha∣stise him for what himself is guilty. Great care must the Father take therefore least he give any bad example either of intemperate anger with ser∣vants, or of using any evil, obscene, or unde∣cent words; and to be such as he desireth his Son should represent him. It concerns him also to overlook even his Governor and Educator, when he is of age to stand in need of one, both to keep him to his diligence, and create authority to his instruction. Cato, though he kept a Master expresly for his Son in his own house, yet did himself always frequently teach him. So did Augustus his Grand-children Caius and Lucius. The great Theodosius used frequently to fit by Arsenius, whilst he taught his Sons Arca∣dius and Honorius; to whom also he command∣ed
such respect to be given by them, that sur∣prizing them once sitting, and Arsenius stand∣ing, he took from them their robes; and not till after a long time and much intreaty restor∣ed them. And if the Father and Family be of good example, it seems to me best to educate him at home, and leave him in his first bed, till he have taken some root before he be transplanted. If the child be of a soft, or of an haughty dis∣position, or the family of evil examples, 'tis better to send him abroad betimes. But generally, the best place of Education seems to be amongst companions (as near as may be, his equals) at some distance from home; but whether he may repair every night, or very frequently. If this cannot be, then with companions in his Fa∣thers house; for to teach one alone, besides o∣ther inconveniences, is extreamly tedious both to Master and Scholar. For want of these op∣portunities the next is at a public School; but then great care is to be had that the Family, where he sojourneth, be of good example. And much better would it be for him there to have a Pedagogue (which in those Countrys, that a∣bound with Clergy, is seldome omitted) i. e. one somewhat versed in learning; who may continually attend the Child, see to his repeti∣tions, and the performing his tasks & exercises, model his manners, and preserve him from dan∣ger, and the like. 5. PARENTS also, fourthly, ought to guide them, as much as is possible, with kindnes and affecti∣on; endeavoring to convince and perswade them of the excellency of labour, seriousnes, learning, virtue, sufferings, and the like; and even de∣nying
what they think not fit to grant them with sweetnes and love; and even chastising them with sorrow, and for vices only, in things in∣different giving them liberty. In bodily sicknesses the patient is the first who desireth the cure; but the distempers of the mind are to be disco∣vered and perswaded to the Patient by reason and good admonition. Neither must the Father destine his Child to such an employment as him∣self thinks fittest to serve his other occasions. Though most mens parts are capable of many employments, yet are many less disposed to one then another; and so much, as it is not worth the time and labour many times (as is said be∣fore) to endeavour the change of such inclina∣tions. Consider therefore both his disposition, and the nature of the calling, i. e. what facul∣ties it chiefly employs: and whether those fa∣culties be most eminent in the subject; and so fit them together; and you shall not need to fear their corresponding to your care. How∣ever, if after all your endeavours they prove not to your desire; as many times it happens: murmur not against God, who permits them to miscarry; either that men may take notice, that all wel-doing is from his grace, not our wise∣dome; or that your faith and patience may be tried, and your self purged from all human and secular affections and interests; or that some faults in your self may be punished in them.
CHAP. III. Of the Educator. 1. THE Fathers greatest diligence is seen in chusing a good Governor, or Director of his Son. A good Educator therefore, whether one be to be chosen, or any one desires to ren∣der himself such, being instead of a Father to his charge, ought to be; First, religious, virtu∣ous, and grave, both himself and family; that he may give good example, and not need to fear that his Scholar resemble him. He must therefore be sure to live with greater severity then he exacts of his charge. Then also may he hope by his prayers to obtain a blessing upon his endeavours; and (performing his duty as in the sight of God) to give up his accounts cheer∣fully, and receive his reward from him. 2. PRUDENT, and discreet, as in all o∣ther things, so especially in observing the Childs disposition, and to know what it will produce. For many times the medicine is to be applied to the disease, not to the symptome. Not too se∣vere, nor too indulgent; not too austere, least he affright; nor too familiar least he become contem∣ptible to his charge. For young men understand not much the reason of his demeanor. He must praise without flattery, chide without con∣tumely, and correct without passion; be cheerful without levity, affable without fawning, grave without morosity, and merry without folly.
3. PATIENT, humble, and meek, to pass-by, dissemble, and bear with, many impertinen∣cies, dulnesses, forgetfulnesses: to endure many affronts, contempts, passions, and sometimes very evil words. Not to despond, though success answer not his Industry; for Almighty God gives grace when he pleaseth, nor doth all seed im∣mediatly sprout: however he shall be rewarded not according to the others proficiency, but his own industry and sincerity. 4. MASTER of his tongue, for that is his great and universal instrument. Besides, the speech of the Master authoriseth the Childs imi∣tation. He must therefore religiously avoid, not only all wicked, profane, and obscene; but also all undecent, all passionate, all hyperboli∣cal, superfluous, customary, vain, speeches; knowing that the greatest reverence is due to Children. 5. DILIGENT, making it his busines to assist and better his charge, to observe all his motions and speeches; for tho all cannot be amended at once, yet no default is to pass un∣regarded; least that connivance authorize the com∣mitting it, and the frequent committing produce an habit. Yet let him not so trust to his own Industry, as not by continual prayer, to recom∣mend his employment to the giver of success. 6. NOT covetous. Especially let him not fan∣cy to himself the making advantage by insinu∣ating into the interest of his charge, for that breeds jealousies at least: nor into his affections, for their gratitude is writ in sand, and their
passions change with new objects. Besides, af∣ter a while he will be look'd upon as imperti∣nent, and exercising ridiculously an obsolete power. If, besides these qualifications, he have experience of forreign parts; if he understand learn∣ing and sciences; if wel-born, of a good presence, and address, and wear his clothes hansomely, it will admit him into the respect of his charge, and facilitate the performance of his Duty. 7. IN all times, great care was taken for pro∣viding good Educators; for they said, it was better to prevent vices, then punish them. And in most States the Magistrates appointed them; nor was it lawful amongst many Nations for Parents to employ any others, or educate their Children, but in public. The Canons of most Churches, since Christianity, have charged that election upon the Bishops: and that with so much reason and prudence, that the contrary practice hath once, and is even now ready, to endanger the ruin of this Government. The An∣cient Persians (despairing to find all requisite ac∣complishments in one) had usually four distinct persons to educate their Princes: one supreme, who had the general inspection over both Ma∣sters and Scholar; another eminent for sanctity and virtue, to teach him Religion, Honor and Justice: a third for learning, to principle him in knowledg and wisdome: and a fourth to perfect him in his carriage, valour, exercise of Armes and Chivalry. And, tho this be a∣bove the capacity and reach of most subjects; yet by this every one may see what is perfectest, toward which he may advance as his estate will bear. And let them be sure of this, that if they
will have the best Educators, they must libe∣rally encourage them; for worthy persons will not labour without considerable rewards, both of means and respect. Besides, the gratitude of Princes, and great Persons to their Educa∣tors, invites others to fit themselvs, and to un∣dergo that laborious and hazardous employment. Alexander the Great built up Stagyra for Ari∣stotles sake, and spared Lampsacus for Anaxime∣nes's. Augustus bestowed great honours upon the person and Country of Apollodorus; and forgave the Alexandrians, to gratify Areus his Master in Philosophy. Trajan dignified his Master Plu∣tark with the Consulship. Memorable is the piety of M. Aurelius, who made Proculus Pro∣consul; and took Junius Rusticus with him in all his expeditions, advised with him of all his both publick and private businesses, saluted him before the Praefecti-Praetorio, designed him to be second time Consul, and after his death ob∣tained from the Senate publicly to erect a sta∣tue to his memory. Tantum autem honoris Ma∣gistris suis detulit, ut imagines eorum aureas in lara∣rio haberet, ac sepulchra eorum aditu, hostiis, flo∣ribus semper honoraret, saith Capitolinus. See the gratitude of Gratianus to his Educator Ausonius in his Epistle to him. Carolus Magnus exceed∣ingly honoured Alcuinus; as did also Theodorick Cassiodorus, making him his Counceller and Con∣fident. So did Otho III. Gerbertus; for whose sake, & ut habeat Magister quid Principi nostro Petro à parte sui Discipuli offerat, Otho gave to the Church, to be disposed of by his Gover∣nour, eight Comitatus, or Counties, Pesaurum, Fanum, &c. Will. Rufus made Lanfranc Arch∣bishop of Canterbury. Laur. Medices greatly en∣riched
Joh. Argyropilus, and Marsilius Ficinus his Educators. And truely it seems to me, that one of the greatest advantages of wealth is, that thereby may be procured better Education, then those can have, who are not able to requite a worthy person. CHAP. IV. Of the Educated. THE Educator cannot perform his Duty, unless he know the aime and scope of his employment, i. e. unless he consider dili∣gently, what a one the Educated ought to be framed by him. 1. FIRST then we suppose, that no man cometh into this World either to be idle, or follow and enjoy only his own pleasure and humour; but to be serviceable to his Maker: who (acting as a rati∣onal agent) maketh nothing for our, but him, self; and out of his infinite favour to us, is pleased to honour us so much, as both that some way we may do him service, and thereby also in the highest manner advantage our selves, by advancing his Kingdome and interest, i. e. by doing good (for God is the universal good) both to our selves and others. There is no excepti∣on even of the greatest Prince from that gene∣ral burden laid upon us by God himself: In su∣dore vultus tui vesceris pane tuo. i. e. Every man is
to have some laborious employment, either of body or mind, which is to be his calling, and of which he is to render a strict and severe account. Solo∣mons Princess eats not the bread of Idlenes. S. Paul laboured. Our Lords whole life was di∣vided in labores and dolores. The greatest Prince is obliged to the greatest observance; and some have accounted themselves but as the General Mi∣nisters or Stewards of their Subjects. The High Priest among the Jews had, and the Grand Sei∣gnior at this time hath a trade, at which (as I am informed) he is to labour every day; which is for no other intent but to mind him of this ge∣neral obligation. And good reason this is; for there cannot be imagined such a difference a∣mongst men, all of the same kind, made all of one mass, having the same entrance into, and exit out of this life; that some should be born for pleasure only, others for labour; some for themselves only, others for the sustentation of them in their Idlenes. 2. THE greater means and opportunities any one hath of glorifying God, the greater Duty and obligation lieth upon him. The reason is plain; it is God that bestows all good things; who being no respecter of persons, gives to every man to profit others. And the more he (as the Husband-man) sows, the more he expects to reap; more from him that had five Talents, then from him that had but two. 3. WHATEVER a man enjoys, enabling him to glorify God, and to do good to himself, or others, is a Talent. As strength, health, parts, &c. Also whatever gives him greater Authority,
as riches, and honors, or reputation; the two foun∣dations of Nobility; which rendring them emi∣nent and conspicuous above other men, sets them also, at least, as lights and examples to be followed by their Inferiors. 4. PERSONS of quality, therefore, besides the obligation of private persons, have others also particular and peculiar to their condition. First, as rich men, they are to make all the advan∣tage they can for bettering themselves and others by their riches. They are Gods Stewards (after they have taken what is necessary or convenient to themselves, and families, the better to perform such duties) not for luxury, delicious fare, or fat∣ting themselves, as beast are for the day of slaugh∣ter; nor for accumulating wealth, the rust whereof will corrode their consciences as fire would their flesh: nor for furnishing their vain pleasures, or extravagant desires. But for providing for the poor, (the immediate and particular care and charge of Almighty God) many of whom he hath left in worse condition then the Beasts and Fowls; were they not preferred to these Treasurers; but for public and magnificent works, which exceed the ability of meaner persons. Besides, that Cha∣rity and Generosity are ingenious to invent many waies of assisting others. SECONDLY, As Masters of numerous Fa∣milies, they are to provide for their several re∣lations, Wife, Children, Servants, Neighbors. And not only temporal, but also, spiritual supplies. Every Family being a little Church, and every Master of a Family a Magistrate within his own walls to govern, advise, direct, reward and
punish those under his charge. THIRDLY, As Members of a noble Stock, they are to advise, assist and benefit also their brethren and kindred, to whom they have a more particular relation then to the rest of Man∣kind. They are also to correspond unto, and in themselves (as in a burning-glass) concenter the characters of their worthy Predecessors; and communicate them as well as their wealth down also with advantage to their Descendants. And let them remember that it is not less praise-wor∣thy to deserve to be a Prince, then to be one. 4. As the most considerable members of a Com∣mon-wealth, they are engaged in more peculiar Duties toward the Prince, and his subordinate Magistrate; to know and obey the Laws, and as∣sist toward the observation of them by others. Beside this, to fit themselves for such employ∣ments as they may probably be call'd unto. Whe∣ther to be Courtiers, and domestick Servants to the Prince. Magistrates in Peace, Commanders in War. Councellers of, or Officers under the Prince. Employed in forreign Parts, as Agents, Am∣bassadors, &c. Or in the Church, as Clergy-Men, Secular or Religious, active or contemplative. Nec sic quisque debet esse otiosus, ut in eodem otio utilita∣tem non cogitet proximi; nec sic actuosus, ut con∣templationem non requirat Dei. Aug. de C. D. 5. THESE, and such like, are the Callings and em∣ployments of Gentlemen; who, as you see, ought not to overvalue or think themselves better, because
of their wealth or honour; but to have greater obligations. And as they may justly expect greater rewards, because of greater temptations, so are they to fear greater punishments, because of greater opportunities of doing good, and because every fault is more conspicuous and dangerous in them then in inferiors. But besides they must not forget themselves also to be private Persons: But let their public busines be what it will; they will, and must have some time to themselves also to bestow on their particular Inclinations. Where∣of, first, that is best spent, which is employed upon Almighty God. And by the way, let them take notice, 1. That they ought not to under∣take any employment, which will not allow them every day a competent time for their Devotions. 2. Next, that is best employed which is set upon in∣genious studies; especially such as are beneficial and advantagious to the Public; or such as poorer persons are not able to support. Such are the History of his own or other Countreys, search of Antiquity, Natural History, and experiments; Medicine; forreign Laws; Mathematicks, Astrono∣mical observations; Mechanicks, and the like; It being a noble study to observe, how God go∣verns natural, as well as free Agents. Thus is Salomon praised for his knowledg in Plants; Moses for being versed in all the learning of the Egyptians; Daniel was chief of the Magicians; Abraham a great Astronomer; David and Job eminent Philosophers, Avicen, Averroes, and Almansor were all Princes. Radulfus the Empe∣ror gave his mind to Jewelling; Gratianus to ma∣king of Arms. But heed must be taken least those be made the principal, which should only be ac∣cessories and divertisements.
6. Now to all these the Educators care can∣not extend, nor is it expected it should. But this he ought to do: First, to lay in his charge the foundation of Religion and virtue. 2. To im∣prove his natural parts as much as he shall be able. 3. To ground him so far in such general know∣ledges, as may be serviceable or useful unto him, till he be able in some measure to proceed in them by his own Industry, and by them be also fitted for the other. 4. And lastly to assist him in such particular Arts or Faculties as he seems most fit for, inclined unto, or likely to follow. But these not all at once, but as his judgment and parts are prepared to receive them: that being not superficially or slightly painted or tincted, but tho∣rowly furnish'd to all good employments, he may have both ability and delight to pursue by himself the same routte; and in his private studies build up that knowledg and wisedome, whose founda∣tion was laid by his Teachers. Which is the end of the Educators pains, and will perhaps take up more of the Young-mans age, then is usually allowed by Parents to that purpose. And per∣haps it will not be amiss here to advertise, that Governors be not too soon cast off. Augustus Caesar kept Posidonius his Instructor with him till his old age; and when he then desired of the Emperor to be dismissed into his own Countrey, where he might dye in quiet out of the tracas and noise of the World; Cesar desired before his departure, to receive some good rules from him for better governing himself; the Philoso∣pher answered, that when he perceived himself angry, he should, before he undertook any busi∣ness, repeat over the Alphabet; Augustus conside∣ring his prescription, replyed, that he perceived he
had still need of him, and perhaps as much as when he was first under his care; so refused to dismiss him, but gave him an appartment in the Pa∣lace, better, and nearer to himself, increased his revenues, and kept him with him as long as he lived. CHAP. V. General Directions to the Educator. 1. THE Educator having thus his end pro∣posed, and his matter (the Educated) de∣livered into his hands, let him consider how to work this matter to that end. And first he should endeavour thorowly to understand what parts and capacity, as also what dispositions and inclina∣tions, his charge hath; i. e. how apt to, or averse from this end. Next, how to frame and order these dispositions; which to correct, which restrain, which encourage. For many times an un∣skilful Gardiner spends much vain labour to ga∣ther out the roots of Summer-weeds, which would perish in the digging. 2. MUCH doth it concern the Educator to carry himself discreetly. For young Men observe diligently, and censure severely (when amongst their Camerades) and their Governors in the first place. His first case must be to steer evenly between mildness and severity. Yet making use of more or less of each, according to the dispo∣sition
of his charge, and the present occasion. It requires great judgment to join sweetnes and efficaciousnes in his commands: not to advance into harshnes and morosity on the one side; nor degenerate into softnes and laschenes on the other. Harshnes is discovered in these and the like par∣ticulars. In enjoyning things in themselves too difficult, unfesible, unsuportable, or too hard for that person: or commanding obscurely, or equivocally, as if he were seeking an occa∣sion to chide; or enjoyning them too imperiously, and not shewing the reason of his commands: in not directing him how to do them: in unsea∣sonable urging, and exacting them either in regard of the time, or the ability, or disposi∣tion of his charge: In pressing all things great and small with the same vigour and importancy, or because it is his command: in rejecting all rea∣sons to the contrary, as excuses; and not hearing his charge speak for himself: In shewing him∣self jealous and suspicious, or to have an ill opi∣nion of his charge, or giving occasion to suspect him morose, unsatisfiable; or that all his actions and speeches, tho dubious, are interpreted in the worst sense: In exaggerating all mistakes and errours into sins and crimes: In denying all, or most of his desires, tho the things be reaso∣nable, or unprejudiciable: In unseasonble, ni∣mious, opprobrious chiding, and such like. 3. REMISSNES on the contrary shews it self in these things. If he take notice only of great and scandalous, not smaller or secreter faults. If what is well enjoyned, either because of the Edu∣cated's unwillingnes, or others intercessions, be
not as it ought, exacted; but either omitted, or changed into an easier. If he judg faults, because ordinarily committed, or his charge is inclined to them, lesser then indeed they are. If he think them incorrigible, and so go not about to re∣ctify them. If indeed he resent them as faults, but chideth or correcteth not so much, as is suf∣ficient to amendment. If, when he hath shewed him his faults, and that he is displeased with them, he leave the amendment to the young Man. If, to please others, as the Parents, kin∣dred, companions of his charge, he yeild to a greater indulgence then he ought, Or if out of timidity and fear of offending his charge, he neglect his duty. 4. Now to avoid both these rocks, either of which is fatal; let the Governor be resolute to obtain his end, but sweet and mild in prescribing and exacting the means. To be sure not to let any vice pass unreprehended, and according to the nature or danger of it, to be more or less eager; but for things indifferent, indecencies, fancies, little humors (which are neither vicious, nor scan∣dalous) to bear with them till their turn come to be weeded out. Endeavour to beget in your charge a perswasion, that you reprehend or cor∣rect, not out of your own interest, pleasure, or passion; but out of a true, internal, sincere af∣fection; which, if you really bear such towards him, will not be difficult. And if you can thus far advance, you may go a step farther; i. e. breed in him an affection toward you (for love begets love) and then the great difficulty of your work is past: in this also the Parents must assist. This must be increased by shewing your self at
all times concerned in his interests; openly taking part in, and justifying his quarrels, tho privately you reprehend him severely, (for thus he sees you are careful of his reputation;) by your di∣ligent care and attendance on him when sick; and many other occasions will be suggested of honest∣ly insinuating into his affections. But take heed you flatter him not, nor praise him too much, yea tho he deserve very well; for many times immoderate praise makes him proud and in∣solent; many times also lasch and negligent, thinking he hath got applause enough, and needs no more endeavour; but, as if he hath already hit the mark, unbends and throws away his bow. Indeed the moderate suffering of praise, is as great a tryal of wisedome and prudence, as the cupel is of silver. 5. STRIVE also to enamour him of what you would teach him. For to him that doth willingly what he must of necessity, the proficiency is certain. To be a good and virtuous man, consists almost solely in the will: Quid tibi opus est ut sis bonus? velle. Sen. ep. 80. He that desires to be so, wants little of being so. And this is done by recom∣mending your commands & instructions with the reason of them; for when the judgment is con∣vinced, the Will surrenders of her self. I can∣not deny but this is contrary to the practise of too many of our great Schools, where Children learn only, because it is minus malum; tho painful and troublesome, yet not so much altogether as perpetual chastisement. Many have doubted whether Children of Person of quality should at all be beaten, pretending it is slavish, and if in another age, injurious; that he, who will not
reform with chiding, will be also obstinate a∣gainst beating. Tho there is no justifying those Masters, who think every thing lawful against that unresisting age, who being overburdened with numbers, make cruelty pass for diligence, and supply their want of care with plenty of the rod: as if they, who are committed to their charge, are abandoned to their passion; or as if reason were not to be used to those who are not yet Masters of it: Yet corporal chastisement is neces∣sary, even for great Mens Children also, espe∣cially for such stubborn dispositions, as care not for shame, but are afraid of pain. But not this till last of all. For the Educator is to try all means before he comes to that: Exhorting, examples, em∣ployments, praise and shame, promising, threat∣ning, rewards alwaies before punishments. Di∣vers laudable crafts also, and deceits are to be practised; as to commend him sometimes more then he deserves, or for what he hath not done, but you feign to believe he hath done it. To let him know that you pass-by many failings in com∣passion to his age; to seem not to believe the evil related of him, but to nourish a better opinion: to put his faults upon another, and exaggerate them in his presence; to declare the punishment deser∣ved or inflicted; to watch over him so as to hin∣der the acting of his evil intention, without ta∣king notice of it. It was also the custome to punish the young Prince's Favorite for the Prince. If these suffice not, try smart chiding; wherein take heed of unbeseeming words, which a noble nature many times resents long after, but all are apt to imitate towards others. Beware also of too im∣portunate, or unseasonable reprehensions; as either when the offender is in passion, or in public,
or your self in passion; tho it be not amiss sometimes to seem so. Neither be alwayes chi∣ding, for that breeds insensibility and carelesnes, and authorizeth his fault by your own. Nescio quo∣modo hoc ipsum, quod concupiscitur, jucundius fit cum vetatur, & contumax est animus (maxime puerorum) & in contrarium atque arduum nitens. Indiscreet re∣prehension is many times recommendation of the vice. Let corporal punishments be the last refuge, and when the rest, tryed, are found insufficient; for what is done willingly is best done, Horses and Beasts are subdued by the rod, but man hath a free-will, which (if possible) is to be gained by reason. What we do for fear of punishment we really detest; and, were we left to our selves, we would not do it. Yet by accustoming to do it, though for fear, the bugbear that cau∣sed our hatred is driven away, and by little and little we acquire an habit of, and by de∣grees a love to, it. 6. TAKE all faults, vices especially, at the be∣ginning, by preventing as much as you can all oc∣casions and opportunities of ill-doing; as let him not frequent suspected places, not be abroad, tho with a friend, nor be late from his lodging, and the like. For tho he do at such time no∣thing blame-worthy, yet that irregularity indul∣ged will breed inconveniencies first, and faultines afterwards. Plato having chid a young man for a slight fault, and he replying 'twas no great mat∣ter, answered, But the custome of it is. Tho he cannot amend all at once, yet he must not settle in any one. Many times also we see a word cast in by chance, or in merriment, to have greater force then a formal admonition. Quinti∣lian,
if any of his young Scholars commited a fault, especially too bold and venturous, would tell him, that for the present he disliked it not, but for the future he would not endure it: so he both indulged their wit, and corrected theit errours aegre enim reprehendas quae sinis consuescere. ESPECIALLY beware of all obscene discourse, and those equivocal phrases, which the wicked invent to express their lust (ingeniously as they think) most plausibly, i. e. dangerously. As likewise of all filthy Songs, and of Libels, wherein either the Magistrate, or other person is taxed. Forbear also (chiefly if the Child be naturally timorous) all discourse of witches, Spirits, Fayries, and the like; which intimidate the spirit, and fill the head with vain and frightful imaginations. Also all fond Romances, whether of Giants or Love. Those seem to have taken their original about the time of the Holy-War, when all Europe was upon the gog of fighting, to which they thought those fond Stories were very conducing; but these from later times, when Courtship and lust were in grea∣ter account then Arms and Valour. But whatever they be, being but Castles in the Aire, it matters not whether they are built for Palaces or Prisons; thay have both a bad effect: For they impress upon Children, and (which is almost the same) upon Women, and weak silly men also, false notions. They are to the mind what a Feaver is to the body, filling the Soul with preternatural, ir∣regular conceits, and hindering the true under∣standing and reall notion of things as they are in the World, which true Histories set forth. They represent actions by a false glass, as in the idle imaginations of silly and loose people. If wan∣dring
and insignificant fancies in the brain, (Ro∣mances in the thought) be so troublesome to all well-minded people; to have such in writing, is certainly much worse. What a madness is it to increase these by suggesting more non-sense? by printing our follies, and publishing our resveries? They shew us lust instead of love, false honour and valour instead of true; the World in imagination for that in reality, agreeable dotages, pleasant means to render men fools. The most dange∣rous of all Romances, are those, which are dressed up with all the artifice of good words, habits, action, &c. on purpose to withdraw the Soul from seriousnes and virtue, to vanity and fil∣thines: Comedies, I mean, which who with delight frequenteth, returns with the passions and humours there represented, shall I say? or recommended. The design of them is sensual de∣light and pleasure (to say no worse) which a good serious man looks upon as his greatest ene∣my: Nemo ad voluptatem venit sine affectu; nemo affectum sine casibus suis patitur. Vbi voluptas ibi studium, per quod sc. voluptas sapit. Tert. de Spect. Upon the same reason I would disswade all con∣versation with Fools, Jesters, Buffoons, and all such as accustome to, and study to procure, laughter. A dangerous and pestilent sort of plea∣sure, that renders the mind's indulging it, like to his that causeth it, light, foolish, vain, and contrary to that seriousnes and thinkingnes re∣quisite to prudence and gallantry of spirit. When this passion is over, reflect upon what caused it, and the manner of it, and you shall scarce find any action wherof you will be more really a∣shamed; as of that which Nature hath not suffer'd to be acted without uncomely mo∣tions
of the mouth and countenance. E im∣possible (saith Danti p. 53.) che sia pace o verit à nella republica, se colui che governa e amico de buffo∣nerie, & bugie. And as it is in a common∣wealth, so in a family, and in all conversation. 7. LET him do every thing for a good end, & the best way. First, direct his intentions aright, and by that means his actions become virtues; and (which is more) there will be insensibly im∣planted the very essence of Religion. To carry himself decently, tell him, not that the people will think better of him, that he shall be more accepted in conversation; but tell him that he ought to carry himself as the noblest and wor∣thiest of Gods creatures. To study and be diligent; not that thereby he may arrive to honors here, and be acceptable to great persons, but to do God his Creator the more service, and the like. To do his actions the best way, will breed a lauda∣ble ambition in him to excell in that which is good. And since in every age the same facul∣ties are employ'd, only the objects changed, and the actions of those faculties not many; it must need be, that our whole life is but rea∣cting the same thing frequently over upon divers subjects and occasions. As the Fool personates the same humour, tho in divers Comedies; and tho sometimes Lance, Jodelet, or Scara∣muccio, yet 'tis all but the same Buffoon. In in∣fancy little quarrels with their brethren, peevish∣nes, wilfulnes, &c. are afterwards angers, ha∣treds, envies, prides, jealousies; and a sensible∣nes in Youth for a gig or a suggar-plum, is the same afterwards for honour or interest. And he is not the only wise man who discourseth of,
or acteth, great and high matters, but he who speaks or doth, whatever it be, great or small, pertinently, and according to the nature of the subject. Therefore let your charge, even in his youth, frequently reflect upon his own and others actions, and censure them freely, that himself may be engaged to know to do better when the like occasion recurs. 'Tis generosity not to admire every thing he hears or sees (which some mis∣call civility) but to use his judgment; to dis∣commend as well as praise; nor to acquiesce in every answer, but to seek for solid reason, and, according to his capacity, satisfaction. Let him also in in his sports be prompt, diligent, active, subtil, free, not dishonest; and where there is any engagement for victory, earnest, contriving, watching advantages, yet not quarrelsome; en∣deavouring to overcome, yet patient if van∣quished: and these qualities will be also afterward put on in more serious matters; for if hunting be a praeludium to War, Childrens sports are so to all other actions of their life. 8. IT is also necessary that the Educator have the disposing of the servants; or at least that the Child have none but virtuous and discreet per∣sons to serve and wait upon him, especially in his Chamber: whose discourse at his rising and going to bed have great influence upon him many times, either to confirme or deface such notions, as have bin infused into him the day before. Great care also must be had of recom∣mending him to good Companions, and rather those that are somewhat above him in years, of a good reputation, and such as you will be content he may imitate. If you come into a
strange place, you may discover evill company; if they be extraordinarily officious without any reason; if they applaud whatever the young man saith, or doth; if they offer their service and assi∣stance to all purposes; if they advise against the Go∣vernor, or to liberty, libertinisme, or idlenes; if they railly, droll, and speak evil of others, especially of virtuous men, or such as the young man is recommended to; if they endeavour to draw him to unknown, obscure, or suspected places, or bring him into much company. Beware of such men, and get your charge out of their hands as soon as you can. 9. I have often thought it a great shame to see Beasts, as Horses and Dogs, taught with so much care and industry, their natural vices cor∣rected, and their disposition reformed, by al∣most certain rules fitted, out of observation, to every humour and imperfection: Yet many men to return not only not bettered, but much dete∣riorated from their Governors; till I considered, that besides the ignorance, negligence, and in∣sufficiency of the Educators, or their undertaking to bring up too many, and all by the same way, there was also required on the part of the Edu∣cated, the generous concurrence of his own free de∣sire and endeavour to do well. That some also have such natural imperfections and perverse dispositions, as if not taken at the first moment, as it were, the primo-prime acts, and preserved with infinite care and industry from temptation, are difficultly reformed and straightned. Nero was not rectified by Seneca and Burrhus, tho it is probable, had he been a private person, and so long under their care till he had got an
habit, and imbibed those instructions they gave, he might have proved a virtuous person. But the Tree returned to its native crookednes before it had time to grow straight. Cicero's Son to the stupidity of his nature, added Drunkennes and good fellowship; and no wonder if from Athens and Cratippus, he returned as he went to them. M. Aurelius provided 14. of the most approved Masters of the whole Empire (the learned Ju∣lius Pollux being one) to educate his Son Commodus; and within a while cashiered five of them, because he had observed some levities in their carriage. Yet could not the other nine rectify the froward and barbarous humour, perhaps suck'd from, and encouraged afterward, by his Mother, at the time of his conception in love with a Gladiator. Caracalla was nursed by a Christian (Tert. ad Scapulam) whose education had such force upon him, that for a long time he behaved himself so, as he gained the love of all men, hujus puo∣ritia blanda, ingeniosa, &c. saith Spartianus. But afterward the natural humors which were not suf∣ficiently by that short time of good education purged out, sermented again, and corrupted the whole mass. In such cases therefore, I advise the Educator to be contented to do his endea∣vour, and not easily despond; but if no better∣ment, to have patience; and without all passion, and with due respect to the person (careful not to fix any scandal or permanent infamy upon the family) send him away. He may be fit for some∣what else; as the Spanish Proverb saith, that which will not make a pot, may make a cover: or others may be more fitting for him, or more fortunate then your self. And so, as Physicians re∣move their incurable Patients far off into the
countrey, free your self from him, that you may not be shamed by him, nor your self see his shame. CHAP. VI. Of the ordering the disposition and Manners of the Educated. THIS I begin withal, because it is the chiefest and foundation of all the rest. For if you can plant in him a virtuous disposition, the rest is easy, and follows as natural co∣rollaries from thence. And this is sustained up∣on two general bases, Conscience, and Honor. Therefore, 1. LET the Educator in the very first place en∣deavour to plant in his charge a true sense of Religion. I mean not that, which consists in Di∣sputing for a party, or in discourse only; but that in the heart and affections. That he may seriously remember and acknowledg his Creator betimes; and accustome himself to bear that yoke, which in time will grow easy, and at length plea∣sant: and that he may not be ashamed to own God Almighty for his Master in this adulte∣rous and atheistical generation. Our Lord said, that the good Seed, being sown in the ground of an honest and tractable disposition, cannot but bring forth in youth the blade, then the eare, and at last arrive at maturity. Regard not any wicked Proverb, or censures of early piety. But if Reli∣gion
once take root in the spirit of a Child; 1. The principal is saved, should it please God to call him betimes out of the World. 2. Neither can he in his whole life miscarry. For this is foun∣ding him upon the rock, which withstands all floods and tempests; i. e. it is a principle, univer∣sal, perfect, unfailable; upon which whoever builds, shall live uniformly, contentedly, and happily, both here and hereafter: A principle which will bear him up in all estates, accidents, and actions; a principle, he never need change, or forget. His sufferings by it will be pleasant, his life blameles, his actions prudent, his words discreet, his thoughts virtuous and regular, and in all things shall he live according to the per∣fection human nature is capable of. Religion pre∣scribes a certain end, the Glory of God, or doing as much good as he can to himself and others; which is an high and noble aime, and direction; and hinders all lownes of spirit, disorder and con∣fusion in actions, and inconstancy in resolutions. For if any object be proposed, he considers not so much what is lawfull or expedient, as what is best to be done. From want of such a scope or mark it comes, that most men shoot under, employ their minds in little by-businesses, un∣worthy their dignity, and not honorable if ef∣fected. Indeed our understandings are foolish, and desires irregular; and to rectify them we have Fathers and Governors, whose wisedome we make our guide; yet is not theirs comparable to that of our Lord set forth in the Holy Scriptures. Fre∣quently therefore inculcate the greatness of God, the Creator and Governor of all, and every par∣ticular, in this World; the shortnes of our life, and certainty of judgment; the great reward for
the good, and severe punishment for the bad. Ex∣plain to him the mysteries of the Lords Prayer, the Creed, Commandments, his obligation in Ba∣ptism, and the doctrine of the Sacraments in due time. Accustom him often to meditate, and set before him the manner of the life, which our great Lord, the only Son of God, lived here on Earth; and the great sufferings and mortifica∣tions he voluntarily chose and underwent; that so he may not prefer in his thoughts any way be∣fore it. Frame also for him Prayers conformable to his age and condition, which may contain a summary of his duty. And take care that he say them every morning and evening upon his knees, not in bed; and as he advanceth, change them, lest they become a meer form. Let him also every night, at his going to bed, recollect historically what he hath done, and said that day; and for what he hath done amiss to be sorry, and for what well done give thanks. Let him also frequently (suppose twice a day) read some part of the Scripture, and the Historical and Sapien∣tial Books rather then the other, which are more difficultly understood. In the morning let him, as much as he can, order his actions and emploi∣ments for the whole day; foreseeing what temta∣tions that day are likely to come upon him, and how he may best prepare against them. 2. LET him also be made to know his own dignity, the sublime ends to which he was crea∣ted, and the noble actions which are in his power. Ad magna, imò ad maxima, nati sumus, not as Beasts groveling on the Earth, obedient to their appetit, and labouring only for their belly. Major sum, & ad majora genitus, quam ut
mancipium sim mei corporis. Sen. Man hath a de∣sign higher then Nature, to be like to Almighty God and his Holy Angels; to overcome himself, master his passions, and rule over others, not by fear and violence, but by reason, justice, and choice. The Arts and Sciences he invents, the Laws and Government he establisheth, the Cities and Fleets he buildeth, argue him to be of a most noble extraction; and that a good man is worthy to be reverenced of his own self; in as much as he will do nothing misbeseeming so noble and eminent a nature. And especially let him be fortified, and well prepared to entertain sufferings; which is the great trial and cupel of gallant spirits, and without which he can never become perfect, i. e. his faculties can never be advanced to the height of their power. For in some sort suffering is the one half of our life, as doing is the other. Sufferings in body, sicknesses, pains, want of conveniencies in diet, lodging, liberty, wearines, &c. In good name, obloquies, defama∣tions, revilings, affronts, too much reputation, expectation, and the like. In his mind, igno∣rances of what he desires, or is fitting for him to know, discontents for loss, or miscarriage of Relations, and Friends, breaches of friendship, treacheries, ingratitudes, failings of his designs, insulting of enemies, &c. In external things, losses, poverty, with infinite more. I shall not name spiritual afflictions, because seldom inci∣dent to this age. Now for these and the like, let him be instructed how to render himself as little, as is possible, obnoxious to them, by not setting his mind upon what is not in his power; by good considerations proper to every sort, such as are furnished in many Books, particularly in Pe∣trarch.
But especially let him be practised and in∣ured to suffer and bear so many as his age well per∣mits, with courage and patience. However, he may arrive to the discretion not to be disturb'd for trifles, for the loss of a Horse, a Dog, or a Picture, or somewhat of smaller value. And if he can bear a small burthen in youth, doubt not but he will be able to carry greater still as he grows in age. 3. ENDEAVOUR to sow in him the seeds of true honor, to be afraid of shame for misbeha∣viours, and to value the good opinion of vir∣tuous and worthy persons. The desire of ho∣nor is of so great force in all our actions, that the false and conterfeit of it is the great incen∣tive and encouragment to all wickednes; that those men, who neglect and despise Religion, yet pretend altogether for honor; that the horridest and most dangerous designs never want persons to act them, if they can be perswaded to be ho∣norable; that the pretended diminution of it is thought not sufficiently revenged with the loss of life; that for it so many Battels are fought, so many friendships broken, so many Laws, even of Religion despised, and Conscience and Justice trampled on. But these are from a misapprehension and mistaking that to be honorable, which in∣deed is not so. But I would my Educated should esteem reputation only from wise and virtuous persons, which is the attestation of them, that know best, to his actions, and a public recom∣mendation to emploiment. By this means he shall list himself under that ensign, and be ranged with that party, whereof our Lord himself is the Cap∣tain; and he will take pleasure in virtue and piety,
when he sees his actions and waies conformed to the sentiment of the World of all gallant persons, both past and present. Nor shall he need to hunt after applause and fame; that will follow him fast enough, with those that are either indifferently, or well inclined. But he must expect obloquy from the contrary party; and many evil words, and much raillery will be spent upon him; in vain, if he have the courage to despise them. Being a Gentleman, then let him consider that he is above the tongues of evil men: That he is engaged to nobler and sublimer designs and actions then other persons; he must steer by higher Stars, and aim at some∣what more Heroical. Other men labour for a fortune, and are a long time before they can arrive at that height to which he is born, and wherein the virtues of his fore fathers have pla∣ced him: he is already, because of his wealth, secured from necessity and want of what may be convenient or useful for his studies; from neces∣sity, too often the mother of low and abject thoughts, with which a poor man first combats before he can conquer any advantage of em∣ploiment. Besides, by his Family he is already placed upon the Theater, where all his actions shall be observed and praised, even more then they deserve; all mens eyes are upon him ex∣pecting somewhat extraordinary from him; and so he needs not some eminent action to intro∣duce him into the good opinion of the World. Let him therefore aim at somewhat above, not only ordinary persons, but his own condition also; least he fall equal to those below him; for he cannot in practise reach the height his imagi∣nation designs. Let him say continually with
himself, for what came I into the World? Why hath God gived me such riches, such parents, such respect amongst men, but to do more good? Surely I have received five talents, a greater increase and return is expected from me. Ma∣gnam fortunam magnus animus decet. 4. THIS greatnes of spirit consists principally in these virtues, (omitting most of those, which Erasmus in his Enchiridion Militis Christiani, re∣commends very effectually, but are common to all Christians as well as to a Cavalier) I will only recite such as are more noble, heroical, and ho∣norable; and leave the pressing of them to the industry of the Educator. HIS Title of Gentleman suggests to him the virtue of humility, courtesy, and affability; easy of access, and passing by neglects and offences, especially from inferiors. Pardoning also injuries, as being superior to them; and not provocable to injure another. Generosum apud animum cito moritur iracundia. He despiseth no man for his for∣tune or misery; and is not afraid to own those who are unjustly oppressed; for such, ordina∣rily, are men of parts, and if of virtue and in∣tegrity, they commonly rise again. He is not proud, no not when commended, nor doth any thing render him insolent or haughty above other persons. Nor doth he strive to make himself known to be a Gentleman by huffing, swelling, strutting, or domineering over inferiors; nor by disobedience, and restines towards Superiors; much less by hectoring and quarelling. So neither by his clothes and peruque: nor stands he upon his family, name, wealth, honor of his kindred
or Ancestors; but strives to equal himself with those that began their reputation, in civility, industry, gentlenes and discretion. By obedience to Laws, submission to Governors; not con∣tent to do barely what is enjoined, or to make Law the adequate rule of his actions, he forbears more then the law forbids, and doth more then it commands: he storns to take advantage of his quality to exemt him from such duties, exer∣cises, and rules, as meaner persons are obliged unto. HE doth nothing for fear of punishment; nor leaves he a good action because of the dan∣ger, obloquy, or the like. Courage is the proper virtue of great spirits. Wherefore he defieth all little crafts and subtilties in negotiations, and thinks to master his designs by reason, and ma∣gnanimity, rather then finesse and devices. He is also, as much as is possible, equal and alike; in his conversation, calme, peaceable; and the same in private as in public. He bears also adversity cheerfully: when deservedly chid or corrected, is patient; is open, and free, not dissembling or hiding himself behind little nets, or fig-leaves. Invalidum omne naturâ querulum est. He scorns to tell a lie. Tasso said, that other vices were like clip'd or light, but lying like coun∣terfeit and false mony, which an honest man ought not to pay, tho himself received it. Nor is he afraid to confess his faults, because he com∣mitteth them unwillingly; nor ashamed to discover his ignorance, for he hath a desire to learn. HE is also laborious, abstinent, and willingly un∣dertakes
difficult and painful emploiments: he had rather be in a Camp then in a Bed-chamber, and is afraid of nothing more the the dead Sea of sloth and pleasure. Difficulties, he knows, bake and concoct the mind, lazines effeminates and loosneth it. HE is ready to do good to all; give rather then receive; is bountiful, values not great favours done by himself, so much as small ones re∣ceived. Is not ungrateful to others; but himself desires no recompense, and is content, tho un∣worthily used. Bona facere & mala pati regium est. He thinks it much below him to hate any one. IN sum, he is bold without rashnes; affable without flattery; prudent without cunning; secret without dissimulation; devout without hypo∣crisy. He is constant, not opiniatre; liberal, not prodigal; gentle, not soft; open, not foolish; fru∣gal, not covetous. He fears nothing, he despiseth nothing, he admires nothing. 5. TO beget in him these and all other vir∣tues, set before him good examples; if of his own family, ancestors, and kindred 'tis the better: as also are those of his own Countrey, condition, time, age, acquaintance, and present, rather then ancient and absent. No Prince (except of a very base alloy, as Nero and Commodus) if he hear of a good Musician or Comedian, desire to be like him; but if he knows of the noble Acts of his equal, he wisheth his own were such. Acquaint him also with the stories of good and virtuous, rather then great-fam'd men, for this many times fills his
head with vain and fruitles imaginations. And here I cannot but recommend to all persons the reading of lives, of modern rather then an∣cient persons: which are not the worse (if drawn truly) because somewhat hansomer then the Ori∣ginal. As Monsieur Peiresk, and Monsieur de Renty, Alessandro Luzzaga, &c Coglione, Giacome Me∣dices, Marquis of Pescara, Pibrac, Giac. Foscarini, &c. Sir Tho. More, proposed to himself Jo. Pi∣cus Mirandula, whose life and some of his Works he translated into English. Carolus Calvus caused a Manual to be made for his instruction in his daily duty, out of the lives of famous persons; and that excellent book of M. Aurelius, seems to be no other, then such Memorials as he col∣lected for the governing himself and Empire. Examples also of evil men, if discreetly repre∣sented, are as useful (if not more) then others; for wise men learn more by fools, then fools by wise men. The thorns also which are dug out of his own ground by admonition or correction, must serve to make a fence for the future: and he must be manured with the weeds pluck'd up in his own Garden. All the faults, both of him∣self, and other men, being useful to preserve him from the like. 6. LET him also know the great advantage of Innocency above Repentance. He that keeps himself from great sins, is as one that hath a prosperous voiage; he that repents as he that saves himself upon a plank. Consider what the good Fa∣ther said to the frugal Son; All that I have is thine. And what S. John of those who continue Virgins, i. e. Innocent; that they have a new and peculiar song, that they, as immediate attendants,
follow the Lamb whither soever he goeth. And that they are the first fruits most holy unto God and our Lord. How happy is he that never goes out of his way! With a reasonable constant pace he must needs advance much further then other persons. Especially fortify him against the three great ruins of youth, Luxury, debauchery, and Gaming; and all other faults, which tho in them∣selves lesser, yet his peculiar inclination may render them as dangerous as the other. But if his garment cannot be kept alwaies clean; yet have a care it may be with all possible speed washed; and let all endeavour be used to pre∣serve him from habitual and customary sins; for ra∣ther then permit these, you ought to render him up to his Parents, who perhaps may find a cure you know not. Dionysius ('tis better to use a forreign example for that, which is too common amongst us) having in his youth in∣dulged himself the liberty of debauchery, and fin∣ding too late the inconvenience, and endea∣vouring to oblige himself to the strict rules of temperance; was answerd, tho perhaps untruly, that he could not safely do it; if he relinquished his drinking he would fall into a consumtion; so in his own defence he was forced to con∣tinue in his sottishnes. So true is that of our Lord, He that committeth sin is the servant of sin; and especially in this sin of Drunkennes, whilst that extraneous supernatural fire quenching the true, native, genuine heat of the body, re∣quireth still to be nourished by its equal or stronger. 7. THE great spring and origine of lust is Idlenes; and if drinking increase the fire, lust takes
away the fewel, both shorten the life. Ply him therefore with continual labour and study, that the Temter may find no bait to cover his poison. This is the remedy against that fire, which con∣sumeth so many noble Persons, Families and Nations; an enemy not to be contended withal, but avoided. After you have detained from him all Romances, lascivious Books, Pictures and discourses, and yet prevail not; bodily labour in∣terchanged with study must be prescribed: and if this remedy not, change places, and suggest new objects continually. A worthy Prince of late times, being, by a servant of his, temted to this sin, shewing him all things prepared for the purpose; the Prince opened the door of the room, and commanded the officious Ruffian to give him place and secrecy; which he had no sooner done, but the Prince shut the door upon him, and forbad him ever to come again into his presence. And truly this Temtation is the exact, and almost adequate, trial of a brave and heroical spirit. He that is not carried away with every beauty, nor too much with any one; that is deaf to pleasure & those enticements which so few can avoid, hath a noble Soul and well grounded virtue. But if neither sense of honor, which this sin wounds more then any other, (shame alwaies accompanying those unlawful, as blushing doth the lawful actions) nor sense of the grievousnes of the sin, nor the expen∣sivenes, nor spoiling his parts, nor danger to his per∣son, nor the fear of diseases, and shortnes of life, nor conscience of his duty and virtue, nor emploi∣ment, nor any other remedy will serve; 'tis best to marry him. This sort of Love, said Tasso, is a vice, wherein the same coin is not current between
buyer and seller: the one pays honor, conscience, virtue as well as money, the other but love at the very best. But betwixt man and wife there is money for money, love for love, and all other things equal. But I look not upon Marriage as a remedy only for fornication, except in such young men, who before the time, are impetuously car∣ried on to those desires; it is much more honorable, but seldom falls under the Educators cognisance; and if it do, he is rather to advise who is unfit, then who is fit for a wife. 8. THE inconveniencies of gaming, are, 1. acquaintance with low, base, unworthy com∣pany. 2. Learning also from them sordid and unmanly Arts, as sharking, cheating, lying, equi∣vocating, which is by such counted overwitting their camerade. 3. Loss of time and money. 4. Great engagement of the passions, which is the most effectual and speedy means to obliterate any good thought, and introduce the superiority of the be∣stial part. 5. Learning, or at lest patiently enduring those abominable swearings, cursings, blasphe∣mings, &c. 6. Danger from other mens Passions. How many have bin murthered, more duelled, upon play-quarrels? Monsieur Faret observes, that only three sorts of persons follow the trade of ga∣ming. 1. Covetuous, who for love of money care not what means they employ to obtain it, and find none easier and cheaper then this which requires no stock, no tools, no learning, and is readily taken up by any one that hath but little wit, and less con∣science. 2. Lazy and effeminate, who not knowing how to spend their time better, can devise no di∣vertisement so proper as this lasch exercise. 3. Desperate, who being by fortune, or their own
wickednes, reduced to that extremity, that they live to day, as if they were to die to morrow, think they may obtain that subsistence by cheating or hazard, which they cannot hope reasonably for by their industry; and not having any virtue, ability, or lawful emploiment to supply their debauche∣ry, they betake themselves to prey upon the weak∣nesses and ignorance of better men then them∣selves. Here then it is to be supposed, that no Gen∣tleman desires to advance his fortune by the detri∣ment of an other, and that to avoid coveteousnes (the author of those horrid mischiefs in gaming) he ought to forbear gaming, as the trade and em∣ploiment of necessitous, idle, dissolute persons: the cheats whereof are so infinite, that it is impos∣sible a virtuous or ingenious person should learn or avoid them; and that it is a science which will neither credit its Professor, nor quit the charge of the learning. Yet if not as a trade, but with due cauti∣on practised, plays may be learned; such especially as are menaged by skill, and not fortune only, to ac∣quaint him with numbring, and to quicken his fancy and memory. Besides, Musick, discourse, and such other divertisements will not hold out long conversation with the same persons. But then let him not play for more money then the loss of it will be insensible to him; and if his play can bear its own charge, seek not to gain by it. And let him (as much as is possible) practise to be unconcern'd in the winning or loosing; to play calmly without passion. To which if he can arrive, he hath been serious in his play to very good purpose. Let him also be ve∣racious, and abominate a lie, or cheat, even in his play. And lastly, if a by-stander, let him beware of discovering the faults, either unskilfulnes, or de∣ceit of the gamesters; else both parties will hate him.
CHAP. VII. Of Frugality, or ordering his Money and expences. 1. WEALTH i. e. Money being the great Instrument, whereby all things are per∣formed in civil Societies; and therefore be∣ing equal to all other external commodities of our life; whereby also well laid out friends are gained in the Court of Heaven; it is necessary the Educated be taught the use and value of it betimes. It is reported of Sr Thomas More's Father, that to the intent his Son might prove a good husband, and employ his time and in∣tention wholly upon learning, he would never permit him to have any money, but when he wanted any thing to ask for it. Quod adeo stri∣cte observavit, ut nec ad reficiendos attritos cal∣ceos, nisi à patre peteret, pecuniam haberet. And this severity Sir Thomas More afterwards migh∣tily commended; For by that means (saith he) I could not furnish any vice or pleasure, I could not loose my time in gaming, nor knew I what unthris∣tines or luxury were, nor could I employ my self in any thing but my studies. Sir Thomas More was indeed one of a rare and extraordinary spirit, so observant of his Father, that the History saith he never offended him, nor was ever of∣fended with any thing his Father said or did to him: And when himself was Lord Chancellor of England, before he ascended his own Tribunal in Westminster-Hall, he went to the Kings-Bench-Court
(where his Father was Judge) to ask him blessing upon his knees: And I beleive had his Fa∣ther indulged him the command of all his E∣state, he would have done no otherwise then as without it. So that whether is better to keep all money from a Youth, or let him have some small proportion (for any great part he must by no means be possess'd of) is a question not to be decided by this example. I knew two Persons of quality, great friends, who brought up their Sons together, and were of divers opinions and practises in this point. If we may judge by the event, he, who had the power of money, proved the better husband. But neither do I think this to be any more then one single example; more, I am confi∣dent, have miscarried on the other side. Me∣thinks the best general rule (because several dispositions are to be handled several waies, which must be left to the discretion of an ex-experienced Educator) is; That he be allowed so much a Month to be spent according to his own fancy, yet over-looked, not scrictly watched (except where there is reason to suspect some ill menagement) by the Governor. Who is also to restrain him from debauchery, gaming, and all notorious acts of Prodigality: and on the contrary to provoke him to compassionate the necessitous, be liberal to such as have any way served him (nothing being so unbecom∣ing a Gentleman as ingratitude) and such like. But by no means let him have all his allow∣ance in his own power, for that is to put the bridle out of his mouth, the means whereby the Governor must coerce him. 2. LET him, (at first with the direction of
his Governor) do as much of his own business (I mean buying, trucking, giving, receiving, pay∣ing, chusing, clothes, books, &c.) as he is capa∣ble: for hereby his mind is inured to a great piece of wisdom, [Soli sapienti notum est, quan∣ti res quaeque taxanda sit. Sen. ep. 82.] to esteem, compare one thing with another; to judge and value, not only things necessary for the pre∣sent, but all others also. For the grounds and principles of judgment and discretion are the same, tho the subjects, whereupon they are exercised, are divers. Nor let him fear the silly opinion of such Persons, as think cheap∣ning or chusing a derogation to their honor, or buying for the just value a cheating of the sel∣ler. I have seen the greatest King in Christen∣dom refuse to buy what he conceived too dear, and to change the Shop where he thought himself not well used. Persons also of very good quality in Italy are not asham'd to go to a Shop, chuse, and bargain, v. g. for their clothes, and make the Taylor also cut them out of the whole piece before them. Whereas an ordinary Gentleman amongst us thinks himself abused, if not cousened. As if it were noblenes to expose and suffer themselves to be overreach∣ed, derided, and fooled by an impudent Pedlar, or flattering Host. Who, tho in our Na∣tion they arrive, by the impudent folly of those, who know no nobler way of generosity then to be fooled by the meanest and unworthiest of all people, to buy the estates of such Pro∣digals, as degrade themselves first into a famili∣arity, then into an equality, at last into an in∣feriority, with them: yet in other Countreys, where men have and make use of the parts
God hath given them, they are kept in that degree and rank which befits their Profession. 3. LET him alwaies buy with ready money; which will both keep him in mediocrity of ex∣pences, within his bounds, teach him the value of money, and acquire him very great reputa∣tion both with Tradesmen and others. He buy∣eth cheaper and better commodities, and is not imposed upon with false bills and accounts. By this means also he may learn to live under his revenue; which whosoever doth not, can ne∣ver keep himself out of debt. It is therefore dangerous to have to do with them that keep books, which are authentick records, tho go∣verned many times by careles or dishonest Boys; except himself also keep another, and as dili∣gently look to his accounts; and that frequent∣ly to, (old reckonings never turning to the profit of the debtor): and if after the manner of Merchants, under the notion of Creditor and Debtor, 'tis the easier and better. But if he keep his accounts severely, not only they with whom he deals, but his Servants also, will be more careful what reckonings they bring him. 4. YOUNG Men out of emulation have a great vanity of desiring whatever they see their equals enjoy, and this proves many times a dan∣gerous and expensive folly: being accompanied most-what with a speedy loathing, or neglect of what they unreasonably long'd for. Omnis flultitia laborat fastidio sui. A young man need not be altogether cured of this distemper: if it can be regulated, excellent use may be made of it for his instruction in many knowledges,
and gaining him much experience. But to mo∣derate the exorbitancy, the best way is to make him an example to others; by putting him upon some particular curiosity by himself, which may with reputation be opposed to those many va∣nities of his Camerades. And such a one also as need not perish with the using, as Globes, Maps, Pictures, Medals, Curiosities of Art and Nature, &c. 4. NEITHER let the Educator be too mo∣rose or solicitous to keep him from all vanity in clothes or expences, lest he be discouraged. For few being willing to learn out of the School of Experience, and she being a good Mistress, if not the sole one, it is very fitting to make her a partner in our instruction. Only the Edu∣cator (that is, reason) must be the chief Master, and let his charge take out only such lessons under her, as his Guide shall think fit: that is, such as may convince the Younker of the vanity of those and the like desires. Scriptum est enim (saith Rog. Bacon very wisely) qui non errat non invenit, qui non corrumpit non emendat, qui non tristatur non laetatur.
CHAP. VIII. Of the preservation of his Health. BECAUSE it is very tedious, chargeable, and sometimes dangerous to repair for eve∣ry small distemper to a Physician, it is very fit∣ting the Governor should know to preserve his charge in health. For without that he is un∣capable to undergo any emploiment; neither can he study, nor follow his exercises, when sick; but is troublesom to others, and unpro∣fitable to himself. 1. IN Youth excess in eating and drinking is very frequent, necessary therefore it is to mode∣rate his appetite. For if the stomack be stretch∣ed beyond its true extent, it will require to be filled, but never well digest what it receives. Besides it is much better to prevent diseases by temperance, sobriety, chastity, and exercise () then cure them by Phy∣sick. Qui enim se Medicis dederit, seipsum sibi eri∣pit. Summa medicinarum ad sanitatem corporis & animae abstinentia est. He that lives abstemi∣ously or but temperately, needs not study the wholesomnes of this meat, nor the pleasantnes of that sawce, the moments and punctilios of air, heat, cold, exercise, lodging, diet; nor is criti∣cal in cookery and vintnership; but takes thank∣fully
what God gives him. Especially let all young men forbear wines and strong drinks, as well as spiced and hot meats; for they in∣troduce a preternatural heat into the body, and at least hinder and obstruct, if not at length extinguish the natural. 2. BUT if overtaken by excess (as it is difficult alwaies to stand upon guard) the best remedy is vomiting, or fasting it out; neither go to bed upon a full stomack, except by reason of drink∣ing, it be necessary to remove him from com∣pany; that the World may not be witnes of his brutality; and that himself may be hindred from all extravagancies, and be ashamed of it the next day. Let Physick be alwaies the last remedy, that Nature may not trust to it. 3. IF through melancholy, timorousnes, or wo∣manish education (for I see very few Women well educate Men; nor Men Women) your charge have imaginations that he is alwaies sick; (if he only pretend so that he may avoid stu∣dy and labour, 'tis another case) do not at first seem to discourage him, but rather bring him off his humor by painful and harsh Physick; which is the cure also of those melancholic persons, whose sicknes, tho they are fre∣quently indisposed, yet is not dangerous either for life or labour. 4. MUCH of health consists in exercises and recreations, which must be regulated according to the Country, Season, &c. but generally ra∣ther violent then lasch; such, I mean, as may cause the body to transpire plentifully; and
exhale those black and fuliginous vapors, which are wont to oppress young men; that nature be not hindred in her circulation. Neither be afraid, tho he be weary and tired: for wea∣rines is no disease, nor doth simple heat without putrefaction cause a Feaver. Besides brisk exer∣cise will render him strong, active, mettlesome; whereas idlenes contracts a stagnation of humors, numnes of the joints, and dulnes in the brain. Yet violent exercises, as running, leaping, wrest∣ling, are not so fit for thin, choleric, and weak bodies: rendring such old and gowty before their time, as they did Constans the Em∣peror. 5. DANCING is a moderate exercise; so much whereof is to be learn'd as may give a good and graceful motion of the body. No Nation civil or barbarous, ancient or modern (except our late contradictive spirits) that express not their joy and mirth by it, which makes it seem a sprout of the Law of Nature. But the use, which is now frequently made of it, espe∣cially since it is become a difficult study, and many years, besides infinite practise, required to a reasonable perfection in it, I cannot but utterly condemn: subscribing to the severe, but true, censure of that most excellent modern Historian Monsieur de Rhodez. There is nothing (saith he) which doth more dissipate the powers of the spirit, nor more enervate the forces of the Soul, then the ravishing harmony, the continual agita∣tion of the body, and the charms of Ladies conver∣sation. The great triumph of sensuality is such meetings, where the eare is fed with Musick, the eyes with Beauties, the smell with Perfums,
the tast with Banquets; whither none are invit∣ed or come, but to please or be pleased. Could their thoughts be then seen, in what a hurry and tumult should we perceive them? what de∣sires, what fears, what impatience, what lust, what jealousy, what envying, what despisings! &c. Card. Borromeus in his Book against Balls and Dances saith: that he, when a young man at the University, and his companions, with great importunity prevailed with one of their Professors, a grave and prudent person, to go along with them to a Ball: who having ob∣served the actions and circumstances thereof, told them with great astonishment, that it was an invention of the Devil to destroy Souls, by corrupting the very being and essence of Chri∣stian virtues. When a servant lighteth a torch, we give him strict charge not to carry it a∣mongst flax, straw, or the like. Why do not Parents forbid their Children to frequent those places, where is more danger of kindling ano∣ther manner of flame? to have the imagina∣tion swelled with the presence of Beauties in their trim, and under a full sail, when the blood is chased, and the mind set upon pleasure; is not drinking cold water, but strong poison to one overheated. 6. IT will not be amiss here to add, that di∣vers bodily diseases, infirmities, and undecencies may by the Educators care be regulated, and ei∣ther wholly, or in good part, amended. For few there be, who have all the members of their body equally sound and well-disposed; the worst is corrected by bringing spirits to that part with labour and exercise: as
Shooting in a long bow, for the breast and arms. Bowling for the reins, stone, gravel, &c. Walking for the stomack. Riding for the head: and the great Drusus having weak and small thighs and legs strengthened them by riding, especially after dinner: as did also his late Ma∣jesty. Squinting and a dull sight, are amended by shooting. Crookednes by swinging and hanging upon that arm. Stammering by deliberate and slow speaking, and observing what words run most currently. So both Mr Mede and Mr Oughtred helped them∣selves. Divers misaffections in the eyes, by Spectacles. Bashfulnes and blushing, by frequent speaking in company, &c.
CHAP. IX. Of the divers passions, inclinations, and dispositions of Man, and the ways to rectify and order them. 1. BUT that the Educator may clearly see his work, and have it, as it were, whol∣ly in his view; I will dig a little deeper; ana∣tomize and lay open the Soul with its operati∣ons. Perhaps not so accurately and punctually, yet as plainly, and for practice as usefully, as I can; regarding not the curiosity or Philosophy, but the necessity and utility of the knowledge. For he that knows quid homo potest, will quick∣ly perceive what his charges abilities are, and what his defects; and consequently what the remedies. 2. IN the Soul then are two sorts of powers, Cognoscitive for knowledge. Motive for action. Knowledge (omitting apprehension as not fal∣ling under our consideration) consists in inven∣tion, memory, and judgment, of which in their places. Action is in the Will (of which we shall not speak) or Affections. And these are either Con∣cupiscible or Irascible, and both these are Passions or Inclinations. Passions are the natural motions of the Soul to∣wards objects agreeable or disagreeable. Or the
motions, or effects, which objects pleasing or displeas∣ing immediately cause in the Soul. i. e. what the Soul suffers from its objects immediately with∣out deliberation. Tho some call Passions on∣ly the more irregular and ungoverned actions of the Soul. Inclinations are the frequenter, and customary working according to those passions. And, if meer∣ly according to natural suggestions, they are properly called Inclinations: but if they pro∣ceed to excess, and be not bridled and regu∣lated, they become vices. But if regulated by reason or Gods spirit, they are properly Virtues. If by the probity of Nature, without much de∣liberation, our inclinations work laudably, i. e. as they do when habitually regulated by reason, then are those natural Inclinations called natu∣ral virtues, or good nature. 3. BY the way take this caution, That you trust not to these natural virtues, as if they were, or could be, sufficient to make a man habitually and throughly virtuous: or, as if he, that acteth ac∣cording to them, were really and sufficiently virtuous. What Seneca saith of Valour, is true of all the rest. Paucissimos fortes natura procrea∣vit, bona institutione plures reddidit industria. And this our holy Religion expresseth more plain∣ly, when it distinguisheth between Grace and Nature; for if natural dispositions be not suffi∣ciently virtuous morally, neither are moral vir∣tues sufficient for obtaining heavenly and spiri∣tual graces. Dispositions indeed they are to vir∣tue, but must themselves also be ordered and directed by Prudence: else they will run into many mistakes; love, where there is more rea∣reason
to hate, and cajole, where they should chastise: they will also neglect many actions of virtue, and run into many of vice. Nor is it a sufficient excuse for any evil-dispositioned, v. g. an angry person, to say, that he is so naturally, for we are to live by reason and grace, not by Nature; nor is it well said of a thief, I am so naturally, for to what purpose have you reason? 4. PASSIONS. INCLINATIONS proper to, or arising from, them. 1. Love. Sweetness, kindness; contrary to insensibleness of good. 2. Hatred. Maliciousness, evil-naturedness. 3. Desire. Heat or eagerness; contrary to coldness or Indifferency. 4. Aversation. Frowardness, peevishness. 5. Hope. Courage, boldness; contrary to faintheartedness, cowardliness. 6. Fear. Timidity, softness, (contrary to hardiness,) indifferency, lazines, quietness, love of ease, dulnes. 7. Confidence. Credulity; contrary to distrust. 8. Despair. Impatience; contrary to pati∣ence, longanimity. 9. Joy. Cheerfulnes; contrary to sadness. 10. Sorrow. Melancholy, saturninenes; con∣trary to mirth, jovialness. 11. Acknowledgment. Gratitude, generosity; con∣trary to ingratitude. 12. Wrath or choler. Roughness, harshness, moro∣sity, contrary to meekness. Anger. Promptness, briskness, rashness, revenge. Pride. Haughtiness, swelling. 13. Shame, Modesty, bashfulness. 14. Impudence. Hastiness, impertinency.
15. Repentance. Flexibility; contrary to ob∣stinateness. 16. Pitty. Tenderness, mercifulness; contrary to hardhearted∣ness, cruelty. 17. Envy. Malice. 18. Emulation. Activeness. 19. Indignation. Vehemency. 20. Reverence. Humility. 21. Contempt. Surliness, disdain, scorn, in∣solence. 22. Love of Women. Amorousness, uxoriousness. 23. Jealousy. Suspiciousness, doubtfulness, suspense, misinterpretation. IT is to be noted, that many times a man worketh contrary to his natural Inclinations; be∣cause the Inclinations follow the cognoscence of the Soul: and it happens frequently, that a vio∣lent and strong apprehension may be formed on a suddain, contrary to what is usual. As the sound of Drums, Trumpets, Shouts, Examples, &c. may put such apprehensions into a Coward, as may make him valiant; and on the contra∣ry weariness, darkness, rumors, sombre and dis∣mal accidents, &c. may intimidate a valiant man. Wherefore it is great rashness to judge of any mans inclination by any particular action: or to think that every man must work, as he is inclined. Again; Passions having their force, because reason and the commanding part of the Soul doth not restrain and bridle them; it seems that Inclinations are best discerned when they are most at liberty: as Childrens at their play, when they think not of dissembling, or re∣straining them. And 2. that they, who com∣mand not one passion, are also obedient to others;
and that he who is one way passionate, is likely to be so in all, or any. And 3. that the Educa∣tor, seeing the inclination of his charge, may moderate, change, and govern it as it shall be convenient; and that by changing objects, and apprehensions; but chiefly by shewing him the good or bad of that, or the contrary, that is, by rationally persuading him to submit it to reason. 5. THESE Inclinations are but as the Ele∣ments and principles of our dispositions and hu∣mors: which are made up of many of these (Man as all other Creatures being de-de-composi∣tum) and these in several degrees and predo∣minancies; and these also mingled and tem∣pered with the differences of knowledge or ap∣prehension. And by the way, upon these grounds, I perswade my self, it would not be difficult to enumerate all, or the greatest part of our actions, and the causes and order of them; which is a piece of knowledge the most con∣ducing to the well menaging of our selves that can be; for the variety of passions, inclinati∣ons, and dispositions is the cause of all human business and affairs in the whole World. From the mingling of Inclinations, and apprehensi∣ons, arise those infinite sorts and varieties of (as the French and Spaniards call them) Wits; we term them Dispositions. The chiefest I have observed, I will here set down, for an essay and sampler, to direct those who have more leisure to add to them according to their ex∣perience. And it would be a good work to cha∣racterize them so vively, that men (at least such as are extravagant) may see themselves as in a
glass; and discovering their imperfections, a∣mend and alter them. In general some dispo∣sitions are bad, others good. Bad are such as these. 1. Such as want wit, dead, stupid, sense∣less, heavy, dull, forgetful, sottish, not able to apply themselves to any thing, yet are crafty, and deceitful; these are miserable. 2. Idle, sensual, slothful, gluttons, without memory or care, cat-witted, dissolute, foolish, impertinent, obstinate, untractable. 3. Weak, base, low, fearful, irresolute, soft, troubled, mazed, confused, emty, open, bash∣ful, sheepish, sneaking, low-spirited, yet many times crafty and malicious; these easily become a prey to low and mean companions. 4. Vain, giddy, harebrain'd, bird-witted, in∣constant, such as employ their thoughts in things of no value (as Domitian in catching flies) skip∣ping from place to place, neglectful, haters of thinking, inconsiderate, heeding nothing after it is out of their hands. Fantastical, restless, light∣headed, crack-brain'd, carried away with every new object, never considering what is best, un∣constant, impatient, changeable; that work without affection or delight, doing what they must to make an end, rather then to do it well. 5. Curious, scornful, mockers, jeerers, taun∣ters, abusive, reproachful, tatlers, charlatans, who upon all occasions are ready to publish all they know to the prejudice of another; de∣lightful in making debates and mischief, ene∣mies of God and charity, breeders of all petit factions, news-brokers. 6. Buffoons, ridiculous, flatterers, apes, ri∣mers, players, wits, airy, light, foolish.
7. Proud, pretenders, pedantick, vain-glori∣ous, formal. 8. Contentious, litigious, quarrelsom, blu∣stering, cowardly, hectors, froward, perverse, disloyal, treacherous, envious. 9. Ambitious, arrogant, fierce, rash, impu∣dent, violent. 10. Crafty, sly, double, malicious, cheats, ver∣suti, and who can change their shape, mine, and discours, according to their advantage. 11. Covetuous, sordid. 12. Of angry persons some are sour, harsh, ill to please, sturdy, sullen, intractable, unad∣visable (a disposition mixed up of pride and melancholy) peevish, fixing upon the worst, morose (a delicate sort of wasps) who are of∣fended if every thing be not done the best way, i. e. as they would have it. Some mens anger vapoureth away in words, clamor, scolding, re∣viling, railing, threatning. Others say little, but lay up revenge against an opportunity; this is incident to superiors, who conceive it below them to quarrel, and who think themselves despised, if every thing is not conformed to their will. Others neither chide nor revenge, but turn their wrath upon themselves, as melan∣cholic men do. I pitty these, for they have already the reward of their peaceable wrath: who have a pleasure in their torment, and a kind of satisfaction in their most agreeable dis∣content. But it were better for them to chide even without reason, then store up this sooty humor, which corrodes body and soul. Some are quickly angry, and quickly pacified, hasty. Some are quickly angry, and difficultly pacified.
Some difficultly angry, and difficultly pacified. Some difficultly angry, and easily pacified. The disposition of God himself. 13. Pragmatical, prating, impertinent, giv∣ing judgment in every business without a fee, without asking, in every mans company un∣welcome. 14. Mad, wild, furious, brutish, untamed, terrible, pertinacious, cruel, impious, divelish, cross, precipitious, despiteful, revengeful, ty∣rannical. 15. Ill-natured, solipsi, valuing themselves only, their own judgment and interest, deceitful. 16. Melancholick, jealous, suspitious, discon∣tented, interpreting every thing in the worst sense; and every displeasure to be contemt, affront; and all men to be against, and ene∣mies to, him. 17. Extravagant, Heteroclites, Alchymistical or blessed-stone-men, Astrologues, Diviners, passionate lovers, Romantick. Good dispositions also are of several sorts. 1. Subtil, sharp, piercing, ready, vigilant, at∣tentive to business, sagacious. 2. Argute, acute, quick in giving answers and reparties, resolving doubts and speculative que∣stions, inventive. 3. Facetious, merry, cheerful, gay, jovial, . 4. Wise, prudent, judicious, that examine things to the bottom, able to discern and judge of things alike, sage, grave, practical, expe∣rienced, that know opportunity. 5. Free, noble, generous, bountiful, meek, peaceable, quiet, moderate, magnificent. 6. Bold, resolute, free in reprehending others,
and speaking their own minds, back'd with rea∣son, hardy in difficult enterprises, brave, war∣like, valiant, sensible of honour. 7. Stable, magnanimous, constant, patient in adversities, and businesses. 8. Industrious, thinking, ingenious, universal. 9. Religious and devout. There is also great mixture and composition of these, sometimes contraries seeming equally emi∣nent in the same person. Procopius saith of Justi∣nian, Juxta malignus erat & deceptu facilis, cujus ingenium pravum & fatuum dixeris. Dissimula∣bat ipse fraudibus omnium expositus. Temperamen∣tum insolitum, cum ex contrariis constet. Inconstans amicis, inimicis inexorabilis; avarus, contentiosus, novarum rerum cupidus; ad scelera facile, ad opti∣ma nullis suasionibus moveri poterat. Yet is not this temper so unusual as Procopius supposeth. For most men mistake a vice for a seemingly like, but really-contrary, virtue. As pride for great∣ness of spirit; hectorisme for valour; cunning for wisedome; which are really contraries. And in∣deed concerning young Men, and all others (as Women, persons ill-educated, &c.) who fol∣low their present apprehensions and impetus, without much considering their actions, or re∣ctifying their inclinations by reason, it is often∣times hard to discern whether they be virtuous, or vitious; which is not so concerning those who are habituated: for then all virtues go to∣gether, as well as all vices. And those constella∣tions are easily discovered by their own light. But natural virtues are often accompanied with such natural vices as are habitually contrary. As meekness is often joined with faithfulness, and then it proceeds from want of spirit and ap∣prehension.
Whereas habitual or acquisite meek∣ness hath perhaps an inclination to sloth, but hath mortified and bridled it. And every vir∣tue appeareth and sheweth it self, when necessi∣ty or fitting occasion requires it. So gravity in a child, and those who being old are yet children in understanding, is accompanied with dulness, formality, pride, and censoriousness: be∣cause it proceeds from want of mettle, not from choice; and seeks to justify and shrow'd that defect by finding fault with others. Where∣as true and laudable gravity is opposed only to levity and folly. So natural civility and courtesy is joined with effeminacy; severity with impla∣cability, and the like. 6. CLIMATS also, and divers other acci∣dents, produce various inclinations; not that any Country produceth only one inclination, but only more of one then another. So all of one age are not alike inclined, tho most of them are; and more in youth then age, because the manners are then least artificial. I will set down therefore, and because most to our purpose, inclinations of youth: that the Educator may in some measure be able to judge, which are im∣perfections of the Age, and therefore likely to fall off when his charge arrives to maturity. On∣ly this caution ought to be observ'd; that he humor or encourage not his charge in any of them, for that is to perswade him to be a child alwaies. And 2ly that, if he be in any of them exorbitant, the fault then seems to be of the person, not of the age; which happens very fre∣quently: and therefore requires more care, and a more early and efficacious remedy in the edi∣cation.
Young men then, being guided by sense, nature and passion, not reason, experience or discretion, are inconstant and unsetled. For the sense being easily tired with the enjoiment of its object, and the Soul (being made for somthing bet∣ter) not finding satisfaction in things sensible, they conceive à fastidiousness of the present, and a desire to change: and this is necessary for their condition, that they may not obstinately and fixedly resist (as old men commonly do) the introducing of such habits as are necessary to the perfecting their faculties, and making them happy. For tho their passions be ea∣ger, and sensuality predominant, yet their re∣sistance is strongest at the beginning, after∣wards they with patience are brought off; their natural inconstancy suggesting advantages to the Director. For their present thoughts be∣ing vented, they are at long-running, as a fish when wearied, brought tamely to your hand: therefore also you may hope well of most of them, but be confident of none. Hence also it cometh that with less reluctance they em∣brace such knowledges as do not thwart their pleasures, and senses, but of morality and prudence they are less capable; and that in sickness when sensuality fails, they are easiliest wrought upon. Therefore also are they open, and free, easily disco∣vering their thoughts and inclinations. Eager, also, hasty, unadvised, sudainly resolving and as violently pursuing what they resolve for a little time. Quicquid volunt valde volunt. Sto∣macful also, as not tamed by adversity or ne∣cessity. They are also taken with shows, gal∣lantry in cloathing, &c. desirous of what they see, and weary of what they possess: ambitious
to do what they cannot, or should not, but neg∣lectful of what they ought and can. Therefore gladly would they be learned, but not study; be excellent, but not take pains: consequently ex∣pensive, easily seduced, negligent, careless, fear∣less, forgetful, improvident and credulous: De∣sirous of honor, and making a shew of excelling in beauty, clothes, &c. of getting the victory at play and gaming, yet valuing honour more then gain; wanting experience they are angry, fierce, enemies of thinking and consideration, and therefore rather affecting bodily exercises, at which they labour and sweat without mea∣sure. Full of hope also, catching at appearances, gay, merry, laughers, modest, bashful (because ignorant) pittiful, loving their companions and and follies more then riches; the want where∣of they value not, because they know not their value; therefore not looking beyond the present, nor avoiding ill consequences. Imitative also; for the Soul, being a blank paper, and natu∣rally desiring to be furnished, greedily imbibes what it sees before it; and this is that faculty, with which God indued them on purpose that they may learn, and advance in knowledge and wisedom. Children speak nothing but what they hear, and do nothing but what they see: hence they are generally addicted to designing, acting, &c. SUCH then being the conditions of young persons; those who have the contrary are to be feared and well look'd after; especially the sly, reserved, close, who are also commonly cunning and malicious, for this reservedness proceeds ei∣ther from pride, conceit of their own abilities,
and unwillingness to be taught; or from evil designs; for who strives to conceal what he cares not who knows? or from jealousy, that other persons counsel them not for the best. These do usually guide themselves by words that seem to them accidentally spoken, where∣by they are easily ensnared and ruined. For no man being able to bear the burden of his own thoughts, and these having no friend or confi∣dent, they have no other course to steer. They will with all patience hear your advice and re∣prehension, when they are resolved nothing shall work upon or alter their purposes. Some∣times they will take notice of so much as serves to their own designs, and misinterpret and detort what you say, even contrary to your intention. These persons are commonly seized by flatterers, mistresses, or at best fall into low and mean courses. It is difficult to cure this malady, yet ere they know their strength, threats and punishment do them good: or accidental recommendation of such to their conversation, who may humor them by counterfeiting the same inclinations, and complying with them, till by little and little they can shew them the great advantage of freedom and openness. It hath bin also the observation of learned men, that the sad, melancholick and querulous hardly advance to any great proficiency. Prae∣cipuè vitentur tristes, & omnia deplorantes, qui∣bus nulla non causa in querelas placet Sen. Neque illum tristem semperque demissum sperare possum cre∣ctae circa studia mentis fore. Quint. Querulousnes often proceeds from some inward debility of body, as sharp humors, mal-conformation of some part, or the like.
IMPUDENCE is commonly a forerunner of debauchery, violence, contemt of Laws; also of heedlesness, forgetfulness, slowness to learning and wisedom. Confidence is the medium be∣twixt it and bashfulness. 'Tis observed in the life of Emanuel Philibert Duke of Savoy, that when a child, he had the confidence to speak to any person, as he did to Charles V. that great Emperor; but if what he said was not approv∣ed, he pressed it not, nor was offended when denied; which seems indeed to be the true notion of Modesty and Confidence, to express his mind freely, yet entirely submitting himself to the judgment of his Superiors. BASHFULNES on the contrary is an evil weed, but sign of a fruitful and good indoles. Care must be had, that in weeding it we extirpate not modesty. A bashful man is not his own master, nor useth his own judgment, but is over-awed by others boldness: and the more im∣pudent have more power over him. 'Tis also an evil guardian of youth, betraying it, contrary to its own desire and inclination, to the worst men, who hurry it to evil actions and places. How many have lost their estates, honors and lives, because they were ashamed to distrust? A man invites you to drink, to game, to rob, to be bound for him: cast of that foolish mode∣sty, deny him. An impudent flatterer comes to eat upon you, he begs an horse, a ring, a gar∣ment, give to the deserver, not the beggar. Some are so bashful, as not to send for a good Physi∣cian, or chuse a good Lawyer or Governor, be∣cause they are acquainted with a worse. Begin betimes to break this fault in small matters, ex∣ert
your liberty and judgment in denying to drink, to accept a recommendation, to lend money, to admire every one you hear praised. And be constant, not overcome with importu∣nity, another sort of impudence. 7. THERE are two Dispositions most inci∣dent to young Persons of Quality, because they most resemble greatness of spirit, tho in truth as much opposite to it as a Dropsy to health: of which I shall speak somewhat more copiously, These are Anger and Pride. 1. AN angry Inclination in children disco∣vers it self, either by pettishness, peevishness, ha∣stiness, &c. or by surliness and sullenness. Tho all in youth of mettle are promt and seem to be angry naturally, yet doth that shew it self in briskness and cheerfulness, this in frowardness and incorrigibility. If this evil weed grow up with them in age, and they be not broken of it be∣times; it makes them follow their own impe∣tus, despise counsel of friends, and authority of Superiors; Eripi sibi suum judicium, etsi pravum, non sinunt; they defend and hug their error, and had rather continue in it, then change, or repent by others advice. Also because they are inconsiderate and furious, they pursue their purposes good or bad with great force and con∣cernment; and therefore take not the aptest and most rational means to obtain them. (For reason judgeth what is fit and just, anger useth that as fit which it judgeth to be such; which makes many good Hunters, for we are not an∣gry with Beasts, few good Soldiers.) Hence it comes that angry men are unwary, easily de∣ceived;
not open and plain, but exposed to them, who are willing to take advantage. Apt also to judge evil, and hate other men upon slight occasions; therefore are they not fit for friend∣ship: also uneven, and unequal in their conver∣sation; many times also inexorable, unsociable, and tyrannical: and their discourses runs much upon oaths and curses. Many are the causes of angriness; sometimes a choleric humor, from their nativity, or adventitious, so we see families ve∣ry subject to it; but most commonly it pro∣ceeds from weakness of judgment. And gene∣rally the more impotent, the subjecter to it: as children, women, aged, sickly, in adversity, or such as are other-waies also passionate. So we are more testy and angry when weary, when watched, or any other trouble upon us, as a thorn in a finger breeds a feaver in the whole bo∣dy. Some are angry out of choice, thinking it a piece of grandezza, and that it makes them feared and respected. Others by an evil cu∣stome, being by their Parents or Educators in∣dulged their own wills; who at first not suf∣fering others to contradict them, at length nei∣ther dare they themselves. BECAUSE this passion admits no counsel as other passions do, but is, as when a man sets his own house on fire, all full of tumult and confusion, that no orders can be heard or obey∣ed; it is difficultly cured. In age it is reme∣died either by afflictions and crosses, which Pro∣vidence bestows upon such persons as he loves, or by prudent considerations; such as these. Be∣cause it springs commonly from small matters, a word, a jest, a taunt, a neglect; endeavour to
pass by, pardon, and get quit of the occasions; examine no faults too curiously; chaw not nor reflect upon them; argue not, nor consider what other men will think or say, for that blows and kindles the flame. Neither desire great, much, difficult, or rare things; nor desire vehe∣mently; be as indifferent to all things as is pos∣sible; and make use of common things, rather then appropriate them to your self; that I and MINE are great sticklers for anger. When you are in a fit, reflect upon your self and your inner constitution, see how the whole frame is disordered (it is a passion even in the external as deformed as dangerous) and either conquer it (which after you have done sometimes, the victory to a vigilant person is much easier) or at least defer what your passion promts you to do; for whatever is done in anger, may also be done with judgment. For discretion saith not, do not punish a faulty servant, but do it prudently. Some endeavor to suppress and quench it by violence, but then it is apt to ferment either into melancholy, or malice, and envy. THE Education also of choleric persons is not less difficult, except they be menaged when very young; for then their humor may be bro∣ken by force and punishment; but when they begin to understand their strength, fair means must be used, for fear of breaking also their spirit; and while we cure the angry man, we make him soft and lazy. For this passion, and spirit, are many times so twisted together, that it is difficult to distinguish the actions of one from those of the other; and consequently to
pluck up one without destroying the other. It is in vain to admonish or reprehend when the passion is violent, for at best 'tis but as burning feathers under the nose of one in a fit of the falling sickness, which may perhaps raise him up, but cannot cure him. But when he is sober, furnish him with good remedies and conside∣rations against a time of necessity; as men do when they fear a Siege, and expect no relief from abroad. Or check it with another passion, as with shame, or fear, or joy. Indeed cheer∣fulness and moderate pleasure clear up the spi∣rits: and tho sadness and anger differ, yet are they much alike in their causes, and the same medicines are good for both. 2. PRIDE is many times grafted upon an∣ger: and is so like to it, that it is not easy to discern which operations proceed from which cause. It is grounded in an error of the under∣standing, i. e. a vain and false opinion of his own excellency above others, and above the truth. In youth it discovers it self by contemt of others, ingratitude, injuriousness; accepting all honor, respect, and officiousness as due and deserved, but paying none: therefore conversing more wil∣lingly with inferiors, and domineering over them also; neither is a proud man familiar or friendly to any but flatterers, to whom he easily be∣comes a prey. His care is not to do well, but to seem so; and therefore he is ashamed to con∣fess a fault, error, ignorance, or inferiority; to learn or be taught; to be chid or corrected. Instead of amendment he is sullen and dogged. He is seldome free from envy, and therefore impatiently hears the praises of another, especi∣ally
his equal; but he swells, looks big, struts, vapors, and boasts to shew what he thinks him∣self to be: he is displeased, hateth, and reveng∣eth if not treated according to his merit. Com∣paring himself with others 'tis to his own advan∣tage; looking only upon their errors, and ag∣grandizing them into faults and vices: but upon his own virtues, which are all heroical. Espe∣cially prying into the actions of Superiors, whom he imagines to usurp upon him, who deserves and can menage all things, better then they. Therefore if in power, he becomes imperious, ty∣rannical, opiniastre, impatient, if every thing correspond not to his desires: But if he fall into misery, as commonly such do (being more ex∣posed to it by reason of their high valuing of themselves) he is low, vile, cowardly, and de∣jected. His great badge is singularity, and his discours runs much upon I, we, mine, &c. This being a fault of the mind, and not radicated in the temper of the body, is reduced to equani∣mity by mortification of his own conceits and fancies: either by punishments, by reason and good counsel, or conversing much with strangers; or by the method taken by God Almighty to humble him by others resisting,, despising, and crossing him. 8 I HAVE not observed that any Physio∣gnomical signs are infallible: not, tho many of them concur in the same indication; and tho ma∣ny famous Authors and Proverbs in all Lan∣guages seem to authenticate them. For indeed the temperature of the body seems no otherwise to be the cause of the actions of the soul or per∣son, then as the temper of the Axe is the cause
of cutting; to which many other things as fi∣gure, weight, motion, &c. are required as well as it; and yet all together are but the instru∣ment of the man, who by greater strength, dex∣terity, &c. can work better with another sort of a worse tool, and can make one advantage remedy another disadvantage. We see also that study and experience give more force to the soul, then any disposition whatsoever of the body; even as temperance, labour, &c. make the bo∣dy more obedient: all which are great testimo∣nies of the Souls spirituality. 'Tis commonly set down by Authors, that tall and strong men are of small understanding and courage: that it is a sign of wit, to have a curiouc tast, and delicate stomack (which indeed proceeds sometimes from the weakness of that faculty by too much intentive study) and many such like: which it is in vain to repeat; since it is not difficult to shew that some of contrary dispositions have the same signs: and of contrary signs, v. g. to in∣genuity, are yet ingenious. Seneca saith of Clara∣nus ep. 66. Inique se gessit natura, & talem ani∣mum malè collocavit: aut fortasse voluit ho ipsum ostendere, posse ingenium fortissimum ac beatissinium suh qualibet cute latere. Et videtur in exemplum editus, non deformitate corporis foedari animam. The like is verified of the President Pedro Gas∣ca, that recovered to the King of Spain, Peru almost wholly revolted: and of many more in our memory. Yet thus much I willingly grant, that the passions discover themselves almost in∣evitably by the countenance; because they, be∣ing sudain and violent mutations in the Soul, cause the like also in the spirits; which shew themselves through the skin: or in the motions
also of the exterior members. But it is not so with the inclinations and dispositions, which are by our own industry and habituations turned now into natural: and impress no such violent or extraordinary motions in any part, either of spirits, or body. 9. MORE trust is to be had to such other signs, as seem to be the flowers, which preceed and pretend some smell of the fruit it self. These then promise virtue; modesty, obedience, advi∣sableness, compassionateness, loving virtue in others, and consorting with such, cheerfulness, aptness to friendship, impatience till reconciled to any he offended, mildness, humility. Those who are apt to shed tears, are of a softer and lovinger disposition, as those who cry and shed no tears, prove commonly stubborn. Signs of nobleness and generosity are, to confess a fault ra∣ther then tell a ly, or frame a cobweb excuse; to be ashamed to be overcome in any laudable study or exercise; not to be angry when justly reproved, or corrected, (moneri posse, ac velle, summa virtus est;) to do more for honor then reward; not to be easily discouraged or despond, but to be more sprightly; to desire difficult em∣ploiments; to pass by small offences; not to deride others defects; to be more ready to ex∣cuse then aggravate faults of his Companions; lastly, to be grateful, especially to his Masters, Teachers, and Servants. Signs of a capacity for sciences, are, attention to what he goes about; demanding the reasons of things. [By the way, asking questions very much discovers the in∣geny of a child: for to ask many is a sign of curiosity and wit; to ask vain and impertinent
ones, or the same over again, or not to stay for an answer, of folly and inconsiderateness; material and pertinent ones, of judgment and discretion.] WHY is the great question of knowledge; not to be satisfied with a slight an∣swer; sagacity, and much thinking; not talka∣tive, but reflecting wardly, meditating with, and entertaining himself. Primum argumentum compositae mentis, posse consistere, & secum morari. Good imitation of what he sees. If he have so much confidence of his parts, as to hope with industry to conquer every thing, but without labour to do nothing well; if he have a strong faithful memory for things, tho not for words; if a rational, methodical, and regular under∣standing. As Democritus seeing Protagoras, when a youth, to bind up a fagot orderly, and to the best advantage, conceived him fit to be a Scholar. AND Cimabue rationally conceived great hopes of Giotto Bondone, when being a poor boy and keeping his Fathers sheep he saw him de∣signing one of them upon a brick. Afterwards he became the restorer of that whole art, and the famousest man of his age. A child that delights in tormenting, and vexing either Beasts or Men (as the daughter of Caligula, that let her nails grow to scratch her companions and play-fel∣lows) is of an evil, perfidious, and bestial nature. DELIGHTING in gallantry commonly por∣tends lowness and weakness of spirit, as have those Women, who have nothing but their outside to entitle them to humanity. But slo∣venliness,
if it proceed from negligence, i. e. if he be careless in other things, especially of con∣cernment, is a very ill sign: ad morem discincti vivere Nattae. But if from particular neglect of delicateness, as too low and mean, 'tis a good sign, cave tibi à male cincto puero. A sign of timorousness and effeminacy is to indulge divers fancies, and to pretend to see imaginations and spectra (things which valiant men are seldom troubled withal) as also to pretend antipathy to divers sorts of meats; &c. and timorous∣ness is the prologue to craft and dissimulation. Unseasonable gravity many times indicates slow∣ness to sciences, negligence, and weak memo∣ry. Quickness of wit is in danger to usher in pride, contemt, abuse of others, and neglect of study. Acuteness and sagacity is often ac∣companied with anger and precipitiousness. Such also, if Students, are apt to fall into needless curiosities, factions and heresies. For they search not to the bottom; but having principles think to work out the rest by the dexterity of their wit. Vain-gloriousness is al∣waies subject to flatterers. Distinguish between softness and meekness: the more soft the less un∣derstanding, the more meek, the greater gene∣rosity and nobleness of spirit: a soft man hath no anger or gall, a meek man bridles and ma∣sters it. Huffing and swaggering (like bottled drink) commonly shews want of spirit, for it is but froth that makes that noise, and pre∣sently such become vapid, and distastful. 10. WE must take heed of thinking any of these imperfections or faults incurable, because according to a natural inclination: or if a child
be not exactly such a one as we would have him, that he must be treated as the Brachmans did their children, whose indoles they disliked, abandon them in the Woods to the wild Beasts; or as the Inhabitants of Madagascar, who ex∣pose all their children born upon a Friday. Tur∣piter desperatur quicquid fieri potest, saith Quinti∣lian. Illud desperandum est posse nos casu bonam mentem influere: laborandum est: & ut verum di∣cam, ne labor quidem magnus est; si modo animum formare incipimus, antequam durescat pravitas ejus. Sed nec indurata despero. Nihil est, quod non expu∣gnet pertinax opera, & intenta ac diligens cura. Sen. ep. 50. Let the industrious and skilful Educa∣tor make many trials and divers experiments, as Physicians do, before they give a determi∣nate prognostic. Now, of cures some are general. As 1. to make them know their infirmity, and that it is an infirmity; and 2. that they be willing to be cured. For it is not as in corporeal diseases, when the body is necessitated, by connexion of causes, to undergo and suffer the malady in∣cumbent. But here the Soul is in its own pow∣er, subject to it self only and its own will, and that directed by the understanding. Where∣fore the first step to a cure, is to convince by reason that they do ill, i. e. to acknowledge their disease: the desire to have it cured follows na∣turally. So that it is in the power of reason to rule absolutely over the affections and disposi∣tions of the Soul. But because reason some∣times is misled, or obstinately mistaken, Almigh∣ty God hath given us his holy Religion, and his spirit, to govern reason also, and render every
thought obedient to Faith. So that in Religion lies the universal and never failing remedy of all the evils of the Soul. But many times parti∣cular and topical ones are also to be applied. A child, when he begins to go, refuseth imme∣diately to be assisted; So when the will begins to follow its own choice, it then also begins to scorn a guide; the appetite of liberty being stronger then that of security. Great industry therefore and discretion is requisite to turn it the best way; endeavouring, as Physicians, to introduce the contrary of what is amiss, and sup∣ply what is defective; to coerce and discounte∣nance the bold and impertinent; to encourage the soft and modest: severe to the merry, cheer∣ful to the melancholic. Waken the taciturn with questions, and silence the loquacious with baffling fallacies. Bridle the too forward and eager, and spur up the lazy and slothful. 11. SOME there are, who are lazy and un∣industrious to study, yet very active and sprightly in bodily exercises; these many times are fitter for other emploiments then learning. Others are to all purposes slow and sawntring, and these are to be cured with bodily labor. First make them play, run, leap, &c. afterwards bring them to study. For there seems to be a moisture clog∣ging their spirit, which must be first shaken of; for if they be indulged they will become more sleepy, even till chang'd into dormice. Then never let them want work, yet not much at a time, but be careful that what you command them be sedulously performed. There are also who are pettish, peevish, hard to please, and are alwaies lean, maigre, and consumtive: which
proceeds from a sharp, thin humor, easily ex∣asperated, and to such a degree as may be very prejudicial. It is best therefore to deal with those gently and smoothly (the default being more in the body then the mind) and not put them upon crabbed, intricate, vexatious, or intentive studies; nor be too rigorous in exacting an ac∣count of them. It would be worth labor to try whether such medicines, as dulcify the blood, would not profit them. Like to these are they, who seem rough, harsh, regardless of civility, and not easily mingling conversation. These, (if not such in extremity) when mellowed by experi∣ence, prove better then the complaisant and ami∣cable. Keep this sour disposition to study, vir∣tue, and knowledge; and tho he grumble and repine, be content so as he doth his work; and he is in less danger of temtation, becomes more solidly virtuous, and lasts much the lon∣ger. As the wine, which pleaseth in the Cuve, must be drunk in the must. They are also fitter for friendship then the compliant; for these are equal to all, and the greatest interest can be gain'd in them is but civility; the other chuse their company, and fix upon the best. This sourness proceeds ordinarily from a brisker, and fiercer spirit, not willing to go in the ordinary routte, nor follow the track of those he under∣values; but loves the generous tast of liberty. Whereas the soft wax, that melts with every ones fingers, keeps no impression. But if this harsh∣ness be extream, and increase with age; consider whether it grow from pride, and then the root is to be digged up; or from natural inclination; and then let him frequent facetious and merry company, let him converse with Strangers, with
whom he must stand upon his guard. Womens acquaintance also, if discreet persons, is not ill for this disease. With the froward and perverse begin to use severity betimes, and master him before he know his own strength. Let him not be humored or gain by his sturdiness; but let him know by experience, that his tricks are not only undecent, but vain also and uneffectual. Imi∣tate God Almighty, who to the meek sheweth himself gentle, but to the perverse, froward: that he may humble the high looks and thoughts of the proud. For indeed this sullen humor, which against all reason will be guided only by its own opinions, and will brook no con∣tradiction, is the effect of the greatest pride; and is too frequently found in Persons of qua∣lity, when cockered by Parents, or flattered by Servants. When they are children rough usage is good for them, but afterwards it irri∣tates them the more. Then if sober reasoning open not their eyes, they must be (as wild Trees) often transplanted and removed into strange company. For where unacquainted they dare not shew their humor; especially be∣fore such as will not brook their impertinen∣cies, but answer them with laughter, scorn, or somewhat more severe. Indeed generally all bad dispositions are reclaimed by conversation, and the example of other persons, especially such as are eminent in the virtue you would produce. Afflictions also have a wonderful force, which are discreetly to be menaged by the Edu∣cator, for then the humors are ripe for purga∣tion.
CHAP. X. Of parts or capacities in general; and of their diversity; and how to be ordered and rectified. HITHERTO we have spoken of Dispo∣sitions in order to the regulation of life and manners. In the next place we must treat of what concerns Knowledge and Science. And in order to this we must resume; that there are three faculties (of which we shall speak by and by more copiously) naturally implanted in us, Wit, Judgment, and Memory. Concerning which that you may the better understand my inten∣tion, I will set down the most common and usual differences of capacities. And first take notice, that the goodness of Wit is seen in, first quick apprehending what is proposed: and 2ly ready, pertinent, and copious invention. A Me∣mory then is counted excellent, when it quickly embraceth, and long retaineth, what is com∣mitted to it. And that Judgment is commend∣ed, which subtilly compareth, and accurately discerns between things that are like. Next, that Wits some are ordinary, others extraordinary. Ex∣traordinary, such are: 1. IMAGINATIVE persons, who 1. either have their fancy so volatil and skipping from one thing to another, that they cannot fix long upon any one subject. Sometimes this proceeds from le∣vity
and impatience of the labor of thinking (non est enim minor lassitudo animi quam corporis, sed occultior;) sometimes from Melancholy. And such a degree there is of this, as is incurable but only by Medicine, that is frenzy and mad∣ness. Or 2ly who have great and ready variety of fancies or suggestions, but little of Judgment. Even as Cisterns, whereinto the water conti∣nually flows, are never clear. These catch at, and sit down with, their fullest apprehensions, without weighing or considering the contrary; and are called Phantastical. The best way to cure both these, is to fix them, by setting them to Mathematicks, Geometry especially, where they are not suffered to tast a second dish, till they have perfectly digested the former; and by employing their memory. Disputations also in public are very profitable. 2. PRECOCIOUS persons, whom the Pro∣verb hath branded to be of small duration. Per∣haps because these sine Tempers are usually less strong and durable, their spirits either exhaling and spending, or fixing and thickning. So that like corn upon stony ground, they spring up upon a suddain, shew all they can do, are in admiration for their forwardnes; but wanting root, they bring forth yellow, and emty eares before the Harvest, and so vanish. Thus Her∣mogenes the Orator was heard with admiration at 12. years old, at 24. with laughter. Yet by the good leave of the Proverb, I have not seen many of precocious parts, except by their own or Educators fault, miscarry. For many times it happens that those persons, seeing their ad∣vantage in the race above their companions,
slacken their speed, betaking themselves to plea∣sure and idlenes; or as they say of Rablais, who not finding his good parts and serious studies encouraged according to his expectation, aban∣doned himself to buffoonery. These pregnant wits, being much courted for their plausible conversation, endanger their ruin from those, who pretend to woe their friendship. It would be better for them to consider, that they are not matched only with those who started at the same time with them, but with those also who had advantage; and that he is to be crown∣ed, not who doth as well as others, but as well as he can. But because of the prejudice most men have against precociousnes, it will not be amiss to shew some late examples of those who begun betimes, have proved admirable, and lasted a long while. The great Card. Bellar∣mine, whilst at School, interpreted publicly Cicero's Oration pro Milone; at 16. began to preach, and openly read the grounds of Divi∣nity, Card. du Perron read over the Almagest of Ptolemy in 13. days before he was 18. years old. Torquato Tasso spoke plain at 6. months old; at 3. years went to School; at seven he under∣stood Latin and Greek, and made Verses; be∣fore 12. he finished his Cours of Rhetoric, Poe∣try, Logic, and Ethics; at 17. he received his degrees in Philosophy, Laws, and Divinity; and then printed his Rinaldo. And tho of prodigious natural parts, yet the writer of his life observes, that he writ (his Poëms especi∣ally) by the force of indefatigable study, ra∣ther then vivacity of wit, or fruitfulnes of in∣vention; which rendered them admirable, for he began there where others would have end∣ed.
Augustus Caesar at 19. years old, contrary to the advice of his Friends, put himself upon the menagement of affairs, claimed, and entred up∣on, the inheritance and succession to his great Uncle Julius. So did Cosmo (the great Cosmo) Medici, at 17. years old, contrary also to the counsel of his kindred, take upon him the go∣vernment of the Republic of Florence, after the murder of his cousin Duke Alexander. By the bye also 'tis observed, that to both of these the first day of Augustus was fortunate, to the one for the Battel at Actium, to the other for the two victories over the two Strozzi, Father and Son. Vesalius began when a child to cut up Mice and Rats; Mich. Angelo to draw Figures: Galen to compose Medicines. Jo. Picus Earl of Mirandula out-went his Teachers, nor could they propose any thing to him, which he did not immediately apprehend; and the 900. con∣clusions, which he proposed to defend against all opposers about 21. years of age, shew what he was, and he never retired till his death. Jos. Scaliger saith of himself, that all the time he lived with his Father in his youth, he every day declamed, and before 17. years old made his Tragedy Oedipus. Besides many other par∣ticulars which he reciteth in the life of his Fa∣ther. To Vid. Fab. Pibrac then not 20. years old, the great Alciati in his public Lectures ac∣knowledged the solution of many great diffi∣culties in the civil Law. Grotius at 8. years old made Verses, and performed his public ex∣ercises in Philosophy; before 15. he put forth his Comment upon Martianus Capella. At 16. he pleaded causes. At 17. he put forth his Com∣ment upon Aratus. Lipsius writ his Books Va∣riarum
Lectionum at 18. years old. Ingenium ha∣buit docile, & omnium capax praeter Musices: me∣moria non sine praeceptorum miraculo etiam in pue∣ro, quae in senectute non defecit. Cent. 4. ep. 87. Sr Phi. Sidney (saith Sr Fou. Grevill) tho I knew from a child, yet I never knew other then a man; with such staiednes of mind, lovely and familiar gravity, as carried grace and re∣verence above greater years. And what his parts were, appears by that strange affection born him by Lanquet, and William Prince of Orange, who kept correspondence with him when but a youth. Calvin printed his Institu∣tions before 25. years old. Alph. Tostatus learn∣ed all the liberal Sciences without being taught; and writ in the 40. years he lived as much as most men can in that time well read: yet was he also Counsellor to the King, Referendary Major of Spain, and Professor of Philosophy, Divinity, and Law in the University of Sala∣manca. I could bring also very many more of our own Nation, and my own knowledg (be∣sides Mr Oughtred and Mr Cowley) to testify against that Proverb: but I think very few ex∣amples (Vopiscus saith none) can be given of such, as being dull and heavy in their youth, arriv∣ed to any great perfection in their age. Nemi∣nem (says he in Probo) unquam pervenisse ad vir∣tutum summam jam maturum, nisi qui puer semina∣rio virtutum generosiore concretus aliquid inclitum designasset. Mai non si raccoglie buon frutto nell' autumno, sel' albero non ispunta buone foglie nella prima vera. Danti. Indubitatum est, eos, qui in ul∣là re unquam excelluerunt, mature puerilibus annis ad eam rem accessisse. P. Com. p. 59. totum in hoc consistit, primum in beneficio Dei, proximè in edu∣catione.
Ibid. Let no man therefore slacken his endeavor towards these early fruits, nor let the young man himself despond, but rather (which is a great truth) say, that God Almighty hath thus furnished him to be an ornament to his Creation, and an assistance to Mankind. Let the Educator also be more careful of him, and not leave him to himself, for there will come cold frosts and hails, loathings and tedious∣nes of Labor, which, if not well defended, will hazard his dropping off. The subtil and deli∣cate edge, if encountring too great difficulties, is in danger to turn; in such cases therefore let them not be tired out, but assisted to expedite themselves with ease and delight. Propose to them high and noble studies, but give them your hand; keep them continually running, but not at their full speed, lest they grow weary, and loath, and abandon them. And indeed it is a much greater difficulty and master-piece, to direct and conduct great parts, then mean ones. Parts are indifferent to good or bad, and great parts to great good or great evil; and all great evil as well as great good proceeds from them. And which way soever they go, they are not easily diverted, their abilities supplying them still with sufficient defence for themselves. Maxima ingenia, saith Seneca, miror & timeo, me∣diocria probo; as he is in less danger who walks on a plain, then he who dances on a rop. Mi∣nutius, in the Preface to his Paradoxes, tells us of one Creighton, a Scottishman, who at 21. years old (when he was killed by order of the Duke of Mantua) understood twelve Languages, had read over all the Poets, and Fathers, dis∣puted de omni scibili, and answered ex tempore in
verse: Ingenium, saith Scaliger, prodigiosum, & admiratione magis quam amore, dignum, ei judicium defuit. Principes solent illa ingenia amare magis, quam bene doctos. Such persons, if not well re∣gulated (which as I said is difficult) become many times proud and conceited, angry and pre∣cipitious, scornful and presumtuous, many times also light and freakish. And truly mean and indifferent, or even low wits, have more pleasure and satisfaction then these high-flyers. For trusting to their parts they neglect study and exercise, and so are easily surprised and dis∣covered, when either not fully apprehending the question and the consequences of an opini∣on, or themselves not well disposed for dis∣course. 3. THERE is another sort who have not so great parts, but have a volubility of language, are able upon a suddain to speak de omni ente & non ente, and of them too, pro & con. This passeth amongst Women and ordinary people for Eloquence and great parts, but amongst dis∣creet and serious persons, for impertinence. And the rather, because these Men chuse to talk commonly of things they understand not, or are most improper and unknown to the com∣pany; and of them also, without order, or me∣thod; and have, when at a non plus, certain common places to retire to; lest they should fall into that terrible disgrace of having no more to say. 4. SOME persons (tho very few) have a strong indoles or inclination to, and abilities for, some particular science; strong, I say; for a slight fancy to one more then another is not
straightways (as they call it) a Genius to such a thing: for most men are not altogether indif∣ferent to all sorts of learning, (tho Card. du Perron could never observe that he was more affected to, or more apt for, one Science then another) and yet may arrive to a great perfe∣ction in that, whereto they are least disposed. But if his Genius lead him so strongly to any one Science, that he be unapt to others, it is by all means to be humored. Ne tentes (saith Quintil.) quod effici non potest; nec ab eo, quod quis optime facit, in aliud, cui minus est idoneus, eum transferas. It is reported of Ch. Clavius, that being found by the Jesuits, under whose edu∣cation he was, very unapt for learning, and rea∣dy to be sent back to his Parents, to be some other way emploied, before they would quite abandon him, one of them resolved to try him in Mathematics; wherein in a short time he pro∣fited to admiration, and grew very famous and eminent in those studies. Or if his Genius be accompanied with a noble and generous wit, let great endeavor be used to teach him other Sciences; and if that, he is inclined to, be not the noblest, to take him off from it also. Om∣nino iniquum est nobiliora ingenia dehonestari studiis minoribus. Yet many times it is difficult to bring such off their inclination; as in Monsieur Pascal; out of the Preface to whose last book I will transcribe some passages very memorable both concerning the precociousnes of his wit, and strong inclination to Mathematics. Monsieur Pascal was observed in his child∣hood to have had an admirable understand∣ing to pierce into the profundity and depth
of things; and to discern solid reason from superficial words. In so much that when they offered him words only, his understanding was restles and unsetled, until he had disco∣vered reason. At 11. years old, at table, hav∣ing struck an earthen dish, and observed it to make a sound, which ceased as soon as touched with his hand, he was very earnest to know the cause thereof; and from that began to demand many other questions concerning sounds, in so much that he made then a small, but very ingenious, treatise concerning sounds. This his strange inclination to ratiocination, made his Father fear, that if he should give him any insight into Geometry and Mathe∣matics, he would be so much taken with them, that he would neglect all other studies, especially Languages. He therefore resolved to hinder him, to lock up all Books of those Sciences, and not so much as to speak of them in his presence. But all this cautiousnes served only to excite his curiosity; so that he often intreated his Father to teach him Mathema∣tics, or at least to tell him what they were. His Father to satisfy him somewhat, in general said, they were Sciences which taught how to make figures equal or proportional one to ano∣ther, and withal forbad him to speak to him, or think any more, of them. A command impossible for such a wit. For upon this hint he began to revolve them continually in his mind, especially at his times of recreation. Once especially being in a large Hall (where he used to divertise himself) he began to make figures with a coal on the pavement, as a cir∣cle, a triangle of equal sides, or of equal an∣gles,
and the like, and this he did easily. Af∣terwards he began to search out and make propositions. But all Books and instruction being by his Fathers diligence concealed from him, he was forced to give names and defi∣nitions after his own invention. A circle he called a round, a line a bar, &c. After this he framed also to himself Axiomes, and upon them Demonstrations after his own manner, till he arrived to the 32. Prop. E. l. 1. His Father surprizing him in this posture, was mightily astonished when he heard him discourse, and as it were analize his propositions. And here∣upon, by the advice of friends, he put into his hands Euclides Elements, which he read and comprehended at 12. years old, with as great pleasure and facility, as other Children do Romances: he read and understood it all by himself without any Master; and advanced so much in that knowledg, that a while after at Paris he entred into the Conferences of learn∣ed Men, held once a week concerning Ma∣thematical questions. Thither he brought his own inventions, examined others propositi∣ons, &c. and yet was all this knowledg only the product of his leasure hours. At 16. years old he composed a treatise of Conics, which Monsieur Descartes would not believe but to have bin the work of his Father, endeavor∣ing to procure reputation to his Son. At 19. years old he invented that Instrument of Arithmetic, which is in print; and at 23. hav∣ing seen the experiments of Torricelli, he also added to them a great number of his own. This example of Monsieur Pascal is very extra∣ordinary, as was that of Pet. Damianus to pie∣ty;
who being a Boy and almost starved and naked, by the churlish and unnatural usage of his Brother, yet having found a piece of mony, not regarding his own necessities, he bestowed it upon a Priest to pray for his Fathers Soul. Most men are fit for many Sciences, and that inclination, which they have to one more then another, is ordinarily from their ability to per∣form one more then another: as memory is for some; wit for others; courage and bodily strength for others, &c. or from their own imi∣tation, or others recommendation, by word or ex∣ample, to one thing more then another; or from some external and accidental effect they have seen or known of any one, or some such like. But tho all men have not, or scarce any have, all faculties excellent in an equal degree; it will be the Teachers care and Educateds en∣deavor to better that, wherein they are most de∣fective; but so all waies, that you conduct them by that way they will go. Too much strain∣ed-wits, as forced grounds, badly correspond to our hopes. Unusquisque suum noscat, saith Tully, ad quas res aptissimi erimus, in iis potissi∣mum elaborabimus. Seneca saith, that Virgil was as unfortunate in Prose, as Cicero in Verse. But I am rather perswaded that both the one and the other proceeded from want of practise. For Tasso was eminent in both: and Ovid was an acute and eloquent Declamator as well as a flu∣ent Poët. And Sen. l. 2. Cont. 3. stories of him, that being importuned by his Friends for liberty to expunge three verses out of his Writ∣ings, he yeilded upon condition he might ex∣cept three, and named those they would have blotted out.
5. BESIDES what I have already mention∣ed, there are in teaching Sciences, two great rules to be observed. 1. Begin not to teach a new science till your Scholar understand all that is neces∣sary to it; as not Rhetoric till he know Gram∣mar, and the Latin Tongue, for so he will learn both more, and cheerfuller. Whereas the mind cannot to purpose intend many things at once. Tho such studies as have correspondence and affinity may well be conjoined; for the comparing illustrates both, and variety takes off the tediousnes. See Quint. l. 2. c. 12. Be not too hasty with your Scholar; advance him not too fast; lay the foundation sure and stable. For he that eats faster then he digests, breeds crudities, and work for the Physician to purge away. Besides he that understands, goes on cheerfully and securely. Which I take to be the reason, why Men of age make greater progress in learning, then Children. Jul. Scaliger began not to learn Greek till 40. years old, and then ma∣stered it in a very few months, as he did French and Gascon in three. Pet. Damianus learn'd not to read till mans estate, yet proved one of the eminentest Scholars of his time. Balaus entred so late upon the Law, that they told him he intended to be an Advocate in the other World. 2. Teach not too much at once, but take your Les∣son in pieces, let him spell before he read; in∣vent in English before in Latin, confusedly be∣fore in order; then chuse the best, put it in or∣der, turn it into Latin, and then file and polish it. It is reported of Virgil, that he first com∣posed his matter in Prose, then turn'd it into Verse, afterwards reformed those Verses to fewer; and last of all revised and amended
them. To these rules I must add, that he be taught things necessary or useful. Such are, 1. LANGUAGES. The Bulla Aurea, tit. 26. commands all the Sons of Electors to be brought up from 7. years old, in the Italian and Slavonian Languages, and to perfect that study before 14. That is prescribed to the Ger∣man nobility; but for ours it seems requisite, that they learn the Latin Tongue, so much as to understand an Author readily, to write and speak it competently; and if they go abroad, the more readily they speak it, the better. Other of the learned Languages are ornaments, but not so necessary as the Modern: and of these, theirs, with whom we have most converse, are the most useful. 2. IT is requisite that he learn to speak per∣spicuously, decently, and persuasively, which is Rhe∣toric. To understand the difference of stiles Epistolary, Historical, and for Orations in all the three kinds. Also to compose and pronounce them hansomly, at least in his own Language. It is better also, if he understand and practise (tho not much, except he have a conside∣rable dexterity in it) Poetry; without which no man can be perfect Orator, but his fancy as well as expressions will be low and mean. Poe∣try warms the imagination, makes it active, and promt to soar to the top of Parnassus; it em∣boldens to the use of a lofty Metaphor, or con∣fident Catachresis. Besides accustoming the stile to measure gives insight, judgment, and readi∣nes also in Oratorical number. It teacheth al∣so to chuse good words, to consider, weigh,
and pierce better into what we read, to take notice of the most delicate artifice, and dis∣cern sparks of diamonds. So that it is observ∣ed, that when Poetry is despised, other Scien∣ces also are in the wane. One great piece of Poe∣try, and perhaps the most familiar and proper, is the Dramatic, in which could they be of good subjects, well garbled, and discreetly hand∣led, it would not misbecome our young Gen∣tleman to have his part. 3. MUSICK I think not worth a Gentle∣mans labor, requiring much industry and time to learn, and little to loose, it. It is used chief∣ly to please others, who may receive the same gusto from a mercenary (to the perfection of many of whom few Gentlemen arrive) at a ve∣ry easy rate. I should rather advise Singing, e∣specially if you fear him subject to a consumtion; which, besides that it strengthens the lungs, modulates the voice, gives a great grace to elo∣cution, and needs no instrument to remove or tune. 4. To discourse pertinently and rationally is also necessary. This is Logic; which tho taught in every Colledg, and every one learneth, yet do very few attain perfection in it. Error is so well disguised, Verity is also sometimes so deep, and our cord so shallow, that it requireth very much experience, to be able readily to discover the truth, and dissolve a sophism. These know∣ledges already mentioned are but foundations, upon which all Sciences are built, but them∣selves appear not in the edifice. For they are nothing but regulating and perfecting the actions
of our natural faculties; not informing them with any new or extrinsecal accedent; they are dis∣posing and preparing the table, that good re∣semblances may be drawn upon it. They are necessary that a man may make the best ad∣vantage of his natural parts in apprehending of other Arts and Knowledges. Some indeed have bin of opinion, that a Gentleman needs no more, but what nature hath given him. Licinius, and a great General in our own times, were so illi∣terate, that they could scarce write their own names. Lewis XI. desired his Son might un∣derstand no more Latin then, Qui nescit dissimu∣lare, nescit regnare. And what harm had it bin, if he had permitted his Son (Charles VIII.) to have learned somewhat of Latin? He could at the worst but have done as he did, that is com∣mit his busines to others, and not be able to discern good counsel from evil, and interessed. But it seems that Prince had but one trick in King-craft, and that a very mean one; more Latin might have taught him others, and not to have needed that, so base and unworthy of a Prince. As it did those great Monarcks, who were practised in them, Julius, Augustus, and the rest of that family; (whereof Nero, to his dis∣honor, was the first that stood in need of bor∣rowed eloquence, Seneca making his speeches for him;) Trajan, Hadrian, M. Aurelius, and that miracle of Princes, Severus Alexander. Han∣nibal writ the lives of two famous Generals: and Alexander slept with Homer under his pil∣low. I will not muster up any more exam∣ples; they are infinite. Learning, i. e. Sciences are not necessary to every man; nor all to any man; yet are they useful to all, tho not to
all equally. But that is best, which is most be∣neficial and proper for every ones condition of life. Learning and study makes a young man thinking, attentive, industrious, confident, and wary; an old man cheerful, and resolved. 'Tis an ornament in prosperity, a refuge in adversity; an entertainment at home, a companion abroad: it cheers in solitude and prison; it moderates in the height of fortune, and upon the throne. In these parts of the World we seem to run after Sciences, and think them to be all things; where∣as the great and universal busines of our life, es∣pecially active, is wisdom, prudence, noblenes, and liberty of spirit. Sciences are necessary to mans life, and Professors of them are requisite to instruct such, whom it concerns to know and exercise them; in other persons wisdom is the chiefest, and what can be spared from ac∣quiring that, let it be bestowed upon Science. By the way, take notice, that these are not both the same, that to be learned is not to be wise; nor are Sciences to be placed in the upper room, notwithstanding the honor and wealth to be acquired by them. They are particular means for the obtaining particular ends; and dispose a man very much for wisdom also: but the great universal Art is, Tu regere imperio populos, &c. to excel others in virtue, prudence, and those abilities which render him more useful in the general concernments of Mankind. Besides Sci∣ences are easily learned being taught by routte and course; but wisdom requires greater advertency, and more accurate observation; which all are not able to learn, and very few to teach. But, if a young man be industrious and of good parts, there is time enough for both Sciences and wis∣dom.
Those are more properly the emploiments of youth, this of maturer age. He may obtain those before he be well capable of this, I mean a sufficient perfection in them; not so much as is required for a Professor, but so much, as is necessary or requisite for a Gentleman. Nor will the acquisition of them hinder his progress in this, but much further, and advance, it. Both because of the well-disposing of the facul∣ty, and of the affinity between both knowledges. Amongst Sciences therefore I recommend to him, 5. THE practise of discoursing, or the seeking after truth by Evidence, which is Mathematics, Geometry especially. I mean not a superficial taking upon trust the Propositions, or the practi∣cal part only, or Instruments; these spoil, make not, Mathematicians, but the high road of De∣monstration. This is the first part of the build∣ing that appears above ground; it is practising them in the greatest Instances of invention that we know; it fixeth the fancy, it accustometh to thinking, and enquiring after truth in all dis∣courses. Analytica is the gage of a mans parts, and Algebra the pinnacle of argumentation. Only let it be remembred, that I advise it here as a piece of Education, not a profession. I would not have a Gentleman give up himself to it; for it makes him less fit for active life, and common conversation; except he well consider that he cannot find his Demonstration in all matters; except he can be content with such evi∣dence as the subject affords; and not despise a proof, because he can say somewhat against it: and except he can apply his mind and intenti∣on to things as they are in the World; and
not rack them to the accurate model of his exactly regulated Imagination. 6. NATURAL Philosophy, but especially E∣thics, and Politics, should also not be neglect∣ed. Which will dispose him, when he comes to greater maturity, to comprehend the Laws, especially of his own, and neighboring Nati∣ons, and their Government. Of which I shall speak hereafter. 7. YET one thing we lack. Albertus Mag∣nus desired of God 5. years before his death, that he might forget all that he had learned in those studies, that he might intirely give him∣self up to devotion. The example also of Mon∣sieur Pascal is very eminent. Tho he was able, as any man could be, to pierce into the secrets of nature, and actually did see very far into them; yet more then ten years before his death, he so well understood the vanity and nothingnes of all those kinds of know∣ledg, and conceived such a distast against them; that he could hardly endure men of parts should seriously discourse of, or busy them∣selves, in them: from that time he alwaies professed, that nothing besides Religion was an object worthy an ingenious mans study; that it was a proof of the lownes, whereto we were thrown by the fall, that a man should seriously fasten upon the search of such things, as contribute little or nothing to his happi∣nes. Wherefore his usual saying was, that all those Sciences produced no consolation in the times of affliction; but that the know∣ledg of Christianity was a comfort both in ad∣versity,
and defect of all other knowledg. He believed therefore, tho there were some advantage or customary obligation to study things of nature, and to be able to conceive and discourse rationally concerning them; yet it was absolutely necessary not to prize them above their just value. And that if it were better to know and undervalue, then be ig∣norant of, them; yet it were better to be ig∣norant of, then know and overvalue, them. The gentle spirit of Petrarch also long before his death quitted his Helicon and Muses for mount Olivet and Divinity. Card. du Perron kept not so much as any book of humanity (tho for∣merly a great Poet and Orator) either Poetry, Oratory, or History in his Library. Jo. Picus Mirandula extreamly repented his love verses; so did Bembus, Ronsard, Marc-Ant. Muretus, Laur. Gacubaro, and Cavalier Marini. And Naugerius tho formerly a famous Poet, yet afterwards so much detested all licentious compositions, par∣ticularly Martial; that every year he bought up a considerable number of such books, and up∣on his birth-day solemnly burnt them. Nonnus in penance for his Dionysiaca paraphras'd the Gos∣pel of St. John. Pet. Veliardus not being able to abolish the custome of reading the Poets, &c. Omnes Poetas, scriptoresque profanos Evangelicos fa∣ciebat. Omnia ad exaedificandam in timore domini juventutem accommodabat, ut unde non pauci perni∣ciem periculumque suis discipulis ferunt, inde illi in salutem & morum disciplinam compararet. Orlan. in vita P. Fabri. These, you will say, did well to begin to disengage themselves of their riding posture, when they came in sight of their home: but that it will be difficult to perswade young
men coming into the World to follow these examples. This I grant, yet some time should be given to him that gives us all, even in youth; and the more the better; and as before I ad∣vised to the practise of Religion in the very be∣ginning, so, as they grow towards maturity, I would perswade them to the study of Divinity, even that decried study of School-Divinity. Which the great Earl of Strafford, and many other very wise Persons and States-men have themselves studied, and to others recommended. Theolo∣gia Scholastica principi viro necessaria; nam, dum quaestiones suas discutiunt, omnes subtilitates, effu∣gia, suspiciones, omnes denique ingenii machinas & vires produnt, &c. The Writers of this do more exactly canvas, and search out, their subject then any others whatsoever. Which partly might be the reason why Monsieur Pascal fell into such an utter dislike and loathing of his Physical and Mathematical studies in com∣parison of Divinity. For tho he afterwards made that discourse of the Roulet or Cycloid, yet all therein was found out by chance, and al∣most without study; and besides he intended it for another purpose far differing from Mathe∣matics. But if ever this study was necessary, it is now much more certainly, when some are ready by the study of Nature to immerse God in the matter; and with those impieties of Democritus and Epicurus to confound him with Nature: and others for want of this ballast in these unsettled times, are driven upon rocks and sands by the ignorance of some, and craft of others, that lye in wait to deceive the better∣minded, but less-learned then themselves.
6. AND the best place and manner of learning these, and all other Arts and Sciences, or what belongeth to them, I take to be in the Univer∣sities. And so hath bin the general opinion from the very beginning of learning. These were the Schools of the Prophets in Gods Church; and such were Athens, Alexandria, and many other places, among them that followed their own reason. For these were the great Markets for Learning; here resided the best learned, and greatest frequency of them; here was emulation and mutual information in studies; here were opportunities of discoursing, studying, and con∣tinual advance; here were Books, privacy, and all other necessaries for that purpose. And still to this day in all Christendom is this observ∣ed; every Nation, whether Kingdom, or Com∣mon-wealth, makes the establishing and well regulating their Universities, one of the princi∣pal parts of their care. For from hence they draw able subjects for all Professions and em∣ploiments; here they institute, both in learn∣ing and manners, the whole Youth of the Nation, and the hopes and honor of the grow∣ing age. And therefore do the Supreme Magi∣strates, by such great rewards, and immunities, encourage and procure the best Professors and Teachers in every Art and Faculty. And such rewards are needful to entice persons of great parts (as such must be), to such indefatigable and uncessant labor and study, and to quit all the means of advancing themselves in the Common-wealth to serve the Public. In these places you may find skilful men in all Knowledges you desire: some give their mind and time to Languages, others to Sciences; either to have a right and
large knowledg, or comprehension of things, whether the effects of Nature or manner of her operations, or of the sublimer and abstruser ge∣neral propositions concerning the higher and noble entities, and such as are not obliged to the Laws of Nature: others to be able to ex∣press their knowledg and notions, whether popu∣larly by orations and speeches, wherein they are frequently exercised, or convincingly to learned Men, by their continual Disputations, to which they are educated. I mean not that arguing and discoursing, which a Student useth with his own self to find out truth, but that which com∣prehendeth both, and the assistance also of others, public and open Argumentation pro & con. This is it which brings a question to a point, and discovers the very center and knot of the diffi∣culty. This warms and activates the spirit in the search of truth, excites notions, and by re∣plying and frequent beating upon it, cleanseth it from the ashes, and makes it shine and flame out the clearer. Besides it puts them upon a continual stretch of their wits to defend their cause, it makes them quick in replies, intentive upon their subject: where the Opponent useth all means to drive his Adversary from his hold; and the Answerer defends himself sometimes with the force of truth; sometimes with the subtility of his wit; and sometimes also he escapes in a mist of words, and the doubles of a distincti∣on; whilst he seeks all holes and recesses to shelter his persecuted opinion and reputation. This properly belongeth to the Disputations, which are exercises of young Students, who are by these velitations and in this palaestra, brought up to a more serious search of truth.
And in them I think it not a fault to dispute for victory, and to endeavor to save their Reputa∣tion; not that their questions and subjects are concerning things of small moment, and little reality: yea I have known some Governors that have absolutely forbidden such questions, where the truth was of concernment; on purpose that the youth might have the liberty of exerting their parts to the uttermost, and that their might be no stint to their emulation. But indeed in natural Philosophy (wherein the greatest liberty is given) what is there that is not disputable? and even they, who most pretend to experi∣ments, will find it difficult to produce one new, or confute an old, universal proposition; and when they shall discover one, they will find it disputed both with contrary reasons and expe∣riments. So true is that of Salomon, Eccles. 3. Tradidit mundum disputationi eorum, ut non inve∣niat homo opus quod operatus est Deus ab initio us∣que ad finem. And of Siracides, Ecclus. 18. Non est minuere neque adicere, nec invenire magnalia Dei. Cum consummaverit homo tunc incipiet, & cum quieverit aporiabitur. There may be further discoveries, as perhaps was the circulation of the blood, and some others; and with all thank∣fulnes we acknowledg, and embrace their la∣bors that endeavor such advancement, but to lay new principles, especially since the received are incorporated into all common speech, and our Languages are formed according to them; and consequently all mens notions set accord∣ing to them, which will not be altered and extirpated by small fancies, is a busines of an higher difficulty. Besides that Aristotle himself, whom all Universities, Christian, have followed
about 400. years (longer then any other of his maligners have continued theirs) but the Gre∣cians and Arabians much longer time, was not a Novice in Natural History; witnes those most learned works in that subject. Yet did he write his Philosophy conformable, not contradictory, to his knowledg in particulars; and therefore it must needs be very difficult to overthrow that which is so well grounded, which was the pro∣duct of so much experience; and by none but those who are better versed in that learning then himself. Neither is his Philosophy more notional then all Sciences, which are delivered in a Synthetical, i. e. a doctrinal method, and begin with universal propositions. I acknow∣ledg indeed one point of Education, wherein I wish our Universities more defective then they are, i. e. that which the Ladies call breeding and accomplishment; a fault incident to all these Schools of Learning, even to Athens it self; for Plutarch tells us, that long before his time some persons wondred, why those, that went fine Gentlemen to Athens, and very knowing, after a year or two's stay there began to know nothing; and the longer they staied the greater clowns they proved. A negligence incident to those, who have their minds more emploied then their bodies; and who converse not with the gallantry of the age. 7. THAT you may judge the better of Uni∣versities, I will set down the manner of Instru∣cting in forreign Universities, or also our own in former times; without reflecting upon, or judging our present practise. Anciently in Ox∣ford and Paris, (the two only general Studies
for a long time on this side the Alps) I suppose in the others too, their reading was dictating, and their learning writing those dictates of their Master. Card. d' Estouteville about 1476. reform∣ed this tedious and unprofitable way of teach∣ing, and brought in (as it should seem) the manner now generally used; which is, first an account of the former Lectures; then to read and write about half an hour; then to expli∣cate that about an equal time. Experience since hath added an hour more for the Scho∣lars conferring one with another in circles, in presence of their Reader, and disputing upon questions given them the reading before. The hour that remains, the Master begins another Lecture, explains it to them, and gives them questions for their next disputations. Yet the Jesuits in Portugal, to ease their Scholars also of much of the labor of writing dictates, have printed a Course of Philosophy, which they ex∣plain, confer, and dispute upon. And this seems the best way: but whether introduci∣ble amongst us; or if it be, whether better then Tutors reading privately in their Cham∣bers, especially if Tutors be diligent, it is not fitting for me to determine. 8. THE true method of studying to render any one a learned man, I conceive not to be, to trust to his memory; Aliud enim est meminisse aliud scire: meminisse est rem commissam memoriae custo∣dire; at scire est & sua quaeque facere, nec ab alio exemplari pendere. And these differ as much as digesting our meat, and reserving it in a cupboard. Wherefore neither is it to be able to quote many Authors, nor tell their opinions, nor to repeat
their pretty sentences or profound subtilties: as neither to read many Books, nor to say them by heart, is to be a Scholar: but to digest what is read, and to be able to know where a diffi∣culty lies, and how to solve it, i. e. to make it your own, and to be able to satisfy your self and others in that which you conceive to be truth. First of all then, propose to your self a subject; never read at adventure the book new∣ly come out, or in fashion, whatever subject it handles, for that is commonly lost labor: but read alwaies with design: then shall you know where you are, how far you have gone, what is behind both of that Science, or of the whole Encyclopaedia. Having fixt upon your subject, take an Author, a modern one, and the learn∣eder the better: and consider first the latitude and method of your Science; and then begin with his first question; upon which first use your own thoughts; or at least yours together with his, i. e. let your imagination loose, both before and when you read; discourse, doubt, argue upon and against; and draw consequences from your Author; who is many times but a ladder to your own inquisitivenes. When you have found a difficulty, which neither your own thoughts, nor his writing, do resolve, make use of other Authors of the same subject; for what one wants another supplies; your difficulty perhaps your Author foresaw not, another did. And by the citations of modern Authors you will easily be directed where to look for satisfaction. When that question and the difficulties and so∣lutions are fixed in your mind by sufficient me∣ditation, go to another, and so forward.
CHAP. XI. Of Invention, Memory, and Judg∣ment; and how to help, bet∣ter, and direct them. IT is not my purpose to intermeddle with any particular Art or Science in this discourse; but only with such things, as do not properly fall under, or belong to, any of them, yet are generally required to them all. And first I must reassume, what before I only mentioned, that there are three faculties to be cultivated, Wit, Memory, and Judgment. 1. WIT, the actions whereof are fancy, or invention, is in ordinary acception, nothing else but a quicker apprehension of such notions, as do not usually enter into other mens imaginations. It con∣sists (saith Thesauro) in 1. perspicacity, which is the consideration of all, even the minutest, cir∣cumstances: and 2. versability, or speedy com∣paring them together; it conjoins, divides, de∣duceth, augmenteth, diminisheth, and in sum puts one thing instead of another, with like dexterity, as a jugler doth his balls. It differs very much from judgment; that is more perspi∣cacious, this more profound; that more quick, this more stable; that chiefly considers appear∣ances, this reality; that produceth admiration and popular applause, this profit and real ad∣vantage. Ingenious men are commonly impatient
of thinking, and therefore take appearances for reality; and their fancy still suggesting new conceits, suffers them not to weigh or com∣pare reasons: wherefore they are commonly unfit for busines; their ability consisting in sudain apprehensions, and quick expressions; whereas 'tis only study, and thinking, that hatcheth and produceth all noble designs and actions. And if ingenious men do come to consider seriously, or to deliberate, they are a∣ble to say so much for either side, that they have no resolution; they dispute well, but con∣clude nothing. Consequently they are irresolute, inconstant, and unfortunate: and their wit fail∣ing before they arrive at old age, and not be∣ing furnished in their memory and judgment, they become flat and contemtible. But if wit be joined with power, it is very dangerous to the public. Sapientia sine eloquentia parum prodest civitatibus; eloquentia sine sapientia nimi∣um plerunque obest, prodest nunquam. saith Cie. l. 1. de Invent. I think I may truly add, that all mischiefs in Common-wealths proceed from these Wits; for wise men will not disturb go∣vernment, and fools cannot. Whereas the Ju∣dicious man is fitted for any emploiment, con∣siders what dangers and evils may happen, and avoids them; consequently is prosperous, brings about his designs, advanceth himself and fami∣ly. And the longer he lives, the more doth his Talent increase. In sum, the one is best in a Tavern or Coffy-house, the other at a Councel-table: the one is a facetious compa∣nion, the other a faithful friend; the one a good droll, the other a good Patriot; the one makes us merry, the other wise. Wit, say some, pro∣ceeds
from active spirits, or a greater degree of heat in the brain; the excess whereof pro∣duceth madnes; and so difficult it is to deter∣mine what degree serves for one, and what for the other, that the Proverb assigns them the same confines. And indeed the conceits of Mad-men are nothing else but high and ex∣travagant Metaphors: as that of one who fan∣cied himself a fire-brand, and desired every one he met to blow him. Another thought himself a mustard-seed. Another took himself for a glass-alembick with a long nose, the droppings whereof he called Rose-water. O∣thers were Cocks, Urinals, &c. A lesser de∣gree of madnes was that they called Enthu∣siasm (many times from some vapor or water out of the Earth) which was imagined to come from the Gods, and which created the most ingenious Poets. Who all, pretending to that afflatus, continually call'd upon the Mu∣ses, Nymphs, and Presidents of those inspirit∣ing places, in the beginning of their Poems. And they, who are denied by Nature this fa∣culty, and will not take the pains by study and exercise to prepare and fit themselves, are wont to increase their heat or frenzy by Wine (which causeth a temporary madnes;) or by some high Passion, which hath the same effect as drunkennes. Magna pars eloquentiae est dolor, said Seneca, when he heard a dull Orator de∣clame most eloquently that day his Son died. So Polus the Actor, that he might more vive∣ly represent the grief of a Father upon the body of his deceased Son, brought in an Urn the ashes of his own Son newly dead. This for one Passion. So for anger, Si natura negat,
facit indignatio, versum. Archilochus and Hip∣ponax two very bad Poets, yet for spite and rabbia, to be revenged of two persons that in∣jured them, invented those doggrel sorts of Verses, Iambics and Scazons, whose force they so well applied, that their Adversaries made away themselves. And for Love, let the Smith of Antwerp be witnes; who, being re∣fused by his sweet-heart because of his dirty Profession, changed his hammers and anvil for pencils and tables, and arrrived to be the fa∣mousest Painter of his time. But to let these pass; Wit is the mother of facetiousnes, con∣ceits, jests, raillery, satyricalnes, (which is al∣most synonymum to wit,) drollery, quick re∣parties, quaint Metaphors, and the like, in conversation. Of projects, new Inventions, Mechanical Instruments, &c. And in learning is the great Nurse of Poetry, Oratory, Mu∣sick, Painting, Acting, and the like. 2. JUDGMENT is the deliberate weighing and comparing of one subject, one appearance, one rea∣son, with another; thereby to discern and chuse true from false, good from bad, and more true and good from lesser. Which who so doth, is a wise man, beloved of God, and reverenced of all good men. Its parts consist 1. in circumspecti∣on, or consideration, of all circumstances, ad∣vantages, accidents, &c. 2. In sagacity, or col∣lecting much from little hints; which requires both a great vivacity, serenity, and subtilty of spirit; all these together make up Solertia. 3. In caution or weighing all things for, and a∣gainst, the subject. And 4. Providence, or pro∣vision of futures, what may, and what may
not, most probably fall out; which is the height of human wisdom. A judicious man is stable, solid, serious, looks after truth, real advantage, and happines; is fit to govern and obey: is not rash or inconstant; believes not easily; nor easily disbelieves, but as his reason guides him. His discourse is not so plausible as solid; useth reasons more then Metaphors; speaks to purpose, and knows when to hold his peace. He is what every one strives, but few arrive, to be. This faculty is proper for all Sciences that depend upon rational discourse, and much thinking, as Divinity and the profound myste∣ries thereof; Natural Philosophy, and Moral; Practical Medicine, Law, Judicature, and Go∣vernment in Peace and War. 3. MEMORY is the calling to mind or recol∣lecting of what hath bin before known and appre∣hended. They that excel in it are accounted many times greater Clerks then wise men; are able to cite many Books, and Authors, and their Editions; can tell their opinions; and enterlace their discourse with ends of gold and silver. Yet, if not menaged by judgment, their opinion or learning is of little force or esteem amongst knowing men; who yet can gather many useful things out of their confusion. This faculty is necessary for Lawyers, whose learning lies in quotations, and records; and who number, rather then weigh, their Authori∣ties. 'Tis also proper for learning Languages, Criticismes, Philology, Antiquities; for put∣ting out, commenting upon, and making In∣dexes to, Authors. It is a natural faculty, and conspicuous even in Children, who by it learn
till they arrive to some considerable degree of Understanding. 4. IT is commonly imagined, that a great memory seldom accompanieth a great wit, or a good judgment; and that these three are incom∣patible one with another; that they have di∣vers habitations in, and a divers temperature of, the brain. Whereas I think the contrary is generally, but not alwaies, true. And thence is gathered an effectual argument, that they are all menaged by one great Agent, the Soul or spirit; which is above temperature, place, and matter. That one man proves not excel∣lent in all or many Sciences, proceeds not from the inhability of one or other faculty of the Soul; but either from the long time re∣quired to one study; from want of industry, every one being most ready to make use of, and cultivate, that, wherein they have some natural advantage, and to neglect the other; or from the two great attachment Men have to what they first master, so that all follow∣ing studies are cast into the mold of the first; or lastly from a mistake, for that memory is not so conspicuous, except where wit and judgment are wanting. Yet in these later times what persons have we seen eminent in all three faculties? Erasmus, when a youth, had all Te∣rence and Horace by heart; Jos. Scaliger in 21. daies got by heart all Homer (the Ilias contain∣ing 31670 verses, and the Odysses about the same number) and in 4. months all the other Greek Poets. Monsieur Peiresk, when a youth at School, could repeat all Ovids Metamor∣phosis, and Justins History without book.
Card. Bellarmin, saith Gallutius, had such a me∣mory, ut quicquid legeret scriberetve statim ac su∣bito reciperet, quicquid recepisset, fidelissimè constan∣tissimèque retineret. P. Paolo Sarpi's great me∣mory, as well as wit and judgment, even from a child, read in his life. What a man Mon∣sieur Pascal was in divers Sciences, his other works; what in Divinity, the Provincials Let∣ters, demonstrate. I will omit Julius Scaliger, Joh. Picus, Paulus Scalichius, Adr. Turnebus, Ca∣saubon. Card. Perron in four daies got by heart all Ecclesiastes in Hebrew, and besides his o∣ther vast abilities, was also an excellent Poet. Mr Oughtred in his old age had Ovid and Vir∣gil fresh in his memory. Fr. Suarez had S. Au∣stins works so by heart, that he could repeat, not only the sense, but for the most part his very words; and if he was asked of any thing in his own works (22. Volums in fol.) he could tell the place and very page where he treated of it. But this himself called not me∣mory, but reminiscence; for it was indeed as much judgment as memory: for he was so well versed in that learning, and so perfectly ma∣ster of it (having read the whole Course of School-Divinity, as I remember, 17. times over) that if he were asked of any point, or conclusion, he would discourse of it just in the same manner, and order, as he had writ it in his Books. I could produce many more instances. But in reason, the goodnes of the judgment must depend upon invention and me∣mory; that being the faculty which gives sen∣tence according to the reports of the other two. Yet few there are in whom these facul∣ties are, as I may say, mingled ana. It is best
therefore that all be cultivated and advan∣ced as high as they are capable to be: and what is most defective is most to be helped. And Children having memory by nature, in∣vention not till youth, nor judgment till matu∣rity, their memory is first to be menaged: only with this caution, that they be made to un∣derstand what they learn, and the reason of it, as soon as they shall be capable. 5. OF the bettering of Judgment we shall speak in another place; but for Memory, be∣cause we remember better those things, 1. which we learn from our childhood; 2. which we are more attentive to; 3. which we exer∣cise our selves most in; 4. which we orderly apprehend; 5. which we can call to mind from the beginning; 6. which we conceive to be somewhat like; 7. and which is pleasing to us; and because childhood and youth have their memory (tho not so excellent as men, yet) more useful then their understanding; therefore what ever they learn, let it be got by heart; that they may repose and store up in their me∣mory what their understanding afterwards may make use of: let them also frequently render it, and after several interstitiums; which will be a great help to their memory, to the perfecting of which nothing conduceth so much as pra∣ctise. Yet there is also an Artificial help to memory, which is variously and obscurely de∣livered by many Authors; the shortest and ea∣siest is this. Make use of a sufficient number of places best known to you; as of Towns in the way to London, the Streets of London, or the Signs in one Street, such in fine as are well
known to you. Keep their order perfectly in mind, which first, which second, &c. and when any word is given you to remember, place it in the first Town, Street, or Sign; joining them together with some fancy, tho never so extravagant, the calling to mind your known place will draw along with it the fan∣cy, and that the word joined to it. And these you may repeat afterwards either in the same order as they were delivered, or backwards, or as you please. This serves very well for words, and indifferently for verses after much practise; but it requires a long time by this art to re∣member Sentences. A succedaneum to memory is writing; and Students are wont to serve them∣selves of Common-place-Books, excellent helps to ordinary memories. The best way that I know of ordering them, is; To write down confusedly what in reading you think observable. [Young Students commonly take notice of remarkable Histories, Fables, Apologues, (such as are not in Esop) Adagies, if not in Erasmus, or Manutius. Hieroglyphics, Emblems, Symbols; (which are all but simile's drest after divers fashions) Histories of heathen Gods, Laws and customes of Nations. Wise and useful Sentences. Ele∣gant Figures, Reasons and Causes, Descripti∣ons and the like.] Leaving in your Book a consi∣derable margin; marking every observation upon the page as well as the pages themselves with 1, 2, 3. &c. Afterwards at your leasure set down in the margin the page of your Index, where the head is, to which such Sentence relates: and so enter into the Index under such a head the page of your Note-book, wherein such sen∣tence is stored. These Note-books, if many,
are to be distinguished by A, B, C, &c. your Index must be well furnished with heads; yet not too much multiplied, least they cause con∣fusion. Your own experience will continually be supplying what is defective. 6. INVENTION is bettered by practise, by reading, by imitation, and by common-places. 1 FOR practise, let him have a Teacher, who himself hath some considerable dexterity and practise in it, who may guide his charge by fit and easy rules and exercises, and not thrust him upon fishing in Books at first; and may take his subject after him, and shew him what more might have bin said, and what he hath said, bettered. Neither let the young man torture his mind at all; but set down what is suggest∣ed by his memory or fancy concerning his sub∣ject, be it considerable or no. The Soul will by little and little heat, and wind it self, unto higher conceptions; and in transcribing, he may reject what is too obvious. Let him be taught first to fill up a Sentence with epithetes, oblique cases of the Instrument, manner, cause, and all circumstances and relations: which is easily known by the rection of the parts of his Sentence. Practise him in most easy oppositions of Not and But; in most easy descriptions of things most familiar to him, to enure him to the observation and taking notice of what he sees: in enumeration of parts and species, as The old is better. In Histories or Fables; giving him somewhat to make out the rest, as Ultima om∣nium spes evolavit è dolio; in most easy and fa∣miliar similes, as of a Shepheard and Magistrate,
pismire and industrious person; sufficient vari∣ety of these is collected by Erasmus. Under simile's are comprehended also Metaphors, Al∣legories, Fables, Parables, Symbols and the like. And it were a good exercise amongst a circle of Scholars, to propose a Symbol (the easiest first) and every one to answer in his turn; v. g. let every one give his Symbol of fortitude, and a motto or word for it such as, a Pillar, which sustaineth the greatest weight laid upright upon it, the motto Rectum stabile; a Palm tree that grows up against a pressure, Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito; to a Die, homo quadratus; An oaken-bough struck with lightning, impavidum ferient: A Rock, an An∣vil, an helmet, &c. Fables are taken (as Symbols from things natural) from things animate, as an Eagle, Cock, &c. clothing them with speech and action; such betwixt Men, are Pa∣rables. So there are mixtures of all these, as, Easter said to the Griggs, tarde venerunt. There are also compound subjects, which they call Em∣blems, of which Alciat, Sambucus, and many others have made Volums. Such are also Im∣presa's of great Men, a vast number whereof are collected by Typotius and others. Another way of practise is, to apply all such things as he seeth, or as occur in his ordinary busines or conversation, to somewhat of morality, po∣licy, &c. As seeing an Ivy thrust down the wall upon which it grew, one said, that was the perfect emblem of a flatterer; an onion having its germe covered with so many scales, representeth a man that conceals his intention under many pretences, and the like.
2 FOR reading; verse him well in inventive Authors: such are generally all Paradoxists, Sa∣tyrists, such as write one against another, De∣clamators, Controvertists, and generally Ora∣tors and Poets, as Cicero, Quintilian, Seneca; I name him last, because, tho his matter be ve∣ry good, yet he husbands it well, and spreads it thin. Among the Latin Poets, Lucan, Ju∣venal, Claudian, Epigrammatists, &c. Let him also use his own invention before he reads upon his subject; and in reading set down what his own fancy suggests upon, or besides, the Au∣thor; and let him alwaies read. Cassiodorus re∣ports of Tully, that he refused to plead when it was expected, because he had not read upon his subject. 3 FOR imitation; let him imitate those he readeth (as is taught in Rhetoric) by transla∣ting, paraphrasing, epitomizing, and composing up∣on his own subject somewhat like the other. Give him the same subject with an Author unknown to him; and then compare his con∣ceits, fancies, reasons, metaphors, &c. with the Authors. Let him also vary discourses, as an History into a Dialogue, or Epistle; which take their Arguments from all occasions; as Antenor to Priamus, to send back Helena. Aga∣n emnon to Menelaus to quit her. So to vary Comedies and Dialogues into Epistles and Dis∣courses, as Mitio to Demeas to spare his Son, and the like. 7. 4 FOR Common-places and helping the In∣vention by them, many have written very co∣piously; others think it altogether unuseful.
For that experience testifies; That those, who have passed the course of their studies, and ne∣ver understood or practised this Art, have yet had very good Inventions; that those who use their fancies, do not at all serve themselves of these common-places, nor beg at every door for Arguments and Metaphors; that the mat∣ter suggested by these places is only general, or an heap of universal notions, which is rather a disadvantage then an help. Thus l' Art de penser. But on the contrary, it must be ac∣knowledged, that all the Ancients, Aristotle, Cicero, &c. made great account of this; that tho some have great parts, that they can without Art perform the effects of art, yet all Fields have not a River or a Spring in them, but some require the diligence of a bucket; that those (whom they called Sophistae) who governed in their daies, made Profession, out of these places, to teach to discourse upon any subject pro & con, and to say all that could be spoken concerning it: that many of late daies have attained to plausibility in discourse meer∣ly by Lullies art, which is but a few of those common-places; and those too the most general and indistinct: that all conceptions are drawn out of these places; and if reason naturally as it were, and of her self runs to them, it can∣not but be very useful (for Art is a more cer∣tain guide then Nature) to make her see her own power, to discover to her self her great treasure, and to direct her, whither to go for what she wants. For if the Soul be a great Palace furnished with all necessaries; is it not a considerable assistance to the general Dispen∣ser, to shew him where every thing is di∣sposed
and deposited in its proper place? The sole reason, why these are not more taught in the Schools, is, because they are included in, and learned together with, Logic and Philo∣sophy; and tho the use of the Topics in Lo∣gic be quite different from this here in∣tended (which seems to be the mistake of that Author) yet being the things are the same, it is left to the diligence and versability of the Understanding, to apply them according to all their uses. The uses of Topics in Logic and Rhetoric, are to discover the value and force of a proposition in order to find out the truth, and to produce assent in our selves or o∣thers, either by conviction or perswasion; but here they serve to procure a right notion and apprehension of things, by considering all that belongs to them: as also to communicate the same right notions to others; and by questions to draw forth as many notions as the subject will afford. It is true also, that these places are general; for being the common springs of wit and inventi∣on, they cannot be otherwise; Invention being the well applying of general predicates to particu∣lar subjects. Thus much also I confess, that these Topics are not so profitable to them, who already understand Sciences, as to those who are ignorant, and concerning the usefulnes of them to such, Matteo Pellegrini (of whose Fon del' ingegno I have made much use in this chapter) telleth us; that the Gentleman, for whom he com∣posed that Book, by the use of it, arrived to such a perfection, as to be able in a short time to write, without defacing one word, many pages concerning any the meanest subject pro∣posed to him; to the great admiration of as many as knew him.
It is also to be noted, that some subjects are barren, which notwithstanding will serve very well for beginners; such are universal, plain, ordinary themes and propositions, which are to be fertilized by divers Artifices; chiefly by clothing them with some rare or unaccustom∣ed circumstances; such as have a shew of novelty or unexpectednes, for nothing else is grateful. As to congratulate for a degree, marriage, &c. are barren, except there be somewhat particular of age, severer examination, extraordinary merit, &c. It is also to be noted, that, tho some per∣sons have such happy Inventions, that they can presently compare notions, and as it were descant ex tempore upon a subject; yet will they sometimes be at a loss; and then these Topics will be useful unto them, tho perhaps not so much as to ordinary wits; who must read, and observe much, that they may store up a Magazin of conceptions; and practise much also, that they may readily and easily by their questions pump out what is to serve their occa∣sions. For every proposition is the answer to some question, and we think we understand perfectly, when we are able to answer any question con∣cerning our subject. All subjects also are either of single words, or propositions. Invention concerning single words consists chiefly in substituting other single words for it, whether for expressions only, or to raise more matter for propositions. In short, the height of the Invention, a sin∣gle word is capable of, is an high Metaphor, Ca∣tachresis, or Hyperbole. I will give you an ex∣ample of a single theme, and how the fancy descants upon, and menageth it through all
the Predicaments, out of Imman. Thesauro, to save my self the labor. His subject is a Bee, dead, in Amber, which he makes a compound subject, and takes first the several parts, Bee, and Amber. Substantia. APIS. Animans, fera, avicula, corpusculum vi∣vax, insectum. ELECTRUM. Gemma inanimis, Heliadum so∣rorum lacrima, arborum sudor, humor concretus, viscus, gelu. Quantitas. AP. Pusilla, brevis, levis, monstrosa. EL. Gutta, stilla, rara merx, informe corpus, formas se in omnes vertens. Qualitas. AP. Flava, auricolor (for first she was iron-co∣lored, till Jove changed that for golden, be∣cause she was his Nurse) sonora, ingeniosa, prudens, sedula, casta, vilis, metuenda, sonitu minax. EL. Flavum, mellicolor, illustre, perspicuum, clarum, pretiosum, nobile, à fluido aridum, tenax, geli∣dum, fragile, sterile. Relatio. AP. Fimo-genita, mellis genitrix, nobilissima insectorum, Jovis nutricula, fera socialis, Reip. amans, fucorum hostis, Regi fida, Colonis chara; Harpyiae, Amazoni, Pegaso similis; Aristaei in∣ventum. EL. Ex populo genitum; matronis carum; spe∣culo, auro, vitro, simile. Actio & Passio. AP. Hortos populatur; dulces è floribus succos de∣libat; furunculos insectatur; nocuis nocet; telum jaculatur; venena fundit; nectareos molitur favos;
facibus ceras ministrat; aliis mellificat; domos ar∣chitectatur; Remp. gerit; Regibus paret; pro Rege militat; fumo necatur. EL. Magneticâ virtute paleas rapit; animalcula illaqueat; labra mordet; oculos allicit; Phae∣tontem extinctum deflet; artificum torno expoli∣tur, elaboratur. Locus & Situs. AP. Hyblaea, Cecropia, odoris innata floribus, hor∣torum cultrix, ceratae urbis inquilina; domi ni∣dificat; dulces nidos fovet. EL. In Eridani ripa, ad Phaethontis sepulcrum stillat; monilibus & armillis inseritur; thesau∣ris atque scriniolis servatur. Motus. AP. Per fiorea rura volitat, vagatur; semper fugax, quasi aliger equus, & eques; dum voli∣tat, pugnat, EL. Trunco haeret & profluit; lentum, segne. Quando. AP. Brevis aevi; in castris hyemat; vere novo se prodit; in aurorâ roscidum nectar legit. EL. Aeternum, immortale; vere liquatur; den∣satur bruma. Habere. AP. Pennigera, alata, loricata, armata; tubam & hastam gerit; ipsa telum & pharetra. EL. Aurium appendix; virginum gestamen; moni∣lium decus & luxus; inter opes numeratur. So joining several of these together, you may call a Bee Ingeniosum insectum; hyblaea hospes; A∣les Cecropia; nobilissima simi filia; aurea Jovis al∣trix; florum praedo, hirudo; Florae satelles; cerea∣rum aedium architecta; nectaris propinatrix; mel∣lis opifex; pusilla hortorum Harpyia; volans vene∣fica; loricata avicula; alata Amazon; volatilis
tuba; viva telorum pharetra; surunculorum terri∣culum, &c. And Amber, Pretiosum gelu; luctuosa Eridani gemma; jucunda Heliadum lacrima & monile; Phaethontis funus; lapideum mel; aridus liquor; concretus fluor; aurum fragile; gemmeus arborum sudor; gelidus ignis; viscosa lux; avicularum illex & pedica; flavus palearum magnes; gemma rapax, mordax; fulva Eridani supellex; lubricae opes, te∣naces divitiae; populea spolia; lapis non lapis; ar∣millarum pupilla; lacrimosum Matronarum delici∣um, nobile aurium pondus. Then he joins both together, not consider∣ing that the Bee is dead. Substantia. Nova Metamorphosis! olim flebilis Niobe in sa∣xum, nunc apis flebilem in gemmam migrat: Mirae deliciae! Apis inter gemmas numeratur: lapis anima∣tur, animal lapidescit: Medusam vidit apicula; imo eadem Medusa est & lapis: novas natura docet in∣sitiones, in arbore gemmas, in gemmis apes: prodi∣giosa fecunditas, lapis aviculam parturit, &c. Quantitas. Myrmecidis anaglyptis adnumerandum opus; apis in guttâ. Unica haec apis rempub. perosa sibi vivit; sola suum implet aviarium, & pusillâ se in aulâ ja∣ctat, &c. Qualitas. Fulva apis fulvâ lucet in gemmâ; electrum dixe∣ris in electro. Cerne ut gemmeo radiet fulgore igno∣bile insectum; dices etiam Apicula est sidus. Alget Apis in flamma; ardet in glacie: quid enim ele∣ctrum nisi flammeum gelu? vilissima rerum Apis electro pretium astruit; nescias utrum utri plus conferat, Electrum Api, an Apis Electro. Haec pretiosior est captiva quam libera, eo carior quo
clarior. Hem voluptuarius puellarum terror Apis in gemma; de alieno superbit Apis, luce fulgens non suâ. Relatio. Jovis altrix praemium alterum tulit, olim aurea, nunc gemmea; imaginem cernis quam nemo expres∣sit, sine caelo caelatam; nimis ipsa sui amatrix api∣cula perpetuo se miratur in speculo. Actio. Arbor apim, apis oculos rapit; ex istâ gemma pateram confice, Nectar apicula propinabit. Cerne ut arcto complexu hyblaeam volucrem gemma soveat; dices electrum esse Adamantem. Ad Phaethontis sepulerum dolens apicula lacrimis obruitur. Aucu∣pio delectantur Heliades, viscus est lacrima. In∣cauta apis in lacrimis invenit insidias. In furto deprehensa gemmeis compedibus tenetur apicula. Non impune arbores pupugit ut flores. Florum praedo fit arborum praeda. Avarae volucri viscus est gemma. Electrum vidit Apis, mel opinata in illecebris la∣queum reperit. Dolosas experta gemmas, viscata munera, &c. Locus & Situs. Gemmeâ in thecâ latet venenum. In gemmâ la∣titat fera: & opes timentur. Apum Regina regi∣am invenit qualem nec Semiramis. Auream do∣mum sibi condidit Nero, Apis gemmeam. Sumtuosa haec Apis in gemmâ nidificat. In spe∣culo excubias ducit. Gemmam custodit apis quâ cu∣stoditur. Apim coluere Aegyptii, apem avari. In∣fidae infida latebra latentem prodit. Ubi asylum sperabat carcerem invenit, &c. Tempus. Strenua bellatrix apis in gemma hyemat, aestivat in glacie. Brevis aevi avicula lacrimis aeternatur. Nuper avis, nunc lapis.
Motus. Vernis fessa laboribus apis vacationem obtinuit in gemmâ. Castrorum desertrix in ostro cubat. A lento velox tenetur. In liquido haeret, in sicco nat at. Ni∣mis alte volitans Icario lapsu naufragium fecit. Ef∣fugere si potest, nollet, illustrem sortita carcerem. Rara avis volucri gemma, &c. Habitus. Novum indumenti genus, vestita est apis & nuda pellucet. Jam matronales inter luxus feram nu∣meres, &c. If you add to these another circumstance, the Bee dead in Amber, you discover a new field of matter. Substantia. Venesica hic jacet cui gemma venenum suit. Ti∣tulo non eget hic tumulus, latentem cernis. Letha∣lis hic succus, quam necuit, servat; dubites, apisne mortua sit an electrum vivat; exanimatum corpus suum animavit sepulorum. Hoc cadaver, uti He∣ctoreum, pretio redimitur, &c. Quantitas. Pusillum hoc sepulorum Mausoleo insultat. In∣gens miraculum apis mortua. Unica jam non est Phoenix, alteram ostendit Eridanus. Qualitas. Obscura olim avicula, dum extinguitur, lucet. Hoc cadavere nihil pulerius, nihil hâc umbrâ cla∣rius; Flysium habet in gemma. Luxus est sic pe∣rire. Pretiosum hoc funus invidiam morti de∣traxit. Relatio. Gemmeum apiculae typum cernis in protypo. Sese ipsa finxit & fixit. Narcissi fatum experta est apis in speculo mersa. Hanc puellae vivam oderunt, mor∣tuam colunt.
Actio & Passio. Exigua haec artifex majori ingenio cadaveri ca∣vit quam corpori; ceream sibi domum molita, se∣pulcrum gemmeum. Nec lacrimis eget nec face; in lacrimis conditur, in tumulo lucet. Crudelis Nym∣pharum pietas! innocuam apim dum lugent, necant: hanc amore an odio peremerint, nescias, complexu praefocarunt. Mortuae Heliades hostem occiderunt. Mirum, auceps in gemmâ latuit. Locus & Situs. Huic cadaveri sepulorum non debes sed serinium. nobili leto laeta volucris fimo-genita in gemmâ mo∣ritur. Sarcophagi pulcritudine capta mortem soli∣citavit. Hunc tumulum violabit nemo; pretium ve∣tat. Rapax volucris rapaci conditur gemma; flo∣rum harpyia sic condi debuit. Motus. Fugacem licet aviculam lenta mors tenuit. Casses abdiderat inter gemmas. Diu pennis velificata ca∣rybdim reperit in gemma. Novum inalum! in la∣pide mergi. Tempus. Quod immortalis sit apis nil superis debet, sed morti. Aeternitatem Phario Regi astruit Myrrha, api Electrum, utrique lacrima. Lethali hoc succi∣no mors apem perdidit, Apis mortem. Habere. Gemmeum cadaver cerne; tales Proserpina gem∣mas gestitat. Inops victavit apes, dives moritur. Thus much for single words; it follows con∣cerning Propositions or Sentences: these consist of subject, copula, and predicate. The subject in Invention is either kept, and other copula's and predicates applyed to it; or changed to raise more matter; and then is substituted in its place either,
1. SYNONYMUM: as for little, take epi∣tome, compendium, pigmeus, homuncio, punctum, atomus, &c. or some other of those expressions, found out in the places for single words. 2. GENUS; as for treachery, take deceit. 3. SPECIES; as for treachery, take Trea∣son against the Prince, or Countrey, as Tar∣peias; against enemies, as Sinon; or against friends, as Bocchus's betraying Jugurth to Sylla. 4. THE Cognata; as for treachery take feign∣ed friendship. 5. Or its simile's; as of a Fisher baiting his hook; a Coy-duck intising those of its own kind into the danger. For beginning; Root, fountain, spring, (as of a watch) seed. 6. OPPOSITES; as fidelity. The Copula, for so we will at present call those Verbs auxiliary, by some of which all que∣stions are made, and by which the predicatos, whether Verb or Noun, are joined to the sub∣ject. These are, am, was, with their divers cases and persons, have, had; do, did: make, made: suffer: shall, should: will, would: may, might: can, could: owe, ought: useth or is wont. These again vary questions by the Tenses or times; present, past, or future: and both these a long or short while: such are these questions, Is it? was it? hath it bin alwaies? lately, or a long time agoe? will it be? would it be? may it be? might it be? &c. ought it or behoveth it to be?
useth it, or is it wont to be? Again all these are either affirmative or negative. Is it not? was it not? hath it not bin? They are also varied with If, as, if it be, if it were or were not what would follow? If Alexander, had fought with the Ro∣mans? If the Sun go out of the Zodiack? For Predicates, ordinarily Authors do pre∣scribe no other Common-places for Invention then the Predicaments; which indeed do sup∣ply answers to very many questions, but not to all. I have therefore rather chosen to fol∣low Matteo Pellegrini, who reduceth all Predi∣cates that can be applied to a subject (as near as his observation could reach) to twelve heads, or (as he calls them) Fountains and Springs of Invention; which are these. 1. The relation or commerce between the object and human facul∣ties. 2. Constituents or parts. 3. The causes, principles, or efficients. 4. The End. 5. The Action. 6. Passion. 7. Quality. 8. Quantity. 9. Time. 10. Place. 11. The Subjects. 12. The Correspondents. Of which I shall speak in or∣der, shewing what sub-heads every place con∣taineth, and how matter may be drawn out of them by questions. Yet I shall not set down all that is to be said, for that were both im∣possible and unnecessary; but sufficient to make the use of them, and of all not set down, un∣derstood and practicable. The manner to use them is this; set down the common place with its particular heads upon a several table or page; till by frequent perusing and practising they become ready and familiar to you. Then, by the auxiliary Verbs put in form of a question, find out such notions contained in each place as are agreeable and fitting to your subject:
change also the subject (as often as you have need) by some of the former waies, and ap∣ply the questions after the same manner to them also. 1. COMMON-PLACE. The Relation of the object to the faculties of man, is as divers as the faculties are; 1. Sense external, internal. 2. Understanding. 3. Expression. 4. Affection. Concerning sense (your subject being the ob∣ject of some of them) are these and infinite other questions, v. g. a Battel. Have I ever seen it? at least painted? or described? might I have seen it? where? how long agoe? how often? had I seen it, what would it have wrought in me? I would I had seen it, for, How can I imagine it? what notion have I of it? hath my friend, or stranger, or acquaintance seen it? had he seen it, or not seen it, what would have followed? hath he dream'd of it? If a Battel be so terrible when heard, much more when seen; yet more when present in it. Could virtue be seen how would it allure all the World! 'tis pitty a lye cannot be seen, that all men might beware of it. Again, the passi∣on of the sense affords such questions as these. The Comet, did it deceive, weaken, blind, astonish, confound, please, comfort, cheer, the sense? Semper ego Auditor tantum? nunquamne re∣ponam, Vexatus toties rauci Theseide Codri? &c. 2. CONCERNING Understanding, or the in∣ternal faculty of knowing. The actions where∣of
are thinking, imagination, apprehension, com∣prehension, perfected when we have a compleat notion, or Idea of our object; this by many men (an original of many errors) is confound∣ed with assent. Assent or beleif that the ob∣ject is so, or not so; hereto belong also doubt∣ing, opinion, beleiving or crediting another, sci∣ence or perfect knowledg, deceit, error, prevision or foresight, remembrance, there being nothing that falls not out to be the object of the un∣derstanding, &c. Concerning these, we frame commonly these with infinite other questions. v. g. Columbus's finding out the new World. How came it into his thought? did any think of it before? what imagination or conception was formed of it? why were not such, as be∣fore him had that imagination, excited to un∣dertake it? did the Ancients think it impossi∣ble? did they doubt, whether it were not all Sea? did they beleive their Predecessors that denied the Antipodes? how did Columbus first assent to it? what Arguments, what Authori∣ties moved him? if he had not thought upon it, would any other? A thing so probable did it find many abetters? &c. How did it move, work upon Columbus, when he first gave his full consent? what Resolutions did he take upon it? &c. 3. EXPRESSION, or that faculty which discovers our minds to others, comprehendeth Words, languages, spoken or written; our own or forreign; ancient or modern; copious or barren; elegant or rude; pleasant or harsh; perspicuous or obscure; ambiguous, equivocal, synonymous, proper, natural, figurative. Again, verse or prose; nar∣ration,
interpretation, question: instructing, disput∣ing, determining, affirming, denying, proposing, an∣swering, confuting, amplifying, exhorting, praying, commanding, advising, congratulating, condoling, &c. All these again are true or false; likely or unlikely; doubtful or certain. To this head are referred also all expressions not by words; as by painting, graving, symbols, emblems, characters, cyphers, hieroglyfics, impresas; as also signs with the hand, eye, or other mo∣tion of the body; either natural, or by con∣sent of general custome, or particular corres∣pondence. As also all natural expressions of passions, as sighing, laughing, &c. V. g. Being to speak of America and its Inha∣bitants; I ask what is the name of the Coun∣try? what language it is? who imposed it? whence derived or took he it? what is its true signi∣fication? what the reason of imposing it? what synonymas to it? is it equivocal? who hath writ of it? in what language? how much? &c. Again, is there any Map of it? what doth it resemble? is it painted any where? &c. 4. AFFECTION hath these sub-heads, whence questions may be suggested. Delight and trouble; pain and pleasure; love and hatred; desire or aversion; hope or fear; gratitude or in∣gratitude; anger, admiration, veneration, contemt, indignation, compassion, complacency, and in short all other motions, or passions of the Soul. In reference whereto I demand, if v. g. a visit of a friend hath ever, and when, and how often, delighted me? whether it be a thing desirable, joyful, &c. to me? or if to any other, and to whom? &c. If he should come, how would
my passions be affected? what content? &c. II. SECOND common place of Constituents containeth three heads. 1. of essential degrees of Genus's, Species, &c. 2. of Particulars of its Spe∣cies; and 3. of parts constitutive. The first hath subheads all Essential predicates. Beginning first with ens, enquiring if your sub∣ject (v. g. an Unicorn) be, or if there be such a thing. So descending, if it be a substance, or accident. If a substance, whether corporeal, or incorporeal. If an accident, whether quantity, quality, motion (action and passion) relation, time, or place; running through the species of your genus till you come to your subject it self. These subdivisions of every genus are to be found in the predicaments. For example, an Eagle. Is there such a thing? a substance or accident? is it a substance created? corporeal? com∣pounded? living? mortal? animal? irrational? volative? wild? that flies single, not in flocks? with a hooked-beak? living by prey? &c. So concerning the first predicate, many questions offer themselves. As, War is a thing, no great matter if it were not in the World. Were it not that we see it acted every day, we should esteem it a fabulous chimera; such as Cerberus, and the Furies. Were it not, from how many calamities should we be free? Oh that there were never known the names of quarrels, dis∣sentions, hatreds, fightings! but that love, cha∣rity, and peace reigned every where. What sort of entity is War? pursuing it through all its differences; it is an Action, not peaceable or profitable, but troublesome and offensive: offensive upon deliberation, not by Nature, as
cold is contrary to heat: for interest of state, to distinguish it from robbery or private quar∣rels. Menaged with open violence, not secret plots, with armed multitudes, against an ene∣my that defends himself with a competent Ar∣my, &c. The second suggesteth to us considerations, if the subject be one or many, simple or various; and of how many sorts, v. g. how many sorts of Eagles? of War? by Sea, by Land, offen∣sive, defensive; just, unjust; horse, or foot∣fights; fair or barbarous. So for particulars, the War of the Turks against the Venetians, En∣glish against Hollanders, French against Spaniards. The third of Constituent parts, whether essen∣tial, integral; and these homogeneal or heteroge∣neal. Adjuncts, as hairs are parts of Beasts, leaves of Trees, and these either excrementi∣tious, or else perfective and for ornament; as pillars are parts of noble Buildings, Theaters, Fountains, Piazza's, &c. of great Cities. Or parts of order, as beginning, middle, end: su∣perior, inferior; internal, external, &c. The Soul, hath it parts? may it have? why hath it or hath it not? if it had or had not, what sort of parts? how many, &c. III. THE third Common-place is of Cau∣ses, efficients or principles, to which are reduced, occasions, instruments, means, or any concurrents, assistants, or accessories to produce the effect. These again are remote, near, or immediate; uni∣versal, particular: primary principal, or secundary and less principal: total, partial, separate, conjoin∣ed: internal, external: necessary, contingent, for∣tuitous, intended: weak, strong: which may, or
may not, be hindred: easy, hard: possible, impos∣sible: prepared, unprepared: dispositions, &c. A∣gain, all these are either of the thing it self, or the thing being such as it is, clothed with acci∣dents and circumstances. In human actions also are other heads, as the Person, our selves, or some other, friend, neigh∣bour, stranger, enemy; which work either by chance, by reason, by passion, and these love, ha∣tred, &c. by force, necessity, or violence; by cu∣stome, by error or mistake, by opportunity, &c. as War: by whom or between whom made? who the occasion? what moved to it? what was the true cause? what the pretence? whence began it? with what Armes and Forces was it menaged? what instruments or furniture? what conveniences? how many artillery? how many horse? how many foot? how many shot? what stock of mony? what strength? what experience? what counsel? who the General? what a one for skill, courage, fortune? what under-Officers of all sorts? how qualified? was he constrained to fight? did he undertake the charge volun∣tarily? out of duty? ambition? doth he menage it by intelligence? treachery? or force? IV. THE fourth Common-place is of the End and Means, or of Good; for the end of every Agent and every action is Good either real or seeming; near or far off; private or public. Of Ends there are several degrees or subordi∣nations. The ultimate or supreme end. The chiefest is the glory of God the Creator: next, the perfection of the universe. And these are uni∣versal of all things. Next follow more parti∣cular
or mediate ends, the conservation of the Species; the conservation of the Individuum: its delight or pleasure; excellency; and convenience; honestum, or duty; profit to the Agent, his friends, neighbors, the public, his Country, &c. All natural Agents, though they work for an end, yet intend it not, but are directed to it. Only man, being a rational creature, knows and aimes at an end. And the end of the man is one; of his Art, another: as the statuary makes a statue to get mony, &c. but of his Art is to resemble the Archetype. Of mens intentions or aims, some are principal, others accessory; some ordinary, others accidental. Pompey mar∣ried Caesars daughter; not for the love of pro∣geny, nor for her beauty, or dowry; but for his own ambition, an accidental end to marri∣age. Some direct, others perverse; as a Father recounts to his Son the worthy actions of his Ancestors, to provoke him to the like; which he perverts to pride, libertinism, dis-subjection to Laws and Magistrates, and insolence to∣wards his inferiors. And this happens some∣times out of error and mistake; as when an Orator diverts his Art to get applause; some∣times also out of malice and wickednes, as when a General desires Victory to satisfy his private revenge. When a man goes to Church to look upon an hansom woman, &c. Again of ends, some are ultimate and prin∣cipal, others secundary, instrumental, or means to obtain the other. As a Prince gives out mony, to form an Army, to fight an enemy, to overcome him, to take away his dominion, to seize it for himself. This is the ultimate end, the other are means. Of these also some
are proper and convenient for the end; as if he, that designs to be a Soldier, learns to me∣nage an Horse, to understand and use arms, to endure hunger, cold, wearines, wounds, watch∣ing, &c. Others are improper, as to quarrel, to swagger, to be drunk, fight, kill and slay, every one he meets. To be an Orator, the proper means are to study reasoning and argu∣mentation; to imitate Cicero, Demosthenes, &c. to observe the best way of disposing his mat∣ter, clothing it with good words, phrases, fi∣gures, &c. the contrary and improper way, or rather impediment, is to scrape together a parcel of well-sounding words, a few snaps of wit, &c. Again, some ends are obtained, others hin∣dred; as a man desires health and strength, sed grandes patinae, tucetaque crassa annuere his supe∣ros vetuere. A Father desires his Son to be virtuous and prudent, and provides him Ma∣sters, Books, &c. but the young man aban∣dons himself to ill company, &c. hindred by our own folly, opposition of friends, ene∣mies. &c. or fortuitous accidents. Questions concerning the End are such as these. Wherefore? why so? to what end, pur∣pose, intention? for whose sake? for what good doth, worketh, maketh, he this? what shall he reap by it? hath he obtained his end? hopeth he, shall he obtain it; what means tak∣eth he to obtain it? are they rational, prudent, proper? who can, hath, will, hinder him? or it? V. THE 5. Common-place is of Actions. Whereof some are immanent, when the Agent is also the patient, commonly expressed by Verbs neuters in Latin. Such are, to grow, to
fail, to move, to rest, to want, to hast, to de∣clame, to study, &c. to think, understand, &c. Others are transient, when the Agent and Patient are divers, aad are expressed by Verbs transitives, as striking, heating, &c. Again, some actions concern being; as v. g. Pride, what doth, can, shall, will, &c. it pro∣duce? [Note that all the auxiliary Verbs have their greatest use and force in this Classe] ge∣nerate, perfect, preserve, consume, destroy? Conversation begetteth similitude in manners, mutual confidence, uniting interests, conserves friendship, and is apt to procure advancement, &c. Debauchery consumes the estate, destroies health, &c. Others concern qualities, and indeed all acti∣ons proceeds from the virtues or faculties of their Agents; whether natural or acquisite; and Actions are as various, and copious, as Qualities are. As a wise man gives good counsel, and doth his actions wisely. A young man doth, can, may, is wont to do foolishly. Strong Wine, doth, is apt to inebriate. In action, the place, time, and quantity often afford mat∣ter considerable. He can speak more boldly in an Ale-house, then at Court. The Sun warmeth and enlightneth (because bigger) more then Venus; more also when nearer. How doth it move, act? by it self, by ano∣ther? by Nature, force, chance; as the Effici∣ent, end, pretence, &c. circularly? directly? how in youth? how in age? how at first? how afterwards? slowly or hastily? constantly or by intermissions? equally or unequally? mediately or immediately? To action are reduced also Consequents or
Effects, which answer to the Question, what doth it, or he, work? and of these some are made, some are done; some endure no longer then the action it self; as, the room is no longer light then it is enlightened. If the Au∣ditors mind him not, all is done, as soon as the Preacher hath spoke his Sermon. Others remain after the action is ended; as health remains, tho the Medicine have ended; Science remains, when the study is fi∣nished. Science gets honor, honor emploi∣ment, emploiment riches. A Prince what doth he? what ought he, &c. to do? to admi∣nister Justice. What will that do, or is it apt to produce? to maintain plenty, security, peace. What are the effects of these, naturally, usu∣ally, alwaies, continually? the peoples love, and readines to spend their lives and estates for him. Hence no danger of insurrections, re∣bellions, &c. he will live in great honor, and reverence with his Neighbors, &c. The gol∣den apple, thrown by discord amongst the Gods at a feast, what consequents had it, might it have? &c. delight of the guests: Emulation and desire of the three Goddesses: Chusing of Paris to be Judge: Mercuries descent to carry him the message: His undertaking it: his be∣holding the three Goddesses, &c. So the im∣mediate effect of the Sun is heat, thence the warming of the Earth, raising vapors, thence clouds, rain. Again, from heat, Seasons of the year, generation of all plants, metals, &c. VI. THE sixth Common-place is of Passion, or receiving an Action. But especially suffer∣ing, which is chiefly of evil. To this belongs
being made, being done; was the World, could it be, could it be made, from eternity? the rebuilding of the City, is it, may it, could it be done, finished, perfected, destroied, con∣sumed and changed into better, worse? Why do some men grow as fat as Ehud, none as big as Goliah? Qualities. The Moon, because receiving her light from the Sun, is subject to Eclipses, changes, full, &c. Priamus, because old, lived to be spoiled of his King∣dom, to see his Sons slain, his City destroied, &c. The Ethiopian is burnt with heat, the Lap∣lander frozen with cold. In sum, what ever heads belong to action, may be also easily applied to Passion. What doth the object work upon us? our senses? &c. what do all Simples and Medi∣cines; Air, and all things (called by Physici∣ans) preternatural? all things edible? &c. work upon us in order to health and sicknes? what do all Arts work? what all virtues, vices, estates, ages, sexes, &c. work? well? ill? or indifferently? VII. THE 7th Common-place is of Quali∣ties, which hath these heads. 1. Good and evil in themselves, good is perfect, worthy, noble, excellent, happy, &c. Evil the contrary. In respect of others, necessary, helpful, superfluous, profitable, agreeable, hurtful, &c. as Lucifer was created a most noble and excellent spirit; but afterwards became unfortunate, wicked, dangerous, malicious, in endeavoring to dimi∣nish the glory of God, and devising mischief to man. Full of hatred against Heaven, and deceit against Earth, &c. by which means he
is become the vilest, and most detestable of all Creatures. 2. QUALITIES occult, which are known only by their actions. What is the power, fa∣culty, &c. of the Loadstone? to draw Iron, to make it move towards the North, &c. who could beleive the power of Circe, to change Men into Hogs? 3. QUALITIES sensible, such are beauty, uglines; figures of all sorts; light, darknes; colours of all sorts, natural, artificial; white, black, &c. for hearing, sounds of all sorts, shrill, loud, skreeking, whistling, din, noise, &c. So for smells of all sorts, and tasts: also tangible qualities, as heat, cold; dry, moist: heavy, light; hard, soft; liquid, solid, thin, thick, subtil, gross, clear, &c. and all these natural, or adventitious. As Lucretia was beau∣tiful naturally, &c. 4. QUALITIES of the mind, faculties, or powers natural, or accidents, as in the under∣standing, perspicacity, sagacity; memory, te∣nacious, treacherous: invention, ready, slow: the affections also and passions: virtues and vice belong to this head. 5. ADJUNCTS; as naked, clothed, armed, adorned, trimmed; not men only, but Hou∣ses, Cities, Sepulchres, Fountains, and the like. 6. SITUATION; as Cloth is tenter'd, folded, &c. a Pillar upright, leaning, fallen, hanged up, &c. a living creature standeth, sit∣teth, lieth, kneeleth, &c.
7. RELATIONS; as Lord, Subject, Judg, Advocate, accused, Magistrate, Master, Ser∣vant, Scholar, teacher: maried, unmaried; rich, poor, &c. noble, ignoble; glorious, in dis∣grace, &c. VIII. THE 8th Common-place is Quan∣tity; this is easily and vulgarly known with its species. To it therefore belong number, one, many, few, &c. v. g. How many Suns are there? is it never seen double, or triple? why can there be no more? if there were more, what would follow? is it divisible or indivisi∣ble? extended? how far? how many parts hath it? how great is it? how large, long, high, thick? greater then the Earth? how often? how is it to be measured? how long hath it lasted? is it diminished or increased? hath it any weight? IX. THE 9th Common-place of Time, hath these heads, alwaies, sometimes, v. g. what is the duration of the Creator? he hath alwaies bin. Is it possible he should be not eternal? if he were not eternal, what would follow? why is he eternal? can any thing be eternal besides him? Duration is varied into past, pre∣sent, and future. Prudence considereth things past, that it may govern the present; and mak∣eth conjectures from both, that it may well menage the future. The past is considered by memory; the present is in acting; in the future are concerned our hopes, fears, providence, cautiousnes, &c. 2. DIVERS measures, of time; as ages,
years, months, daies, hours, moments, and parts of time as Morning, Evening; Spring, Sum∣mer; Infancy, Childhood, &c. the beginning, middle, ending of the Duration of any thing. 3. OCCASION, as favorable, opportune, accustomed, purposed, &c. with their contraries. X. THE 10th Common-place is where, or place. To which belong. 1. The several parts of the Universe; as Air, Earth, Fire, Water, Heavens, Firmament, &c. North, South, &c. Zones, Climates, &c. Land, Sea, Islands, &c. Countries, Asia, Africk, &c. India mittit ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei. Where shall we find de∣ceit? in Shops and Markets, in narrow Souls. Where subtilty? in the Genoueses. Where In∣dustry? in Holland. 2. PLACE is either Proper, common; due be∣longing to another. A Scholar in a Market is a fish on dry land. Place also is natural, violent, accidental; where it ought, is wont; it may safely, well, be. Our Country, dwelling, &c. 3. DIFFERENCES of place; before, be∣hind; on the right, left &c. hand; above, un∣der; over against, towards, &c. neer to, far off; in, by, at, &c. Where stood Carthage? Italiam contra, Tyberinaque ostia. Where is water to be had? in the Fountain, River, Sea, Well, &c. 4. QUALITIES of place, cold, hot; fruit∣ful, barren; clean, dirty; champaigne, moun∣tainous; tilled, untilled, sandy, chalky, &c. desert, inhabited.
5. CIVIL places, as an House, Town, Vil∣lage, Villa, Shop, Market-place, Street, Thea∣ter, Church, Hall. Public or private. Sacred or profane, solitary, inhabited, our own, ano∣thers. Where may a man plant, build, &c. upon his own. Where do flatterers frequent? the Court. 6. THE power or property of place. Vervecum in patriâ, crassoque sub aere natus. XI. THE 11th Common-place is the subject to which any thing belongeth, or wherein any thing is. There is nothing that may not be the subject of another. The cause may be of its propriety. Virtuous actions to whom are they proper? in whom to be found? in pru∣dent persons. What things are hot? those ex∣posed to the Sun, are neer to the fire, are in motion. Who are cunning? they who have much experience. The effects and signs. Who are noble? they who do nothing basely, or craftily. Who are true Princes? they who go∣vern for the good of their People. Who are subject to anger? they who have a sharp nose, curled hair, red face, &c. Substances are most properly the subject of other things. As God is the fountain of good∣nes, the Angels receive it immediately from him. Men and other Creatures are good each in his kind. So for all other things. What things are, may be, use to be, ought to be, accounted long? [Actions and Passions] a Journy from England to China. The works of Tostatus Abu∣lensis. Delay of what is earnestly desired.
[Time] the lives of Men before the Flood. [Piace] the way from Paris to Constantinople. What things are weak and feeble. [Quantity] things small and little. [Quality] sick per∣sons, Women, pale persons, fearful, tired, &c. [Action] Children, old Men. [Place] the Asiatics, &c. XII. THE last Common-place is Corres∣pondents, which hath many under it, as 1. Before and after; first, second, third, &c. last: beginning, middle, ending. More or less. Whether is before, Saturn or the Sun? in dig∣nity and perfection the Sun is before: in place descending Saturn is before. In time they are equal. 2. The same and divers or different. Virgil was the Author of the Georgies, who of the Aeneids? the same. How doth his Poems dif∣fer from Homers, Theocritus, Hesiod, Tasso? &c. 3. Equal and unequal: double, triple, &c. half, and generally all Proportions. 4. Like, unlike; contrary, opposite; and these varied with more and less. Alexander and Jul. Caesar were like in boldnes, unlike in stature; of contrary dispositions. Whether was more prudent? less fortunate? Was Plato a better Philosopher, or Dionysius a worse Tyrant? the Astrologues prediction of Caesars death, brings to mind the like of the Earl of Pembrok. 5. Union or conjunction in the same action; as when two act one upon another. Mutually, as two enemies, or emulators seeking to un∣dermine one another. Or when both act up∣on a third, as two Rivals toward the same Mi∣stress. Or both suffer from a third, as two
servants under the same Master. Or one act and the other receive or suffer, as the Master and Scholar, Judge and accused. 6. Together, near, far of: antecedent, concomi∣tant, subsequent, either in place, dignity or time. Christmas brings to mind good cheer, mirth, jollity. A feast suggests Meats, Cooks, Fish, Foul, Flesh, Sawces, Dishes, Chargers, Wines, Cups, Plates, &c. The Spring brings in Sum∣mer, Autumn, Winter. Caesar makes me think of Brutus, Cassius, Pompey, &c. CHAP. XII. Brief Directions for Elocution. I Beg the Readers pardon, if, contrary to my own design, I here subjoin to the discourse of invention, a few lines in order to regulate our speaking and writing, what we have invent∣ed. And the rather, because amongst the very many Books of Rhetoric, I have not seen any, that declares the differences and reasons of Stiles and Figures so exactly as Eman. Thesauro. Out of him therefore, for the greatest part, I have drawn this short scheme and prospect; whereby any, even meanly practised, capaci∣ties, may be able to discern and judg of what is well, and Orator-like written or spoken; and consequently himself also to imitate the Elo∣quentest Authors, There are then divers manners of speaking and writing.
1. CONCISELY, in few short abrupt Sen∣tences, as men ordinarily speak in common conversation, without any art, or order. As Dic mihi Damaeta, cujum pecus? An Melibaei? Non, verum Aegonis. Nuper mihi tradidit Aegon. Such is very frequent in the Comedians. Vos isthaec intro anferte: abite. Sosia Adesdum. Paucis te volo. Dixi, audivistis, tenetis, judicate. 2. SOMEWHAT artificially but imperfectly; 1. without any observation of numbers, cor∣respondence, measure, &c. when a period hath no certain bounds, but goes on till the matter be ended, keeping the mind of the Auditor still in suspense, till all is said which is to say; which when it will be, the Auditor cannot divine, because he cannot foresee where the speakers design will determine. Such are the beginnings of most of S. Pauls Epistles. Such is that beginning of Cicero's Oration pro Caelio. Si quis Judices forte adsit, ignarus legum, &c. till you come to quibus otiosis, ne in communi qui∣dem otio, liceat esse. So in that pro Milone be∣ginning at Occidi, occidi non Sp. Maelium &c. unto non modò vestibulo privaret, sed omni aditu & lumine. So in Catone Majore. Plus apud me Antiquorum authoritas valet, &c. unto per visum ex Africano audisse dicebat. Such is that Dithirambique scene in Senecas Oe∣dipus which begins, Effusam redimite comam nutante Corimbo Mollia Nisaeis armati brachia thyrsis. &c. Such that of Virgil in his Silenus. Namque canebat uti magnum per inane coacta, &c. And Aeneid. 6. Principio caelum ac terras, camposque liquentes, &c.
Such is most of the Historians manner of writing. This fashion of speech the Greeks called Ora∣tio pendens, Ar. Rhet. l. 3. c. 9. such when an Athenian Ambassador used at Sparta, the Se∣nate replied, the first part of your Oration is gone out of our minds, and the second never entred in. 4. AFTERWARDS Thrasimacus, or who∣ever he was, that first observed the pleasingnes in Lyrics to proceed from their pauses and mea∣sures, began to practse the same in Prose; and to mince those great and unlick'd masses into shorter and rounder periods. Of these, that, which consists of one entire sense only, and is not divided into members, (such as are most of Senecas) is called by Aristotle Periodus supina: and by reason of the omission of the transiti∣ons, and the frequent repetition of the same matter in several words, is by most Orators re∣jected. Wherefore others, out of more dili∣gent observation of what was pleasing, chang∣ed those round and incoherent periods into ma∣ny more concise members: carving them, as it were, into divers clauses and parcels; which were also made correspondent and commensu∣rate one to another. So that they became neither intire, nor yet maimed; not metrical, yet not without meeter; not in feet, yet not al∣together loose; without Verse, not without rythme; verse compared with other prose, prose compar∣ed to verses. This came not in fashion amongst the Romans till the latter end of Tullies time; which made his first Orations not to be so elo∣quent as his latter; and himself to complain that he was going out of the World when he
began to understand Rhetoric. And of some Orators in his time he saith; In iis erat admira∣bilis cursus orationis, ornata sententiarum concinni∣tas non erat. i. e. they had a wonderful fluency in their stile, choice words, and round full pe∣riods, but they wanted the neat distribution of them into parts and members. The first is like an head of excellent hair, but hanging down, and flagging; this other like the same hair dis∣posed and made up into rings and curles. Ex∣amples of these are infinite in Plinies Panegyric. 4. THIS Harmony or correspondence of the clauses of a Period consists in three things, 1. Equality of the members. 2. Contraposition of the words. 3. Similitude of terminations. 1. Equality is, when the divers clauses of a period consist of equal number of words, or of syllables, or times, (two short syllables being e∣qual to one long) which is altogether as grace∣ful. As Speremus quae volumus; quod acciderit fe∣ramus. Cic. Alterum optare crudelitatis est, alte∣rum servare clementiae. Superbia in fronte; ira in oculis; pallor in corpore; in ore impudentia. Plin. Si quid obtigerit, aequo animo paratoque moriar; neque enim potest accidere turpis mors forti viro; neque immatura Consulari; neque misera sapienti. Cic. 2. Contraposition, antithesis, is a conversion or retorsion of the same words in divers clauses of the same period. For the same words are severally (and often contrarily) joined, to make as it were a seeming contradiction, or paradox at least. As
Saepius accidit ut imprudentes felixiter, prudentes infeliciter agant. Inselix Dido nulli bene nupta marito; Hoc pereunte fugis, hoc fugiente peris.Stultus prudentibus, prudens stultis, visus. Sometimes also words of a contrary significa∣tion are joyned together elegantly in one periodus supina. As, Inclinata resurgo. Carpit & carpi∣tur una. Qui spectavit vulnera vulnus habet. Sparta ibi muros habet ubi non habet. Sometimes words signifying contrary things are placed in divers clauses of the same period. As, Aut vivos amplifica, aut mortuos derelinque. Alba ligustra cadunt, vaccinia nigra leguntur. Sometimes they are placed in manner of a Dilemma. Morere, si casta es, viro; si incesta, amori. Jupiter aut falsus pater est, aut crimine verus. 3. Similitude of terminations, whether. 1. by iteration of the same words in several clauses. 2. Of the same cases and persons of nouns and verbs, though not the same words, yet of the same or like sound. Of the Spartans at Ther∣mopylae. Trecenti sumus, sed viri, sed armati, sed Laco∣nes, sed ad Thermopylas; nunquam vidi plures tre∣centos. Of the same, Nos sine deliciis educamur, sine muris vivimus, sine vita vincimus. This cor∣respondence is sometimes in one word, some∣times in 2, 3, 4; and 5 sometimes, but rarely. Indignus cui vel improbi bene vel probi malè dicant. Dum laurum acquisivit regiam, palmam ami∣sit popularem. Vel in negotio sine periculo, vel in otio cum dignitate esse possint.
Aeque nocent & qui nolentibus vitam officiosè impertiunt, & qui volentibus mortem mali∣tiosè negant. An tu me per hos in patriam revocare potu∣isti, ego te per eosdem in patria retinere non potero? 5. BESIDES these, there are two other sorts of figures, or ornaments of speech. The first are such as move the affections, and perswade as well as delight, and therefore may well be called Pathetical. The second are such as con∣sist in ingenious expressions in the words them∣selves. Pathetical are those figures, which serve to express some passion, or other operation of the mind; as the imagination, understanding, &c. whether they concern apprehension, appetite, anger, or any other affection whatsoever. Such are, 1. Cognitio, to this belong these and the like expressions. Agnosco, audio, intelligo, scio, expe∣rior, video, &c. Agnosco, agnosco; victum est Chaos. Sen. Nunc scio quid sit amor. Virg. Nescio quo pacto fieri dicam. Cic. 2. Demonstration, to which belong en, ecce, adspice, audite, &c. En quo discordia cives per∣duxit miseros! En queis, &c. Virg. Intuemini huic erutos oculos, illi confractos pedes; quid exhorresci∣tis? sic iste miseretur. 3. Narratio, to which belong, dicam, enarro, &c. Favete linguis; carmina non prius audita Mu∣sarum sacerdos Virginibus puerisque canto. Hor.—Nunc quâ ratione quod instat confieri possit, paucis adverte, docebo. Hospes, disce novum mortis genus. 4. Affirmatio, est labor, non nego; pericula
magna, fateor; multae insidiae sunt bonis, verissime dictum. Cic. Affirmo tibi, Caie Mari, non sic re∣stitisset. Qum. Negatio. Nego esse quicquam à testibus dictum, quod &c. Jole meis captiva germanos dabit? non. 5. Ironia. Ni fallor, feminas ferrum decet. 6. Aposiopesis. Novimus & qui te. 7. Praeteritio. Non dico te à sociis pecunias ac∣cepisse; non sum in eo occupatus, quod civitates, regna, domos omnium depeculatus es; surta, rapinas omnes tuas omitto. 8. Juramentum. Per has lacrymas dextramque tuam te. Virg. Testatio. Vos, Dii Patrii, penates, testor, inte∣gro me animo ac libero P. Sullae causam defendere. 9. Animadversio, epitasis. A reflecting upon what was said before, or animadverting upon some circumstance of what preceded. Obrepsisti ad ho∣nores commendatione fumosarum imaginum; upon which he animadverts, Quarum nihil habebas simile praeter colorem. Cic. in Pis. Tu intrare illum Senatum poteris, O Tulli, in quo Pompeium non sis visurus? tu illam togam induere, quae armis cessit? Sen. in Suas. Regina quondam ancilla nunc quidem tua. 10. Parenthesis. 11. Correctio. Antronium in campo vidimus, & quid dico? vidisse nos? Ego vidi. 12. Repetitio. Commotus non es, cum tibi mater pe∣des amplexaretur; non es commotus. 13. Admiratio. Novum monstrum! integer ali∣tur, debiles alunt. Sen. 14. Exclamatio. 15. Extenuatio. Levia memoravi nimis; haec virgo feci. Leve est quod actum est.
16. Commemoratio. O Mysis, Mysis, etiam nunc scripta illa dicta mihi sunt in animo. 17. Praesagitio. Nescio quid animus grande prae∣sagit malum. 18. Dubitatio. Dubito an moriendo vicerit, an vincendo sit mortuus. 19. Inquisitio & interrogatio. Nunc quaero abs te, quare patrem suum Roscius occiderit: quaero quando occiderit. Cic. 20. Responsio. Quaeris, quo jaceas post obitum loco? quo non nata jacent. 21. Interpretatio. Si intelligis, Cicero, non dicit roga ut vivas; sed roga ut servias. When Antho∣ny offered him his life if he would ask it. 22. Occupatio, or preventing an objection. 23. Fictio. Fingite vobis, antiquam illam urbem videre, lucem orbis terrarum, &c. 24. Imaginatio. Jam mihi cernuntur trepidis delubra moveri sedibus. Virg. 25. Expressio, ectypôsis. Putares cadaver ambu∣lare. Quacunque iter faceret, ejusmodi fuit, ut non legatus Populi Romani, sed ut quaedam cala∣mitas pervadere videretur. Cic. Verr. 26. Prosopopoeia. Tecum patria sic agit. Cic. Cat. 27. Apostrophe, when we speak to one that hears not. O Fons Blandusiae splendidior vitro, dulci digne mero. Hor. 28. Ratiocinatio, when one discourseth with himself. Cur Pallas non nupta? virum non invenit ullum. 29. Conclusiuncula, when the foregoing mat∣ter is reflected upon and concluded with some∣what unexpected. As Cicero, having declared how the Herbetesi were by Verres condemned to pay a great sum of mony to two of his Mistres∣ses,
concludes. Itaque civitas una sociorum atque amicorum; duabus deterrimis mulierculis vectigalis fuit. Epiphomena. Sic dii spreti exardescunt. Sic hu∣mana consilia castigantur, ubi se coelestibus praeferunt. Val. Max. Compendium. Illis parentis nullus aut aequi est amor, avidis cruoris, imperii, armorum, doli: diris scelestis, breviter ut dicam, meis. Oedip. 30. Perplexitas. Quid agimus? animum distra∣hit geminus timor; hinc gnatus, illinc conjugis cari cinis. Pars utra vincit? 31. Approbatio. Sic, sic agendum est. Bene est. Abunde est. Hic placet poenae modus. 32. Imperium. Egredere ex urbe Catilina,—Egredere, purga regna; lethales tecum aufer herbas: libera cives metu. Medea. Admonitio. Vos pro mea summa diligentiâ mo∣neo; pro authoritate consulari hortor; pro magnitudine periculi obtestor. Cic. Obsequium. Tuus, O Regina, quid optes Explorare labor, mihi jussa capessere fas est. So for the Passions. Blanditiae. Animula dulcis, suavis animula. Salutatio & Apprecatio. Bene valeas, quisquis es. Sit tibi terra levis. Dii te ament qui haec legis. Veneratio. Delubra & aras coelitum, & patrios lares supplex adoro. Abominatio. Heu stirpem invisam! & fatis con∣traria nostris. Irrisio. Ah, ah, Ah, lepidus amator silicernius. Execratio. Dii te perdant, fugitive. Cic. Optatio. Fecisset utinam Deus immortalis. Maxi∣mè vellem, Judices. Invocatio. Hymen, ô Hymenaee veni. Votum. Voveo tibi victimam, fortuna redux.
Obsecratio. Per has aniles ecce te supplex comas, atque ubera ista penè materna, obsecro. Commendatio. Si te in germani fratris dilexi loco: sive haec te solum fecit maximi, seu tibi morigera fuit in rebus omnibus: Te isti virum do, ami∣cum, tutorem, patrem. Bona nostra haec tibi committo, ac tuae mando fidei. Concessio. Do quod vis; & me victusque volens∣que remitto. Gratiarum actio. Non erimus regno indecores, nec vestra seretur fama levis, tantive abolescet gratia facti. Virg. Recusatio. Non me delectant ignoti domino servo∣rum greges: nec sonantia laxi ruris ergastula: nolo dives esse: Patrem gratis amo. Exultatio. Jo. triumphe! tu moraris aureos currus, & intactas boves. Jo triumphe! nec Jugur∣thino parem. Horat. Jactantia. Et nos aliquod nomenque decusque ges∣simus. Gratulatio. Laetare, gaude gnata; quam vellet tuos Cassandra thalamos. Plausus. At mihi plaudo ipse domi, simulac nummos contemplor in arcâ. Horat. Ejulatio. Hei mihi! nequēo quin fleam. Expostulatio. Improperium. Ingrate cessas orbis? excidimus tibi? Poenitentia. Potens jam cecidit ira: poenitet; facti pudet. Sen. Spes. Spero equidem mediis, si quid pia numina pos∣sunt, Haesurum scopulis. Desperatio. Actum est, conclamatum est. Occidimus. Aures pepulit hymenaeus meas. Timor, horror. Sudor per artus frigidus totos ca∣dit: omen tremisco misera feralis Dei. Sen. Pa∣vet unimus, horret: magna pernicies adest.
Verecundia. Heu me! per urbem (nam pudet tanti mali) fabula quanta fui. Audacia. Impudentia. Resistam: inermes offeram armatis manus. Dabit ira vires. Ingentem confidentiam! num cogitat quid dicat? num facti piget? Excandescentia, Minae. Accingere ira; teque in exilium feras furore toto. Vae tibi causidice. Diris agam vos; dira detestatio nullâ expia∣tur victimâ. Nemesis. Indignatio. Isthic nunc metuenda jace: non te optima mater condet humo, patrioque oner abit membra sepulcro: Alitibus liquere feris; aut gurgite mersum undaseret. Virg. Miseratio. Compescere quidem verba, & audacem manu poteram domare; sed meus captis quoque scit parcere ensis. Confessio. Me amare hanc fateor; si id peccare est, fateor id quoque. Tibi, Pater, me dedo; quid vis oneris impone, impera. Deprecatio. Miseremini familiae, Judices; misere∣mini fortissimi Patris; miseremini filii. Cic. 3. OTHER figures there are, which consist in the words; as Metaphors of divers sorts, whe∣ther the Genus for the Species, Species for the Ge∣nus, part for the whole, or the like. As Hypoty∣posis, or applying of words of life and sense to things inanimate. As Hyperboles, Laconisms, Op∣positions, such as Campi liquentes, liquidi Chry∣stalli; Or Deceptio, when a sentence ends unexpe∣ctedly. Spero tibi eventuram hoc anno maximam messem mali. Her mouth, oh heavenly! wide. Tuâ nitet in fronte sulgor aureus; argentum in cir∣ris; smaragdus in oculis; sapphirus in labiis; chry∣solithus in genis; collum in resti.
Metaphors are of divers sorts, i. e. are taken from divers common places. 1. From likenes Homo quadratus. 2. From the attribute Regnat gladius. 3. Equivocation Jus Verrinum. 4. Hypotyposis Pontem indignatus Araxes. 5. Hyperbole Instar montis equum. 6. Laconismus Carpathii leporem. 7. Opposition Mens amens: 8. Deception Vale apud Orcum. More particulars may be found in Authors; thus much is sufficient for this place, where this discourse intruded it self, besides my intention. CHAP. XIII. Of bettering the Judgment. 1. THE Judgment is that faculty whereby we discern, i. e. Judge of, true and false; good and bad; better and less good. Naturally some (i. e. sedate considering persons) are bet∣ter disposed to it then others; but none at ain any considerable perfection in it any other way, then by experience. Experience (I say) of others commu∣nicated by Books or instruction, and of themselves by their own observation. The habit, which per∣fects this faculty, (as that which regulates the will and affections is virtue) is Wisdome or Prudence. That great power, whereby we live in happiness and content; whereby we excell all other crea∣tures, and most men also; being by it out of the reach of their deceit and craft, and not imposed upon, or derided, by them; whereby our reason and better part is regulated; and whereby we
ought to govern both our selves and others. This if it be applied to particular subjects hath seve∣rall names; as if to govern Cities or Common-wealths, 'tis political prudence; if Armies and War, military; if a family, oeconomical, &c. with none of which I intermeddle, but only with that, which concerns every particular person in the conduct of his life: and here only in general; reserving to the second Part such particular rules, as either my own or others experience, that I have read, have suggested. In this place therefore I shall only advise (as wall as I can) how the facul∣ty is to be cultivated for the implanting that great perfection. 2. AND first take notice; that the ex∣ercising this faculty is the employing of all the rest. For it is in vain to give judgement without ex∣amining the reasons (devised by Invention) for both parties; and the like cases in former times suggested by memory. For the chief employment of the judgment being concerning the future, ei∣ther the choice of an End, or of apt means to an end; no man can promise to himself any success in his election without engaging all the powers he hath. As there must be. 1. [Supposing the end to be already resolved upon and alwaies be∣fore his eyes] a proposal or finding out severall v. g. mediums to an end. Which is called Counsel. 2. A comparing these together, that he may be able to chuse the best and properest, and honestest for his purpose, (for if he use dishonest means, tho proper, 'tis craft and subtilty, as to chuse impro∣per is folly and want of wisdom.) This is the im∣mediate action of Judgment; and which consists of many parts. As 1. circumspection of all circum∣stances
of time, place, and all other opportuni∣ties; 2. Caution for prevention of hinderances, considering all dangers, and difficulties, he is likely to encounter; and either providing to de∣cline and avoid, or arming himself to resist, or suffer them. 3. Solertia or good and rational con∣jecturing of what is likely to succeed. 4ly A firm resolution, and competent secrecy. And last∣ly a constant and due execution of what is well re∣solved. Now because this knowledge is very dif∣ficult, and at the best but a conjecture, it is ne∣cessary to consider what hath succeeded heretofore upon such premises, for that is most likely to hap∣pen again: but this cannot be done without the assistance either of Books or experienc'd persons, who have seen and known the like cases and suc∣cesses: and this cannot be without much obser∣vation and taking notice of things in the time of their actual flourishing; and storing up such rules and histories in the memory for future ap∣plication. By the way it will not be amiss to take notice, that as there is no new thing under the Sun, so neither any new action; but the same are repre∣sented over again under varying circumstances; so that he, who intends to be a wise man, must endeavour to distinguish the Action (as Physici∣ans do in judging diseases) from the circumstances; that he may be able to give a good judgment and prognostic; and afterwards to frame a general rule, which may stand him in stead at other times and occasions. 3. OPPOSITE to wisedom is folly, that base, abject, low, poor, sordid, condition; which ren∣ders a man wearisome to himself, and contemtible to others; exposed to every ones deceit and craft;
a slave to his own passions and others flatteries; and a stock whereupon to graft any vice, shame, or misery. This is made up of two Ingredients, Igno∣rance and Error. To avoid which, as also to re∣ctify the understanding, and abtain a true notion of things as they exist in the World, and relate to us, it is necessary that we. 1. Endeavour to be set at liberty from the dominion. 1. Of Vices. 2. Of Passions. 2. To use much attention, consideration, and weighing things themselves. 4. That a man may be virtuous it is not suffi∣cient that he now and then do virtuous actions; nor that he do them frequently out of good na∣ture, interest, mode, passion, or the like: but that he work discreetly, constantly, habitually, and for a good end, and by deliberation and choice; which two last conditions necessarily presuppose Prudence. So that as no Virtue without Prudence, neither is it without them. For it hath bin the observation of all knowing and discreet persons, and thay have delivered it for a certain rule, as hath also the Holy Spirit, and Wisdom of God himself; that virtuous courses onely, together with Gods grace obtained by much prayer and intercession, are capable to make a man wise, i. e. to direct his actions in such manner as he shall not need to repent of them. And that there∣fore such actions are called good: and others evill, because of the evil consequents; that they bring such as perform them to sorrow, repentance and misery. Hereupon are grounded those rules in the holy Scripture, that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom, that the beginning of Wisdom is to avoid folly, and wickedness. That it is sport to a fool to do wickedly, and the like: Reli∣gion
being the chiefest and supremest of all vir∣tues. An evil man seeks occasions to gratify his hu∣mor; and at best thinks to stop at the confines be∣twixt passion and vice; but a wise man avoids the occasions of vice, which he looks upon as a disease of the Soul, contrary to the natural and due con∣stitution of it, and subverting its true tone and disposition. And that every vice in particular is contrary to Prudence, appears; because Covetous∣nes instead of wisdome introduceth craft, subtilty, deceitfulnes, which are called the wisdom of the World. Pride breeds confidence of a mans self, and despising others advise and counsel; and lust (the third fountain of all vices) is the mother of negli∣gence, precipitious inconsiderateness, inconstancy, and at length of that blindness of understanding, which renders them uncapable of discerning, such things especially as concern their Souls, but even such also as are advantageous to their temporal welfare; and of chusing better from worse; fit and convenient from improper and aliene. 5. PASSIONS, tho not so immediately concur∣ring to the ruine of the Judgment as vice, yet indirectly and by consequent destroy it also. For being (as I said before) undeliberate motions to∣wards objects pleasing or displeasing, and there∣fore in the sensitive Soul; the objects passing through that to the understanding, carry with them that tincture or forme they there receive by those Actions; not now as pleasing or painful, but as good or bad (for so the passions represent them.) And if the Intellect do not speedily reflect upon the deceit; and separate and cleanse the na∣tural from the passionate, wherewith it is stained, it becomes partaker of, and ingaged in, the er∣ror.
And so not only looseth the true notion and knowledge of the object, but apprehends it also under a wrong and false Idea; mistaking v. g. the pleasure or good for the object. And whatever it receives or considers, whilest in that disposition, is conceived under the same mistake. So that all passions more or less, according to the degree of their strength, render the understanding par∣tial and unindifferent, and consequently erro∣neous, and unfit to judge in any thing of mo∣ment. Hence it is, that a man in passion, tho the alteration be only in himself, yet ima∣gines the World without him to be changed. What was before esteemed; when now look'd up∣on through this false light, appears contemtible; and the contemned becomes admirable. The beloved or desired is without faults, is excellent and easy; the hated is all faulty, unworthy, and impossible. Yet is this no great matter com∣pared to the Passions, when they are in their height and vigor. Do we not see how for the satisfying of a lust, and enjoying a revenge, a man breaks through all Laws, all obligations natural and civil? how he regards not what injury or affront he offers even to Magistrates and Parents? how he despiseth all inconveniences and evill consequences, his own or other mens reasons may forewarn him? But I will not med∣dle with these extravagants, utterly unfit to be carved into Mercuries, and will consider those which work more mildely; and seduce, not tram∣ple upon, the Judgement. Such are, 1. SELF-LOUE, or self-estimation, an o∣vervaluing of a mans own parts, opinions, or actions. An error in some sort necessary to the
well-being of man; for should every one know exactly the measure of his own ability, the grea∣test part of the World would be miserable. Every man, therefore, makes himself the stan∣dard for all others, esteeming every ones abili∣ties and actions, as they are equal or confor∣mable to his own: And this seems to be a na∣tural suggestion; but if it be too much indulged, so that either for pride of his own parts, know∣ledge, &c. or for interest and covetousness; or for honor and reputation; or for custom and educa∣tion; or any other by-respect, a man warp his Judgment, he lies under a lasting and univer∣sall prejudice. For this is the beginning of Opi∣niatrety; and when despising the advice and judg∣ment of others, he follows only his own coun∣sel, is it not just that he should be permitted to fall into the consequences of his own opi∣nion? he that bends, and plies his reason to his passion, why should he not enjoy the product of his indiscretion? why should he that sows folly, reap the fruit of counsel and advise∣ment? But to instance in the foresaid par∣ticulars. 1. HE that is conceited of his own worth, eo ipso des∣piseth others, and therefore will not read or take pains to informe himself what other Men say or know, but when he fixeth in himself this proposition, that other Men are more ignorant then he; then whatever comes in his fancy, seems to be an addition to knowledg; and must either be reserved as a mystery, or vented as the Depth of Science, and Oracle of wit; though many times it is but either a great error, or at best, a vulgar truth, And the most extrava∣gant
and grotesque conceits, as being most of all his own, he esteems and values the most. Such a man frames to himself notions and opinions, which all the World is to submit to, and these alone are to be taught and propagated; and all opposers are opiniastres, and ignorant, if not ma∣licious, contradicters of the truth, and envious of the glory of him that discovers it. Hence comes the spirit of contradiction, that let the ad∣verse opiner say what he will, his reasons will not be heard; for indeed our learned man stands upon his guard against truth; and so at last, instead of fair arguing, turns to chicanery and Pedan∣tery. 2. How much interest and secular respects wrest the judgement, is manifest to any one that observes; that the thriving opinions, and such as are countenanced by them that can re∣ward, never fail of abettors. But I can easilier pardon these then those who for love of gain oppose the Magistrate and Government; who knowing the humor of the ordinary people to be against obedience, and subjection, make use of it to disturb the peace, that they may fish the better. They gain Proselites that they may grow rich; they gather Churches that they may collect wealth; and heap up Disciples, that they may multiply collections. Thus they deceive un∣learned and unstable Souls, of their temporal, as well as their spiritual, goods: and care not what craft and deceitfulnes they use that they may fill their puries; their Arts are infinite, and seen of every one but those who are decei∣ved by them.
3. VAIN-GLORY, or desire of seeming more knowing then other persons, is as strong a pas∣sion, ever since our first Parents were carried away by it, as any that molests our Souls. This goes masked many times under a vizor of seeking Reformation, advancing knowledg, and the like; when it is in reality seeking applause, insinuating into a party, and vaunting our own selves. The beginnings of this delusion are ma∣ny times very subtil, and difficultly discerned, except by those who are very jealous of them∣selves. Hence comes an itch to invent or pub∣lish new opinions and fancies; to quarrel for a new interpretation, and even go to Law for the primogeniture of a notion. From hence also, if sharpned a little by coveteousnes, comes all seditions, disobedience to Magistrates, heresies, schismes, and rebellions. Is it not strange to see an ignorant person, without comprehending, or so much as tasting, the prin∣ciples of Arts and Knowledg, to judg for him∣self, and scorn to be guided; especially in things of consequence, where most caution is to be used? he that will not refuse to be taught to be a Shoe-maker, scorns to be instru∣cted in Divinity; and he will submit to a Ma∣ster of a Trade, that will not bow to a Doctor. If a man well furnish'd with this spiritual Pride, happens to be informed in some particular knowledg above the rest of his condition; he immediately thinks himself inferior only to An∣gels; instruction he despiseth; all ignorance, yea and sometimes Science too, he defieth; and pretends to nothing but inspiration, and, the consequent of that, infallibility; then hath the Devil perfected his work in him, he is ad∣vanced
as far in error as is possible, and be∣comes a seducer and an impostor. 4. OF all Opiniatrety, that which proceeds from Custome, and Education, is the least ab∣surd; yet a fault it is also, and more difficult∣ly conquerable then the rest. For the errors become in a manner connatural; and tho a disease, yet have so tincted the Understand∣ing, that it apprehends nothing but through them. And therefore the more any one knows in his error, the more difficultly is it eradi∣cated; yet time, and labor will do much; one custome not being to be expelled but by another. From this force of Education it comes, that heresies and dissessions are for so many genera∣tions continued; that whole Orders, and some∣times Nations espouse one opinion; and that con∣trary to another as wise and learned as it self. 2. TIMOROUSNES, basenes, or slothfulnes, is another origine of Errors, quite contrary to those produc'd by self-love; when a man seems to have no opinion of his own, but to assume the colour and tincture of those with whom he converseth. The Opiniatre takes for false what any other person affirms, the Complaisant for true. This is indeed the most peaceable way, and the best to make a fortune, but corrupts the judgment more then the other. For such a man either despiseth Truth as a thing of no value, not worth laboring for; or his own Soul, as if God had not given him reason, but had brought him into the World, and not endued him with sufficient ability to guide himself in it. Such men usually admire other mens per∣sons,
and take things upon the credit either of a greater number against a less (which in diffi∣cult matters is very dangerous) or sometimes of a less against a greater. Or of persons not versed in what is desired to be known, as of a learn∣ed man in things of piety or secular prudence; of a pious man in matters of learning and the like: yet this is better then to take a mans judgment, because of some external and acciden∣tal advantages; as to think a man learned, or in the truth, because a friend or acquaintance. Or, I am of his opinion, because I gain, or hope to get, by him. Or, he is rich, for which Men hold him wise. He hath so many legions, there∣fore he hath reason. Or, he is in great Office, he is above us, therefore wiser then us; he is of our Order, therefore we must sustain him. From this admiration of persons it comes, that he is thought a good Preacher that sweats and labors in the Pulpit; or he a good Advocate that bawls at the Bar; or he a wise man that talks gravely. We also think him a wicked person or our enemy that is acquainted with such, as if all that converse together joined in the same interest; him proud and insolent, that neglects a due civility; him ignorant, that is slow and silent; and him to have taken good counsel, that hath success. Hence also it pro∣ceeds that most Men admire what is in fashion and vogue even in Religion it self, and learning, as well as in clothes and phrases. That Men are taken with shews and splendor, and vain appearances; and are unwilling to go out of the track; but relinquish reason, and many times virtue it self, because they want com∣pany.
But that which most imposeth upon persons of learning and prudence, is; if they see a man say much truth, and well, they are apt to take the rest of his discourse upon that credit. The strong carries off the weak; and the Understanding once conquered, is not willing to try her strength a second time against the victor. 3. I WILL mention no more of the Passi∣ons; but in short reduce all the causes of errors to 2. heads of misjudging. The first is too hasty assenting, the second too slow. For the first, 1. There being no proposition, for which somewhat may not be said; many Men (whe∣ther out of passion, interest, want of ability or leisure, lazines, or whatever other cause) rest with the first appearance, and by little and little take root, and fix in error. Alas how few can judg of probabilities! of them that can, how few will take pains to weigh and consider? how many are concern'd that Error should be Truth? and who are so easily deceived, as they that think themselves wisest? Hence it comes, that so many Men abandon themselves to sensuality, covetousnes, and other vices, without remorse, or discovering the fallacy, for they assume to themselves certain reasons built upon slight foundations, which they are concern'd should be true, and therefore they will not examine them: but because they have some (tho but very small) shew of reason, they serve them, first for discourse with others, and then to fool themselves. As generally for all vice they urge. The example of other Men, the most, ma∣ny also in prosperity, and many esteemed good, that yet are vicious some way.
That it is not so bad, or dangerous, as is pretended. That many sin, yet but few punished. And the like. For pleasure, such as these, That natural desires are vainly implanted in us, if not lawful. That it is for poor and impotent persons not to bestow upon themselves what they desire; to bridle appetites and lusts is an argument of lownes of spirit, or want of power; and that by this, great persons are distinguished from mean ones and inferiors. That if pleasures had not been fitting, Na∣ture had not joined them to those actions, which are mostly hers; and that therefore Beasts are alwaies regulated by them. That no men, whatever they pretend, but use them. That studying, or emploiment, is only that pleasures, and rest, may be enjoied in old age with more gusto. That thinking is a dull formality; and de∣siring a laborious life, by him who can live at ease, is a busy folly. So for Covetuousnes. That a good Patriot endeavors to encrease the stock and wealth of the Nation, which prodigals wast and consume. That it is a great fault to spend and abuse those things, which may be put to good use. That nothing breeds respect but wealth; that alone is equal to all things; the ransom of a mans life; the last appeal, and resort of all ca∣lamitous persons. That it is but storing up what is necessary, &c.
The like pretences, and fig-leaves may be found for all other irregular and vitious de∣sires. To which if a man by education, inte∣rest, passion, or any other way, be biass'd and prepossess'd; and his indifferency removed; he will easily take up these plausibilities; and by them make his reason and truth truckle un∣der his lusts and desires. Qui vult decipi, decipiatur. But this fallacy of hasty judging reaches fur∣ther, even the learned and Philosophers are guil∣ty of drawing universal conclusions out of insuf∣ficient inductions. The Instances are infinite, but not fit for this place. But see in common Conversation what argumentations are frequent amongst us. Some professing Religion, live not accordingly, therefore all Religion is hy∣pocrisy. Some grave men are only formal, therefore all gravity is formality. Some things are uncertain, therefore there is no truth at all, &c. 2. The last Error in Judgment I shall note, is contrary to the former, i. e. too long deferring Assent. When a man hath considered a Que∣stion, and finds on either side Arguments; ma∣ny times he will not put himself to the trou∣ble, or for want of judgment he is not able, to consider; which is more probable, which ea∣silier answered, &c. but sits down with suspense of assent; thinks, that of two so equal in pro∣bability, either part, or neither, may be safely taken; and is contented with Scepticism. In justification of this folly some have made a profession, and instituted a sect; defending that there is no proposition so probable, but its contra∣dictory is as probable: and that no man can be certain of any thing, against which any reason
may be objected. So that wee are not to be∣leive our selves awake, because we, somtimes, dream that we walke, think, eat, &c. A Doctrine more then brutish; for the Beasts feed, and sleep, guided by their senses, notwithstanding the manifold errors, and deceits of them, without any scruple of doubting. Against human nature also, and injurious to our good Creator; bla∣ming him for giving us no more certainty then is needful or useful; and not such a one as by curious persons may be imagined. Tis also A∣gainst their own practise; for what Sceptic ever refused to eat or sleep, pretending that the ne∣cessity of those actions was not grounded upon a principle of absolute certainty, or the like; which notwithstanding, they willingly sug∣gest to others? Upon the testimony of senses and reasoning upon the objects supplied from the senses, all the moments of our lives and fortunes depend; Peace and War, Government and o∣bedience, and the rest. He would be very ri∣diculous, that being convinced of robbery before a Magistrate, should plead that the senses of the witnesses might erre; that they might be at that time asleep; and dream they were rob∣bed; that it is dangerous to take away a mans life without absolute certainty. In short, not to assent to sufficient evidence, i. e. to so much as all men are wont to assent unto, and upon which they set their lives and fortunes, seems to be a disclaiming of humane nature, and a silly affectation to be what man never was, is, nor can be. 6. I Will instance in no more Errors, but proceed to the Remedies; of which some concern the Educator, others the Educated. For the first.
1. I Would not have the Instructor to be offen∣ded, if his charge take not every thing upon his authority; Obest plerumque iis, qui discere velint, authoritas docentis. But encourage him to ask questions, and move doubts; accustom him to give his opinion and reasons in doubtful ca∣ses; especially such as fall out at that time, and upon the place. For want of such, let him censure the Ancients; let him accuse the murderers of Caesar; jeer Cato for killing him∣self, &c. Quicken also and waken his spirit, by giving him liberty to Contradict you, when he finds reason for it; and when he doth not, do you shew him what arguments are against your self. Encourage in him all thinking and exercise of the mind; and let him judge and censure freely what he reads or hears; sparing persons alwaies for charity sake; and discourage him not for every error he commits. Take not all the talk to your self; nor make to him long ha∣rangues, expecting a youth should go along with you, and understand and believe all you say. But discourse with him much after Socrates's man∣ner; which teacheth him to know things even before he learn them, i. e. by considering and comparing them with things obvious and fami∣liar, to wind up to the knowledge of things unknown and obscure. This will enlarge and exalt his spirit to an universal contemplation of the natures of things as they really are; and make him to admire nothing; to be surpriz'd with nothing; and not condemn every thing that is not cast in his own mold, or framed af∣ter his own mode and taste. Thus he will not be offended with small matters; nor be amaz'd to see contrary humors, opinions, or fashions,
nor be like a man brought up in a bottle, see all things through one hole. It is also observa∣ble, that the more any one knows, the less is he ingaged in opiniatrety; but this I only mention. 2. HE that seeks truth, and to perfect his judgement, must endeavour to render himself indifferent, free, and disengaged, that he may be ready to pass his Sentence secundum allegata & probata: which is chiefly by delivering himself from the power and dominion of all passions whatsoever. Which is done by regulating the Imagination (for there is their beginning) i. e. by subjecting it to reason and the Understanding; that it may not without consultation follow the suggestions of sense, and unruly motions of the Appetite. And this is not difficult if the particular occasion can be foreseen; but be∣cause that happens not frequently, it is requi∣site to set a continual guard over our weakest place, where we are most obnoxious to the e∣nemy; and to have a continuall magazine of such sober and, moderate considerations, as ad∣vice, reading, and experience will furnish. But if notwithstanding you cannot prevent these apprehensions, which indeed is difficult; I mean for a man to stand so continually upon centry, his arms ready and fixed, and in his hands; then at the time of the assault, retire; let the motion spend it self in vaine, and suffer it not to fix upon the object. But at the worst, play an aftergame. If anger v. g. have prevai∣led against you, force your self to beg pardon; and let shame and (especially voluntary) pu∣nishment, & penance, bring wrath to reason. So
against Insolence contradict your own, tho law∣full, desires another time, and do contrary to what you most affect. In sum, observe your own inclinations (for accidental Passions are not so dangerous) and watch over them di∣ligently; which is also better and easilier per∣formed, if you can procure a faithful monitor to assist and advise you. Next set not your af∣fections to much upon any thing whatsoever, even not upon the public, or works of Charity which are not necessary; pursue nothing with eagerness and engagement. And think not, when you have conquered three or foure times, that the war is ended. Passions are much the weaker by being overcome; but take heed they rally not. Qui sani esse volunt, ita vivere debent, ut perpetuo curentur. Good counsel. is not to be taken as Physic, but as nourishment, continually received, ruminated, and dige∣sted. And lastly, when you are foiled, put some penance upon your self, and resolve up∣on greater diligence for the future. And using these means, doubt not, by Gods blessing, but to arrive in time to a sedate tranquillity of mind and a clear understanding of the truth, a condition not more advantageous to the posses∣sor, then grateful to, and admired by, them with whom you converse. 3. THE last means I propose of acquiring a good Judgement, is consideration, weighing, or thinking much upon the probabilities of both sides; and that not onely at the present, when the mind is engaged and concern'd in, and for the business; but at leisure, suppose at night, when you recollect what you have done all the day; for then the mind is free to review, and revise
her own actions. He that useth this, will find in himself other thoughts and conceptions then he can possibly imagine, and he will see the same difference as is betwixt looking into mud∣dy, and clear, water. Hence it will follow that much busines is a great impediment to him that de∣sires to perfect his judgment; nemo occupatus bonam mentem invenit. Sen. An experienc'd person is ca∣pable of engaging himself in many emploi∣ments, but a beginner must not; nor in any one busines that taketh up his whole time: for by that means indeed he may be well skilled in that one thing; but he cannot arrive at the largenes and comprehensivenes required to true Wisdom. Again, whatsoever conduceth to heigh∣ten, and, as I may say, to spiritualize, the Soul, is also advantageous to wisdom. And this no∣thing doth so much (of the several parts of learning and sciences I have spoken before) as Devotion or Contemplation; which is a borrow∣ing of light immediately from the Sun; and a lifting and raising up the Soul to God; who of his infinite goodnes hath made the reward of his service in some sort the effect of it also. Now the first consideration a wise man fix∣eth upon, is the great End of his Creation; what it is, and wherein it consists: the next is of the most proper means to that end: afterwards he weighs the difficulties and hinderances, he is like∣ly to rencounter in his obtaining that end. After which he weighs all particular occur∣rences, how they conduce to, or at least agree, with that end, and those means so chosen. But for these, I refer you to such Authors as have spoken expressly concerning them.
CHAP. XIV. Of travelling into Forreign Countries. 1. THE Advantages of Travel are, 1. to learn the Languages, Laws, Customes, and understand the Government, and interest, of other Nations. 2. To produce confident and comely behavior, to perfect conversation and discours. 3. To satisfy their minds with the actual beholding such rarities, wonders, and curiosities, as are heard or read of. It brings us out of the company of our Relations, acquain∣tances, and familiars; making us stand upon our guard, which renders the mind more dili∣gent, vigorous, brisk, and spiritful. It shews us, by consideration of so many various humors, and manners, to look into and form our own; and by tasting perpetually the varieties of Na∣ture, to be able to judg of what is good and better. And it is most useful for those, who by living at home, and domineering amongst ser∣vants, &c. have got an habit of surlines, pride, insolence, or other resty and slovenly custom. As also for those, who are entangled with un∣fitting companions, friends, loves, servants. For those, who are seized upon with the vices of their own Country, such with us are Drink∣ing, rusticity, sowrnes in conversation, lazines, &c. and then, every one must be sent into the place most proper to reform him; as Drunken∣nes
is not much used in France; less in Italy and Spain. Debauchery with Women not so frequent in Germany, Flanders, &c. Gaming is common every where, but less in Italy. Quar∣relling dangerous in Italy, and Spain. Prodigality is often helped by setting a certain allowance, in a place where he cannot be trusted, where he is necessitated to live within his compass; or in prison; or shamefully run away without paying his host. It is also profitable for all persons learned, inquisitive, and curious: who, by the conversation of learned Men, and use of Books unusual with us, and Libraries, may very much augment their knowledg, as well as their experience. 2. I WOULD not advise any young man to go abroad without an Assistant or Governor, a Scholar: one able to instruct him in such in∣genious Arts, as are fitting for him to know; to chuse his companions (else a young man left to himself, not having to employ his time, must of necessity fall to debauchery, and evil company, who are alwaies ready to seize upon young straies;) to assist him in sicknes, or any other necessity; to advertise him of his fai∣lures; to exact the performance of his studies, exercises, and emploiments; to husband his al∣lowance; to keep him company, and furnish him good discourse, and good example. 3. WHOEVER would have his Son molded upon the form of such a Nation, must send him thither young; that his tongue may be plied to their Language, and his whole carri∣age imbibe, by imitation, their manner and
fshion, before tincted with any other. But if that design be not regarded (as I conceive it not very convenient for any one to quit his own Country customs, [customs, I say, not vices]) then it is better to travel when they arrive at some judgment, to discern better from worse; when able to furnish discourse, and by that means enter gratefully into conversation. Whereas being sent young, and having no knowledg or experience, they cannot advan∣tage themselves abroad, but are there in a kind of amazednes; variety of objects, which they nei∣ther understand, nor value, confounding, rather then edifying, them. And truly I conceive the cheif reason, why Travellers have so little (especially good) conversation of the natives, to be, because of the jealousy they have of young Travellers; that nothing is to be advan∣ced by their conversation worthy the trouble of their bad Language, impertinent discourse, silly questions (for such those demands seem to be, which concern things to them familiar and obvious) and frequent visits. Methinks therefore, it were better every one to be educa∣ted at home, to the subjection and obedience of his own Country Laws, and Customs; (ex∣cept the Laws and Government be subverted, as they lately were; and except there be some such Nation in the World, as admire all Laws and Customs but their own.) Etcocles would not give hostages to Antipater of the youth, but of grown Men. And the Persians, when wanting a King, they sent for some of the Royall Family, then hostages at Rome, were afterwards displeased at, and cut them off, as not agreeing with the manners and customs of
their Country. Besides 'tis better they should stay, till by instruction and study they have arrived to a capacity of employing their time profitably and delightfully by themselves; with∣out being (as too many are) forced to seek divertisement with others: then leave their Country at that age, when they should be ha∣bituated and molded into the Laws of it. And this is the reason, why not knowing their na∣tive duty, and living as strangers, licentiously, and not according to the best examples abroad; they bring home instead of solid virtue, for∣malities, fashions, grimaces, and at best a volu∣bility of talking non-sense, &c. Yet some, perhaps, think them then well educated; and that forreign vanity is preferable to home-discre∣tion. This is also the reason why they are forced, for passing their time, to apply them∣selves to such conversation as they can find; and good company being very rare and shy, but bad alwaies ready, and offering themselves, 'tis no wonder if they run into extravagant ex∣pences, as well as evilnes of manners. Or if they escape these, then the Fencing, Dancing, and Language-Master catch them, from whom picking up some scraps and shreds of discourse, at home they vent them for laces and rubans. Or at best of all, they sow but gape-seed, which, if well husbanded, yeilds them a goodly crop of wonders in their own Country. 4. EXERCISES commonly learn'd in Tra∣vel are Dancing, Fencing, Riding, to which some add Vaulting, and anciently Swimming, (for which reason Suetonius takes notice of it as a strange thing, that C. Caligula, so good at other
exercises, could not swim: He observes that Augustus instructed himself his grand-children to write and swim; Swimming also was pub∣licly taught at Athens) Music, and Designing. And these, I conceive, might as well, if not better, be learned in our own Country; were it not either for the sloth or opiniatrety of our Nation. The use of dancing and fencing is suf∣ficiently, if not too much, known; riding ren∣ders him master of the noblest and usefullest of all Beasts; Vaulting makes the body active, but else is not of so great use as wrestling were, if in fashion; or swimming; which is both more healthful, and many times proves to be of great consequence and necessity. Music I advise not; since to acquire any considerable perfe∣ction in it, takes up too much time; and to understand little of it, is neither graceful, sa∣tisfactory, nor durable. To thrum a Guitar to 2 or 3 Italian Ballad tunes, may be agreeable for once, but often practised is ridiculous. be∣sides I do not remember to have seen any Gentleman, tho very diligent and curious abroad, to qualify himself with that skill, but when he came to any maturity, he wholly re∣jected it. Designing I advise to, but only as a parergon, not an emploiment. And the small Mathematics Strangers learn in France serve to little, besides getting mony to the Teacher. Rules in Travelling. 1. Be very careful with what company you associate upon the way in pension, lodgings, &c. But make no such fa∣miliarity (except you have of a long time tri∣ed the person) as not to leave your self liber∣ty to come off when you please. Neither be ready to make or accept assignations of meetings,
at Taverns, &c. Especially be not the first motioner. Much time is lost, ill acquaintance got, mony spent, and many mishaps come by it. Besides they beget and draw in one ano∣ther, the most idle alwaies contriving to twist in another meeting. 2. Suspect all extraordinary and groundless ci∣vility of foreigners, as a design upon your purse; and what mony you lend upon the way to Strangers, count it given, not lent. Nor ever declare what mony or Jewels you have (of which notwithstanding you ought to have a reserve, not to be touched but upon extra∣ordinary occasions:) but alwaies make your self poorer then you are. 3. Make even with your host for pension, and all other demands, at the end of every month, and take his hand to an acquittance; for by that means you hinder all after-reckon∣ings; and they are wont, at your leaving them, to pick some quarrel, or seek some pretence upon you to get more of your mony. And so upon a journy, when you are not at an Ordi∣nary, reckon with your Host after supper. And where you never mean to return, extend your liberality at your first coming, or occasi∣onally as you have need of them, and defer it not till your departure. 4. Injuries from Strangers, especially in their own Country, are easily, safely, and discreetly, put up; but never safely revenged, where they have more friends, and power, then your self. Especially beware of intrigues with Women: infinite quarrels and Tragedies have begun there. 5. For health, without which you can do
nothing. When you begin (especially a long Journy) for three or four of the first daies, or meals at least, abate a third of your ordinary eating, the like do also at your arrival to rest, tilll your body be somewhat accustomed to the alteration. In travelling, especially in hot weather, drink as little as you can; especially by the way, for that increaseth your thirst, heateth, and disposeth you to a feaver. Mix water with wine, but water alone to one sub∣ject to thirst, makes him more thirsty. 6. If you find your self indisposed, of fea∣verish, throw in a glister, miss a meal or two, cover your self well in bed, that your body may transpire or sweat, or else let blood. But if it seems by your wearines, unquietnes, di∣sturbed sleep, high pulse, pain, &c. that it tends to a real sicknes, call the Physician betimes. 7. Have with you a little Venice-treacle, or some such Antidote; that if you eat any bad meat or drink, go to bed presently after sup∣per, or find any thing heavy on your stomack, or be tired with a long, wet, or tedious Jour∣ny, by taking a little of it, you may restore your self. Lucatellos balsom also (if well made) serves against ulcers, wounds, aches, galls, brui∣ses by falls, and like accidents. 8. If your occasions require you to voi∣age in hot weather, be very careful to preserve your head from the heat of the Sun; be very abstemious in your diet, and take the best care you can, your body be open. Accidental heat also is best expelled by transpiration. 9. Drink not before you eat, for that quench∣eth appetite; nor at any time without eating, especially no mornings drinks, and beware of
raw fruit, the most pleasant and newly ga∣thered commonly is worst; corrected much by eating bread with it. 10. Temperance, chastity, and moderate ex∣ercise are the great advancers of health and long life. De resto in every Country observe the rules of health, practised by the discreetest Inhabitants. CHAP. XV. Of prudent chusing a calling, or state of life. UPON the discreet choice of our calling, or state of life, depends our whole content and felicity: for if we chuse that which is agreable to our inclinations and abilities, both of body and mind, we work cheerfully, our life is pleasant, and we are constant to our purpo∣ses. But if, capable of better, we chuse a worse and lower, we espouse a continual vexation: if we aime at what is above our capacity, we des∣pond and despaire. Players fit their parts to their persons; and let us exercise our selves in what we are most fit for. And if necessity force us against our inclinations, let us use diligence to comply with it as hansomely as is possible: and at least avoid vice, rather then pursue things which are not given us.
2. IN all our actions, the principal guide we have is the End; as in travelling the place whither we are to go directs the way. And since we have, by the law and condition of our Creation, one principle (reason) in us, which doth, or may and ought uniformely to produce all our operations, we may also have them all directed to the same scope and inten∣tion. We are indeed composed of body and soul; and the body is guided by sense; but the soul (the better part) doth, or ought to govern the body, and it self be governed by reason illustrated in Christians by Gods holy Spirit. 3. THEY who aime at nothing but satisfy∣ing their sense, are such as either, 1. never look before them, but live in diem, without care or prudence, passing their time in mirth and jol∣lity, without design or consideration, except to contrive that to morrow may be as this day; or to escape some present pressure and difficulty which interrupts their delights. Or 2. do indeed advise and propose an end, but such a one as is either not obtainable; or if ob∣tained, not satisfactory, universal, or durable. Such are pleasures, riches, and honours. Any, or all, of which to be made the principal and ultimate end of our actions, is great folly and madnes. For neither will they avail us in sick∣nes and the calamitous parts of our life; whereto also they often engage us; and, in the prosperous, they are not in our power to com∣mand them when we please; nor keep them when we have them; nor do they satisfy us, if we keep them. They grow tedious and bur∣densom, subject us to cares, sorrows, envy,
and dangers: and there is somewhat better, which is not liable to these exceptions. 4. BEASTS do not deliberate, but work out of instinct of Nature; all of one kind the same way; (wherein they may be somewhat per∣fected, but not changed) without any general end or intention of their living or acting; tho they have some little particular ends of some of their actions. But deliberation is a considerate weighing of all reasons pro & con, such an end, and the means to obtain it. i. e. how a man shall employ those powers and faculties, which God hath given him, either by nature or his own acquisition, to that purpose, for which God hath given them. For there is one certain end, which all men may, and ought to propose as most agreeable and proper for their nature and condition. 5. THIS intention, which will sustain a man in all estates and conditions, which will have an influence upon his whole life and actions, which is a rock, whereon he may safely build in all conditions and accidents, is: To do as much good as he can, both to himself, and others. Which the holy Scripture calls glorifying God (a phrase demonstrating the reason why this is the universall end of our Nature) because that God created us all; and gave us our being and all that we have; and this not for our own sakes, for no rational and intelligent work∣man doth so, but for his own sake: who is glorified when his works answer his intention. He being also the universal good of all creatures,
what ever good we do, is a corresponding to, and as it were an assisting, him; a propagation of his interest, and consequently a fulfilling of that end for which he made us. 6. THIS is performed severall waies, as 1. by serving him in his own house, being members of his family, i. e. Officers in his Church, or Ecclesiastical persons, whether active or con∣templative. 2. By serving him in the Common-wealth, in actions of charity: and that, either as Magistrates, or private persons. In both which good is to be done by example, advice, counsel, commanding, governing, rewarding, punishing, liberality, assistance of the weak and poor against oppression, &c. In all which the Magistrate hath greater opportunity and obli∣gation to do good, then private persons. Ma∣ny of these good actions also cannot be per∣formed without wealth and reputation; and riches, if with due moderation and justice, to this purpose desired and employed, are very good. For, these being the measure of all things in the commerce and conversation of mankinde, tis impossible for him that deals amongst men, to be without them, and for him who is in an active life, and to do good, to be without a considerable proportion of them. And his re∣putation (I do not say popularity, but the good opinion of wise and virtuous persons) every one is bound to preserve, and to provide thimgs honest in the sight of men also. So much pleasure also is to be allowed as is necessary to keep up the body in health and cheerful vigor; which the wise Creator also hath appointed, in that he hath joyned pleasure to natural actions.
7. IN chusing a calling therefore (the fitnes whereof is only in order to our glorifying God, i. e. our own Salvation) consider 1. The advantages or disadvantages to our end, or its contrary. 2. The temtations we are likely to undergo and meet with. 3. What strength, assistance, or hopes we have to overcome them. But because it is not possible to judg of these but by experience, which the Deliberant is sup∣posed not to have, but in some lesser measure; it is therefore necessary for him, to ask advice first of God, then of wise, upright, and expe∣rienced persons. And 1. Those who have an excellent faculty, or ge∣nius, to one thing above others, seem to be by God called to that. 2. Those, who are by their Parents, or own choice, educated in one thing particularly, and find it agreeable to them, may safely acqui∣esce, and be persuaded, that calling is from God; as may also those, who have as it were an hereditary calling, being born to riches, and honors, may safely acquiesce in it, I say, pro∣vided they can overcome those temtations of offending God, which do usually accompany it. As all callings have some, and some very many more, and greater than others. 3. Those, who upon any rational grounds embrace such a calling, wherein they are per∣swaded they can serve God, and live charitably, and do good to their neighbors, may safely conclude that they are called by the ordinary providence of God; who is also the giver of reason to assist and govern us in those things,
which fall under its cognisance. 4. Some, also, God Almighty calleth extra∣ordinarily by his Prophets, Ministers, or inter∣nal inspirations, exciting to somewhat extraor∣dinary, either in spiritual, or secular emploi∣ments. Concerning whom we can give no rules. 5. Many men are not capable to chuse for themselves, being of weak judgments, unexpe∣rienced, biassed with some vice or irregulari∣ty: these are to submit to the counsel of their friends; and the most disinteressed, and near∣est a kin, are the likeliest to give best counsel. 6. It is in vain for him to ask advice that is not indifferent to all, or most of them; at least so much as to be without prejudice, or to refuse any proposed, and not to love or hate any so much, but to be ready to change his passions upon the information of better judgments. Unindifferent are those who are preingaged. As for married persons, it is in vain to consult about single life. For then, they can only deliberate how to glorify God in a married estate. And if an estate be ill chosen, but irremediably, accuse not God Almighty for the ill choice, but seek to amend it by more virtuous and pious living. 8. GOING to chuse, therefore, place your self as much as is possible in equilibrio; and resolve to chuse the best as near as your own discre∣tion (the assistance of Gods spirit implored) and the advice of friends, shall suggest unto you, The best, I say not simply, but the best for you; considering your parts, inclinations, bo∣dily health, and strength, exterior advantages, and the like.
And 1. consider that, tho no man is ob∣liged under guilt of sin to undertake the abso∣lutely best calling or estate; and that God Al∣mighty hath not so made man for eternals, that he hath no care for temporals; yet in Pru∣dence, and if he have a design of attaining Christian perfection, he ought to make choice of that which he conceives the better. 2. That as every man is to give an account of the calling wherein he is, and not of ano∣ther: so a man is rewarded that lives and doth better in a less perfect state, then he that doth less well in a more perfect; yet a more perfect state is to be preferr'd, which affords more ad∣vantages of doing well, or better. 3. That tho there is no lawful estate, wherein heroical virtues may not be exercised; yet these are much more easily and frequently practised in some then others. 4. That since contraries are so mingled in all our affairs; that nothing is so good, that it hath not some inconveniences joined with it; nor any so probable as that somewhat may not be said to the contrary; you are not to defer your re∣solution, till all difficulties be cleared, and you be able to answer all things to the contrary; but it sufficeth to embrace that which is most probable. 5. That, if your election be thus made, i. e. with indifferency, unpassionatenes, and since∣rity, seek not to change, but settle your self quietly in it: and make account that whatever you chuse, you will sometime or other repent of it, i. e. when you find the unexpected in∣conveniences and hardships of your own, and the seeming ease and conveniences of another.
The sincerity of your choice needs not be doubted of, if you chuse purely for the love of God; if you would have advised your friend to the same course of life; and if you would be content, when God shall call you, to be found so doing. 9. AN old man in Vitis P. P. being demand∣ed of one, what he should do, answered; our Works are not all of the same sort. Abraham was hospitable, God was with him. David was humble, God was with him, &c. There∣fore, what you find your Soul inclined unto, so as it be according to Godlines, that do. It is true that one calling hath more opportuni∣ties of glorifying God, and of glorifying him more, i. e. with nobler and sublimer actions. All men are not alike capable of those heights; and by him, who after due consideration, pro∣bably conjectures that he shall do very well in an active, and but meanly in a contemplative, life, here the active doubtless is to be preferred. 10. IF you have made choice of an estate less advantageous, which you may change, be sure to advise well before you do so; for many times wearines & inconstancy advise a quitting of that, wherein it is really better for you to continue. 11. THO there be no state, but may be more or less dangerous, or convenient for one then another; as where God gives greater strength and plentifuller grace there is less dan∣ger from temtations; yet those states seem to be in themselves best, which are not subject to so many temtations; which have the fewer
avocaments from Religion; which have more incentives to, and occasions for, piety; more good examples, more leisure for devotion, more severity towards our selves, more, and more he∣roical acts of virtues, which approach nearest to the life of our Lord, and which shew most gratitude towards Almighty God. 12. THO God supplieth grace sufficient to every one for his estate, and he that fails of his duty doth it by his own default; yet he, who casts himself into temtations, cannot pro∣mise himself to be assisted by God. S. Paul adviseth younger Women i. e. such as will put themselves in frequent dangers or tem∣tations of not living continently, rather to mar∣ry. Temtations are from company, health, bo∣dily strength, wealth, bad inclinations, as to am∣bition, covetousnes, opiniatrety, desire of liberty; opportunity of time, place, &c. 13. FROM the consideration of which, and such like, these rules may be taken notice of, A good natur'd facil man is not fit for such an emploiment, wherein he must necessarily converse frequently with evil persons. A melancholic person is not fit to undertake a profession of much study or solitarines. A timorous spirit is not fit for Magistracy. A covetous person is not to be a Merchant, or Banquier. A man of bodily strength and choler will not be a good Officer in War. The sleepy and drowsy are best employed in a calling, wherein is much bodily activeness. A rash man not to be entrusted with a great affair, especially in War.
14. LET no man easily perswade himself; that, what ever his calling be, his thoughts will be different from the rest of mankind, that is in that calling; for all men are alike; have the same principles of thinking and acting, and the same way of deducing from, and acting by, them. Particularly let no man think; that Magistra∣cy will change him, to the better especially: look at his actions and conversation in his private life; such will he be also in his Authority. And therefore let him not upon such confidences ha∣stily take upon him a calling, in which he sees in general great inconveniencies or dangers, to the preserving of his virtue, or innocence. 15. IF you be consulted concerning a person, either very inconstant, passionate, or vitions, give not your advice; it is in vain: for such will do only what shall please themselves. Never advise any one to a calling, which is much against his will, or inclination.
OF EDUCATION. PART II. CHAP. I. Of Civility. IN this second Part, are thrown to∣gether a miscellany of observations concerning several, the most usual occurrences in Active life. Such as enter not into any Art or Sci∣ence, but are the result of experience in the conversation and affairs of this World. I be∣gin with Civility, as being the first to be learn∣ed and practised; and tho many rules of it seem plain and obvious, such as are fit to be insinuated into the Practise of Children; yet are they not to be neglected, but to be neal'd into youth, that they may not through defect of them, miscarry in their age, as many great persons have done, who trusting to their Ju∣stice and severe virtue, have bin ruin'd for neg∣lect of compliance and civility. For tho Ser∣pents are greater poysons and presenter death, yet more men are destroied by their irregula∣rity in eating and drinking. And small wounds, if many, are mortal. To be couragious, boun∣tiful, and just are indeed much greater and
nobler then to be of an agreeable conversation: yet is this as useful, for it is in continual pra∣ctise, the other rarely and upon occasion: be∣sides other virtues have need of somewhat to maintain and exercise them. Justice will have power, liberality, wealth, &c. but this is set up with no other stock then a few pleasant looks, good words, and not-evil actions. All men are in some sort disparata; and even these, who are under the relations of superiority and inferio∣ty, yet, those obligations being satisfied, as to all other matters, account themselves as equals. And tho laws punish not the resty and fro∣ward, yet are they chastised by the loss of that good-will and freindlines which good-behavi∣our gains; most men having greater aversenes to the incompliant then the vitious. Wherefore it is necessary for every one, that would bring his purposes to effect, (which cannot be done without making use of other mens abilities; and the greater the design, the more Instru∣ments are needful; and those Instruments also not inanimate or necessitable, but spontaneous and free) to master the wills and powers of those he makes use of; to make them, I say, to work cheerfully and readily for him; which is by Civility to let or insinuate himself into their good liking, and voluntary assistance. For he who cares not to live void of offence to∣wards others, renders himself offensive and odi∣ous unto others; consequently they comply not with him; they act for him, if at all, by force either of reward or punishment, and therefore no more, nor otherwise, then they are constrained. Thus, for want of civil ad∣dress, many men of parts and virtue become
useless in their generation; but others by their surly and uncompliant humor, grow distastful in conversation, fall into contemt, whence follow affronts and quarrels. Some also are forc'd upon low and mean company, and there∣by bring a dishonor, not upon their persons only, but their Family and Parents (who are look'd upon, as not willing or able to give them decent Education) and their Country also, if they happen amongst Strangers, who are ready to censure hardly of that Nation, whose Gentry are so little civiliz'd. 2. AGAIN, where there is much company, as in Cities, &c. there is also great variety of hu∣mors and dispositions; and a greater care of wary conversation; as also where are persons of greater and more piercing spirits, or curiouser observers, as in Courts, or amongst Forreigners, who take particular notice of many things which continual practise makes us pass over. He who thinks to live contentedly or peacea∣bly in these places without mortifying his own humor, and deposing his natural inclinations, is of a shallow capacity, or an evil nature. i. e. He is either of a savage, fierce, insolent dispo∣sition; or of a stupid slothfulnes. Both of them fitter company for Beasts then Men, and for Deserts then Cities. 3. WHEREFORE, as Justice bridleth our coveteousnes, and constancy our natural timo∣rousnes, so doth civility our haughtines and presumtion: and as a good Christian, for the glory of God, mortifies all his own passions and hu∣mors, and puts on those, which are for his
purpose, and according to his intention: Such I mean, as Religion and reason suggest: And as a good Courtier, for his interest complies with every one; alwaies gay, cheerful and com∣plaisant, without any humor of his own, only borrowing that of the company. So in like maner, every civil person doth the same, so far at least as to avoid all offending those with whom he converseth. 4. FOR Civility consists in these things, 1. In not expressing by actions, or speeches any injury, disesteem, offence, or undervaluing of any other. 2. In being ready to do all good offices and ordinary kindness for another. And 3ly in re∣ceiving no injuries or offences from others. i. e. in not resenting every word or action, which may (perhaps rationally) be interpreted to be disesteem or undervaluing. Indeed our reputa∣tion, which is onely pretended in this case, (were it really in danger) yet is not of such consequence many times, as peace and quiet∣ness; but we are ordinarily unjust and partial Judges of our own concerns, never looking upon our selves but with love and value. But however our patience is certainly a rewarda∣ble virtue (but whether the correction of a misdoer will reuscire well, is a difficult que∣stion) and is that so much recommended by our Lord, of forgiving trespasers against us. 5. CIVILITY is not, therefore, punctuality of behaviour: I mean that which consists in certain modish and particular ceremonies and fashions, in clothes, gesture, mine, speech, or the like; is not using such discourses, words,
phrases, studies, opinions, games, &c. as are in fashion in the Court; with Gallants, Ladies, &c. This is a constrain'd formality, not civili∣ty; a complying with the times, not with per∣sons; and varieth with the age or season, fre∣quently according to the fancy of mechanic persons, in their several professions: whereas the rules of Civility, founded upon Prudence and Charity, are to perpetuity unchangeable. I speak not here of such ceremonies as are by duty required towards our superiors, either in gesture, speech, or other address. Those are not in our disposing to omit or alter; custom our Great Master hath imposed them, and that rationally, for the ease of the Magistrate, and to make his commands current, and we ought to obey without dispute or pleading. Nor of such as are used generally in conversa∣tion, whereof also I advise every one to be rather liberal and give some of his own, then retrench any of what is due. But of such as by particular persons (who either would seem modish and perfectly civil, or would hide their poverty of understanding and discretion under the vail and varnish of mode) studied and af∣fected. Whereby themselves think to insinu∣ate into the favor of those with whom they converse; but those imagine themselves e∣steemed as weak and easy, that are to be mo∣ved with such trifles; and (as some women) are thought to be taken with rubans and fan∣cies more then real decency. 6. COMPLIMENTS also are another thing, serve to a contrary end, and proceed from a different cause. Civility from sincerity and vir∣tue;
these from duplicity, and deceit. That makes friends, these unmake and hinder them; that distinguisheth one man from another, these involve all in an equal adulation. They consist in prai∣sing immoderately, and pretending greater love and friendship then either is deserved by, or intended to, him, to whom they are offered. He that useth them, beleiveth not himself, nor would have his Auditor believe his expressions; but I know not what greatness of affection: he is alwaies offering and promising, never per∣forming; asking pardon where there is no offence or necessity, but when it is com∣manded by God and reason, he will dye ra∣ther then demand it. These are imaginary ser∣vices; notional, impertinent, humiliations; a solemn non-sense; an abusing of language, and putting together many good words to signify nothing. The use of this traiterous discourse (if any be) is to hide a mans-self (as Juglers and Mountebanks) in a cloud of good words, that the Auditor may not discover more of him then himself pleaseth. Or as Trades-men keep you still in talk, lest you should too nar∣rowly examine the wares they would put upon you. Officious lies they are, licensed by cu∣stom, and like the unproportionable garments, are faults of the age. Neither is flattery; en∣couragement to, or accompanying, in vice, or error; consenting to any thing prejudicial to a third person; a permitting to offend, or actu∣ally sinning, or the like; any part of Civility. For this consists not but with severe Justice, real Charity, and solid Discretion.
7. AND therefore it, as all other virtues, requires an early initiation, and continual pra∣ctise to arrive at a perfect habit of it. It con∣cerns also Parents and Educators to see that the educated converse as much as may be, with his equals or superiors; not with servants or mean persons, lest he put on their manners, and playing Rex amongst them, he become apt to undervalue all others, and so become insolent. It behoves them also to give him no evil example by themselves, or others; but propose such Precedents, as they desire the young Man should copy. In France, Fathers are wont to carry their Children, when youths, with them to visit persons of Quality, to shew them how such demean themselves, and to procure them a convenient boldnes. Mothers also in Italy teach their little Children pieces of Dialogues or Plaies by heart; which they render and recite in their presence, and are taught by them graceful address in saluting, speak∣ing, &c. they also send their Children frequently in errands, and visits to their kindred or neighbors; teaching them what to say, what titles to give, what answers to make to the demands most likely to be asked, somewhat also to furnish discourse, &c. 8. THE young Man himself also, ought, as he grows in age, to observe the actions of o∣thers, especially of his equals, and of such as are most reputed for civility; and to note what becomes or misbecomes them. Also, what is practised by most, by persons of higher quality and by persons of maturity and judgement. He must also watch over himself severely, and once a day,
at least, call himself to acount of his speeches and actions. And also procure some friend to ob∣serve, advise, and admonish him of what is well, what ill, what might be better, done, or omitted. Lastly observe such rules as these that follow, some of which are framed for youth, others for such as are growing up, or arrived to some discretion. 1. Do nothing which may justly scandalize virtuous persons; chiefly by any neglect of Reli∣gion, as by undecent behavior in Gods house, as seeking your ease, abandoning your self to laziness and lolling, gazing about you, fre∣quent changing postures, covering your face or head. Regulate therefore your self by the ex∣ample of the best and most devout in the place you live. Use not commonly or unnecessarily the name of God, or of the Devil; not passages of holy Scripture; not mocking or profaning holy persons, things or actions: not only because these things are sinful, but undecent also; and practised only by persons of ill behavior, or mean condition. 2. Do nothing that may offend anothers sense or imagination. To strike or pinch a man, is a clowns salutation. No carion, or excrement, is to be shewed to your companion, for you know not how squeamish he is. Approach not your mouth so near in discoursing, as to offend or bedew any one with your breath, for all mens breaths are offensive. Be not nasty in your clothes, or about your body, in much sweat∣ing (except in time of War or action) bel∣ching, biting, or cutting your nails, rubbing
your teeth, picking your nose, or ears, hand∣ling any parts of your body which are not usually uncovered, nor those more then needs. Sing not to your self, nor drum with your feet or fingers in company, as melancholic men do. Grind not, nor gnash your teeth, nor scrape or make any sound to offend or interrupt o∣thers, not so much as lowd speaking, except where necessity. Spit, sneez, cough, &c. from the company, and not loud, for decencies sake. 3. LET your look be pleasant, composed, modest, confident. Frowning is apprehended to be a sign of a cruel disposition, as is noted of Caracalla. When you discourse with any person, gaze not upon him, as if you were tak∣ing his picture. Nor fix your eyes constantly on any one object; for that betokens impudency, or at best, amazedness, or contemplation, as staring doth folly. Wandring and inconstant looks express madness, or unsetled thoughts; wink∣ing (if not a natural infirmity) is the action of light-headed persons, as winking with one eye (like Shooters) is of maliciousness and evil nature. A sharp and fierce look, is as one that is angry. To bite your lip is used in threaten∣ing; to thrust out the tongue, is scurrilous. To sink the head into the shoulders, is laziness; the head erect and backward, is interpreted pride and arrogance, as letting it fall on either side, hypocrisy. To go with folded arms, is sloth or melancholy; and in this, it is a natu∣ral suggestion to keep the breast warm, and defend it from hypochondriac pain; to set them a kembow is arrogance, and to hang them
down, folly and lazines: to keep your hands in your pockets, or covered with your cloak, is a neglect of the company. A slow pace is proper to delicate and effemi∣nate persons, an hasty one to mad men; strutting is affectation, wadling is for the sloth∣ful and lazy, and in measure to dancers. Speak not through the nose, nor with any affe∣cted or unhansom gesture, wrying the mouth, swelling the cheeks, lisping, &c. If you have not a pleasing pronunciation, recompense it with good matter; and when speaking, cough not, nor use any interruption, for so do lyers when they invent what to say. A little laugh∣ter is permitted, moderate smiling commended. 4. THERE is a certain mine and motion of the body, and its parts, both in acting and speak∣ing, which is very graceful and pleasing. Greg. Nazianz. foretold what a one Julian (after∣wards called the Apostate) would prove, when he saw his hasty, discomposed, and unseemly gestures. S. Ambrose discarded a Clerk, because of an undecent motion of his head, which he said went like a flail. On the contrary Cn. Pom∣peius, saith Tully, ad omnia summa natus habebat in voce splendorem, & in motu summam dignita∣tem. This consists; 1. in the proportion and har∣mony betwixt every mans person and conditi∣on; as for a young man to be active and sprightly, not mimical and restless: a grave man slow and deliberate, not dull and slug∣gish. 2. In confidence, opposed to sheepish bash∣fulnes; when one knows not how to look, speak, or move, sor fear of doing amiss; but alwaies blusheth, and is not able to support
an harsh word, a chiding, an angry look, without being altered. 3. In avoiding all affe∣ctation and singularity; for whatever is accord∣ing to Nature is best, and what contrary to it, alwaies distastful, and betraies vanity and indiscretion, that knows not to imitate the best. Nothing is graceful but what is our own. And therefore every one strives to work easily and freely, and with a seeming negligence, for such seems to proceed either from Nature, or an habit. But constrainedness undervalueth an action; as doth also seeming to do all with design and study. Yet, affected negligence is worst of all. 5. IN eating, at meals, the company is of∣fended, if you eat with hands dirty, or unwash∣ed after you have made water, or done any offensive action. If you hover over the plate or table, as an Hawk over her prey; if you handle others meat, be delicate, or take the best, or most, or formost, to your self. As the Indian, that seeing at the other end a dish that pleased him, leaped upon the table to fetch it. If you feed with both hands for fear of loosing time, or keep your knife alwaies in your hand, or with the point upward: if you dip your fingers, or any thing you have tasted, in the sawce, or make a noise in eating; cut or put into your mouth great morsels, or lick your fingers, or not wipe your mouth or spoon after eating. It is against health to swallow your meat un∣chewed, or greedily, or much, or much variety, or delicacies: and against civility to eat after others, to throw your bones or offal upon the
floor, to gnaw your bones, to handle dogs, &c. at the table, to observe what and how o∣thers eat, to dispraise or praise immoderately the meat, or smell to it; for if you suspect it let it alone, lest you offend others. Present not to others what your self have tast∣ed. Drink not, nor talk with your mouth full, or unwiped, or glass full; nor put the cup too far into your mouth as Children do; nor drink greedily, or so long that you are forced (as Horses) to breath in your draught; nor blow into any ones cup, or upon his victuals, tosts, &c. Talk not at table any ungrateful or impertinent discourse, nor be angry with your servants, nor do any thing which may interrupt the cheer∣fulnes of the company. It is questioned whe∣ther it be civil to talk much at meals, because that hindreth the intention of the table, and it is not easy to avoid all offensivenes, especi∣ally in discouse about Divinity; the frequentest table-talk in England. In England, Strangers tax us for drinking be∣fore we eat, against health; drinking many in the same cup; and many times the snuffs left by the former; for eating much, much flesh, sitting long at meals; not using forks but fin∣gers, and the like. 6. IN Visitings is much more ceremony and civility observed in some places then others. The Italians, and of them the Romans, and Neapolitans are most punctual. The greatest cause hereof is the avoiding of misinterpretations, and quarrelling. This hath begotten an Art of ceremoniousnes, so full of subtilties and pun∣ctilios,
that it is an emploiment to learn them. And therefore, tho in this Country of great freedom and little jealousy, where persons of quality are neither so apt to give, or take, of∣fence, they are unnecessary, or also unfitting; yet it may be fitting to know how to entertain a Stranger; or how we are entertained by him, or by any other that expecteth or practiseth this accuratenes of ceremony. I have there∣fore set down the cheifest of their rules, for the most part out of the Book called Il Maestro di Camera, which is on purpose to instruct in those observances. Women are not usually visited in the morning; nor Ambassadors, or persons of business, on the hour or day of their dispatch or emploiment. Nor persons in the beginning of deep mourn∣ing; and if visited, it is not expected they should use the accustomed ceremonies. Nor sick per∣sons till they can sit up in their beds, and put on their upper garments. Women also have alwaies the upper hand, even in their own hou∣ses; and are intreated not to stir out of the Chamber of entertainment. It is better to give too much honor to any per∣son then too little; therefore better to carry himself as inferior to his equals, and equal to such as are not much inferiors. Inferiors also, if of parts, are to be better treated, for parts are equal to honors or wealth. The more fami∣liarly, the more honorably are inferiors, or e∣quals treated, (but superiors the less) as to your table, to your bed-chamber, or closet, to your self in bed, dressing, or retired. Neerest the wall in England and France (I sup∣pose because the cleanest) is the honorabler
place; in Italy the right hand, if two; the middle place, if three, walk together; be∣cause easiliest heard of both. To make signs to one to be covered, is superi∣ority; so is to turn the back first at parting, to accompany the departed but a little way; where∣as your equall you wait upon to the utmost door or gate, the superior to his Coach or Horse. The Visiter ends the visit, but not in the midst of a discourse; nor is he to stay so long as the visited seems glad to receive him; but if he see his company much desired, he may come the oftner. Visits of congratulation and condoleance the sooner the better. The uppermost place of a table ought not to turn its back upon the greatest part of the room, nor to the door where the meat comes in; it should also have the window before, or at least on one side of, it. In making visits few things are observed; but in receiving visits many: as, entertaining a superior or equal, he ought to be so clothed as to go abroad; and drawing near to hasten his pace as if he would have gone further to re∣ceive him; to meet a superior also at the bot∣tom of the stairs, to accompany him to his Coach. It being a general rule to accompany the departer one degree further then where you receive him. Equals (tho best received as you desire to be received by them) are commonly received at the top of the stairs; and the Gentlemen meet them at the bottom. It is alwaies obser∣ved that the visiteds Gentlemen attend one de∣gree at least further then the Patron.
Inferiors are received according to their quali∣ties, some in the Anti-camera, some three, some two, or one Chamber off, or at the Chamberdoor, or half the Chamber of enter∣tainment. Only it is better to use too much, then to little, courtesy. With Strangers, extraordinary civility and freedom may be used; because they come but seldom, stay not long, and have no emula∣tion with persons of your own Country. An eminent person not knowing how to entertain a Stranger, feigned indisposition, and received him in bed. If two send messages to have Audience of Com∣pliment at the same time; to the latter the Pa∣tron commonly answers, that A B. is Lord of himself and time, but that at the same time he expects such a one. If any one come to visit, whilst his superior is entertaining, ordinarily he is conducted to another room, where he is entertained by the Gentlemen; or if of lower rank, he staies in the Anti-camera. If an equal come to visit, whilst an equall is in the room, the Patron asks leave of the pre∣sent, and leaving a Gentleman or two to keep him company goes to receive the new comer. To Persons of Quality, Audience is given with the Portiere (or hanging that covereth the door on the outside) down; public Audi∣ence with it open; yet if then a Person of quality come, it is also let down. Likewise at their entrance and departure the whole door must be opened (all their doors being made dou∣ble:) it being an action of great superiority to give but half a door.
Seats also ought to be set ready before the visitants enter; and chairs with arms are more honourable then those with backs only: and these then stools. The visitants or principal seat is to be set in such manner as it may look full upon the door of entrance, and the great∣est part of the room; the Patrons with the back towards the door. If many visitants e∣qual, their seats are to be set one besides ano∣ther, or ordered along the wall which hath the foresaid conditions. If two, their seats are to be set so as to have the door on their shoul∣ders, and that on the right hand of the door is the better place. The M. de C. may deliver a message of com∣pliment of a meaner person then the Visitant: but he must be more careful if a message of business, except from an equal, or that it re∣quire hast. But all messages from the Prince or Superior are instantly admitted, and no mes∣sage must be whispered to the Patron in com∣pany with equals, but spoken aloud. If there be many visitants, and one depart before the rest, the Patron leaveth the rest and accompanieth the departer. And if whilst he is conducting an equal, another equal en∣ters; he entertains the new comer a while with the departer; then recommending him to some of his Gentlemen to conduct him to the place of entertainment, he accompanieth the departer, and then hasts to the other. When visitants are ready to depart, the Pa∣tron maketh a noise with his foot or chair, that the Attendant may understand to lift up the Portiere; but he ought not to command him, or to do any thing which may shew supe∣riority
in his own house. But if there be need of any thing, to ask leave of the visitant to call for it. But visited by inferiors, he may call or do what he pleaseth. If the visitants stay till it be dark, the M. di C. causeth to be lighted and set up in the Foot∣mens station, a torch of white wax; and in the other Chambers, each two candles of white wax; and in the entertaining room two or more, as shall be necessary, which are to be brought in by the Gentlemen; also two or more in the Anti-camera must stand ready to be light∣ed, to be born by the Gentlemen before the visitant when he departeth; who yet are not to turn their backs absolutely upon him. At the Hall door must be ready torches to be carried in like manner before him by the Foot∣men, or Pages if there be any; four at least for an equal, six for a superior, &c. A Man meeting his equal, or not much infe∣rior, makes his Coach stop; the worthiest stops last, and departs first. A man in coach meeting his equal on foot, lights out of his Coach, and when they part he walks on foot a while after; and then remounts. For an in∣ferior, he alights not, except he have business with him. A Governor of a Place, through which his e∣qual is to pass, sends to invite him before he enter his Jurisdiction; and if his invitation is accepted, he sends to meet him 9. or 10. miles, some of his Gentlemen in Coach; and so o∣thers as he draweth nearer; when near, the Governor goes to receive him in person; or if he please to honor him, under pretence of taking the Air, he may go abroad that way
he comes, and so receive him as he pleaseth. 7. Do nothing in a company where you design to shew civility, that resembles superio∣rity, nor usurp upon their rights, nor do any thing whereby any of them may think you do not love, prize, or respect them. As do not your own busines, command or chide your ser∣vants; assume not all the talke to, or of, your self, family, wife, &c. nor tell your dreams, when perhaps your best actions when waking are not worth the reciting; censure not nor contradict the rest; but cede to the major part. Desire not the highest place, nor be trou∣blesom with impertinent debasing your self by refusing to go first, &c. throwing the arms like a fencer, and spending time in being in∣treated to do what you desire. Some are dainty and nice, that take excepti∣ons if not saluted, &c. in due order, mode, &c. hence they become jealous, think themselves affronted, &c. those mens conversation is a slavery; to be with them is to be in little-ease, and a man had as good handle Venice-Glasses. Let them, I beseech you, enjoy themselves by themselves, their conversation is a rope of sand, and no cement of love and kindnes can ty you to them. 8. THE beginning and end of Conversation with every one, is Salutation: nor must you break company, tho with intention to re∣turn speedily, except you first ask their leave. The inferior salutes first out of duty; and so doth the visiter.
Modesty is more graceful then boldnes, bold∣nes then bashfulnes, bashfulnes then impudence. Country people know not how to look, but think they do best when most extravagant. Endeavor not to partake of other mens secrets, i. e. either Letters, Books, Papers, Discourses, &c. if any thing be given to another to read, take it not out of his hand, nor be hasty to see any curiosity the first; nor be curious to know what any one is doing or studying, or with whom. Whisper not with any in company, for the rest suppose you talk of them; but if you have any private busines, take him aside after you have asked leave, and when none is discoursing: and when you discourse privately, eye no man of the Company. When you walk to and again, turn your face towards your superior; and if you meet a su∣perior in a narrow way, stop, and press to make him more room, for it is an action of respect. Beware of Sullennes, melancholic, furious, si∣lence; as if you observed and censured what every one spoke or did. Tho silence in a studious person may be tolerated. And if all the Company laugh, do not you act the grave, nor be like a pump to yeild only what is for∣ced from you. Yet to be complaisant is not to eccho to what every one saith, or do whatever any o∣ther would have you; to make up a number, and be a cypher in conversation. To comply with all is worse then with none, as much as contemt is below hatred. Pride, insolence, statelines, imperiousnes, an∣grines,
are not signs or qualifications of a Gen∣tleman, but the scandals of Conversation, and proceed from a spirit of presumtion and want of breeding, which conceives it self to be above, better, wiser, then others; and that he alone ought to be the rule, to which others ought to conform: that all others are wandring stars, himself only in the Ecliptic. The greatest Magnetismes in the World are Civility, conform∣ing himself to the innocent humors, and in∣firmities, sometimes, of others; readines to do courtesies for all, speaking well of all behind their backs. And 2ly Affability, which is not only to be used in common and unconcerning speech, but upon all occasions. A man may deny a request, chide, reprehend, command, &c. affably, with good words; nor is there any thing so harsh which may not be inoffen∣sively represented. Consider, that the meanest person is able to do you both good and harm. Esteem the faults you commit against others to be great; those of others against you to be small. Answer no man till he hath spoken, for those who are impatient to hear, are rash to censure: nor turn your back upon, nor correct, the speaker: depart not before he hath done, pre∣vent him not by helping him out with what he seems to have forgot. Tell not what comes into your fancy in the midst of ano∣thers discourse, nor seem to know what he would say; if you think fitting to interpose, do it not without asking leave; else you hin∣der the discourse to be understood, and make what is said to be misinterpreted; whence ma∣ny unnecessary arguings, and confused tattles
before the matter can be cleared. Say not, I knew this before, but accept what is said as new, and in good part. Be not magisterial in your dictates; nor con∣tend pertinaciously in ordinary discourse for your opinion, nor for a truth of small conse∣quence. Declare your reasons; if they be not accepted, let them alone; assure your self that you are not obliged to convert the whole World. It is also an uncivil importunity to clash with every thing we dislike, or to con∣fute every thing we think is false: to forma∣lize upon all the foolery and non-sense we hear. Let us not contrast with the whole World, as if we were, universal reformers. In a controversy say not all you can, but what is necessary. Also if what you report is not be∣leived, do not swear it, nor use any imprecati∣ons upon your self, nor lay wagers, nor take your self engaged to defend it, or that he, who beleives you not, affronts you. So neither re∣peat the same things frequently over; if the company harken not to you, let them chuse; suppose it your own fault, who speak not what deserves their attention. If they understand you not, blame your self who either speak not clearly, or accommodate not your self to your Auditory. After a man hath told a story in your pre∣sence, ask not, what's the matter; for that shews that you contemned the speaker, and minded not what was spoken; besides you make him your inferior, to tell a tale as often as you are pleased to ask it. He that speaketh much, cannot speak all well. But indeed it is the dwarf-tree that bears the
first fruit, and the emtiest that makes the most sound. Besides it is an injury to the rest of the Company, who expect to be heard, every one in his turn. Yet better to speak much then nothing at all, except it be apprehended to be Discretion. If you live in a place where the Language is spoken in an evil Dialect, do not affect to speak either purely, or badly, but as the best of that Dialect speak. And avoid all big and hard words; remember how the Lyon crushed the Frog, whom he saw so contemtible, after he had made so great a noise. All obscenity, whether in matter or words, proceeds from, and creates, evil manners; and ren∣ders a Gentleman contemtible. But amongst clowns he is most accepted, i. e. is the greatest clown, that useth it most. The pains we take to be pleasing ought to be spent only upon things honorable and of good fame. The reason why some words are immodest, others signifying the same thing, not, is: because these represent the displeasing object at a distance, through ano∣ther light, and covered with another notion; so that the offensivenes is not that which at first appears to the imagination; (so Toads and Vipers cause not that effect in us when seen a far off.) It appears sometimes under a Me∣taphor, or some other translatitious expression; which is a corrective to the harshnes and un∣pleasingnes of the other. The same cautions prescribed in speaking, or greater, are to be observed in writing; the neglect of their pens hath ruined very many; and particularly the great Master of Civility, the Author of Galateo. For going to present
to the Pope a petition, by mistake he deliver∣ed a copy of licentious Verses writ by himself: whereby he lost the Popes favor, his own re∣putation, and all hopes of further advance∣ment. CHAP. II. Of Prudence. 1. THE Prudence here spoken of, is not that Wisdom of the Philosophers; which, that we may live happily, would never have us experience sorrow, or trouble; would reduce us to speculation, abstinence from emploiment, and a life abstracted from common conversa∣tion. That teacheth to menage action, public affairs and negotiation with others; this shews how to escape inconveniences, and sufferings, by withdrawing from busines, and living with, and to, our selves only; which that teacheth to avoid by discreetly governing, and regula∣ting our actions. The Philosopher perswades us to chuse the perfectest, i. e. the most quiet, innocent, retired, manner of life; this Prudence to live most perfectly, i. e. with the least incon∣venience, or evil consequents, which may di∣sturb our happines, in a common or active life. The one adviseth temperance by abstaining from all Banquets, Feasts, &c. this shews how to be abstemious, tho you come to them. The one tells us that the way to avoid danger, v. g. is never to go to Sea; this, since we are em∣barked,
would have us govern our selves, and steer our course in the best manner. Whether of these is better, I now dispute not; but sup∣posing a man to have already made choice of an active calling, then Prudence is of great force; to foresee all consequents, and avoid the bad; to act effectually, and the shortest way; to chuse the best means; to menage crosses and hardships; and to be content with what success God shall give. 2. SIGNS of a wise man are these; he ra∣ther hears then talks; beleives not easily: judg∣eth seldom, and then not without great exa∣mination; deliberates as long as his matter per∣mits, and when resolved, is constant, and changeth not without solid reason; therefore having deliberated, fears not to repent. He speaketh well of all; defendeth the fame of the absent; courteous, not flattering; readier to give then ask or receive; smiles rather then laughs; is moderately grave; honoreth his Su∣periors; attributeth the glory of good actions to his companions, rather then himself; ob∣serves his friends, but doth no unworthy acti∣on for their sake; is ready to assist and plea∣sure all, even the unknown; yet without of∣fending others; considereth both events, that whatever happens, he may be like himself, neither exalted nor dejected; avoids anxiety, melancholy, and morosenes; what he doth, tho necessitated, yet doth it not as unwil∣lingly, but makes a virtue of necessity; is even in his carriage, true in his words, the same in shew and reality, and beleives so of others when he hath no reason to the contrary; he
admires none, derides none, envies none, and despiseth none, not the most miserable: he delights in the conversation of wise and virtu∣ous persons; profereth not his counsel, especi∣ally when he understands not well; is content with his condition: nor doth any thing through contention, emulation, or revenge, but strives to render good alwaies even for evil. He la∣boureth to know so much, as to be able to de∣pend upon his own judgment, tho he do it not. Abi tu & fac suniliter. 3. A FOOL talks much, and little to pur∣pose; is angry without cause; trusts any one; is restless and still changing place, troubleth himself with what doth not concern him; the more fool he is the more he understands other mens busines, his own the less, and therefore is alwaies ready to reprehend and advise, sel∣dom to obey; he discerns not when flattered; but sensible enough to fancy himself abus'd. He desires without choice and discretion, and therefore is quickly weary of what he enjoies; he resolves without advice, and therefore sud∣dainly changeth, and that without reason. He is apt to refuse what he cannot avoid, desire what he cannot obtain, and repent what he cannot amend; he laments the past, is exalted with the present, and negligent of the future. The first degree of folly is to think himself wise, the second to proclaim it; and therefore he hath an answer ready to every question, and is never better by either counsel or affliction. As amongst wise men he is wisest that thinks he knows least, so amongst fools he is the greatest that thinks he knows most.
4. PRUDENCE depends upon experience; without which no man, of ever so great capa∣city, can any more arrive to be a wise man, then a fruit to maturity, without time. And experience is either of other men, which we see, read, or hear, or of our own affairs. This is the harsher Mistress; and happy is he that can learn of the other, and arrive to perfection, tho in his old age. Hence it is, that most men understand that only wherein they are most practised; as many know what is to be done, but neither how to go about it them∣selves, nor to direct others; such have much study, little experience. Many can advise well, but themselves cannot act. Many can menage a busines if not opposed; and many better if opposed: as many are not able to beat or chaf∣fer, tho they know the prices; and many ignorant of the prices, yet bargain cunningly. For the rules of busines are the same, tho the subjects are divers; conversing much makes a man bold and confident; and engaging in bu∣sines fits for more busines; And therefore it is no wonder that many Citizens (Merchants es∣pecially) prove wise-men, (and in the late Wars also excellent Soldiers) because much practised to treating, and negotiation. The like is also of Lawyers. But many of both these Professions, thereby accustomed to value small gains, contract such a narrownes of spirit, and tincture of interest, that it scarce ever leaves them. Nor do I perceive Lawyers fitter for state emploiment then Merchants; they having both particular Trades, and differing, as to pub∣lic Government, no otherwise then an East India, or an Hamborough, Merchant, in refe∣rence
to traffick. For tho the professing of Law may seem to intitle to somewhat more knowledge in governing (of which Laws are the rule) yet in effect it doth not; because their practise and study is about just and un∣just; about meum and tuum; the petit iuterests and controversies of particular persons; not the Government of a Prince over his people; or his negotiations with his Neighbors; which depend upon different principles, seldom con∣sidered by those who deale between private per∣sons. Besides that the tying of Princes to the formalities of Courts, tediousness of Processes; and casting the Laws of Government into the mold of the Laws of private interest, must needs be great impediments unto it. 5. THIS Prudence, you see is quite different from cunning, the advantage of Fools, and wicked men, who mistake them for the same. For the Prudent mans aime is to secure himself, and interest, (the wisedom of the Serpent re∣commended to us by our Saviour;) to be in such a condition in all estates, as to be able justly, honourably, and openly, to make use of all opportunities, and occasions for his own advantage, toward the obtaining of the great end of his Creation. Cunning measures Justice by escaping punishment, right by law, and wise∣dom by success, reputation by wealth or pow∣er, and the satisfaction of others by his own interest. A Prudent man deals so sincerely, that he fears not the examination of his actions or purposes; and is not afraid to have witnesses, if it were possible, of his thoughts. The crafty builds his House under ground, celat, tacet,
dissimulat, insidiatur, praeripit hostium consilia, and in order to his own advantage he looks upon all other men as enemies. And to these purposes, he useth many artifices; as taking ad∣vantage of the person, if in necessity, intang∣led in vice, fear of punishment, or discovery; if in danger, humor, passion, any weakness or ignorance: he also watcheth the time, if in mirth, drinking, sorrow; if inadvertent, if easy; he makes use also of his authority, repu∣tation, and superiority, to impose upon inferi∣ors. He pretends great kindness and affection in general expressions; or particular ambiguous ones; or such as he will not be obliged by; for he purposeth nothing; nor hath he, or e∣ver intends to have, any friend. But his great engine is a smooth tongue, and a competent stock of Wit. 6. PERSONS passionate, fanciful, intem∣perate, are wont to apprehend things strongly; and so apprehended to beleive, and affirm to others, and act accordingly thenselves: and if such men be of reputation or power, they of∣ten do much harm. Very wise men also are oftentimes too resolute, and obstinate in their opinions; for being used to thinking, they ap∣prehend much of their object, i. e. in a short time they overlook the reasons, circumstan∣ces, probabilities, collect consequences, &c. which actions familiarize the object to the fa∣culty, and this renders the reasons of the con∣trary side, less probable. Even as our conversa∣tion with a man breeds some degree of kind∣ness and friendship to him, tho the man him∣self be not worth our acquaintance. Wherefore
every Prudent man ought to be jealous and fear∣ful of himself, lest he run away too hastily with a likelyhood instead of truth; and abound too much in his own sense. 7. ALL estates are equall, i. e. Men may be happy in every state. For security is equal to splendor; health to pleasure, &c. Every state al∣so hath its enemies, for Deus posuit duo & duo, unum contra unum. A rich man because rich; the poor man hath as poor neighbours, or rich ones that gape after that small which he enjoy∣eth: beware therefore how you offend any man, for the offended joins against you; and be sure you hate no man, tho you think him an evill or unjust person. Nor envy any one above you; you have enemies enough by your own state, make no more; but rather, procure as many friends as you can to uphold and strengthen you. Every man hath also an enemy within him∣self; he that is not choleric is covetous, is facil, I mean by Nature, for if he hath sub∣dued these natural desires, 'tis otherwise. Nor can a choleric man say; I am to be pardon∣ed; 'tis natural to me; such a one is not so. For that such a one hath also his infirmity, his in∣clination, which perhaps is harder to conquer then yours. Besides what is according to na∣ture, is seldome perceived by us; a choleric man perceives not when he is angry, at least thinks it no great fault. Therefore it is neces∣sary to have an Adviser. 8. ALL men, therefore are evil Judges of themselves, and think they do well many times when they sin, and commit small errors when
they are guilty of crimes. It is also in our life, as in Arts and Sciences; the greater differences are easily discerned, but of the smaller moments onely the wise and skilful in the Art can judge. Many vices also, tho contrary, yet are like to virtues, the confines of both are the same; and the exact limits and boundaries difficultly fixed; as of pride and greatness of spirit; Re∣ligion and Superstition; quickness and rash∣ness; cheerfulness and mirth; so of ambition and sufficiency; Government and Tyranny; liberty and licentiousness; subjection and ser∣vitude; covetousness and frugality; and so of the rest. And yet Prudence chiefly consists in this very exactness of Judgement; to discern the one from the other; and give to every cause his proper actions and effects. It is therefore necessary for every one, that desires to be a wise man, to observe his own actions, and the original of them, his thoughts and inten∣tions, with great care and circumspection; else he shall never arrive in any tolerable man∣ner to the knowledge of what he doth well or ill. And lest all this diligence should be insuf∣ficient, as the partiality to himself will certain∣ly render it; it is very requisite for him to chuse a friend, or Monitor, who may with all freedom advertise him of his failings, and advise him remedies. Such a one, I mean, as is a discreet and virtuous person; but espe∣cially, one that thrusts not himself upon the acquaintance of great Persons; nor upon em∣ploiments scandalous for opportunities of in∣justice; that bridleth his tongue, and wit; that can converse with himself, and attends upon his own affaires whatever they be. Insinu∣are
your self into a confidence with him; and desire him to observe your conversation, and seriously and friendly admonish you of what he thinks amiss; and let not his modesty rest till he condescend to you: for do not imagine that you live one day without faults or that those faults are undiscovered. Most men see that in another, which they do not in themselves. And he is happy, who in the whole space of his life can attain to a reasonable freedom from sins; and that with the help of old age also, that great dompter and mortifier of our lusts and passions. If he inform you, whether true or false, take it not patiently, but thankfully; for the advantage is the same (which is, to break the inordinate affection you bear towards your self,) and be sure to amend: thus you both get a friend, and perfect your self in wisedom and virtue. When you consider, that you must give account of your actions to your vigilant reprover; that other men see the same imper∣fections in you as he doth; and that 'tis im∣possible for a great man to enjoy the advan∣tage of friendship, except he first disrobe him∣self of those qualities, which render him sub∣ject to flattery, i. e. except he first cease to flat∣ter himself. A good Confessor in Religion will supply much of such a Monitors work; tho the one doth it judicially, the other only in familiar conversation. And how much more worthy is such a one of entertainment, then those, who come to your table to make sawces, eat your meat, censure their neighbors, flat∣ter, and deride, you? 9. IF a friend tell you of a fault, imagine al∣waies
(which is most true) that he telleth you not the whole: for he desires your amendment, but is loath to offend you. And nunquam si∣ne querelâ aegra tanguntur. 10. THERE is little or no difference be∣twixt not deliberating and deliberating in passion; except that this is the worse, as engaging more, and more irrevocably in error. For he that being out of the way, is resolved to go on, straies the further. 11. THE fore-game, a wiseman plaies, is to foresee and avoid; but the aftergame is to carry himself with courage and indifferency. And there∣fore Cato falling into a calamity, not by his own fault, should not have rid himself of it by a greater wickednes; but by his constancy and generosity have shewed to the World, what a wise man should do in such a case. 12. ALL mens apprehensions naturally are alike: what one sees red, another sees not green; and Aloes is not better to one, and sweet to ano∣ther; and their first thoughts upon them are the same. And that one man is more learned, is not because he knows otherwise then another; but it is because he knows more consequences, and more propositions by his greater industry and ex∣perience. The conceptions according to truth are alike and the same, but false are infinite; wherefore if you find one man single in his judgment, be wary of him; he either knows more then all others, or there is some ill prin∣ciple in him.
13. NO evil man but hath irregular passions; which passions are offensive to evil persons, more then to good; (for good men are hum∣ble, complaisant, &c.) Therefore one evil man agrees not with, nor loves to deal with, another. 14. MUCH of the trouble of this world proceeds from certain irregular humors and de∣sires, which many men indiscreetly espouse; and because they are innocent, they think them also prudent and rational. If other men en∣deavor to repress them as inconvenient, &c. 'tis ill taken, and with trouble, and disquiet; being these are not unlike to such as have antipathy to certain meats that exposeth them to need∣less passions, and impertinent affliction. 15. WISEDOM is made to rule, and yet Magi∣strates generally are readier to make use of their power then wisdom; of their will then reason. Because it is easier, shorter, and com∣plies more with the humor of mankind. Yet the subjects prefer, and often expect, the other. 16. A GREAT General where ever he tra∣velled, went continually considering the situa∣tion of the country; and casting with himself, what was to be done, if leading an army he should be assaulted there by an Enemy. By which means he was alwaies provided against surprises. The same care doth every wise man take by pondering all the cases of danger and difficulty which may or are likely to occur in his emploiment.
17. EVERY man hath a tender place; which when touched by the hand of God, afflicts him, and he complains. And those, who are most en∣gaged in the World, have more tendernesses, as riches, family, reputation, bodily infirmities, &c. Wherefore a wise man provides before hand a stock of patience; And fortifies the dangers by good considerations, and by taking off his affe∣ctions and passions from them. 18. THE things of this World seem greater at distance; the things of the other World greater near hand. Because those are fully known; and comprehended alwaies with passions of love, fear, &c. For they enter in by the senses; which, being natural, and not free, Agents, work ad ultimum virium, and entertain their object as much as they can. Besides, the objects are themselves clothed with many circumstances, pomps, and shews; which make them seem great and taking: and without these they would be naked, and nothing. But spiritual things move only the Soul and spirit; which receives not without arguing and disputing, i. e. without something of truth, and rejecting appearances. Wherefore a wise man is wary of the things of this World, and admits them not confidently. 19. CREATURAe Dei in odium factae sunt, & in tentationem animae hominum, & in muscipulam pedibus insipientium. For that which is the occasion to wise and virtuous men of obtaining and do∣ing good, is by their ignorance turned by fools to their disadvantage. Indeed all things, even wise counsel, are by fools made either instru∣ments or testimonies of their folly.
CHAP. III. Of Conversation and Dis∣course. 1. CONVERSATION casual with ma∣ny, voluntary with few, of busines to be denied to none. Have many acquaintance, one friend, and no enemy. Some keep company to spend their time, and saunter away their age; such care not much with whom they converse; nor is their com∣pany either grateful, or beneficial. Others for pleasure and divertisement, to laugh and make themselves merry, and so pass their time. Others for interest; and that either honestly, or deceitfully, as by gaming, debauching, he∣ctoring, overreaching, flattering, &c. 2. GREAT care is to be taken in all con∣versation, for we must do as the Ancients feign∣ed of their lamiae, that within dores wore their eyes in their girdles but going abroad put them in their heads; but still greater care is requi∣site in choice of such companions, with whom a man is to converse much, or a long time, or to trust with busines of consequence. As the Italians say; measure it a hundred times, before you cut it once; at first standing upon your guard, till you discover their Inclinations. And First, Avoid, as much as you can, the com∣pany
of all vitious persons whatsoever; for no vice is alone, and all are infectious. Of Swearers, prophane, and blasphemers; lest Almighty God lay to your charge the neglect of his interest, and honor, in your presence uncontrolledly affronted; whilst you are rea∣dy to resent and vindicate every small offence done to your self. Of Hectors, and those brutish persons; who either for gain, or satisfaction of their bestial arrogance, care not whom they debauch or affront. Insolent Children of Hell, ruiners of so many persons and families. Of Scoffers; who put their own faults in the back end of the wallet, but discover all they know of others. With such no peace is durable. Of a person scandalous either for Profession, or manners; for you run his hazzard, and es∣pouse his disreputation. Never expect any assistance or consolation in your necessities from drinking companions. 2. AVOID also consorting with those who are much superior, or much inserior, to you: Infe∣rior, not only in degree and external quality, but especially in parts. Tanti eris aliis, quanti tibi fueris. Your own thoughts and designs will be such as your companions are; and low fortunes breed many times degenerous purpo∣ses. He that makes himself an Asse, 'tis fit∣ting others should ride him. And it is a very mean ambition to be the best of his company. With open, upright, plain dispositions as also with the cheerful and facetious, there is no diffi∣culty in conversation; except where they med∣dle too boldly with other mens lives; but theirs is Satyre, not calumny.
With resty, froward, ill natur'd humors, who are hard to please, and think it grandez∣za to be harsh and parsimonious of good words, and supercilious towards their equals, few con∣verse who intend not to gain by them. From all good natur'd persons, women, and drink, keep your secrets. And with such as are wholly bent upon their own interest, dis∣cours not upon what concerns their interest. 3. THEY who pretend to cunning observe, and make much of a rule, which I think it is not amiss to know, to beware of, and fortify against, but not to practise, it; which is, to observe every mans imperfection, (for few there are but have such a one) and according∣ly to apply themselves. As for example 1. With such as are swelled with conceit of their Nobility or Wealth, if they have busines, they give them respect enough; if they have not, yet they pay them with their own coin; no matter if they deceive themselves with the opinion that they are honored according to their merit or desire. 2. All humorous persons are weak, and consci∣ous to themselves, that they stray out of the plain way of the reason of Mankind; for it is discretion and judgment that corrects out irre∣gular fancies, and (where virtue or vice in∣tervene not) conforms us to the common cu∣stoms. Wherefore he, that will take the pains to comply with, and seem to justify, their fol∣ly, rules them. 3. Such as having imposed upon themselves certain Laws of ceremonies, &c. would also ob∣lige others to the same; (which proceeds
many times from Melancholy and not pride) their weakness is manifest. 4. With morose persons, they deal freely, o∣penly, and familiarly; that they may think they see through their designs, and so they are stricken in the right vein. 5. Those who are curious to pry into other mens matters, are commonly malicious; no friendship with them, as neither with a proud, nor any angry, person. 6. With such as are in disgrace with Superiors; they converse not much, and are wary how they offer them help, &c. for they fasten as men drowning upon any shew of assistance. 7. With such as are in grace with the Prince, they keep good correspondence, and seek their favor; and tho mean persons, yet they des∣pise them not, for they are chosen by his judg∣ment. But they do as they, who in a dark night follow him that hath a torch, tho a rogue, or a beggar. 4. GIVE no man just cause of offence; nor resent too vively injuries towards your self. But if after your care to avoid quarrelling, you hap∣pen upon such brutes, as either to try your mettal, or out of a bestial love of injuriousnes, (for such Hectors this age hath brought forth in greater plenty, then any other I ever read of) the best way is to resent it briskly; and threaten seriously, at least; if you do not cha∣stize, the insolency, that makes injuring a pro∣fession. Chuse therefore the conversation rather of ancient men, for their testimony is of greater force; of such persons as are famed for virtue
and wisdom; (for something is alwaies to be learned by them) and such there are many, but they offer not themselves, but expect to be sought out, and admit not every applica∣tion without choice. So much for Conversation, it follows of Dis∣course. Men are commonly judged by their Discourse, and therefore it is necessary for a wise man to regulate that, almost in the first place. Dis∣course is either concerning. 1. Raillery and mirth. 2. Other mens lives and actions. 3. Occasional, as History, News, &c. 4. Erudition and edifi∣cation; or 5. Business and interest of self or friends. 1. THOSE, who take pleasure in exposing others to contemt and derision, either by imita∣ting their actions, or imperfections, or by jee∣ring and mocking them, avoid, as you would the heels of an Horse, that kicks every one he can reach: if you cannot, take the part of the abused; blame the action, spare the person; or if the person be known, excuse the action; if neither can be done, praise the person for some other good action or quality; so have you an Antidote against the poyson. Indeed there is no greater enemy to Peace and Charity then the Railleur. For, as ordinarily it is the sooty oven that mocks the black chimney; so one jeer seldome goes forth, but it returns with its e∣qual; and they together beget a quarrel. Be∣sides, to abuse inferiors argues a mean and con∣temtible spirit; Superiors, is dangerous; and a word often provokes them more then an a∣ction. To abuse a friend is to lose him; a Stran∣ger, to lose your self in his and the Worlds
esteem. Those mocks are most resented which touch a mans reputation, chiefly that of wit or discretion; for of that even fools are chary; and every one rather confesseth his forgetfulness, then ignorance. next those which are for par∣ticular actions, rather then in general, for they seem to have more of truth, these of wit; which are of some secret imperfection; which are of that wherein a man prides himself. Since Fran∣cis I. time (who giving Charles V. the lie, and challenging him to a duel, was refused) the lye hath been counted a great affront; and ma∣ny exaggerations are made of that abuse. But had not that King (perhaps in justification of his own rashness) said, that he was not a Gen∣tleman that would take the lye; I do not be∣leive that would have deserved a severer chas∣tisement then other imputations; I speak in conversation, for Laws take no more notice of that then others. Yet it seems, to condemn all raillery is to tether the wits; and therefore if preserved in a mediocrity, it might be allowed. For it makes men stand better upon their guard, when they know that they are likely to hear again of their actions; besides it inureth them to bear harsh words, and bridle their passions. But to railly hansomely is very difficult, for good jests are to bite like Lambs, not like Dogs, tickle, not wound. And therefore 'tis requisite to have a third person of Discretion, to stroak over the severer nips, and throw dust upon them, when being heated they begin to sting one another. Also with small miscarriages and misfortunes, and such as happen without the parties fault, &c. you may be the bol∣der;
and with such as bring no shame with them, and such wherein many are concern∣ed. The jeerer also must be content to tast of his own broth; and the expert in this trade are wont to do; as he, who having in his youth taken great liberty to railly upon marri∣ed persons, in his declining age took a Wife, where any one might have had her for his mo∣ny; and the first entertainment of his friends was the discourse of his own marriage, to pre∣vent all that could be said. In sum, jeers are only then good, when ex tempore; when they seem to proceed from wit, not anger or malice; when they are intended for mirth and pastime not calumny; when you are pleasant with his error or mistake, not his shame; and seldom please at second hand. But because these in∣tentions are difficultly known; because many persons are very captious and hasty; and be∣cause at best it argues not a solid, and univer∣sal wit, but a peculiar dexterity and promti∣tude, which is frequently accompanied with want of good Invention as well as Judgment; a Discreet person will not much engage him∣self in it, nor render himself a fool to make others laugh; but after he hath tried 3 or 4 times and finds not himself fit for it, let him never endeavor it more. 2. A KIN to the Railleurs are the Drolls, who turn all to Ridiculousnes. Their censure see in Sen. ep. 29. Marcellinum nondum despero; etiamnum servari potest, sed si cito porrigatur illi manus. Est quidem periculum ne porrigentem tra∣hat. Magna in illo ingenii vis, sed tendentis in pravum. Faciet; quod solet; advocabit illas face∣tias,
quae risum evocare lugentibus possunt, & in se primum, deinde in nos jocabitur, &c. Christians have greater arguments against this Drollery; that it grieves Gods holy spirit, and is contra∣ry to that seriousnes and consideration requi∣site to Religion. That there is nothing so sa∣cred or prudent, which by the petulancy of wit may not be made ridiculous, consequently contemtible, fit to be neglected and abolished. Virgil we have seen publicly, and even the ho∣ly Writings we heard to have been, travesty, by those who spare neither their Souls nor re∣putation, to prove themselves Buffoons; and shew their abilities and ingenuity in folly. And this indeed is the great engine charged against heaven, the only and trusty weapon wherewith dirty potsheards (Disciples of Julian the Apostate, Porphirius, Epicurus, and the rest of that brutish heard) bark and grin against a Deity. When all true reason, and sober consideration as well as the other Creatures ju∣stify their Maker, yea when even the Dogs revenged him upon Lucian the great Professor of scurrility and scoffing as well as Epicurism and irreligion. But besides this disposition pro∣ceeds from a laschety and levity unbefitting any person of quality and emploiment; and in∣creaseth the same inclinations both in the Drol∣ler and the Auditors. For as a wit used to ver∣sifying is ready to put all its thoughts into rime; or a Mathematician is presently redu∣cing all his fancies to somewhat in those Sci∣ences; every one casting his thoughts into that mold whereunto they are accustomed: So do Drolls reject all serious notions, and accept and fix upon the light and emty. And therefore
we see that when such persons aim at any thing grave and serious, it misbecometh them, as done out of order and season. Thus doth mirth pleasingly by little and little steal away the judgment, rendring it vain, studious of, and delighting in, that which wise men avoid, laughter. And these men, whilst they think to fool others, become themselves really, what others are in their imagination. 3. IN Discourse concerning other persons (fa∣miliar amongst Women) Back-biting, and ca∣lumny is most frequent: because all men had rather hear evil of another then good. Per∣haps thinking thereby to justify their own faul∣tiness; at best indulging their self-love, which is grounded upon a too high estimation of themselves, and too low of others. This evil speaking is very frequently used by many, who pretend to extraordinary Godliness; whose bitings are also more dangerous, and venemous with those persons, who mistake their formality for seriousnes, and their gravity, for reality, in Religion. But even in ordinary conversation men are wont also to defame their neighbours open-fac'd, without any ceremony, design, or remorse. From both these sorts of people, especially the former, turn away, as much as you can; but be sure to be none of them; nor partake with them in their calum∣niations. Consider what you say of others, o∣thers say of you. Before you calumniate, think, am not I the same? or as bad? Take heed of doing that, which may hurt, but cannot do good; for 'tis madness to make enemies with∣out cause; and it is better to suppress, then
vent and satisfy, a piece of wit or a foolish passion. The great rule is, Nothing but truth before the face, and nothing but good behind the back. Beware also of censuring Nations, Conditi∣ons, or States of Men, as well as particular persons; for there is no Nation or condition, wherein are not many good; and none so good, wherein are not many bad. 'Tis also a great honor and wisdom to pass by the back-bitings of others against your self. Charles the 7th of France demanded of one, much em∣ploied by him, and on whom he had bestow∣ed many favors, what thing in the world could alienate his mind from, and bring him in di∣slike with, his Prince? the Gentleman answer'd, An affront. This person seems to have bin very sensible indeed, but whether his discre∣tion had merited the favor of his Prince I much doubt. Certainly the behavior of An∣tigonus was much more generous; who, when one told him, that such a one affronted him, answered; it may be so, but I will not be af∣fronted. Augustus advised Tiberius not to be offended with peoples speaking ill of them; it sufficeth, saith he, that we can secure our selves from their doing us harm. When one said, he was a Tyrant; he answered, were I so, he durst not have said it. To one calling him Dwarf, well, said he, then I will get higher shoes. P. Bernard, when one bid him get out like a dirty Priest, replied, you are mistaken, I came in a Coach. And truly since all these evil tongues are conquered by silence, one would think the victory easy; did not experience shew us, that the great remedy against burst∣ing is giving vent.
There is no reason that the effect, which may proceed from divers causes, should be attributed to one. v. g. an action of seeming disrespect may either come from an intention to affront, from negligence, from having some other busines in his thoughts, &c. interpret not therefore such actions as affronts; and the rather, because it is our duty to take every thing by the best handle. 4. THE most innocent, grateful, and uni∣versal Discourse, is telling Stories; and modern rather then ancient. Some are so well stock∣ed with this trade as to be able to answer any question, or parallel any case by a Story; which is (if well done) a very great perfe∣ction of eloquence and judgment. And in tel∣ling Stories avoid too often said he, and said I, hear you me, mark me, &c. be perfect also, that you need not recant, stammer, or repeat things said before; be not tedious in impertinent cir∣cumstances, nor make your own glory the chiefest concern. Tell no lye in your discourse; especially not Gasconades, and improbable Rhodomontades, wherein some, out of weaknes and lowness of spirit and parts, take as much pleasure as others in drinking when not thirsty, and think they then overwit the company. Be not hyperboli∣cal and extravagant, especially in praising and dispraising; for the wit takes away the credit; whereas the end of speech was first to make us understood, then beleived. And if you be convinced of an error, for truths sake acknow∣ledg it, and change your opinion; for this in∣genuity is greater, because rarer. And remem∣ber, that
One chance falling out, as the Astrologues pro∣gnosticate, gets them reputation; and their thousand lyes are not taken notice of; but to a wise man one lye doth more disgrace, then thousand truths can recover. When news comes from an uncertain Author, tho probable and expected, yet suspend your beleif; because men easily report what they desire or expect; but rather give heed to cer∣tain extravagant and unexpected Relations, as un∣likelier to be invented. And when you tell news, engage not for the truth of it. 5. IN your discourse rational or of erudition, skip not from one subject to another; as do Fanatics, and other ignorant Sciolists, who are never at ease till they have vented all they think themselves to know above other men. Neither maintain an argument with ignorant, nor contradictive per∣sons; nor think that you are bound to convert or instruct the whole World; least of all with vain drolls, who make your seriousnes their sport. Be content to satisfy with reason, not (especially your own) authority (a refuge many fly unto when worsted, if they know there is no exa∣mining Books) such as are capable and dis∣posed. In reasoning, the most excellent way, where∣in the best able is certain to carry the cause, and which will bring the controversy to a spee∣dy determination, is by asking questions, and proceeding still upon the adversaries concessions▪ which he cannot without shame retract; (by Syllogisms is more Pedantic.) This is Plato's manner of discoursing. Pedantry is a vice in all Professions, it self
no Profession. For a School-master is not there∣fore a Pedant; but he only who importunately, impertinently, and with great formality, shews his learning in scraps of Latin and Greek; or troubles himself with knowledg of little use or value; or values himself above his deserts, be∣cause of something he knows (as he conceives) more then ordinary; or despiseth others not skilled in his impertinencies; or censures all Au∣thors and persons confidently without reason. And whoever doth thus, be he Divine, Law∣yer, Statesman, Doctor, or Professor, he is a Pedant. Do not in ordinary company treat of matters too subtil and curious, nor too vile and mean; nor of things unseasonable, as of Religion in mixed, or young company, or at table; but in all Discourse have an intention to better your self and others. Which that you may do, contrive, (as much as you can) before hand of what to discourse; and lay your scene, which afterwards you may menage as you please. A man may judiciously discourse, when either he knows the subject very well; or when de∣sirous to learn (a submission and ingenuity very grateful in company) or when necessitat∣ed to discourse, and then he must do it dis∣creetly and doubtingly, unless he very well know his Auditory. Cautious also must he be who discourseth of that he understands a∣mongst persons of that Profession; an affecta∣tion that more Scholars then wisemen are guilty of; I mean to discourse with every man in his own faculty; except it be by asking questions, and seeming to learn. You may freely and safely discourse of mat∣ters
of Philosophy, Mathematics, Travels, Govern∣ment of forreign Countries, Histories of times past or present of other Places, Husbandry, and the like, which subjects concern no mans reputa∣tion, and therefore none much care what part you take. Discourse, tho amongst learned men, laies no grounds of Science, but supposeth them, and therefore study is necessary; without which who so adventures amongst Scholars, is like a Lady, that hath excellent Medicines, but nei∣ther knows whereof they are made, nor how to apply them effectually. Have a care also that your income exceed your expences, i. e. that you hear and read more then you speak: for he that spends out of the stock of wit and me∣mory is quickly bankerupted; but knowledg and learning continually improve by discourse. Cunning discoursers to avoid baffling are wont at first to lay down a proposition easily defensible, to which they may retreat in case of necessi∣ty; but defend the other out works also as long as they can. Mens wits and apprehensions are infinitely va∣rious; nor is there any opinion so extravagant, which hath not some followers and maintain∣ers, who fit their hypotheses to it. Where∣fore do not censure any thing on a suddain as ridiculous, for tho it please not you, it may another, as wise. Every man makes himself the measure of all o∣thers for truth and falshood, wisdom and folly. learning and ignorance, and the like. And who is able to denudate himself of this false opinion, or prejudice at least to truth? But from hence it proceeds that we esteem
him knowing that knows more or as much, and him ignorant, that knows less, then our selves. Him also virtuous that is according to our sentiment and degree. Also that all men are more ready to blame anothers errors, then praise his virtues. And that a man knowing what another doth not, and being ignorant of what another knows, yet knows not his own ignorance; but consequently values himself and despiseth the other. To man alone (not beasts nor Angels) hath nature given a nauseousnes of the present. The best things in the world if not accompanied with variety, become distastful. And nothing sooner then Discourse: which is so much care∣fullier to be menaged, as the eare is sooner cloy'd then the eie. Prudent eies are kept o∣pen by reason, ordinary persons by wit. Old men commonly discourse of grave and edifying Subjects, Divinity, Government, Hi∣story, &c. Young men rather of pleasant; Hunt∣ing, Fashions, Travels, Wonders, &c. every man chuseth to discourse of that he best un∣derstands and loves.
CHAP. IV. Concerning Business. A Doctor being intreated by his Nephew to give some rules for guiding and securing himself in negotiation, and contracts; after long study told him, he could give him but one; which was, alwaies to have to do with virtuous persons. But for many reasons this rule, tho a perfect one, is hard to be practised; and therefore I beseech you be content with such imperfect ones, as my reading or experience can furnish. If any one tell you, that it is to no purpose to think long upon any matter; that they are only wise men who can dispatch business ex tempore; that consulting is but a dull formali∣ty; and that a man sees as far into a thing at first, as by much consideration; say boldly that man is a fool: the more you think, the more and clearer you shall understand. There∣fore Men of most leisure do business the best; and those who have much business must have much pardon. Therefore men used to business do it better; because they have thought of it be∣fore, either in the same, or a like, case. A prudent Man doth no business rashly, i. e. without reason and advice; and he advis∣eth also as long as he can; and that first with his own thoughts: which being not sufficient, he takes in also the assistance of other mens counsel; and heareth others, tho he follow
perhaps his own. Most men advise for their own interest, and therefore happy is he who hath a friend. To order your thoughts well in Delibera∣tion, endeavor to put your business into an History, considering what is to be done or said first, what afterwards. For the hindrance of prudent resolutions is the confusion and disorder of thoughts; which by this method is cleared: by it also you shall quickly disco∣ver where the difficulty is, and know when you have done. It is also very convenient to write down your reasons pro & con in delibera∣tion; for the mind by this means, is freed both from the confusion, and burden of those arguments. Give not your advice or opinion before asked; for that is to upbraid the others ignorance: nor attribute ill success to the neglect of your councel; nor be angry if your advice be not followed. Neither accustom your self to find fault with others actions, except vitious; for you are not bound to weed other mens Gardens. Be not too eager in counselling others; for the evil success (which happens frequently to good advice) will be laid to your charge, and sel∣dom shall you be thanked for the good. It happeneth frequently to men that are wise by experience, and not learning, that they cannot give a reason of their opinion and ad∣vise, tho it be really the best: (as a meer mechanicall workman knows there is a fault in the work, (tho he cannot tell punctually what it is.) Despise not such mens opinions for their want of Discourse, In Deliberations where there is reason on both
sides and that a man hath resolved one way, he commonly thinks that he hath chosen the worse, because then he onely considers the reasons of the contrary part; which represen∣ted by themselves (the other after resolution being no more considered) seem greater and of more consequence then they are. There is one great perfection in doing busi∣ness, which is, That tho you set your mind and thoughts upon business, yet do not engage your affections, at least deeply, in it. For thus shall you both have your understanding clear at all times; and not be disturbed if you mis∣carry; which you must make account will of∣ten happen unto you. Besides precipitiousness, impatience, or not staying to take the oppor∣tunity, and time your business, is frequently the ruine of many noble designs; and all pas∣sion whatsoever deteriorates your negotiation; if your reason will not bring you to this indif∣ferency, experience will. A l'adventure tout vient à point à qui peut attendre. In treating about business you understand, you have an advantage to propose first; in what you understand not, 'tis best to receive proposi∣tions. And if you have a doubtful cause, an inconstant adversary, or find him disposed to comply with your desire, defer not to dis∣patch. In business (except buying and selling) you shall find very few persons speak to the purpose; therefore let every man talk his fill: rather then interrupt, provoke him to speak; for he will blurt out many things to your advantage: some out of ignorance and inexperience; o∣thers on purpose standing on circumstances
and things of small consequence. Women commonly (as weakest) are most extrava∣gant; and at an end, or the midst, of their Story must drop a tear; for being themselves compassionate, they think others are so too; and that is their interest. The difficulty of dispatch is not from the bu∣siness it self, wherein a man may easily see what is necessary, or fittest to be done: but it is in perswading your interest; in communicating so much and no more then concerns you; u∣sing such reasons only, as are proper for your matter; in applying them to every ones under∣standing, inclination, and at a fit time; and in taking off the opposition of Adversaries. For there is no interest that hath not its contrary, and sometimes also so forcible a one, as is to be conquered onely with mony; which is a sword that cuts even a Gordian knot. All things concernning the menagery of af∣faires are reduced to these heads. 1. The ground or occasion. 2. The end to be brought about. 3. The reasons whereupon the affair is grounded. 4. The difficulties likely to be encountred 5. The answers which may be made to the reasons. 6. And the replies to them. 7. The advantage of the affaire to the other party. 8. Examples of like cases. But alwaies be sure to remove the principal obstacle. Some men are apt to beleive what they hope for, or desire; others are never secure, till
they see and enjoy. And this doubtless is the better; because it encreaseth diligence, good success, and less affliction. Wherefore of fu∣ture things, imagine and provide for the worst; tho of actions dubious of other persons you conceive the best. Fear is a necessary passion, and hath a great share in all our affairs. The great and general defect being negligence, laschety, and love of ease; fear discuseth these. He that is in con∣tinual apprehension of evil watcheth to avoid, prepareth to rencounter, and is cautious not to give admittance to, danger; but endeavors to secure his condition, and remove further from evil. In things of the other world men are more apt to hope, because they have not so clear an apprehension, nor so firm a beleif, or not so frequent consideration concerning them; but in matters of this world more apt to fear; for all mens hopes frequently fail, their fears seldom. Besides the loss of what we enjoy goes nearer and is more sensible to us, then the future good may advantage; where∣fore in treating with most men you know the best Topic. And seldom is it seen but that fear also gets the better of love, and therefore good Magistrates trust not only to love, but will in some degree be feared also. Secrecy and reservednes is of infinite use; for, besides that such are not easily prevented and interrupted, men are still commenting and in suspense about every motion of theirs; which gets great reputation. Besides suddain things do more amaze, and confound, then things foreseen or expected. But you need not put your self to the trouble of secrecy, where you fear no opposition.
Many time; also your secrecy is to be conceal∣ed; nor is an inquirer into the business you would hide rudely to be denied (for that ma∣ny times breeds jealousies, &c.) but by pru∣dent and courteous dissimulation to be fenced withal, and his thoughts dextrously avoided rather then forcibly returned upon him. He that is a good Practitioner in this trade be∣comes often-times Master of his thoughts that came to sist him. Beware of trusting to your fortune; for most men are fortunate for a time, and in some things only: nor is he fortunate, who hath a good occasion offered to him, for it is Prudence to take hold of, and use, it; but he that hath it presented twice. Think not such as these to be good consequences. He is a good man, therefore doth nothing ill: he is a bad man, therefore doth nothing well. He is a wise man, therefore doth nothing foolishly, &c. Consider this well and stand upon your guard. For every one hath errors, from whence sometimes greater, other times lesser, mischeifs arise: happy are they, whose errors happen to be in small matters, and which come betimes, and are remediable. He that doubts not, knows either all things, or nothing. And he that imagines never to commit an error, his next pretence must be to Divinity. The things of this World never stand in one stay, but are alwaies moving their own way; and if we perceive not their alteration, it is because our age is shorter then theirs. This observation is of importance to many purpo∣ses, v. g. virtue and vice, wisdom and folly, are
but good and bad, prosperous and adverse, in the seed. When we read in Histories the great chan∣ges of Government, we much wonder at them, and are apt to pitty the sufferers. But Providence hath so ordered, that great altera∣tions ordinarily happen by little and little; so that both reason and nature either accomo∣date to them, or have time to escape, and provide other waies. He that entreth into danger without considering it, is a beast; he only is valiant, who knowing the danger, embraceth it cheerfully, whether out of necessity or honor. Yea, tho he knows and supposeth that all dangers have not their effects; but that some are prevented by industry, some by courage and prudence, and some fortune and the course of things (Gods Providence) casts of. Dealing with Merchants and men of busines and virtue cut of ceremonies; and declare the busines at length rather then too-short; for this is apt to raise mistakes; besides a man is not alwaies in disposition or ability to fathom the depth of an affair with a short cord. When you have extorted from a person what he obstinately denied, you need not doubt, but at the same time also to obtain another he would not willingly grant. For when a man is for∣ced, as it were, to let go his hold of what he most firmly grasped, he unbends his hand, and abandons whatever it contained. Commota se∣mel & excussa mens [à stabilitate suâ] ei servit à quo impellitur. Thus the Parliament propo∣sed to the King, together with the bill of at∣tainder of the Earl of Strafford (which he was
formerly resolved not to grant) a bill for per∣petuating the Parliament, which, tho of far greater consequence, he scrupled not. Deser, as long as you can, the doing of a thing against your mind, rather then give a positive denial; for accidents many times divert the design, and deliver you from that strait, where∣in a refusal may deeplier engage you. Never dispatch an evil and difficult busines so absolutely, but that (if possible) you leave place to undertake and introduce it again. Time and opportunity alter many things, and make that pass smoothly which formerly would have bin refused, had not your dexterity left open the door for a new treaty. All men naturally avoid persons inquisitive into other mens affairs; for such commonly are lavish of their intelligence, and thereby breed quarrels and spread animosities: besides that themselves are apt to envy and malign others, that being the concern which breeds their inquisitivenes. The reason, why things conform not to the ge∣neral desire and expectation of the World, is, because they who give beginning and ending to busines are but few, and many are those who desire and expect. He is often to blame, who neglects a present good for fear of a future evil, except it be nigh at hand, and in a manner certain. So is he who strives to avoid all difficulties; for more things affright, then hurt, us. And there are many changes in this World. Di cosa nasce cosa. And in judgments of the future we see wise men frequently mistaken. Poor, meanpeople, and wranglers, &c. conclude
not any treaty, nor offer all they mean to give, till they be forced, i. e. till they see the treaty ready to break up; and they think that they get a considerable advantage by such re∣stines, and importunity; as indeed they do, if they deal with ingenuous persons. So petty Tradesmen love to call their customers back. Since grateful and virtuous persons are so rare, value the service of such as are joined with you in the same interest or danger; and you may more reasonably expect to be assisted by him, that hopes to get by you, then by him, who hath already received favors from you. And remember that a Crown in your purse doth you more honor then ten spent. When in consultations there are contrariety of opinions, seldom is the best chosen; and the more persons argue, the further they are from agree∣ing; the love of their own opinion insinuating it self by little and little with their reason. Wherefore, sometimes the most importunate prevails, sometimes he that finds out a medium; not that this expedient is alwaies the best; but that persons in heat of dispute, cannot easily pass over, or fully consent, to a contrary. Thrust not your self to be Moderator or Umpire in Controversies, till required; and then 'tis better to exaggerate the mischeifs of disagreement, then benefits of concord; for fear is stronger then love. Many are wont alwaies to take the Adversa∣ries part. But it is a very hard thing to recon∣cile men at first, their passions being high, and animosities great. But after they are reasona∣bly wearied with Law, or other inconvenien∣ces, 'tis not difficult to find out a medium, which may save both their honors; which is
that both commonly desire. A worthy Gen∣tleman being to reconcile two persons, first made them swear both to stand to his determi∣nation; and 2ly that neither of them should reveal upon what terms they were reconciled. Every man is more apt to love, cherish, and trust in him, on whom he hath already bestowed most courtesies; esteeming him as his creature; [This is the cause of the great love of Parents toward their Children:] and he, that loveth, and doth favors, obligeth, and submitteth him∣self to the receiver; so that for fear of losing what he hath already bestowed, he must be∣stow more. Wherefore if you seek the favor of a great person, accept courtesies from him, and not from others. He that would perswade great men, let him first begin with the weakest; by probable ar∣guments, good words, and humble carriage he shall obtain their friendship; and by their Au∣thority (tho but fools) draw in the wiser. Mean wits alwaies distrust subtil arguments, and Logical heads: and great men, for the most part, are of an inartificial understanding, and therefore by seemingly naked truth, and plainness, are brought to your opinion. In great Councils and meetings there are al∣waies some leading men, whom if you gain, your business is done. Amongst Multitudes, one adversary can do more harm, then many friends can do good. There are some who are children even in ma∣ture age; and of them a man must not say, they are 40. years old, therefore they will do as men of 40. years old. But concerning those and all such Heteroclites, look at their present
customs, and menagery of their private affairs. For if you see an aged man vehement, suddain in his resolutions, following the impetus of his passions; hold that man for a child; not mo∣ved with reason, unconstant; to day resolving without consideration, and in the same manner reversing it to morrow. Nothing is well done, or said, in passion; tho there may be just cause of being passionate; but less or more all passion according to the degree of it hinders reason and deliberation. But beware instead of passion you fall not into slyness and cunning: for these two, passion and cunning, do many times shoulder out one ano∣ther; and generally people without passion are look'd upon as sly and crafty: which of the two is worse, there being more of the volun∣tary in it. It is good therefore sometimes to seem passionate, if you be not so. In all treating with other persons try first what may be done by fair means, good words, hopes of gratitude, &c. before you come to power or passion. And let power either of your self or the law be the last. When you consult with a friend about any bu∣siness, be not hasty to receive a present answer; but give him time to consider; for the com∣mon and first conceptions of all men are much what the same: at least his extempore is not equal to your premeditated. Physicians and Lawyers answer out of their trade, and, as they pretend, by certain rules and cases very like, if not the same, with yours; but it seldom falls out, that the same case in dispatch of business falls out twice; or if it do, yet it is clothed with such various and differing circumstances
(according to which a wise man frames his o∣pinion) that it is very difficult to give judge∣ment. The manner is when you propose a thing which you are afraid; will hardly be accepted, or grant∣ed; propose it by parcels; that one piece be digested, before the other be swallowed. It is better to be near to, and serve, a pro∣digal, then a thrifty and parsimonious, Prince; tho for the publick this is more advantagious. For the prodigal is forced to use divers oppres∣sions, &c. and more suffer by his profuseness then are benefited by it; and they commonly are most benefited by it, who least deserve it. It seems that Princes are more free, and Ma∣sters of their own will, then other men; but it is contrary in such as govern prudently: for they are necessitated to act with infinite cau∣tiousness and consideration; frequently to court even mean persons; and swallow many a bit∣ter pill at their hands. Wherefore pardon your Prince if he do not all things exactly, accord∣ing to the precise rule of wisedom. He, that having bin the means to advance another to high degree, thinks to govern him, cancels his own courtesy. If you find that any one hath spoken ill of you to your Patron, take no notice of it; nor be ea∣ger to vindicate your self; but continue your emploiment without complaining; and your innocency will both appear, and prevail at last. Great enterprises are not to be relinquished, be∣cause we cannot reconcile all difficulties; for were all things easy, they were not great; and could all objections, i. e. difficulties be solved, little were left to your courage or discretion. Some
things Gods providence, and the course of things render easy; and others are difficult only, be∣cause we see not through them at present. The more you come into favor, the less ad∣mit Cabals and Juntos, to avoid suspition. Nor converse much with the ordinary servants; for so they will respect you the more. Yet, lest you be hated, be courteous in your salutes, discourses, offers of service, but especially in giving them reasons in your discourse: for then they think you do not despise them. But if they hate you for any good service done to your Patron, sell it him dear; that he may be ob∣liged to protect you. No Patron really loves a servant wiser then him∣self, let him pretend what he pleaseth; and therefore if you be a person of understanding, covet not to be too near him, as of his bed-cham∣ber, &c. for Patrons are not pleased that such persons should pry too nearly into their actions and inclinations. Wise men, when they have auy way come in competition with their Prince, have alwaies ceded. Yet it is better to be feared and hated, then despised. Wherefore chuse rather to be a se∣vere searcher into, and censurer of, actions; then to be undervalued for taking no notice of them. If Spies abound in a Court, discourse in gene∣rals; and give them no cause to think them∣selves discovered by you. Neutrality makes the slowest, but surest, pro∣gress: for the neuter is connived at through the others mutuall envying. A weak Patron is easily gained, but no con∣siderable advantage of honor, or profit, can
be got by him; a wise Master is jealous, easi∣ly lost, and then never recovered. If your Master have any near kindred, keep fair with all, for they will certainly prevail; and stick to the best beloved. If you light upon a Master that is inquisitive after your words and actions, know, that he intends to keep you under. Pray to God not to light upon a cunning Master; for either you shall be ruin'd by him; or at best tired with standing upon your guard. In this case make shew not to perceive his subtilty, but to ad∣mire his ingenuity. Sic ars deluditur arte. If your Patron, by discourse, or actions, endeavors to conceal any of his vices; be sure he holds that dear, is deeply engaged in it, and would enjoy it without a rival. To avoid envy, affect not expence and osten∣tation; but mind reality. For be sure that way, accounted so honourable, leads streight to destruction.
CHAP. V. Of Servants. SINCE Slavery was banished Christendom, a Servant is no other, then one hired to such emploiment; and under such terms, as if well observed, the difference is not great between the condition of the Master and the Servant. For none can compel another to serve him against his will; nor can I contract with him for his service, but at the same time he will bargain with me for his salary. I take him under my roof, I make provision for his sustenance, I de∣fend him from his enemies; as well as from hunger, cold, and diseases. And what doth he for this? he serveth me? no, he serveth himself. The same labor, he would under∣go in his own house to maintain himself, and perhaps with great anxiety, he doth in mine with pleasure. So that now service is nothing but a compact betwixt the rich and the poor, for their mutual advantage. And to demand or imagine, that a servant should quit his own interest, profit and advan∣tage, to procure his Masters, is a folly no considering man will be guilty of. Therefore let the Master command according to reason and sweetness; not so imperiously, or with such opprobrious language as may justly discontent or chase away a Servant. If he o∣bey with cheerfulness, and affection, he may at length perhaps make his Masters interest his own.
If you pay him not his wages, he will pay himself. In controversies, let the Master sometimes cede to his servant, to keep his mettal in breath; and not too severe, if the faults be small, or committed for want of Judgment, or through a little itch of liberty. Let the Master be some∣times blind, and the servant deaf. But faults of malice, or impiety are not to be pardoned. The first such fault is the Servants; the second divided between Master and Servant; the third, wholly the Masters. Correct him not before Strangers, but if correction amend him not, rid your hands of him; both for his sake, your own, and the scandal of others. Rich men are inclined to pride, and contemt of others; for having wealth, which com∣mands all things in the great Market of this World, they are apt to become insolent, pe∣tulant, impatient of disobedience, denial, re∣proof, or advice. And because ostentation of happiness is one part of it; therefore are rich men vain glorious, desirous to be observed, and to live splendidly. And men newly enriched, and without their own industry more vain then they, who are born so, or have by industry acquired great estates. Men in power also are more honorable, gallant, generous, and less vain then the rich. Also because great estates are commonly ac∣quired with little, and small ones not without great, labor; therefore are rich men apt to ex∣alt themselves as either above others, in parts, or the favor of God, both which are very great and dangerous errors, but difficultly to be eradicated.
Let them not, therefore, mistake morosity for grandeur, and passion for greatness. It is better to subdue your Servants reason, as well as his strength and diligence. And those, who betake themselves to the rich, are to comport with their follies, impertinencies, and contumelies; and to conceale them. It is better they should love their Masters, but by no means hate them; or speak evil of them be∣hind their backs. Not dispute their Masters judgment; not vy wit, taunt or rally, with them; not use familiarity without leave; but to put on patience, when they put on a livery. To admonish and reprehend is not an action of an Inferior; and an affectionate disrespect ob∣ligeth not so much by its sincerity, as it provokes by its ill example; wherefore when you advise your Superior, do it so, as it may be accepted. And let not the Master refuse to hear the ad∣vice of his Servant, tho he follow it not. No man ever miscaried through excess of respect; or was disgraced for retaining a constant and proportionate sense of his Patrons grandeur. Yet Patrons love not sullen, melancholic, austere, grave, or silent, Servants. A Master ought not to divertise himself with his Inferiors, nor make his Servants privy to his infirmities and failures; but if he do, the Ser∣vant must not presume, nor heighten himself for it. But let him be secret, and faithful to him. Let the Servant also know, that it is harder to menage well his Masters affairs then his own; let him therefore be more careful. For he hath more temtations to negligence and dis∣honesty. Besides his Masters business is not
alwaies to be menaged the best way; but that he likes best. Put your Servants to emploiments proper for their condition, years, capacities, &c. but never upon unnecessary trouble; for that is to abuse, not use, a Servant, and will cause them to hate you. Those Servants justly expect to be rewarded extraordinarily, whose industry and diligence seem to merit it. (For gratitude being the least of virtues, ingratitude is the most infamous of vi∣ces; especially in a great person:) and this re∣warding is so to be done, as the other servants do not resent it. That therefore is best done after some signal service. But beware of equal∣ling all your Servants in your gifts, or rewards: for the discreeter and Superior hold it an affront to be equalled with the rest; and the Inferior made proud: but none more obliged then they, who catch mony thrown about in a solemnity, to render thanks to the Donor. Some there are, who defer their rewards till some festival, as Christmas, or Easter: But then the day is thanked, not the giver; and after you are accu∣stomed to it, 'tis expected as due, and part of wages, not kindness and bounty. It is better to be somewhat sparing then libe∣ral to a good Servant; for as he grows full, he inclines either to be idle, or to leave you. And his murmuring you may govern by a seasona∣ble reward. It seldom happens that a reconciliation of Ma∣ster and Servant is sincere; therefore return not to a service, whence you have been ejected. In places which concern mony, employ not your kindred; nor use them as your Servants;
for they will presume upon their condition, and you cannot with reputation break with them. And truly, if you be a single person, I cannot forbear to recommend to you a say∣ing of a great Prelate; that a Courtier at Rome ought to have 1000. Ducats rent, 2000. in his purse, and be 1000. miles from his kindred. CHAP. VI. Of giving, receiving, and promising. IT is uncivil and unfitting for a man to oblige another to keep a promise disadvantagious to him; or one made in mirth, passion, hast, un∣advisedly, in civility, or compliment, or one obsolete; as also not to admit of a reasonable excuse for the failure of a promise. It becometh every man to promise nothing but what he intends to perform: yet many, tho justly denied, are much displeased; for all men govern not themselves by reason. Insomuch that if a person desire to engage your indea∣vors in his business, if you shew him the diffi∣culties, tho you promise your assistance, he commonly takes it for a denial, or a sign that you intend not seriously to befriend him. For these and such like reasons, the fashion now-a∣daies is, to give good hopes to all suiters, and to promise very freely and largely. And they find thereby great advantage (as they think) for carrying on business. The performance is
sometimes hindred by unexpected casualities; sometimes a good and plausible excuse goes a great way; sometimes the party suffers himself to be wheedled with good words. Yet 'tis so ignoble and dishonorable a thing for a man to be worse then his word, that it never ought to be done. But this may he do; he may enter∣tain all suiters with general or conditional pro∣mises, and fair words: and tho all men ought to look at effects, and not words; yet have good words a wonderful power (take heed of being fool'd by them) I suppose be∣cause every one values himself, and his merits, at more then he is worth; and he is offended when that price is not set upon him, as him∣self thinks to deserve. At Court they are wont to promise and of∣fer service largely, especially to those, who are not likely to make use of them; but to∣wards ordinary conversants they are more wa∣ry, because better known. Grant a Courtesy (if you intend it) without much asking, for that doubles it. To keep long in suspense is churlish, and by long expecta∣tion the passion to the favor dies, and the courtesy is not esteemed, nor thanks heartily given for it. Monsignior Pamfilio (afterwards Innocent X.) in his Nunciature in France, and ever after was called Monsignior-non-si-puo. From his frequent use of that answer to Suitors. Do your favors cheerfully, not as if they slipt through your fingers, or were stollen or wrested from you. And do them readily, for the intreater submits himself to the intreated; his modesty therefore must be considered. Non è cosa piu cara, che quella, che con priegh▪ si compra. Do
them also without considering whether they be lost, or likely to be recompensed; for a mag∣nanimous and generous person looks not to receive as much again; for that is the courte∣sy of Tradesmen. Be not as the Barbarous King of Madagascar that demanded more for the cowes he gave, then his subjects for those they sold; for he said, that his good will and kindness was to be recompensed. And if you deny, do it with good words; as if you were sorry you could not pleasure him. Be not niggardly of that which costs you no∣thing; as Counsel, Countenance, and the like. But beware of being security; rather offer to lend mony of your own upon others bond. And by no means sell your Ceremonies, nor pay your creditors, friends, and servants with good words, looks, and smoak. After a courtesy done, if you upbraid it, you lose it; one principal end of giving being to ob∣lige the receiver to your self and interest. Nei∣ther too much undervalue, nor extol your gift; but rather diminish, and excuse, when you give: seeming pleas'd so small a matter stood in such stead, and was so well placed, and ac∣cepted; that you shall be ready to do greater service upon occasion; but when you receive a favor, rather augment it. He is not ungrateful, who cannot, but who will not, repay; will not through malignity and evil disposition. Wherefore a generous spirit is satis∣fied, when the receiver declares his acceptance of the courtesy, and acknowledgeth the favor and honor; for that shews he hath a good mind to be grateful; if he were able. After a courtesy received, be not in hast to return
another; for that shews you are not willing to be beholden, nor return a much greater, for that seems to reproach the smalness of the re∣ceived. Those who willingly alwaies receive and never give, or those who would alwaies give and ne∣ver receive, (of which melancholic generous humor some few there are) are not much esteemed in conversation. Towards other mens Servants the custom of the Country is to be followed. In many places the Ma∣ster takes it ill if his Servant be considerably rewarded for what himself gives. But it is not so with us; where to lodg at a friends house is dearer, besides the inconvenience, then at a com∣mon Inne; and where what a friend sends, is perhaps a present, but not a gift; when the re∣ceiver paies double, the value to the Messenger, and an acknowledgment to the sender. However in all places in entertainment, great care is ta∣ken the Servants be pleased, for the tongues of idle persons are loos-hung. If you desire a courtesy from one beholding to you, 'tis ingenuous not to put him in mind of it; least he think you tax him of ingratitude. A favor done to a man sinking, or in any dan∣ger, is alwaies very obliging; both because it te∣stifies sincerity without expectation of a return, and a good opinion of the receiver; to whom the giver needs not to be favorable. Most men do more for interest either of gain, or friends, then reason. More for favor, then obligation. But mony, if well and discreetly applyed, seldom fails of its effect. A man apt to promise is as apt to forget it.
CHAP. VII. Of Prudence in acquiring emploiment, and preferment. 1. PRESUPPOSING, that a person, out of a good and sincere intention to serve his Prince and Country, desires to employ himself, or be employed, in such a condition; it is necessary, first, that he avoid such hinde∣ran ces which are contrary to, and destructive of, his design. 2ly That he use proper means to the compassing it. 2. HINDRANCES are, 1. Pride, which renders him intolerable to him that should raise him; and tho to avoid this, such men as are most insolent toward their Inferiors, are most supple (even to baseness) towards their Superiors, yet is it very difficult to conceale this vice from any considering person; even be∣cause one of these actions betrayeth the other, both proceeding from the same lowness and vileness of spirit. Where it is, it renders its owner impatient of advice, admonition▪ con∣tradiction, even in his own affairs; by which he becomes a prey to flatterers, despised of all good men, odious to all upon whose dues and interests he usurps, and unfit to be em∣ployed. 2. Anger, for what Prince desires to be served by, or chuse instruments out of, Bedlam? and if prudence consist in much de∣liberation;
precipitiousness, the daughter of An∣ger, is incompatible with it. If it be said that angry men are good natur'd; yet what discreet per∣son will suffer such, and so many, impertinen∣cies, to enjoy now and then a little good nature, i. e. so many storms to have sometimes fair weather? Who will be content to stay for a little reason, till the choler be scum'd, and the boiling ceased? Two to one in all things against the angry man, was a saying of Cardinal Maza∣rine. 3. So following good companions or intem∣perance, and lewd Women, discover secrets, render a man contemtible, and unuseful; for besides that strong Drinks and Tobacco fill the head with imaginations, hot headedness, jea∣lousies, &c. when a man should hast to his emploiment, he must go to sleep, or to his Mistress. 4. He that is by nature lazy and slothfull ought not to intermeddle with public affairs; for tho in quiet and dull times he may serve well enough to pursue formalities; yet when any activeness, he fills up the room of a better person. 5. Covetousness is not so de∣trimental, as Liberality and bounty discreetly placed, are advantagious. But 6. there is no∣thing worse then an unbridled toung. 3. HE that would serve God as well as his King, and save his Soul as well as make his fortune, must beware of such temtations as are most frequent in that sort of life. Such are Ambition, i. e. desiring advancement for an evill end, or more then he deserves, or at unseasonable times, or too eagerly, or for his own private advantage, and not to serve the public. Envy at others preserment; with all the consequents of
it, hatred, detraction, faction, partiality and the like. Adulation or complacency with the Prince, or other great person in vitious, or unfitting, courses. And the like. 4. IT is impossible to be preferr'd if not known, and so known as approved also: and no man can reasonably be offended for being passed by, and neglected, if he use not rational means to make himself accepted. Such means are of ma∣ny sorts. As 1. By merit; and that either by ordinary, or extraordinary, good service. 2. By friends, be∣ing introduced or recommended by such as are in favor and reputation with the Prince. 3. By fear and terror, being so considerable as that the Prince is glad for his own security to employ him. 4. By flattery and evil insinuations into the Princes affections. 5. HE that hath no other Introduction must shew himself diligently; that the Prince (who observeth more then he seemeth to do) may take notice of him; besides, there falls out fre∣quent occasions of employing him, that is pre∣sent; and a constant attendance, tho volun∣tary, is a kind of service. And, he that loseth a beginning tho not so considerable, loseth an introduction to greater matters. 6. THERE are few of whose merits the Prince can be a just and accurate Judg; because he is not witness to all the circumstances, &c. of their actions. Besides to know a man, requires much familiarity with, and observation of, him. But such precise knowledg is not requi∣site;
and a Prince may, with but a reasonable observation, discern a wise man from a fool, and a virtuous man from one inclined to those vices, which render him unfit for service. But if a Prince be forc'd to see only with others eyes, and hear with others ears, he had need to be very wary; for those are very seldom in∣different toward the person recommended; in∣form more frequently for their own interest, then the Princes. Wherefore a wise man be∣leives little, but keeps himself in suspense till the truth be manifest. He that is chosen by the Judgment of his Prince, and not by the recommendation of o∣thers, hath a great advantage; for if he prove well, the Prince is inwardly proud of his choice; and will certainly employ him further; for he looks upon him as his creature. Wise and subtil Princes seldom prize or ad∣vance a man wiser then themselves, except in some case of great necessity. They are also commonly very wary of employing such as are recommended by public fame; except it be in smaller matters. Consider therefore, what emploiment you con∣ceive most suitable to your Genius and condition, v. g. whether War or Peace; Sea or Land-ser∣vice; action or advice; governing; or finan∣ces, and providing mony or necessaries. And endeavor to render your self very able in that; tho it is fitting also you should not neglect other matters. Also disrobe your self (as much as you can) of all particular interest; and at least prefer in your designs the advantage of your Prince and the public. A small emploiment in youth, or betimes, is
much more to be valued then a great one in old age; for Di cosa nasce cosa. One business twists in another. And suffer not your self (as much as is possible) to be out of possession of doing somewhat. If you be, yet by continual presentation of your self, let it be known that you stay there ready to be hired. It is good sometimes to sue for an emploiment, tho you be sure to miss it. For by that means, you shew your self to imagine that you have some pretences to be considered. And your Superior, having once denied you, will be more ready to pleasure you another time, for fear of discontenting you; especially if you be a man of parts. But by no means put in for every thing, for that discovers your Ambition; and a conceit of your self, that you are fit for every thing. You cannot be Master of what emploiment you please; but your commendation must be, well to perform that you are actually possess'd of. In a Comedy, he that acts a Slave well, deserves as much as he that personates a King. 'Tis a comfortable hearing, friend come up higher. Nei∣ther refuse or contemn any reward or gratuity, how small soever, your Prince bestows upon you. Design not upon what is not in your power. And remember that being to deal with other per∣sons, you must drive the nail which way it will go. Therefore be as indifferent as is possible. Your future gains also not being in your pow∣er, spend not upon the hopes of them: and remember, that expectation is alwaies greater then the reality.
7. HE is happy that hath an opportunity given him to shew signally his prudence and loy∣alty. Sejanus, by one action, I know not whe∣ther generous or fortunate, of saving Tiberius's life with the hazzard of his own, obtained that reputation, that he governed the whole Empire; and had almost settled it upon him∣self; through the great confidence Tiberius, otherwise a very jealous Prince, had in him. But these cases fall out seldom, and by the immediate Providence (as I may say) of Al∣mighty God, If you chance to do any great action, be sure to give the glory of it to the Prince; as indeed he, in some sort, deserves it: for you follow his commands, or instructions. Besides the means, and opportunity of all such are his only; and it was performed under his authority. Seem not to be willing to draw all businesses to your self; nor keep too great grandeur in house, followers, &c. for that gives ombrage to the Prince; as great titles are offensive to the Fel∣low-subjects. Extraordinary service, if many ingaged in it, is counted a piece of duty, and seldom rewarded. Either because the Prince, pretending that he cannot gratify all, to avoid murmuring and emulation, will reward none. Or because those about him, if many others be to be consider∣ed, are likely to find the less share for them∣selves. It was a saying of Antigonus; first get power then good will. Power is ability of parts, wealth, friends, emploiment; then good will and re∣putation by courtesy, civility, and other acts of prudent conversation; as also by drawing
others by your interest. For you may then engage many unto you, and spread your roots and fibres a great way: especially if by the re∣putation of Justice and bounty, you have pro∣cured you a veneration amongst virtuous per∣sons. For by this they are assured, that they may securely lean upon you, and run your hazzards. And it is more desirable to be loved then ho∣nored: this indeed is more splendid, but that is more safe; this is greater, that better; this is in the imagination, that in the heart, of o∣thers; from that proceeds peace with others, tranquillity in his condition, and a compla∣cency in his own mind. Yet is love harder to obtain, requires a greater time, the acquir∣ing of it is subject to many difficulties, which honor is not; and therefore make much of honor; which also carrieth a tincture of affe∣ction with it. Only remember what a great General said. I desire to honor my life not by other mens opinions, but my own actions. 8. BECAUSE more men are drawn, then heaved, up. And that amongst ingenious per∣sons there is alwaies emulation, and amongst rivals (and for all preferments such there are) envyings also; which are great rubs; and diffi∣cultly surmounted or removed; endeavor to make a friend; who may give an Antidote a∣gainst their poyson; and by lending his hand raise you in spight of all the weight and pres∣sures they can hang upon you. Friends are not easily made, and still more difficulty amongst great persons; both because they have fewer equals, and amongst such e∣quals
emulation is frequenter then friendship; yet are they not so rare, but they may be pro∣cur'd. For long, especially youthful, acquain∣tance; kindred and relation; sympathy in af∣fections; partaking in a common danger; or such like, do reconcile friendship, but not fre∣quently: nor are these means in every mans power, they are obligations by which Provi∣dence only tyes men together. But there are others also which are more ordinary; for you insinuate your self into the affection even of a great person, if you can shew him, that you are able to strengthen, assist, and confirm him, in his estate; and be able by your parts, or other way, to recompense the favors you expect from him. But mony discreetly applied is a plaister that unites and soders all affections: nor is there any Heart, as well as not any Castle, that can resist its battery, if rightly placed. To desire wealth for its own sake, is low, sordid, and proper only for them, who make the obtaining it their Profession: but to desire it moderately, in order to do more good, is unblamable. Even Reputation it self is acquir∣ed, and sustained by discreetly keeping and spending; so that it also is in a manner sub∣servient to wealth. We seldom see that wealth increaseth in a family for three generations together: perhaps because that he, who comes into a plentiful fortune, having no occasion to employ his parts and industry, grows lazy, and negligent, or at best betakes him∣self to some other affairs; or perhaps, because men not knowing the difficulty in obtaining it value it not much; but rather look after the splendor of the World, whereunto rich men
commonly engage and enter their Children; and for that reason live at the height of the reputation of their estate. The Prudence to obtain wealth is generally conceived to be cutting off superfluous or unne∣cessary expences: but that is not all; for there is also required good menagery, or making your penny go further then another mans. But in this, Caution must be used, for many have bin ruined by buying good pennyworths. In making friends by mony Prudence also is required, lest you lose that also. For it is best used upon an exigent; occasionally rather then frequently; and actually rather then con∣stantly; like a wedg, not like a saw. Many can hurt who cannot profit. And the ill tongue of an Inferior many times harms more then that of an Equal; for it is easilier beleived, because less suspected. Therefore endeavor to keep a fair reputation with all persons; with Superiors humble and compli∣ant, not low and flattering; with equals grave, not morose; with inferiors courteous and fair∣spoken, not sullen or imperious. Considering, that no man is willing to own him, that is out of fashion, as I may say, out of the good opinion of the World. It was more dangerous to offend Sejanus then Tiberius. For all men raised from low condi∣tion are more jealous of affronts and contemts; which a natural and generous Superior is not: who interprets nothing to be contemt but what is meerly so, or done on purpose to affront; and nothing to be so, but what cannot well be construed otherwise. To such therefore, as Sejanus, you must carry your self so, as not to
be hated by him; for you will find it hard to please both the Patron and him. Besides you know not how long he will last; and it goes hard with a man of understanding and spirit, that his good must depend upon two, and his ill upon one. If you cannot be reconciled to a favorite, be sure to tell your Patron that he is your enemy; so his ill offices cannot hurt you. It is unpardonable folly to quarrel with them, who are much your Superiors; for the thred breaks where it is weakest. If you be so ill satisfied of any person, that you think not fit to pardon or bear with him any longer, yet let him not know so much; for the time may come when you shall have need of him. And if you resolve to chastise him, discover it not, lest you be prevented. But this is not to be used but in extremity, and to∣wards persons incorrigible. For, according to the rules of our most holy Faith, 'tis infinitely better not to revenge at all, but to pass by of∣fences; then which no man can shew greater wisedome. And this is not very difficult if you stifle quarrels in the beginning. But there are some so wicked dispositions, that nothing works upon them but fear; and he that lets them go unpunished, encourageth them in their evil courses. Whether you expect emploiment and pre∣ferment, or chuse a private life, if you have any thing to lose, Endeavovr to be in Reputa∣tion with your Prince and Superior: and trust not to your innocency, or wary living. For besides, that he cannot want an occasion some time or other to punish you, you know not
what may happen, wherein you shall stand in need of him. Much less presume, that your manners are un∣discovered, or to commit any fault upon hopes of secrecy; for a good Judge will so entangle and hamper you, that you cannot escape. And if you be once suspected, more suspicions will be continually suggested against you. And e∣ven to have much suspicion and little proof makes against you, for it is a sign that you are more dangerous. No man can stand alwaies upon his guard, but sometimes he will faile and mistake; happy he whose errors are in small matters, that he need not great applications and much endeavor to get himself off the shallow. Nor can a man on a suddain foresee the depth of a question, or the consequences of an action. Therefore when you doubt, or see not clearly, be wary, and take time. Many times small mistakes produce great evil effects; and great mistakes sometimes none at all; wherefore contemn no danger, how little soever it seem to threaten. Be vigilant; Cavendi nulla est dimittenda occasio. It is much better to do so, then be beholding to your friend to fetch you off; for that is ac∣counted equal to, if not greater then, a con∣siderable benefit. Give not much heed to those, who would perswade you to quit your emploiment; or pretend themselves to be weary of business; have they not a mind to succede you? or are they not like the Fox, that having lost his own tail, would perswade all the rest to cut off theirs?
9. 'TIS not an unusual way to obtain pre∣ferment to shew a mans-self so considerable as to fright his Prince into compliance. In reason this should be an ill means, but experience shewes, that under lasch Superiors, or such as are under-hatches, it many times thrives well enough. Upon the same grounds proceed also those, who endeavor to make themselves ne∣cessary to their Prince; and so rivet themselves into his business, that they cannot be drawn out without tearing the piece. But of such the Prince is alwaies jealous; and will at some time or other emancipate himself. He therefore that takes this course walkes upon a precipice, and the further he goes the grea∣ter is his ruine likely to be. The Count of S. Paul took his measures upon these grounds in Lewis X I. time. But he had to do with a Prince of extraordinary parts. The people (upon whose recommendation many persons think to raise themselves) guide not themselves by reason, but chance; therefore he is not wise that strives to make himself their favorite, or forceth himself to gain their affection. For they will never do the like for him again, nor forgo the least of their profit for his greatest benefit. On the contrary, the Nature of the people and of all mean per∣sons, is, alwaies to value themselves, as if all men were obliged to augment and better their degree: 'tis best therefore to deny them at first, when their desires are modest. For if you once grant, you must never after refuse, lest your former courtesy be lost; and to think to satisfy them is to give drink to an Hydro∣pic. Yet, if occasion offer it self to be fa∣voured
by them; or if your virtue and good a∣ctions have procured their favor, neglect it not. For a general plausibility may stand you in great stead; besides that, it may be very ad∣vantagious by your good menagement to your Prince. Popularity is one of the lowest and meanest sorts of Ambition; a refuge commonly of those who envy such as have prevented them in the lawful acquiring advancement by the favor of their superiors. And the thoughts of the peo∣ple being meaner and lower then theirs, they are forced to do and say many things contrary to their own judgments and inclinations. Be∣sides the people, being necessitous, measure all things by advantage, so that their favor is char∣geable, and seldom any other then breath and air, except Religion be in the case. If you arrive to any power, be very wary how you tamper to change governments (which is usually the refuge of necessitous persons.) For not being able to perform it your self, you must of necessity trust your cause and person to many foolish and open persons. Yet no∣thing more frequently ruins such designs then too much caution for security. For that re∣quires longer time; and employs more persons about the principal business; and is subject to many more accidents. In court have many acquaintances, but make a friend for advice and consultation out of Court, and one that is not likely to have any interest in your Patron. 10. THE service of a Prince is procuring that his will and intentions be fulfilled: for no
man esteems that (be it never so good) that is not according to his own desires. Such there∣fore as his desires are, such must they be whom he employs: for they are looked upon as only the Instruments for his compassing and bring∣ing about his purposes. Wherefore they, who seem most zealous to perform the Princes will in all things, with∣out deliberation, or interposing their own judgement concerning the lawfulness or unlaw∣fulness of them, seem to be in the plainest road to preferment. Yet divers of the wisest Princes have made even that, the criterion to exclude men from their favour; and retain such, as upon tryal were found constantly virtuous. Princes usually more esteem one that is Phil-Alexandros, then one that is Philo-Basileus, that is, more one, that loves his person, then his state and condition, then his Nation, then the public; tho this is indeed the more hono∣rable, and the other more easily counter∣feited. But in reality Princes have very few, if any, friends to their persons; for they have no equals, nor familiars▪ for indeed few wise men will expose themselves to so much hazzard, nor set themselves as pales against the wind, but for their own advantage. Besides they know that if any difficulty happen, it is reasonable they should be deserted. Wherefore they ought to make much of those, who are truly Philo-Basiless, for there are too few of them, who are sincerely even so affected. It is an action of very great Prudence to carry even between adulation and sowreness. Neither to be as the Cook, that aimes onely at pleasure;
nor as the Physician, who intends only health; but to mingle and ajust them together. Whilst we retain Justice and friendship, not to scan∣dalize Prudence and interest is a difficult mat∣ter. Yet not impossible, for M. Lepidus kept to the end his authority with Tiberius, a very jealous Prince, as Tacitus observes. Flattery and obsequiousnes is a more quick and ready way to advancement, then either durable or laudable. For when discovered to be such, it is contemtible, and afterwards odi∣ous. It is but lead that bends and plies every way; nor is he a man either of virtue or cou∣rage, that can condescend to make himself universal Minister to any one. Consequently he is neither faithful in his emploiment, when he eyes a greater reward; nor constant to him, when he spies danger. Of flatterers there are two sorts 1. Bouffons, whose cheif insinuation is to eat and be cloth∣ed. Who like the Ape, finding himself nei∣ther fit to carry burdens as the Asse, nor to keep the house, as the Dog, betakes himself to make sport. These are easily discovered, and their worst is not very dangerous. 2. The o∣ther sort are more subtil, gentile, and mis∣chievous; whose designs are to intrigue them∣selves into business; to make fortunes, and get estates, or perhaps honors, by universal com∣pliance. These, by observing the actions and discourses of their pretended Patron, discover his inclination, as Hunters do the haunts of wild Beasts, that they may easilier intrap them. It is their interest he should be vitious, careless, irregular, and extravagant; for by that means, they can more easily withdraw him from all
virtuous persons, and ingross him to themselves: who have no other way to ingratiate them∣selves, but their ready compliance with all his desires. This they endeavor should pass for affection to his person; and they represent all other advisers, either as contemners of him; or at best as morose and of evil humor. Therefore they pretend to Idolize him; to ob∣serve his counsels and commands as Oracles; not to converse with those he suspects; to in∣veigh against his enemies; to make him the head of their own Counsels; and themselves to be even in their particular affairs ruled by him; to take great content in serving him; to praise him immoderately before those who will be sure to inform him of it; to exaggerate every small favor received from him; and to dissemble the injuries. They also are careful to new-name all his vices. Covetousnes they call Providence; jea∣lousy, circumspection; Prodigality is generous∣ness, &c. Then they compare him with others either of a contrary vice, if the man be hated; or of the same, if in any reputation. They feign also in themselves the same inclinations, sympathy, sentiments with their Patron. And often undervalue themselves in respect of him. They are also apt to praise him for what he hath not done, or extravagantly for what he hath done, glosing and varnishing all miscar∣riages, &c. and few there are who are not taken even with this one bait. For who is he that values not himself above his deserts, and thinks not all is his due which is given? In reality, the refusing or accepting of praise ra∣tionally and discreetly, is as great a trial of a
wise man, as the cupel is of silver. No Master esteems a Servant, of whom he hath no need; and that either for his abilities (of which few Masters can judg) or because he knows his secrets; this then being the easilier and securer, is that way, which flatterers, and all those who endeavor to make themselves great by unlawful means, chuse to walk in. And of all secrets, they most desire to be privy to his vices, for by that means he becomes ob∣noxious to them. In Doing ill Offices these flatterers observe, 1. to do them seldom. 2. To tolerate, if not confirm, the praises of him they design upon; lest they be suspected to have done it out of malice. 3. To pretend no small or inconside∣rable occasion, nor their own concerns, but a public one only, and in defence of their Su∣periors. 4. To dispose their words so, as they may seem casual and unpremeditated. Artis est celare Artem; they endeavor there∣fore by all means to be accounted sincere and upright persons; for they see that the fame of being crafty and subtil (which is the great skill they really pretend to) much retards, and im∣pedes their businesses. In general conversation therefore none more open and free; none seeming by their discourse more noble and ge∣nerous. But their confidence is in simulation and duplicity; which, because of other mens evil dealing, they pretend is necessary. They often pretend, and endeavor, to be in esteem with the Clergy; especially those who make shew of greatest severity, and holines. And of so great force is the shew of Religi∣on, that even an hypocrite is feared and reve∣renced.
Hereby also they have considerable advantages; that they can decry all vices, even those themselves are guilty of; and can safely asperse those whom they hate or fear; and un∣happy are they, that fall into their hands. 11. PRINCES, when they have denied a favor, to one that importunately sues for it, are apt to suspect that such a one hates them for the denial: and therefore afterward look not well upon that person. Wherefore be not too earnest in your requests. And if your misfor∣tune be to be denied, be sure not to shew such resentment, as he may suspect you intend him any harm. Rather seem to be content with any slender shew of reason he gives you; so you may obtain, if not this, yet some other favor. But if you perceive his mind to be alienated from you, retire betimes; for a man falling is by every one thrust downwards. Besides all the miscarriages and errors will be surely laid upon your shouldiers, notwithstanding all your innocency. Do violence to your self rather then not conceal or dissemble the injuries done you by your Prince or Patron. For should you declare your self unsatisfied, so far would he be from compassi∣onating, or making amends, to, you; that up∣on the least occasion he will hate you. FINIS.
ERRATA. Pag. 35. l. 27. first care. p. 57. l. 3. preternatural. p. 80. l. ult. eradication. p. 117. l. 29. in matter. p. 136. l. 19. governed learning. p. 179. l. ult. dele actions. p. 264. l. 6. his thrusts.
