E1053_8 50922812 168988
THE Wandring whore CONTINUED: A DIALOGUE BETWEEN Magdalena a Crafty Bawd, Julietta an Exquisite VVhore, Francion a Lascivious Gallant, And Gusman a Pimping Hector. Discovering their diabolical Practises at the Half-crown CHUCK-OFFICE. With an Additional LIST of the names of the Crafty Bawds, Common Whores, Wanderers, Pick-pockets, Night-walkers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners. Delivered to the Publisher hereof by a late Hector, several deep Pyemen, and decayed Gamesters amongst them. Sine Cerere & Bacch friget Venus. London: Printed in the Year 1660.
THE WANDRING WHORE CONTINUED. Julietta. COme (sweet heart) wilt thou do-a-little, the fitt's come on me now, I will show thee a pure pair of naked breasts, smooth Buttocks, Lovely and ivory thighes whiter than untrod Snow, with the best red-lip't C—in Christendom; such as Europa never showed Jupiter, Orithya Boreas, nor Helena Theseus, when they cornu∣ted their husbands, nor at the Wrastling amongst the naked Roman virgins. Francion. You are huge merry me-thinks Julietta, the news and sight whereof would tempt a saint es∣pecially such a one as I am, therefore lye down dear heart and make my P—rise, disclose thy curled, silver∣colour'd turn-pikes and perfum'd Cabinet lyes in thy vally sweeter than Violets; then lead me with thy ivory fingers to it's fancy, where I will enter it's Port with a full spring tyde between thy bum's riding safe at Anchor within thy harbour. Julietta. I am prepar'd to give you entrance with all your burden, (without searching you with Custom∣house Officer's) you need no other Transire but my permission.
Francion. I like thy free and kind reception, al∣though the enjoyment thereof abate my affection there∣unto, then have at all my deer,—I've done the business with discretion, and spilt my Posset on thy beard and in thy belly, with a total rout to P—and stones. Julietta. I had rather heard thee saying, I will kill thee with this kindness, oh! how sweet would be the death, as once a seeming-holy sister said when a long t—Chyrurgion made her trump and trump again and again. Francion. That makes me think of Baudy Martiall's verses. Mentula longa placet, magna implet, parva titillat, Sic facit officium mentula quæque suum. And this pleasant Frolick of a wanton fancy, O bone Girdruris, quam nocte tu bene ludis Quoties enim ego trudo retrudis. O deer Girdrure, how sweetly in the night Thou sport'st with me, when we together fight. Julietta. I know what pleases me best, and which displeases me most, for I am not like the old E—of E—C—unpentrable, or troubl'd with a narrow pas∣sage, but like to Mal. Savory, who sitting in a publick passage in a very good habit and rich apparrel about twi-light, lay lamenting the loss of her husband she ne∣ver had, (though children several;) A kind hearted Gentleman passing by, with little importunity treated her into a Tavern, where drinking two or three pints of Canary, she related her distresses and distractions with
such cunning and counterfeit sighes and teares, that he became a great admirer of her speeches, and condoler of her pretended miseries: But the night drawing on, she press't with importunity to be gone, saying 'twas not usual for her to be out at eight of the Clock: the Gentleman drawes a very fair and large Watch, telling and showing her it was not Seven, calling for more Sack, smuggling, groping and hugging her between his arms and leggs, till she very expertly got it out of his pocket without present discovery, and then renew'd her suit with much importunity to depart; not so, said he, for I know your want is onely a Chamber-pot, which I will call for, and you shall, Dear Madam, make use of, which being called for, was accordingly brought up by the Drawer, and carried by her into another room, and made use of, in which interval she thrust both Watch, Key, and string into her Commodity, making her return into the room, drinking Sck in a plentiful manner, continued in that way so long, that going to enquire for his Watch, it was non est inventus, whereat he was somewhat astonished and amazed, crying sweet heart thou hast got my Watch. I beseech you dear Sir, replyed this rammish whore, harbour no such thought of me, nor take me for any such person, rather send for some honest woman or women, and search me stark-naked from top-to-toe, which was accordingly done, but the cheat undiscovered, whereat (as he could not chuse) he wondered, saying for the abuse was done her, he would call for a pottle more and give it her in part of Satisfaction, which was accordingly brought up, but before 'twas drunk out, an all arum betrayed all,
going Dub-a-Dub-a in her C—at nine of the clock, which so affrighted this female, she confess't her fault, fearing the devil (who hath right to them all) were about to take possession. Francion. I remember how Jone Harman a running baud, and Nan. Robinson a common whore, served a Sea Captain as he walked thorough Pye-corner neer Smith-field, where spying him all alone with a large load of mony under his arm; they drew-up close to him, and ask't if he would give or take, and pray good Sir what a clock is't, how far do you go this way? if you won't give us a pint of wine, we have a pint at your service, for I take you to be my Countryman, with such stuff as this, they got him into a pimping-house, telling them they had got a rum-cully, who assoon as he was entred a room he threw down his bagg, and burden of 50 l. upon the Table before them, drinking Sack very merrily and feeling the whores whibb bobs one after the other, till they drove a bargain to play at heave-and-shove, as if't had been on ship-board, the running baud standing Centinel and door-keeper to secure them in their sporting from apprehension and inter∣ruption; whereupon he unhasp't his breeches, took up her petticoates, smock and all, falling on to board this pinnace, which the baud seeing in their postures of na∣ked leggs and bare breeches, she cover'd them over with her apron, pretending an act of modesty; whilst she steales up to the Table, up with the bag, leaving them close at their merriment, cleering way with the summa totalis, leaving him a C—for his Coin, nether of which he ever fingered after.
Julietta. There's my sister Frank Poulter (alias Ulls) who div'd, and pickt by her own acknowledgment, nine pieces of Gold out of a Cullies pocket at one clap, a bagg of Silver as long as her arm (almost) at another clap, and for silver Hat-bands, Gold-rings, Watches or Rings in your Bandstrings she ha's them infallibly, if you have them about you, therefore beware of your Pick-pocket Whores, and make much of the honest Whores. Francion. Well, since we have entred upon these discourses, bid Gusman bring up a Quart of Sack with a dish of Anchovas, and then wee'l proceed further, and I'le tell you how Cock Chambers lately served a puny Brewers Clark as he was wandering in the fields for that purpose: she cast her eyes upon him, he, back to∣wards her, she speaks to him he accepts of her, and into a house (fit for their purpose neer the Windmills) they entred (with Dick Cartwright her friend and Hector, af∣ter her three husbands who are now living) so that whilst he was pying her, she pickt six Pounds in a can∣vase bagg out of his pocket; leaving him under pre∣tence of pissing, a pledge for the reckoning, returning to her constant rendezvouz over against Moorgate, where she told out the mony upon her scarfe, giving her piti∣ful Dick a new band (a halter had been more deserved) and a pair of new shoes for his paines in the business, of whose abode, what she is, whither she goes, or where he may light of her, this ignorant Puppy knowes no∣thing, but might of the publisher hereof. Julietta. Mall. Tremain who stood three market dayes in the Pillory, and lay in New-gate for picing of
pockets, and Trappanning of Merchants, subtilly served a Drapers man in Pauls-church yard, for after his pick∣ing up monies on a Saturday night, she pick't him up in Cheapside, getting him into the Star-tavern (a fit house for such stories) who whilst he was handing his P—to her Placket, she got both her hands in his pockets, and after he had done the business she catch't him, grasp't him and held up her tayl, bidding him prethee love stay-a-little, stay-a-little longer, for her loving kindness was coming towards him, and by that means foyl'd his cloy of above ten pounds, afterwards giving him a Cockle de-moy for his mony, and a slip for the reckoning: then there was a drunken Marriner who had received Threescore-pounds of the Owners of a Ship for buying a Cable and Anchor, which was lost in Malt. Crumwells bottom as he was sayling be∣tween Temple-bar and Ald-gate, to his perpetual ruine and his whole family; as for your pitiful poor whores, such as Bss Whittle, Betty Blum, Black Betty, Nan Taylor, Mal. Rose, &c. who are seldom out of the Mar∣shals mens Cuy or Bridewel, if they are pick't up at night-time, they I not talk of drinking, but going into a corner or some by a Ally, where they will be more certain (be you drunk or sober) of picking your pock∣ets, then you shall be of finding or putting a finger in their plackets. Francion. Come speak here Cusman, bring up more Wine and Tobacco, bid Magdalena appear before us, if she is not over-busy at her old trade, and bring in Mrs. Glover, that I may know whether her pitiful, shifting, vapouring husband got the palsy and tremb∣ling
throughout his joynts with over-much drinking, or too much knocking, and let Mrs. Snow be one of us (his neighbor, who keeps a couple of hansom hackney∣jades at the Postern gate) provided she hath layn-in the full time of her By blow she had lately by a Swag∣gerer since the decease of her husband, and that By-blow be put out to nurse. Gusman. I hav't in my hand Mounsieur, but for Magdalena she's hard put to't to please a yong Merchant in L—street, who will not be contented with doing the business, but will have half a dozen Girles stand stark naked found about a Table whilst he lyes snarling un∣derneath as if he would bite off their whibb-bobs, and eat them for his pains; another will needs shite in one of our wenches mouth's (which is odd lechery) another who has brought rods in his pockets for that purpose, will needs be whip't to raise lechery and cause a standing P—which has no understanding at all, and would quickly cool my courage; a fourth would fayn be buggering some of our wenches, if the Matron could get their consent, but had rather be dealing with smooth-fac'd Prentices. Juletta What unseen and unheard off Monsters are here amongst you in England, nay, in London all of em, well might Flora Laurentia, Leana, and Faula be nnoz'd among the Romans for down-right occupy∣ing, but these are such wretched persons, guilty of such wicked Actions, they are not fit to be nominated, they are surely old Devils, and yong Saints. Gusman. They are such as can pay any price for to sve their wickedness and appetites and for the per∣sons
they have to deal with, they'l endure any an∣noyances, punishments or extremities to get mony by't, in regard of their poverty, which together with idlenes, makes so many whores and dishonest women amongst us. Julietta. I must deal ingeniously with you, since I saw the last days List, I admire how or which way, so many of the society are maintained by their Lechery, and yet they are but a handful in comparison of those are yet to enter themselves amongst us. Gusman. I do not think that all my leaves and pages in folio, are able to contain them, especially if the de∣cayed Occupiers, and Deep Pyemen should be put down; in which particular there is no great difficulty. Julietta. If all their actions, names and places of abode were registred, they could not be read over in Centuries of yeers, as for example, how Su. Leming had Tabbies, Taffaties, Scarfes, &c. from out Ben. Rosses Cod-piece at the white-horse in Pater-noster-row, without paying for them, onely he had a little pying, and help't to a fresh bit in a time of need, and now and then a pint bottle of Sack without paying for; How Butterfield the Wood-monger drunk out two Loads of Faggots at Betty Lawrences; and lastly, how the Rules of the Chuck-office are onely profitable to Whores, Hectors and Trappanners, &c. Francion. Well, I finde no Motions to a second Rancounter with you, Julietta, therefore for this time let the Reckoning be plac't upon account, tell our next days meeting, and I will stay to hear read the additional List to this.
A Perfect List of all the Crafty Bawds, Maiden-head∣sellers, Common Whores, Night-walkers, Pick-pockets, Wanderers, Shop-Lifters, Foylers, Whippers, Kid nap∣pers, Decoyes, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners, and their usual Meetings. Crafty Bawds and Maidenhead-sel∣lers. DAmrose Page Pss, Fotheringham at the Chack Office Mrs Mason, in Horse-shoo-Ally in More-fields Mrs Farlo, in Pepper-lane by Gryes-inn. Mrs Cater senier Betty Farmer, Tho. Beards, wife and saviges Mobb Pimp Allens, wife, in Goodmans yards John Baker B and Mal. Walsgrave in Dog and Bitch yard Eleanor North, in Cross∣lane Abigail Littleton Graverer's in Morefields Ml Pulver Prudence Misters Frances Coleman Elizabeth Herbertson, in New-market Mal Winter Grace Holland Rachel War in Dog-yard Nan Harcock Jone Harman, a running baud Frances Sands: Ragged∣staff in Chiswel-street Wiggins, in Checquer ally in white-cross-street Green-Lettice i'th mi∣nories Mrs Crosbow, in the mi∣nories Pimp Yopes wife Mrs Eaton, a Maiden-head∣seller on the Ditch-side neer Hoggsden Mrs Hughes, in Ram-ally Ml i eo Mrs. Stone. Mrs. Creswel Mrs. Garrish Mrs. Habbiger Turks head in Moorfields Mother Baker Su. Lemmon Mrs. Whetston Mrs. George Mother Lockyer Mother Baxter Mrs. Arnol Mrs. Joes Mrs Salmon Virginia, going to Hack ney Crow, white-crose-street Mrs Osbridg, Bedlam Mrs letherel Mrs Waller, Thomaz in white Chappel Mrs Thomas, Stepney Jeremyes and Services, Booths by Hackney rive Mrs Bull Mrs Halfpenny Mrs Harrison Three Sugar-lovs in Gub-street Ship, in long Ally turns Jones at the Cock in long Acre Mrs Davies a Midwife Mrs Barber, a Midwife in Holborn Mrs Howard, in Lincolns In-feild Mrs Hughes Mother Cunny The Cherry Garden Black Swan in St Mar∣tins-Le-grand Mrs Brooks, Mile-end Hanna Hickman, Baud and Whre Margaret Leech Margery Wilson Mrs Page, Old-street Ann Price Houkins, Baud Paskin at the Armitage Margery Lawon Alice Hulburt Mrs Burges Joyce Ebbs Nel Yate Mrs Wollaston Mrs Stockwel Mrs Lawton, by Hatton∣wall Mal Ledger Mrs Sadler Mrs Gibbins Frank Tilt
Jane Hayward Nan. Hennes Bess Mundel keeps three Baudy-houses in Dog and Bitch-yard Jacobs Well, in Jewen∣street Nan Evans Mrs Jones in Cross-lane Mrs. Simpson The Last and Lyon, in East-smith-feild. Mrs. Saunders Mrs. Kemp Mrs. Abigail Common Whores, Night-walkers, Pick-pockets, Wanderers and Shop-Lifters and Whippers. Mrs. Snow Nan Langsden Mrs Phænix. neer Jewen-street Mrs Farmer Betty Cater, junior Bess Cox Jane Broith∣wait, Amy Butler, Shop-lifters Rebecca Wharton Tho. Langley's mobb Nan Lidford Shop∣lifter Ursula Bunny Johanna White, a but∣tock-whore Jone Horto, alias Singleton Rebecca Tentch Marget Read Nan. Welliams in New-gate marget Gladwel Grizel Conference alias Wood Nan Stanley martha Chester mrs Debbenham, mrs. Clark-two crackt∣brain'd whores mrs Smith, a Brick∣layers wife in white∣chappel mrs Fletcher Bess Country mrs Ivcs mrs Holland mrs ettice mrs Wells Betty Hyde mrs Elwick mrs Betty, at Crosbows Peg the Seamans wife at mrs Crosbowes Ruth Shaw in morelane mal Crumwel alias Hyam Nan Robinson Penelope mantle alias Fle∣tcher Jane Johnson Thomz in Cobb, alias Day Nan Scy Jane Powel Mrs ding Betty Edwards Betty Holly Mal. Nun Welth Nan Ml Avory Esther Clark Non Love Mrs. Warren Nell Gulliford Sarah & Nan Fullam Betty Yong Faith Clayton — Cross Betty Orange Mrs. Curtes Betty Laurence Mrs. Sberley the yonger Mrs. Smith Jane Stamford Mrs. Spevcer Mrs. Taverner Mrs. Marten Mrs Watson Mrs. Berry Mrs. Green Green Mall, alias Joan Godfrey Mall. Chauney Betty Cox Mall Hegg Mall Horsfield Mall Savory Peg Williams Alice Spilman Kate Hare Mall Tremain Mrs. Westover, Band∣string-seller to the Offices in Chaucery-lane Per Cross Nan Bret Ursula Higgins Betty White Betty Farmer Margery Noble Jane Dixon Mall Peak Sarah Martin Nan Glscock Mrs Honor Queen of Morocco
Mrs Mate Toothless Betty Bess Goring Grizzel Wood Mrs. Holliland Mrs. Diamond Mrs Cupid Mal Grey Nan Cooper Betty Cooper Mrs Ames Nan Wats Betty Bates Betty Eton Mal. Bell Butter and Eggs Jane Thebey Mrs Owen Mal Fink Betty Baxter Betty Gansford Black Betty Nan Taylor Neck Lunn Mrs Love Mrs Lote Bess Whittle Bess Blunt Mrt Simmonds Betty Downes Luee Brook Nel Syder Mal Craford Mal Bell Mrs Wood Mal Rose Mrs Flower poeky Frank Poulter, alias Ulls Fayth Anderton Dutch Whore Wilkis, a weavers Wife at Smock Ally-end Mrs Dawes Denues wife in Shoreditch Mrs Swails maid Bess, Mrs Joy Mrs Bulls Daughters Mrs Bourn a Scribes wife Mrs Tippit Shards wife in Dunning-Alley Mrs Mils by the Cur∣tain Play-house Su Hedge Jone Thorn at Newington butts Ensign Websters wife Ms Harfed—Robinson Woodst Compter Mr Sweetman Long-haird Mrs Spencer in Spittle-fields Mrs Wroth, Grubstreet Mrs Phillips Peg Angel Greens Satchel— Mall Rose Nan Rash Betty Knight Su Harris Nan Braithwait Boulrun the bayliffs wife Wil Martins wife Mrs Fransces, alias Mat. Robinson Pimp Hollilands Pockey pug-nasty Mrs Spicer in Mobb-lane, alias Browns Mrs De-maroy Mrs Carr in Rose-lane Mrs Bonsly Tanners wife Wheeler str. Mrs Dickenson Jane Glisson alias Roberts Frank Evitt Tracyes wife Mrs Taverner Wheeler-street Frank Rigs, alias Robin∣son, a thieving whore Betty Wilson —King Sarah Price Kate Wilkinson Grace Steel. Elizabeth Smith Betty Blunt Mary De-gret, Mobb to Tho. Crouch Allice Jones Mall Cole Nan Lowe —Fox Mary Paget Mrs Cadman Sarah & Joyce Price Bess Cox Cock Birch Sarah Bostwed Jone Bonner Jone Bouden Nan Southern Frank Palmer Silver-lac't Bess Frank Ouden Fair Rosamond Sugar-C— a constant wanderer & night-wal∣ker Mrs Dodman Peg Hodgson Nan Stephens Sarah Blades Mrs Bliss Mrs Russel Mrs herman Mrs King a Sempstress.
Foylers, Kid-nappers, Decoys, Hectors, Pimps and Trappanners. ARmstrong Pets Pierce Savage Thom Beard Joseph Riches Thom Allein John Baker Gravenor beyond Bedlam∣gate Wil. Cox Lion Broithwait Tho Langley, Harry Bily, Ned Jervois, Peter Goodjeway, Tho. Orrel, Shop-Lifters and Foylers, Pimp Singleton the ex∣temporary poet Wil Pease, an-extorting pimp in Long Acre, who is burnt in the hand Ned Yope Roger Kiffner, with a Wen over his eye John Pierson, by Hatton∣wall Tho Blackberry Jack Miller. Tim. Thorn∣ber, Newgate Birds Dæmon a Hardy Hector. Fox Tho. Hurst Wil Taverner Dick Cartwright George Clark Barr Holliland, a great Cheat Gladwin, an ignorant whelp Len. Lansden Tho. Stern Barr Higgins Tho. Dodson Nat Lummocks, Apoth Anniseed Robbin Wil Nash. Man. Middleton Frank Ashburn Jack Jones Wat. Gulliford Carter, Rabbit-seller Dick de Lane Jo. Cocks Robin Thrower Tho. Rand Wil. Merrit Wat. Stainton. Raymon, Trump-alley Croe Green by Newgate Harry Martin, Vintner Pimp Skipwith. Ned Brooks Tracy a Hector Brown a Chyrurgion Ratford a Troper Tho. Player Ned Traford Harry Bird Will Dossel Will Uus Jack Daines aylor the Prigg Little Taffy Sam Pink, a slovenly pimp James at Dog-yard Gundamore Shatterwait, scribe Hopper Writing-master Winch the Nailer Jack Berry, & Jack Harris Billiard-players Pimp Howard Fair Rosamonds pimp George Paskins, a Kid-catcher, at the Crooked-billet at the Armitage Pimp Glover Jack Gould Jack Wallis Ralph Ashington alias Shitten-arse, Grocer Tho. Ebbs Dick Stockwel Will Ledger Will Sadler Wat. Gibbins Tho. Hayward C — Jackson Pimp Sherman Hammond Will Gill FINIS.
Advertisements. Modest Reader, SOme libidinous wretches out of despight to the de∣sign of the Publisher hereof, and affection to the wicked Actors, concerned in the List, have censured, condemned, insinuated, and suggested the intent here∣of to be for propagating of whoreing, and tempting Customers to go amongst them, instead of destroying them: This the world may be assur'd of, that instead thereof, some of them like rats have remov'd for fear of ruine, others have chang'd their names, some thereby have been denied Licences and thrust out of their pari∣shes, others have profered gratuities to be obliterated: so that I say from Whores, Harlots, and Varlets, good Lord deliver all honest men, and their Eubulus. One Holliland a Trappanning Rogue (who lately lay by London wal, as the pretended husband of Mat. Robinson, alias Mrs. Frances a pitiful, pocky, wheazing whore) carry'd away after two nights lodging, a flying-coat cost 3 l. 15 s. about afortnight before, who-ever leaves notice in writing, for Eubulus at Dun∣kirk, close by where he may be apprehended, they shall receive half a piece for their pains. One Frank Riggs a thieving whore lately borrowed (or stole) some goods neer the abovesaid place, who-ever leaves word for her apprehension, shall receive a crown for their pains at the said place. Farewel.
