E1065_4 99869296 169261
ARTICLES OF PEACE, FRIENDSHIP & ENTERCOURSE, Concluded and Agreed between ENGLAND & SWEDEN, In a Treaty bearing date at Upsal the ninth day of May in the year of our LORD GOD 1654. blazon or coat of arms of the Anglo-Irish Commonwealth Published by his Highness special commandment. London, Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, MDCLV.
ARTICLES OF Peace, Friendship and Entercourse con∣cluded and agreed between England and Sweden. In a Treaty bearing date at Upsal, the ninth day of May in the year of Our Lord God, 1654. I. THat from henceforth there be and remain a good, firm, sin∣cere and perpetual Peace, Ami∣ty, Allyance and correspon∣dence between the Protector and Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Queen and Kingdome of Sweden, and all and singular their Do∣minions, Kingdomes, Countries, Pro∣vinces, Islands, Plantations, Lands, Cities, Towns, People, Citizens, and generally all their Subjects and Inhabi∣tants, so that each part treat and use the other with all real friendship and affection. II. The said Confederates, their People, Subjects and Inhabitants shall, as op∣portunity is offered, take care of, and pro∣mote the welfare each of other. And shall advertise each other, upon knowledge ther∣of, of all imminent dangers, plots, and conspiracies of Enemies against the other; and, as much as in them lies, oppose, and hinder the same. Neither shall the one Confederate, either by himself, or any else, treat of, act, or attempt any thing to the prejudice and disadvantage of the other; his Lands or Dominions, in whatsoever place, whether at Sea or Laud, Nor shall any way assist the Rebells or Enemies of the other, to the damage of the Confederate, nor receive, or entertain within his Do∣minions, any Rebel or Traytor, who shall attempt any thing against the others State, much less afford them any Council, help or favour, or permit it to be done by any of his Subjects, People and Inhabitants. III. The said Protector and Commonwealth, and the said Queen
and Kingdome shall take diligent care, That, as much as in them lies, all impediments and obstacles be removed, which have hitherto interrup∣ted the freedome of Navigation and Com∣merce, as well between both Nations, as with other People and Countries within the Dominions, Lands, Seas and Rivers of either. And shall sincerely endeavour to assert maintain, defend and promote the a∣foresaid Liberty of Navigation and Com∣merce against all the Disturbers thereof, by such waies and meanes, as either in this present Treaty, or hereafter shall be agreed upon. Neither shall they suffer, that either by themselves, their Subjects and people, or through their default, any thing be done or committed contrary hereunto. IV. That either of the aforesaid Confederates their people and Subjects, may without any safe conduct, licence, general or special freely and securely go and enter by Land, or Sea, in and to the Kingdoms, Countries, Provinces, Lands, Islands, Cities, Vil∣lages, Townes, whether walled or un∣walled, fortified, or otherwise, Ha∣vens and whatsoever Dominions of the
other, and there stay and from thence return or pass through; and in the same places, upon just prices to procure, and have provi∣sion of Victuals, for their use and sustenance and to be used with all friendly Offices. And that either Confederate, their people and subjects may trade and have commerce in all places where commerce hath hither∣to been exercised, in what Goods and Mer∣chandises they please, and may freely im∣port and export the same, paying the customs which are due, and conforming themselves to the Laws and Ordinances of the said Commonwealth and Kingdome, whether the same respect, Trade, or any other right; which presupposed, the people, subjects and inhabitants of both Confederates, shall have and enjoy in each others Kingdomes. Countries, Lands and Dominions, as large and ample privileges, Relaxations, Liber∣ties and immunities, as any other Foreiner at present doth, or hereafter shall enjoy there. V. No Merchants, Captains, and Masters of Ships, Mariners, nor any other per∣sons, Ships, Goods, or Merchandize be∣longing to either Confederate shall upon a∣ny publique, or private account, by virtue of any Edict General or special, within a∣ny the Lands, Havens, Sea-roads, Coasts, or Dominions of the other, for any publick service, or expedition of War, or any other cause, much less for any private use, be fei∣sed, embargued,
arrested, forced by violence or be any way molested or injured, provi∣ded onely such arrests, as are conformable to justice and equity be not hereby prohibi∣ted, so be it they are made according to the ordinary course of Law, and not granted upon private affection, or partiality, but are requisite for the administration of right and justice. VI. In case any of the Ships of either Con∣federate, whether of War, or Merchants, belonging to the Subjects and People of either, be by occasion of Tempests, pursuit of Pyrates and Enemies, or any other ur∣gent necessity constrained to put into each others Havens, Roads or shores they shall be received there with all kindeness and hu∣manity, and enjoy all friendly protection, and be permitted to refresh themselves and procure, at a reasonable price, all things needfull for their sustenance, reparation, or use. Neither shall they be hindred from go∣ing out of the said Ports or Roads, at their pleasure, without paying any customs or duties. Provided they do nothing con∣trary to the Laws, Ordinances and Cu∣stomes of the place, which the said Ships shall enter into or abide in. VII. In like manner, if any Ship or Ships, whether publick or private, belonging to ei∣ther Confederate, their People and Sub∣jects, shall
within any the Coasts or Do∣minions of the other, stick upon the sands, or be forced to lighten their burden, or be wrack'd, or suffer any dammage, all friend∣ly help and relief, shall be given them upon a competent reward. And what ever shall be remaining of the goods thrown overboard or after Shipwrack, or any other damage sustained, shall be kept in safe custody, and restored to the owner, or whom the said Owner shall appoint. VIII. In case the people and subjects on either part, whether they be Merchants, Fac∣tors, or Servants, Masters of Ships, Mariners, or such others, who travel and inhabit within the Dominions of the other, or those who act on their behalf before any Court of Iudicature, for recovery of their Debts, or for other lawful occasions, shall stand in need of the Magistrates help, the same shall be readily, and according to the equity of their Cause, in friendly manner granted them, and Iustice shal be admi∣nistred to them without long and unneces∣sary Delayes. Neither shall they be any way molested upon any pretence in the Dis∣patch of their Affairs, in their Iourneying, Bargaining, and Receiving the Price of their Commodities, but that all Love and Friendship be extended towards them. And it shall be free for them on both sides, in their passage to and again, in each others Coasts, Ships, Havens, and Publique Places, to wear
about them Armes for their proper defence, so be it they give no iust suspition to the Governour or Magi∣strate of the place, of any design against the publique or private peace. But he es∣pecially who behaves and demeans himself soberly and inoffensively, shall be protected from all injury, violence and molestation. IX. The said Confederates, and all and sin∣gular their people and Subjects, may buy and export out of all the Countreys, Do∣minions and Kingdomes of the other, all kinde of Armour and Provision of War, and may safely and freely put in with their Ships, and arrive at each others Ports, Havens and Shores, and there stay, and thence depart, they carrying themselves peaceably, and conformably to the Lawes and Customes of the respective places, and not disturbing the freedome of commerce therein. In like manner the Ships of War shall have free access to the Ports of either, there to stay, and come to anchor, but not in such numbers as shall occasion manifest suspition, without the leave and consent of that Confederate first obtained, to whom the Port belongs, unless compel∣led thereto by tempest, force, or danger of the Sea, in which case they shall signifie to the Governor, or Chief Magistrate of the Place, the cause of their Arrival, and shall continue there no longer then the said Go∣vernor or Chief Magistrate shall permit, Observing alwayes and every where, the
Lawes aforesaid, and such as shall here∣after be agreed upon. X. The Subjects and Inhabitants of the Queen and Kingdome of Sweden, may safe∣ly and freely travel in England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions thereof, and pass through the same by Sea or Land, to any other Nations freely to traffique and have commerce with them in all sorts of merchandize, and to import and export the same. And the people of the said Common∣wealth shall enjoy the same freedome in the Kingdomes, Dominions and Territories, of the Queen and Kingdome of Sweden. Provided, the Lawes, Ordinances, and particular rights of each Nation, concer∣ning Trade and Commerce be observed on both sides. XI. Although in the preceding Articles of this present Treaty, it be forbid to either Confe∣derate to yield any aid or assistance to the E∣nemies of the other; yet it is not to be so understood, as if either Confederate having no War with the Enemies of the other, might not sail to, or traffique with the said Enemies, notwithstanding that the other Confederate be in actual war with them; But it is only provided, That till a more particular agreement be made concerning this matter, no goods called goods of Con∣trabanda, a Catalogue and Specification of which shall be
made within four monethes after the date hereof, shall be carried to the Enemies of each other without peril in case they be taken, of being adjudged lawfull prize without hope of Restitution. XII. But lest such Navigation and Enter∣course of the one Confederate, his People and Subjects by Land or Sea, with o∣ther Nations, during the War of the other Confederate, should redound to the preju∣dice of the said other Confederate. And lest goods of enemies, should pass concealed under the name of friends; for the remo∣val of all suspition and prevention of fraud herein, it is agreed, That all Ships, Waggons, Wares and men, belonging to either Confederate, shall in their passage, have Letters of safe conduct, commonly called Passe ports, and Certificates signed by the Governour, or chief Magistrate of the Province or City, from whence they come, Of which Letters and Certificates such forms shall be observed as shall be mu∣tually concluded upon, within the space of four Moneths, next after the date hereof. And wheresoever any the Merchandize, goods, vessels, or men belonging to either, their people and Subjects, shall be met with either in open Sea, or in any Channel, Ha∣ven, Road, Land, or any other place by the Ships of War, publique or private, or by any the People, Subjects and Inhabi∣tants of the others, or shall happen to be in one place with them, they producing their Letters of safe Conduct and
Certificates aforesaid, shall have nothing further exac∣ted of them, no search made, either of Goods, Vessels or Men, much lesse shall they receive any dammage, injury or mo∣lestation; but shall be suffered to pass on with freedome to pursue their occasions. And if any the people and Subjects of ei∣ther shall do, or commit any thing contra∣ry to the proper sense of this present Arti∣cle, either Confederate shall take care that severe punishment be inflicted on the Offen∣dors, and cause full and speedy satisfac∣tion to be made to the parties wronged, for all Costs and Dammages. XIII. In case it shall hereafter happen, that, during this Amity and Confederation, any of the people or Subjects of either, shall act or attempt any thing against the same or any part thereof, either by Land, Sea, or other Waters, this Amity, Confedera∣tion and Allyance, shall not be thereupon in∣terrupted or broken of, but shall remain and continue still in full force and virtue. Onely in such case the particular persons which have offended, shall be punished, and no others; And that Iustice shall be done and satisfaction made to all persons inju∣red, within twelve Moneths after Demand thereof. And in case the persons so offen∣ding as aforesaid shall not appear and sub∣mit themselves to Iustice, and make satis∣faction within the said Term, the said per∣sons shall be
declared enemies to both States, and their estates, goods and ef∣fects whatsoever, shall be confiscated and employed to a due and full satisfaction for the wrong by them done. And their per∣sons shall be lyable to further punishment when they shall come within the power of either State, as the quality of their of∣fence shall deserve. And that speedy resti∣tution and satisfaction be made for the losse and dammage which either part hath su∣stained from the other, during the War be∣twixt England, and the United Provinces. XIV. This present Treaty and Confederati∣on shall in nothing derogate from any pre∣eminence, right or Dominion of either Con∣federate within any his own Seas, Chan∣nels or Waters, but that they have and re∣tain the same, in as full and ample manner as they have hitherto had, or as of right belongs to them. XV. It being the primary intent of this League and Amity, that each Confederate their people and Subjects might enjoy such freedome of Navigation and Commerce, as is described in the foregoing Articles, within the Baltick, Sound, Northern, Western, and British Seas, Mediterranean and Channel, and other the Seas in Europe; Therefore all sincere endeavour shall be used on both sides by common advise, aid and assistance, that the aforesaid mutual Liberty of
Na∣vigation and commerce, be established, pro∣moted, and as occasion is, defended against all the Disturbers thereof, who shall go a∣bout to interrupt, prohibit, hinder or re∣strain and limit the same to their own will and pleasure, in prejudice of the said Con∣federates. And either part shall with all Willingnesse or readyness, promote the good and prevent the hurt each of other; Sa∣ving the Treaties which either Nation hath made with other Kingdomes, Com∣monwealths and nations. And neither Con∣federate shall hereafter make any League or Agreement in prejudice of this present, with any other People or Nation without the privity and consent of the other, or if any such Agreement be hereafter made, the same shall be reputed null and void, and give place to this present Treaty. But as for the manner of giving aid and assistance each to other for the defence of this League and of the Liberty of Commerce and Na∣vigation, a more particular agreement, as need shall require, shall be made thereupon accommodated to the circumstances of time and other affairs. XVI. For what concerns other Commodities, which Ships of War may enjoy, and the Lawes by which they shall regulate them∣selves when they arrive in each others Ports and Harbours; and for what concerns com∣merce to be exercised in America, as also the advantages of the Herring, and other Fishe∣ries, the execting Staples for Trade, and
other Things and Conditions which shall be found requisite for the better clearing of the foregoing Articles, Resolution shall be had therein according to what shall be a∣greed upon in a distinct and peculiar Trea∣ty or Contract. XVII. Whatever is agreed on in the foregoing Articles shall be in force and vertue from this present time, and be truly observed on both sides by all such as are within each o∣thers Allegiance. And for the further Con∣firmation thereof, shall be subscribed, sign∣ed and ratified by the Protector of the Com∣monwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions therto belonging, in the name of his Highness and the said Com∣monwealth, and by her Majesty of Sweden, under the handwriting and Seals of their said Highness and Majesty, within four Moneths next ensuing the Date of these Presents. FINIS.
