B3134 E301_1 99861067 113195
THE GREAT QVESTION So much now insisted on by Some TOUCHING Scandalous Christians as yet not legally convicted: Whether, or no, They may be lawfully ad∣mitted by the Minister, or communicated with by the People, at the Lords Table? THE AFFIRMATIVE MAINTAINED By way of Answer to a Discourse of Mr. B. Coxe. By Martin Blake B. D. and Ʋ. of B. in Devon. in the behalfe of himselfe, and his Parishioners, whom Mr. B. Coxe hath secretly laboured with, to draw them to the con∣trary Opinion. ROM. 16.17. Now I beseech you, Brethren, marke them which cause divisions and offences contrary to the Doctrine which you have lear∣ned, and avoid them. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Charles Green, at his shop in Ivie Lane, at the signe of the Gun. 1645.
To the Reader. CVrteous Reader, take notice that this Answer to Mr. Coxe hath beene finished at the Presse a∣bove a yeare since, only a small par∣cell of Copy by negligence of the Printer was lost; the Author dwel∣ling farre distant, and the waies so troublesome, it could not sooner bee supplied, and so now it appeares to thy view. God give a blessing to it. Vale.
A Table of the Contents. THe Preface, declaring the occasion of this  Discourse: together with a true Copie of Mr. Coxe his Writing, to which this Answer was fitted. The Answer it self distinguished into severall Chapters,  the summe whereof may be thus reduced. CHAP. I. An examination of the Title, which Mr. C. prefixeth to his discourse: as also his manner of stating the Question, by the way of Proposition, and Expli∣cation. pag. 1. CHAP. II. Of Mr. C. his confidence in his own arguments, toge∣ther with the severall branches of his Assertion: the first whereof concernes the Minister, and the pre∣tended unlawfulnes of his act in admitting scanda∣lous livers (not legally convicted) to the Communion. His first proofe scanned, being 1 Cor. 5.11. p. 8. CHAP. III. An answer to Mr. C. his second proofe, grounded upon 1 Cor. 10.16.17. p. 30. CHAP. IV. Of three other places alleadged by Mr. C. toward the proving of this first part of his assertion, viz. Gal. 5.19.20, 21.] 2 Thess. 3.6.14.] 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5. p. 39.
CHAP. V. Of Mr. C. his foure aggravating circumstances, where∣by to prove the act of the Minister in admitting such persons to the Communion, to be not a sin only, but a very grievous and hatefull sin: With a briefe cen∣sure upon them all. p. 46. CHAP. VI. The second part of Mr. C. his Assertion, affirming it to be unlawfull for the People of God to communi∣cate at the Lords Table with scandalous livers: with a just examination of the places which he brings to prove the same; as namely, Ephes. 5.11. Lev. 19.17. 1 Thess. 5.22. Act. 2.40. 1 Cor. 6.17. p. 60. CHAP. VII. Of Mr. C. his undertaking to answer objections made against his Tenet: With a vindication of the said objections from his exceptions. p. 75. The Conclusion, exhorting Mr. C. to ingenuity and humility for the preservation of the Churches Peace. p. 119 John 7.24. Judge not according to the appearance: but judge righteous judgement. 1 Cor. 11.16. But, if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custome, neither the Churches of God. 2 Cor. 13.11. Live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall he with you. Rom. 14.13. Let us not judge one another any more: but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block or an occasion to fall, in his Brothers way. Hebr. 10 24 25. Let us consider one another, to provok unto love and good works: not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together, as the manner of some is: but exhorting one another, and so much the more, as ye see the day approaching.
The Preface to the Reader. SOmewhat lesse than a yeere since,  The occasi∣on of this Discourse. two of my Parishioners (not un∣justly well reported of by the neighbourhood, as for their mor∣rall honestie, so for their integritie and zeale in matters of Religion) came one evening to my house, and acquainted me with some scruples, which Mr. B. Cox not long before had (at a pri∣vate meeting) assayed to cast into their mindes, especially concerning the promiscuous manner of our communicating at the Lords Table. Some opposition (as they told me) they then made to his discourse: enough (it seemeth) to preserve themselves from being led captive into his opi∣nion. Nevertheles, for their own more ample sa∣tisfaction, and in part also to re-settle the judg∣ments of others, whom Mr. Cox by his words had put into a wavering condition, they entrea∣ted
me to consider of some fit time & place, when and where he and I might freely in their hearing conferre and reason upon these matters. I heard them, and indeed was much grieved at the re∣port of this so unhappy an attempt: the more, because I found such unworthy cariage where I was fairely promised better things. For, though I had formerly understood by good intel∣ligence, that Mr. Cox was far gone in this opini∣on: yet upon some conference with him there∣about (wherein, as it became me and the love I bare him, I did the office of a friend in seeking to reduce him) so plausible were his replies, and his pretended lothnesse to disturbe the mindes of others so guilded over with faire semblances, that I believed not he would ever so farre have vilated, I say not only the laws of Amitie, but of Christian modestie, as thus in a creeping and close way to endevour the undermining both of the Peoples Devotion in frequenting, and his friends comfort in administring this holy Sacra∣ment. But sorrow, if not seconded with some endevour of redresse, is a fruitlesse Passion. And therefore, foreseeing the ill effects which this dealing (if not seasonably prevented) might pro∣duce,
I fell into a discourse with the foresaid Parties touching Mr. Cox his grounds, so farre as their memories did then serve them to repeat the same unto me: and in the end told them, that for the fuller evidencing of the Truth, I would gladly reason with Mr. C. about these his new-taken fancies, whether by word or writing, but rather by writing: first, because (as I con∣ceived) that way of reasoning would be more safe for me, and more satisfactory to them. They liked my motion well, and told me that Mr. Cox had already put his minde in writing, with his name subscribed thereunto, and that this wri∣ting was extant in some hands, from whom per∣adventure they might procure it, or else obtain the like from Mr. Cox himselfe. I wished them so to doe, and withall promised (upon receipt thereof from them) to apply my selfe with all the speed I could to furnish them with an answer thereunto. This is summarily the truth of that which then passed betwixt my foresaid Parishi∣oners and my selfe. Not long after,  A true copy of M. Cox his writing to which this answer was . one of them came againe unto me, and justly, according to his promise) brought me a Copy of Mr. Cox his Tenet with his argu∣ments
annexed thereunto, being written and sub∣scribed with his own hand. And the writing (word for word) was thus. A Thesis or Position concerning the admini∣string and receiving of the Lords Sup∣per, cleared and confirmed by B. C. Preacher of Gods Word. THESIS. HE that administreth the Lords Sup∣per to one that is a fornicator, or co∣vetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a drun∣kard, or an extortioner, doth therein com∣mit a very grievous and hatefull sin: and the children of God must have no fellow∣ship at all with this sin; but reprove it. This is meant onely of such a one, as is known to have been either a fornicator or covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; and hath gi∣ven no sufficient evidence for a judgement of charitie to be satisfied with, of his turning from this wickednes in the exercise of true repentance. The position or Thesis, specially as tou∣ching
the first part of the same, is certainly confirmed by the saying of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 5.11. But now I have written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such a one, no not to eat. Touching the meaning and force of this place, I desire that these ensuing propositi∣ons may be weighed. 1. No man may be admitted to the Lords Supper, unlesse he be called a Brother according to the meaning of the Apostles phrase in this place: for he that is not a Bro∣ther in this sense, doth remaine without, 1 Cor. 5.12. 2. The Apostles meaning in this place is, that it is more tolerable and safe to keep company with fornicators, covetous per∣sons, extortioners, Idolaters, that are out of the Church, than with those that are such wicked ones as are here named, and yet are called brethren. We must farther estrange our selves from these, than from those that
are without. The truth of this will pre∣sently appeare unto you, if you doe but look back to 1 Cor. 5.9, 10. How then may we safely administer the Lords Supper to these; or communicate with them? 3. The word here translated, to keep company, doth properly signifie, to be mingled with. And he that administers the Lords Supper to others, and they also that communicate, are in that action mingled one with another. 4. The meaning of the Apostles charge concerning the sinners here mentioned is, That with such wee should not so much as eate. Doth not the Minister eate at the Lords Table with those to whom he admi∣nisters the Sacrament? Doe not Commu∣nicants there eat and drink with those with whom they doe communicate? and if wee must shun communion with such at a com∣mon table, should we not much more shun to communicate with them at the Lords Table? It was the use of Christians in the Apostles dayes, to have their Love-feasts, e∣ven then when they met together for the
receiving of the Sacrament, as appeares in 1 Cor. 11. They did not then hold it lawfull to receive the Sacrament with those, tou∣ching whom they were charged, no not to eate with them. 5. The Apostle having laid this ground in 1 Cor. 5.11. doth in verse 13. adde this inference; Therefore put away from a∣mong your selves that wicked person: Thereby meaning, not only that the ince∣stuous person should be repelled from the Sacrament, but also that he should be cast out of the Church by the sentence of Ex∣communication. He meant not then, that these offenders should only be shunned in respect of private and common familiarity, but that they should be repelled from the Sacrament, and that their Communion at the Lords Table should be shunned. That the force of this which hath been spoken, may yet more clearly appear, con∣sider what the Apostle saith concerning the Sacrament in 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing which we blesse, is it not the Com∣munion of the blood of Christ? The bread
which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? For, we being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread. This text assures us of the truth of these Propositions. 1. True believers rightly receiving this holy Sacrament, are thereby assured of their partaking of the benefits of Christs death. 2. All they that doe outwardly receive this Sacrament, doe therein make an out∣ward profession of receiving Christ crucifi∣ed, and partaking of the benefits of Christs death. 3. This Sacrament doth teach and assure all true believing communicants, that they being many persons, are yet one mystcall body, because they are all partakers o one and the same Jesus Christ, of whose body the bread in this Sacrament is an ordained token and pledge. 4. They that joyn together in outward receiving of this Sacrament, doe both joyn together in the profession of the same faith in Christ, and also doe professe themselves to be (in the judgement of charity, which they
now mutually professe concerning each o∣ther) fellow members of the same mysticall body, as being all fed with the same spiri∣tuall food. Judge then with what good conscience a Minister may give this Sacrament to those with whom, for their open wickednesse, we are charged not to be mingled; yea, not so much as to eat with them? consider also with what comfort a Christian may com∣municate with such. Now, howsoever in my Thesis and in 1 Cor. 5.11. there is expresse mention made onely of him that is a fornicatour, or covetous, or an Idolater, or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner; yet what is there expresly said of these, is also to be understood of every other that is called a Brother, and yet is known to live under the reign of any other like sin. For the truth and soundnes of this, see and consider these places; Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. 2 Thess. 3.6.14. 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Whereas I say of the evill that I have re∣proved, not only that it is a sinne, but also a
very grievous and hatefull sin; that I may not seem to charge it too heavily, consider, 1. That these persons thus admitted by the Minister to the receiving of the Sacra∣ment, and outwardly joyned with by the rest of the Communicants, are by this means hardned in their security and cursed pre∣sumption: and thus the Devill is exceeding∣ly aided to carry them easily to Hell. And whatsoever fig-leaves we now make use of to cover this shamefull evill, their blood will crie loud against us at the day of judge∣ment. 2. That these persons thus communica∣ting must needs abuse Gods ordinance in a high degree, thereby most fearfully increa∣sing both their own sin, and their damnati∣on hereafter. 3. That this admitting of such persons to the Sacrament makes the whole lumpe to be sowred with their leaven, 1 Cor. 5.6. 4. That this admitting of such persons to the Sacrament, and communicating with them, makes their wickednesse to redound
to the shame and dishonour of the Faith and Religion which we professe. I shall not need now to insist on any far∣ther proofe of the latter part of my Thesis, viz. The children of God must have no fellowship at all with this sin, but reprove it. But only to presse the consideration of these places. Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull works of darknes, but rather reprove them, Ephes. 5.11. Thou shalt in any wife rebuke thy neighbour, and not suffer sin upon him, Levit. 19.17. Abstain from all appearance of evill, 1 Thess. 5.22. To which you may adde, Act. 2.40. Save your selves from this untoward generation. And 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing. Against the application of this last place, it will be objected, that it is to be understood of se∣paration from wicked ones that are yet without. But then let it be remembred, that we must estrange our selves more from knowne wicked persons that would seeme to be within, than from open wicked per∣sons
that are manifestly without. For, so much we have learned from 1 Cor. 5.9.10.11. Whereas in publike a filly objection hath been made from 1 Cor. 11.29. let it be considered, 1. That the Apostle speakes that with an intended application to the Corinthi∣ans, who received the Sacrament unwor∣thily (that is, after an unmeet and irreve∣rent manner) only in a measure, not being under the reigne of this sin, as the unrege∣nerate are. The word there translated [damnation] doth signifie only judgment: and is there to be understood only of such judgements, as God layd upon the Corin∣thians for their correction in that respect. This the verses there following doe make manifest. 2. That this inference,—He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drink∣eth judgement to himselfe, Therefore his sin cannot hurt any other,—Or, Therefore no man else ought to restraine him from his sin,—Or, Therefore no man else needeth
to refuse to communicate with him. That this inference, I say, is so alogicall, false, and senselesse, as that a man which regards his credit, will be ashamed to owne it. It is every mans duty to keep himselfe unspot∣ted from the world, Jam. 1.27. Doth it therefore follow, that a man is not bound to regard his Brother? or, that a Christian needs not to turne away from those that deny the power of godlines? Who will stick to say, that Achan by his sin did draw down judgment upon himselfe? will any man of understanding conceive such a say∣ing to implie, that his sin did hurt no body but himselfe? As touching those many that were weak and sickly among the Corinthians, and those many among them that were smitten with death; doth the Text implie, that none of these felt this affliction for their sinfull fellowship with the sin of others that did communicate unworthily? When the Apostle saith, He that eateth and drink∣eth unworthily, eateth and drinketh judge∣ment to himselfe; his meaning is plainly
this; He draws misery upon himselfe by his own sin in communicating unworthily. If it be farther objected, that the Apo∣stle doth not here give order for the re∣pelling of any from the Communion, or for refusing to communicate with them: It is answered, That the persons, touching whom he now speakes, were either indeed, or at the least in the Churches judgement of charitie, in some measure fit for the re∣ceiving of the Sacrament, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. Touching wicked persons, appearing to be such, he had already taken order in chap. 5. and needed not now to repeat it again. Whereas there hath been also some nib∣ling at these words of the Apostle, Let a man examine himselfe. Consider; 1. That the emphasis there lyes, not in the word, Himselfe; but in the verb, examine. 2. That no man in his right wits will from thence inferre, that a man should not examine those of his own charge. 3. That our present question is not concerning persons, whose unfitnes is to be
sifted out by examination; but concerning persons, whose unfitnes and wickednes doth already manifestly appeare. Whereas a like poore objection hath been publikely made from Mat. 22.11.12. For answer thereto, consider, That by per∣sons called, spoken of in vers. 14. of that chapter, are meant such persons, as have not only been invited to faith and repen∣tance by the preaching of the Gospel, but also in outward profession have seemed to answer that call. Accordingly, by the man not having on a wedding garment, are meant such as in Gods sight were found to come short both of sanctification and justi∣fication, notwithstanding their faire out∣ward profession by which they had decei∣ved the eyes of men. What is this to the admitting of open wicked persons to the Communion, or communicating with them? Whereas it is farther objected by some well-meaning Christians, deceived by the error of their own judgement, and by the false suggestion of others, That it is their
duty to receive the Sacrament; and they cannot be perswaded, that by the perfor∣ming of their required duty, they should make themselves guilty of hardning others in their sin, or of any such like offence a∣gainst God: To this I answer, That men must take heed that they performe requi∣red duties in the right order and manner, not transgressing the rule of Gods word in the pretended performance of a duty. Otherwise, they will be found not so much to prforme a duty, as to provoke God to anger by a great sin. It was the duty of David to bring the Ark to Jerusalem: yet because the Ark was then set upon a cart, and not borne by the Priests, the Lord was provoked to anger; see 1 Chron. 15.13. It was the duty of the Jewes, in the dayes of Zerubbabel, to build the Temple: yet might they not suffer the Samaritanes to build with them; Ezra 4.2.3. It was the duty of the Jewes to eat the Passeover: yet might the not eat it in Babylon, though they were enforced to tarry there 70 yeers, because their eating the Passeover there
would not have been according to the rule of Gods word. It was the dutie of the Priests to offer Sacrifices: yet they that offered Sacrifice, not in the Temple at Je∣rusalem, but on the High-places, did in so doing sinne greatly against the Lord. Though it were the dutie of all the Isra∣elites to eate the Passeover▪ yet might they not eate the same, eith  thr own un∣cleanesse, or with  were uncir∣cumcised, or uncleane. So, though it be the dutie of Christians to receive the Sacrament, viz. when they may doe the same in a right manner and order: yet it doth not follow, that they may safely re∣ceive the same with those, touching whom they are charged, no not so much as to eat with them. If any shall be pleased to own any other Objections against my Thesis or any part of the same, he shall, God willing, speedi∣ly receive a satisfactorie answer thereunto. But I would now desire, not to be put off with meer objections: but either to have a punctuall and cleer Answer to the ground
that I have now layd, and to the severall parts of the same; or, if the same shall be found unanswerable (as indeed it is) then to have the truth thereof ingenuously acknowledged So I rest Haec scripsi April. 6. 1642. A true lover of the Truth, and sincerely set for the Defence of the same, BENJAMIN COXE. This is really and entirely that whole dis∣course, which by the foresaid partie was brought unto me, subscribed with Mr. Coxe his own hand: and I have been the more care∣full thus to transcribe it, without any either Addition, Diminution, or Alteration, first for the Readers sake, that, having all under one view, he might be the more enabled to judge be∣twixt us; secondly for M•. Coxe his sake, that he may see himselfe to be fairely dealt with, and not have any just cause to complaine of wrong in this regard. This writing I received the very next day after the date thereof, and ac∣cordingly,
as I could gaine time from my con∣stant weekly employments otherwayes (which they that know me and the place I live in will readily acknowledge are enough for one man) I applyed my selfe to give as speedy and as sa∣tisfactorie an Answer thereunto, as my weak∣nesse was able: hoping, that in the mean time (till the cause betwixt us might be farther tri∣ed) Mr Coxe in modesty would have desisted from his unpeaceable proceedings. But, my Charity in this also was deceived. For, besides that he went on still in a private way to adde unto the number of his Disciples, he was now come to that excesse of boldnesse, that openly in the Pulpit (where he could finde admittance) he durst proclaime and venditate his fancies to whole Congregations; and that, not in this point onely, but in sundry others of no lesse con∣cernment to the Churches Peace. In a word, by his demeanour now he seemed such a one, as had given himselfe over to the strength of his own misguided and deluded passions I must confesse, the report of these exorbitancies did at once work in me both indignation and compassi∣on. The one, with respect unto the things:
the other, out of well-wishing to the man. And truly, this was it that moved me (while I was meditating an Answer to his Thesis) to dis∣burthen my selfe sometimes in such a mixture of expression, as the Answer it selfe declares. Wherein (yet) if I have said ought, either for matter or manner, which (in a just constructi∣on of my words) may not beseem the cause and him, I shall (upon due notice thereof given un∣to me) no sooner see my error, than retract it. It is not needfull I should say more, and I hold it not sitting to say lesse. Well then, that I may set a period to this Proëme. Thou mayest be pleased, good Rea∣der, to understand, that as I was drawn on to this task by the motion and desire of my Pari∣shioners, so for their sakes mainly I undertooke it, that they might be provided with some de∣ence against these dangerous assaults. And accordingly, having done in it what I judged needfull for the time, I called some five or sixe of them to take a copy of my Answer, and desi∣red them that they would communicate it to such of their neighbours, as they thought in danger of seduction. After this, I caused ano∣ther
copy thereof to be delivered into Mr. C. his own hands, as an answer not only from my self, but in the behalf also of divers my good friends, whom Mr. Coxe had laboured to seduce. Hee received it, as with some scorn, so with a great deale of impatience, and in that mood threat∣ned (superciliously enough) a very quick re∣ply. But ever since, even from July the 5th 1642. having waited his leasure, and some∣times also called on him to make some perfor∣mance one way or other, it hath pleased him to hold me in suspence, without doing any thing in that kinde. I say, in that kinde; for other∣wise, as he could finde meanes, he hath been but too active in his endevours to gaine a party to himselfe: which underhand dealing, how inconsistent it is with an ingenuous disposition, let the impartiall Reader judge. Meane while, because those few Copies, which I had caused to be transcribed and sent abroad, were indeed too few to prevent that mischiefe which I saw was comming on, I judged it very reasonable that the result of my endevours for the common good should be made more common. And so, chiefely for that end, and in part also to avod
the tediousnesse of much writing (which my daily attendance upon other things will not al∣low) I have so farre yeelded to the importu∣nitie of my friends as to send it forth into more publike view. God Almighty so blesse it in the desired issue, that his People may there∣hence reape some answerable satisfaction! and even now, in these distracted and sad times, so enlighten our minds, and sway our hearts, that all humor of contention laid aside, both in this and every other thing, we may with all sinceri∣tie apply our selves, as to learne and love his Truth, so to regaine and bring back his Peace, that it may dwell among us! And let all, that beare good will to Sion, say, Amen.
An Answer to Mr. B. C. his Thesis, about the refusall of scandalous Christians (as yet unconvicted) at the Lords Table. By M. B. Vicar of Barum, in the behalf of himself and his Parishio∣ners, whom Mr. C. had secretly laboured with, to draw them into his opinion. CHAP. I. An Examination of the Title, which Mr. C. prefix∣eth to his Discourse: as also his manner of sta∣ting the Question, by way of Proposition and Ex∣plication. SECT. I. THE first thing that I meet with in this Paper, is the Title. You say, it is A Thesis or Position, touching the administring and receiving of the Lords Supper. A Title too generall for your Text. For, the administring and receiving of the Lords Supper extendeth a great
deale farther than you either mention or meane in this Discourse. And therefore (in discretion) you might well have restrained it to the proper subject, about which the controversie is. But, to make a∣mends for this error, you forthwith adde, and so I will take it as a promise from you, that you will both cleare it and confirme it. The one (I suppose) to our capacities: the other, to our beliefe. 'Tis well: but then, I pray, observe your promise, least for want of clearing, your Thesis be as full of confusion as the Title; and through default of confirmation, we be occasioned rather to pitty your mistakes, than to embrace your opinions. But that which in this Title most amuseth me, is, that B. C. or (in plaine english) M. Benjamin Coxe (for so the subscription to this Paper tels me) should be the Author of this Position. Mr. Coxe is a man, whom I have long known, and whom (for his good parts) I thought I had deservedly esteemed, as both judicious and ingenuous: and consequently, could not easily have believed, that either upon so weak grounds he would have receded from his own station in the Church; or by his so secret conferences and wri∣tings (privily spread among the people) would have gone about to entangle the tender-hearted, e∣specially under the charge of his antient wel-wish∣ing & familiar Friend; I say not only without his no∣tice, but even against an outward plausible and fair-seeming carriage to the contrary; that so, after he had abandoned his own lawfull Flock, he might surreptitiously gather to himselfe another Congre∣gation
(exempt and independent) out of another mans Cure. Surely, this course was neither friend∣ly, nor ministeriall, nor beseeming a Preacher of Gods Word (which is now the only Title you assume unto your selfe; for, a Minister at large, viz. in all the branches of that holy Office, as in use with us, you refuse to be, as if it were Babylonish: look you to it, for so the voice is gone out) much lesse doth it become such a one, as, in the close of all you sub∣scribe your selfe, A true Lover of the Truth, and sin∣cerely set for the defence of the same. SECT. II. THE next thing that comes in veiw, is, the Thesis it selfe: which you propound in these terms. He that administreth the Lords Supper to one that is a Fornicatour, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a drunkard, or an Extortioner, doth there∣in commit a very grievous and hatefull sinne; and the Children of God must have no fellowship at all with this sinne, but reprove it. In which words, the subject matter, where-about your Position turns, is a wick∣ed liver with respect to any the particular sinnes by you here named: which indeed are bad enough, and such as doe render the party that is tainted with them deservedly odious in the sight of God and Man. The enumeration of these (as I finde after∣wards) you take out of 1 Cor. 5.11. where they are all reckoned up as you repeate them: of which, and what you inferre thence, I shall consider more
at large in the due place. Mean while, as touching a man that is openly scandalous in regard of all or any of these evils, you resolutely tell us for the pre∣sent, that neither the Minister may admit him to the Lords Supper, nor the Children of God com∣municate with him therein: or, if they doe, they shall both draw sin upon themselves. The Mini∣ster, by a personall commission of his own, for he shall therein commit a very grievous and hatefull sin. The Congregation, by a necessary and unavoidable association or fellowship in sinne, either with the Mi∣nister admitting, or the Party admitted, or both; which the Children of God should be so far from, that they should reprove it rather. I thinke, I have rightly guessed at your meaning. If I have not, the fault is yours: especially in the last clause of your Thesis, wherein your expression is so confused and involved, that I can but guesse at your intenti∣on. But, in the next words you will give us some farther light. SECT. III. WEll then, the third thing that occurs, is, your Explanation of the Thesis. And here, because (before) you had indefinitely pronounced, that neither a Fornicatour, nor Covetous▪ nor an Ido∣later, nor a Railer, nor a Drunkard, nor an Extortio∣ner, should be either admitted by the Minister, or com∣municated with by the godly, in the celebration of the Lords Supper: now, to prevent mistakes, you tell
us, that this is meant of such a one, as is 1. known to have been wicked in any of these kindes; and 2. hath given no sufficient evidence for a judgement of Charity to be satisfied with of his turning from this wickednes in the exercise of true Repentance. Answ. Perad∣venture you may thinke now, that you have said well, and said all, towards the cleering and stating of this question: but you come short in both. For, First, to let passe the antecedent part of this limi∣tation, the other thing which you adde, (though concurring with the former) is not here of so great validity, as to make a man repellable from the Communion. Suppose a man to have been wicked, and to have been known for such (for so you speake in the preterperfect tense:) yet unlesse we know him to be such also for the present, his not having given a sufficient evidence (as you mean it) for a judgement of Charitie to be satisfied with of his turning from this wickednesse, is a weake ground, whereupon to re∣fuse him at the Lords Table. Peradventure he hath repented, though I know it not: and in charity I may hope, that he, being a reasonable Creature, and hearing himselfe so often and so severely admonish∣ed, not to presume to meddle with these holy things, unlesse he be repentant, hath taken to him∣selfe a right Christian resolution in that regard. In this case, whatsoever he hath been in former times, yet if he doe not give us some positive and certaine evidence against his Repentance, the privative (which you insist on) is not ground enough for our rejection of him. Towards our satisfaction
in this point (if indeed we will be satisfied) our duty is in private to deale seriously with the party; and so, having used all the meanes in our power (thus far) to win him, to make our charitable try∣all and construction of him. It may be, you will say, this course is not denied, but intentionally supposed and granted by you in your assertion. When I heare you say it, I will believe you: but then, why did you not in plaine words so expresse your selfe? especially, seeing by promise you had engaged your selfe to deale cleerly. SECT. IV. BUT secondly, for discourse sake let it be ad∣mitted, that these things (thus presupposed) doe make a man (potentially) repellable from the Communion: yet, here-hence it doth not follow, that presently, without any farther expectation of some judiciall intervening act of lawfull Authority, the said party should actually be repelled. Though such a man be notorious enough in Fact, and so in himselfe unworthy to communicate: yet, if he be not thereof legally convicted, and so made notori∣ous in Law too, & so consequently cast out or sus∣pended for that unworthines, I see not how (by the Word of God) either the Minister may repell him, or the rest refuse to communicate with him, if he shall offer himself unto the Sacrament. Such a man, till he be convicted and cast out by lawfull censure, remaines still an actuall member of the visible
Church, and so (by virtue of his Baptismall professi∣on and admission to the outward Covenant, as it hath been well observed by some) retaineth his right still to this Sacrament, in regard of us. To this Sacrament, I say, though not as to a seal exhibi∣ting grace,M. Rob. Abbot in triall of Church-forsakers. sect. 11. passim. whereby he may be fed unto eternall Life (for there is a bar that lyes between God and him by reason of his impurity and unbeliefe:) yet to it, as to a signe offering grace (on Gods part) to them that will receive it on Gods conditions, and accor∣ding to their Profession. Well then, by this time (I hope) it doth appeare, that, as in the former respect you said nor well, so neither in this latter respect have you reflected up∣on all, that was meet to be considered by us in this Controversie. Though you have said somewhat to serve your own turn, yet you have concealed a great part of that, which was needfull to the cleering of the Truth. And so you come short still of your Promise.
CHAP. II. Of Mr. C. his confidence in his own arguments, to∣gether with the severall branches of his assertion: the first whereof concernes the Minister, and the pretended unlawfulnesse of his act, in admitting scandalous Livers (not legally convicted) to the Communion. His first proofe scanned, being 1 Cor. 5.11. SECT. I. HAving thus far proceeded in the exami∣nation of your Thesis, and the Expla∣nation thereunto annexed: I come now to scan your confirmation of the same; which, if your own words may be taken for it, is already boasted to be indeed un∣answerable. I doe not faine this; it is your own confident expression in the close of your discourse. And truly, if in the issue it so prove, it is most agree∣able both to Reason and Religion, that (as you there adde) the truth of your Position, and the ground which you have layd (in way of confirmation) should be ingenuously acknowledged. For my part, I am al∣together of that mind, as one that hath learned from S. Paul,1 Cor. 14.32.33. that the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets: and, that God is not the Author
of confusion, but of peace, in all the Churches of the Saints. How you may stand affected to this rule of modesty, I will not censure: but your words (to my seeming) doe imply a resolution in your self of no∣thing lesse. For, though you cannot be ignorant, that this hath been a controverted point, wherein many both judicious and gracious men have em∣braced contrary opinions: yet you, in the height of your confidence (as a man, now altogether on a sudden, superlatively illuminated above your Bre∣thren) doe seem to judge of your selfe, as if, even here in this so questionable a subject, you were in∣fallible. And hence it is (as I suppose) that you have not only pronounced the ground which you have here laid, to be unanswerable; but also made a Challenge to all Opponents (none excepted) that if any shall be pleased to own any other objections (sc: than you have now reflected on) against your Thesis, or any part of the same, he shall God willing speedily re∣ceive a satisfactorie answer thereunto. Bravely crow∣ed, even with clapping of the wings. He shal not on∣ly receive an answer, but that answer shall be satis∣factory; and for this too he shall not waite long, but he shall have it speedily. I must confesse, I have no great leasure to write much in points of controver∣sie: my constant weekly employments otherwaies doe forbid it. Howbeit, because, by your unkinde and clancular attempts to draw my Flock into a dangerous Schisme, you have so much provoked me, I shall (by Gods help) notwithstanding your big words adventure to make some tryall of your strength.
SECT. II. TWo things you have undertaken to demon∣strate as matter of duty in this point: one is, concerning the Minister his not admitting; ano∣ther is, concerning the People their not communi∣cating with wicked livers at the Lords Table. And of both these you will give us a sufficient proofe. First then, as touching the Minister, you say, If he admit such persons to the Lords Supper, he com∣mits a sinne: and that also, a very grievous and hate∣full sinne. A sin, because he goes against the Com∣mand of God. A very grievous and hatefull sinne, because of the aggravating circumstances, and dan∣gerous consequences, which you will inferre there∣upon. That it is against the command of God, you assay to prove out of 1 Cor. 5.11. a place, by which your Thesis or Position is most certainly confirmed, specially as touching the first part of the same. Answ. If as touching the first part, which concerns the act of the Minister in repelling: why not also, as touching the second part, which concerns the act of the People in refusing such wicked company at the Communion? The Apostle directs his charge to both, even to the one, as well as to the other: you cannot fairly de∣ny that. And from this place likewise you after∣wards reason, as if you would willingly have it to conclude for both. This off and on bewrayes a shrewd distrust in you of obtaining your purpose
from this place. But, let us see the words. I have written to you, saith the Apostle, not to keepe company: If any man who is called a Brother, be a Fornicatour, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner: with such a one, no, not to eat. SECT. III. BEfore I come to consider what you infer from hence, there is one thing which I am willing to premise: and that is touching the twofold reading of the middle clause in this Text. You know,Pro prima lect. vide Irenaeum l. 4. cap. 46. Origen. ho∣mil. 5. super Levit. & Cyprian. de Aleatoribus apud Esti∣um. Ambros. de poenit. lib. 1 ca. ult. Au∣gust homil. 50. & contr. Parmen. l. 3. c. 2. Pho∣tium apud Bezam. Oc∣cumer. in locum. that word for word (according to the Originall) it runs thus. If any Brother called either a Fornicator, or Co∣vetous, &c. where, as good Expositors have obser∣ved, the participle [called] is set down in the Greek without a verb, and may indifferently be referred, either to the word [Brother] which goes afore, or to the words [Fornicatour, &c.] which follow af∣ter. And so, from this shortnesse of expression, it is come to passe, that the Text hath been read two divers wayes: Some, & among them S. Augustine is neither last nor least, doe read them thus. If any man, that is a Brother, be called a Fornicatour, &c. Others, whom our Translations doe more follow, render them thus: If any man, that is called a Bro∣ther, be a Fornicatour, &c. If after the first way you read the words, then the meaning is, that if a man who is a Brother [.i. a Christan by profession, and so a member of the visible Church] be called [.i. defamed and branded, and by a judiciall act of law∣full
authority pronounced and declared] either a Fornicator,. or a Covetous, &c. [.i. such a one, not in fact only, but in obstinacy too, and so be justly for his wickednes either ejected or suspended] then according to S. Pauls charge, we may not keep company or be mingled with, nay, we may not eat with such a one. And, if thus the Apostle be to be understood, then the controversie betwixt us is at an end: for, who in his right wits ever thought, that a man legally convicted, and thereupon ex∣communicated or suspended, ought not (while he so remains) to be repelled, I say not only from our private consortship and familiaritie, but from com∣municating with us at the Lords Table? But se∣condly, if we read the words after the other way, then the meaning of them is this: That, if any man, who is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Cove∣tous, &c. [.i. be such a one in himselfe, and perad∣venture also be known for such to many others, but as yet is not convicted or censured by authority, as afore] then our duty is, so farre as we may, and as it lyeth in our power, to estrange our selves from him, not keeping company, no, nor so much as eat∣ing with him. This reading (it seems) you rather follow, and I will not now contend with you about it: though (as I have intimated) the former hath many very grave and great abettors, both antient and modern. But then, reading the text this way, it is meet wee understand it in the Apostles owne sense, which, in the judgement of more than a few both wise & learned in their generations, doth pro∣perly
and directly require no more than a forbea∣rance of sociall familiarity with such a Brother in way of private conversation, untill some farther in∣tervening act of lawfull authority shall enable to do more: Thus they. But you are of another minde: how truly and justly, let us see. SECT. IV. UPon allegation of this Text, I looked that you should have brought some solid and con∣vincing argument, towards the strengthening of your opinion: especially, because you tell us in the preface to it, that your Thesis is thereby certainly confirmed. And indeed, me thinkes, a man that is a Schollar and a Logician, should be ashamed to al∣ledge a place of Scripture, without so much as assay∣ing to draw from thence any formall argument at all, whereby to justifie the point for which it is alledged. At least, if you would have done any thing, you should have done it so, that your Reader might fairely have seen your scope and meaning, and not be left unto his owne conjectures, as here I am. For, I professe ingenuously, that in the reading of your Commentary upon this Text, I have been more puzled to finde out what you would have me answer to, than to answer what I finde. But your Will must be a Law, and (of necessity) I must follow you in your own track: for so you say, you would have a punctuall and cleere answer to the ground that you have laid, and to the severall parts of the same.
Well, be it so: let us heare (then) what you say. SECT. V. FOr our better understanding of the meaning and force of this place, you lay before us certain Pro∣positions, together with some short confused snatches here and there annexed to the same: and concerning them you tell us your desire is, that they may be weighed. I will not stick to gratifie you in this thing, but shall weigh them severally, as they come, and as I can. Propound therefore. Proposit. 1. No man may be admitted to the Lords Supper, unlesse he be called a Brother, according to the meaning of the Apostles phrase in this place: for he that is not a Brother in this sense, doth remain without, 1 Cor. 5.12. Answ. A proposition not denied by any that I know: though yet, I see not how you can deduce it from this Text, so immediately and properly, as you pretend. For, S. Paul here hath no particular discourse of the Lords Supper. SECT. VI. PRoposit. 2. The Apostles meaning in this place is, that it is more tolerable and safe to keep com∣pany with Fornicatours, &c. that are out of the Church, than with those that are such wicked ones as are here na∣med, & yet are called Brethren. We must farther estrange our selves from these, than from those that are without. The truth of this will presently appeare, if we doe but
looke back to 1 Cor. 5 9.10. Answ. This Poposi∣tion, in S. Pauls sense, is undeniable. For, in point of private consortship and familiar conversation (which is the thing in this place aimed at) the scrip∣ture is plaine, wee must more withdraw our selves from such a Brother, than from a man that is without. Compare this Text with that other in 1. Cor. 10.27. and you shall find, that the same Au∣thority, which forbids us in such manner as hath been declared to eat with a scandalous misliving Christian, doth yet on the other side allow us (be∣ing first invited) to sit at feast with an unbelieving Pagan. And hereof our Divines doe render many reasons, which I am not now at leasure to relate: So then, if in this sense you understand the propo∣sition, I have nothing to oppose. But, it seemeth by that which follows, you have another meaning, and would willingly extend the proposition fur∣ther, than the Apostle did intend, even to eating and drinking in the Sacrament; for, thus you in∣ferre: How then may we safely admin ster the Lords Supper to these, or communicate with them? meaning scandalous Brethren. I have thought much upon the Logick of this, How then? And let any man judg, whether you have spoken herein cleerly, as you pro∣mised in the Title. It may be your meaning is (if I doe rightly riddle) that seeing an Alien may not be admitted to this Sacrament, therefore a scanda∣lous Brother (from whom we must more estrange our selves than from an Alien) may much lesse be admitted. The argument (as I conceive) may be thus formed.
A man, from whom we must more estrange our selves than from an Alien, may not be admini∣stred to, or communicated with, at the Lords Table. But a scandalous Brother (though as yet not censu∣red by lawfull Authority) is a man from whom we must estrange our selves more than from an A∣lien. Ergo, A scandalous Brother (though as yet not cen∣sured by lawfull Authority) may not be admi∣nistred to, or communicated with, at the Lords Table. A starke fallacie, à dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter: which also your selfe will quickly see, if I should counterbuffe you with another such like Syllogisme; as thus— He that hath denyed the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, may not be admitted as a Preacher in the Congregation. But, a man that provides not for his own, and speci∣ally for those of his own house, hath denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel. 1 Tim. 5.8. Ergo, a man that provides not for his own, and spe∣cially for those of his own house, may not be ad∣mitted as a Preacher in the Congregation. Or thus: They who are of that sort from whom we must turn away, may not be administred to, or com∣municated with, in the Lords Supper. But, such as creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sinnes, &c. are of that sort
from whom we must turne away, 2 Tim. 3.5, 6. Ergo, such as creep into houses and lead cative silly women laden with sins, &c. may not be admini∣stred to, or cōmunicated with, in the Lords supper. I suppose, you will not allow me thus to reason: and peradventure it may touch too neer. But why then doe you applaud such kinde of reasoning in your selfe, as if it were unanswerable? But, a little farther yet to shew the vanitie of your argument, let us consider the ambiguity of your middle term, viz. the estranging of our selves from a Brother more than from an Alien. To estrange our selves from another man, is to withhold from him our wonted fellow∣ship and society, either in the things of men, or in the things of God: that is, either more privately, in our sociall and civill conversations; or more publikely, in our solemne and sacred conventions, particularly at the Lords Table. Now, if you take the word at large, as it includes both these, I grant your major, but deny your minor; for, a Brother that is not le∣gally convicted, & so either cast out, or (at the least) suspended, by an act of lawfull Authoritie, may not be to me as an Heathen man or a Publican (as many doe interpret that place, Mat. 18.17.) much lesse in your sense must I estrange my selfe from him more than from an Alien. But, if you take the word more restrainedly, as the Apostle doth, importing only an estrangement in respect of private consortship and familiar conversation: then, I grant your minor, but your major is miserably false, and so (while you play thus with ambiguities) your Syllogisme too,
as consisting of foure termes; which is against the rules of Logick. I say no more. SECT. VII. PRoposit. 3. The word here translated [to keepe company] doth properly signifie to bee mingled with. Answ. This explicatorie Proposition is not controverted by me: I embrace it as farre forth as you either doe or can, if herein you will keep your selfe to the scope and meaning of the Apostle. But, I perceive you wander. For, thus you adde. And he that administers the Lords Supper to others, and they also that communicate, are in that action one mingled with another. Answ. It is true: they are mingled, in regard of the common place wherein they meet, and in regard of the common employment about which they meet; though yet, in their manner of performance, and in their acceptance with God while they so performe, they are farre asunder. But, I beseech you, tell me, is this mingling at the Lords Table the same with that which the Apostle disal∣loweth in this Text? Is there no difference (think you) between the one and the other? Or, from the prohibition of the one, can your Logick conse∣quentially infer a cleer and certain inhibition of the other? Your argument from this criticisme (if I rightly apprehend you) must be to this purpose. He, who forbiddeth us to be mingled with a scanda∣lous Brother in common conversation, doth also
inhibit us to be in any sort mingled with such a one at the holy Communion. But, S. Paul in this place forbiddeth us to be min∣gled with a scandalous Brother in common con∣versation. Ergo, S. Paul in this place doth also inhibit us to be in any sort mingled with such a one at the holy Communion. The strength of this Reason, if there be any in it, must depend upon the truth of your major: which yet is wholy thereof destitute, nor doe you goe a∣bout to prove it, but leave it (naked as it is) to our credulitie. Wherein yet, upon your bare word, we shall not be so easie: it being altogether without ground from the Text, and attended with great ab∣surditie in it selfe. First, it is without ground from the Text. For (as I have said) the mingling which the Apostle here forbiddeth, is a thing farre different from that which you inferre. The Apostle speaketh of such a mingling as is in private society, by way of fami∣liar conversation: you, of that which is in publike assembly, and by the way of Church-fellowship in the outward acts and services of Religion. The dif∣ference betwixt these two you cannot but acknow∣ledge, the one being in it selfe a matter Arbitrary and in our power to be either vouchsafed or with∣holden, as a right informed conscience shall suggest, without expecting any farther warrant from the command of Authoritie so to doe: the other be∣ing not dispensable by us, but lying upon us as a
necessary duty, as that whereto we stand obliged by the command of God, where ever we may have the liberty of observing the same, without adulte∣rating his prescribed service in the substance thereof. Now, in regard of the former, it is most just and requisite (and so the Apostle doth declare) that if any man, that is called a Brother, be scandalously e∣vill, we may, nay, we must withdraw our selves from him in respect of sociall intimacie. According to this sense, we may not so much as shew him a friendly countenance: no, though (perhaps) ei∣ther through default in Governours, to whom cen∣sures belong, or through defect of others, whose dutie is to informe; the Discipline of the Church doe sleep towards him. This exclusion from pri∣vate familiarity and consortship, though in proprie∣ty of speech it be not that which we call Excommu∣nication: yet (as a late learned man hath observed) in a large sense it may be stiled by some such name, because even familiar society with Gods Children in private life,D. Slater alicu in Episl. ad . is indeed one branch of the Communi∣on of Saints. And who so (according to this sense) doth not withdraw himself from wicked company, doth in that his omission sin against God, against the Party, against himselfe. Against God, by trans∣gressing his command. Against the Party, by hard∣ning him in his lewd behaviour. Against himself, by blemishing his own fame, by partaking with the sin∣ner in the guilt of his sin, and by hazarding his own oule to the danger of infection; for (as in this chap∣ter at the sixth verse we read) a little leaven leave∣neth
the whole lump. All this is most true. But then, from hence to inferre (as you doe) that therefore also (out of a dislike to their company, though as yet not censur'd and removed by just au∣thority) we must, for their presence sake, forbeare the performance of publike holy duties, and such as appertain to the worship of God, in the Congrega∣tion (which are things enjoyned, and not in our power either to neglect of dispense with) is a matter altogether from the minde and meaning of S. Paul. For, as the same man hath observed, though in evill we may not hold society with any, no, not with the best, but reprove them rather, Ephes. 5.7.11. yet in goodnesse, specially in sacris, even in the outward prescribed service of God, we must hold a kinde of society even with the worst men, rather than neg∣lect the service it selfe. Secondly, it goes attended with great absurdity. For, if this inference be good; The Apostle in some cases, and in things within our power, forbids all needlesse intermingling of our selves with scan∣dalous Brethren; Ergo, (seeing he that adminstreth the Lords Supper to others and they also that communi∣cate, are in that action mingled one with another) it is unlawfull to communicate in the Lords Supper with any such: I say, if this inference be good, why may not I by the same reason conclude, that the children of God must withdraw themselve from all promis∣cuous and mixt assemblies, in respect of all the other parts and branches of Gods publike service, as namely, the Hearing of the Word and Prayer▪ as
well as in respect of this holy Sacrament? The rea∣son you insist on is the same: for in our hearing we are mingled, and in our praying we are mingled one with another, no lesse, than we are at the Lords Sup∣per. And therefore, unlesse you will utterly dis∣claim our publike meetings, and universally forsake us in all our solemn exercises, and so turn downright rigid Separatist, you must needs acknowledge an ab∣surdity in your argumentation. I hope, you are not yet so farre gone. But, take heed, Mr. Coxe: a man that gives way to the Spirit of contradiction and dslusion, knows not where he shall stop. SECT. VIII. PRoposition 4. The meaning of the Apostles charge, concerning the sinners here mentioned, is, That with such we should not so much as eat. Answ. You needed not have made this an explicatory pro∣position: the Apostle had said it in as plain words, as you have any. But, you goe on. Doth not the Minister eat at the Lords Table with those, to whom he administers the Sacrament? Doe not the Communi∣cants there eat and drinke with those, with whom they do communicate? Answ. It is most certain, they do. But, what will you conclude from these premises? The next words tell us. And if (say you) we must shun communion with such at a common table, should we not much more shun to communicate with them at the Lords Table? Answ. Much more? This is too great a stride at once. You should have proved
first, that, for the very presence sake of such, we must shun the Sacrament at all. The Sacrament is good, to which our comming is not permitted on∣ly, but commanded: and at the Sacrament, if some be prophane, yet some are holy. And, I cannot but thinke it strange, that, in so required a duty, a man of understanding should thinke himselfe bound to excommunicate himselfe from a participation in so much good both reall and personall, for the acci∣dentall presence of an offensive evill, which is not in his power to remove. As I have said afore, so now I say againe, Our private congresses, and our publike Church-meetings, are two different things: and these two ought heedfully to be distingushed, as things whereto our power extends not equally and alike. In our private congresses, we have a li∣bertie to refuse, or to admit, as we see cause: but, in our publike Church-meetings, that power is li∣mited to the determination of some higher Autho∣ritie. It is (for the most part) in our own power, to keep off such as are offensive to us from our own suppers: but it lyeth not in us to debarre and shut out whom we please, from communicating with us in the Lords Supper. No, this belongeth to the publike officers and Overseers of the Church. For (that I may borrow a similitude from another man) as in a family every one may not be a Governour,Attersoll on the Sa∣craments. l. 3. c. 16. and in a Common-wealth every person may not be a Magistrate: so neither in the Church may every man assume a jurisdiction in this kinde to himself. And this (as I conceive) is abundantly sufficient, to
shew the inconsequence of your argument in this ce. So then, as the case stands, we cannot con∣clude the necessity of our abstaining from their company at the Lords Table, whose company we are to avoid at our own table. Yet, you insist still, and will prove it by example. It was (say you) the use of Christians, in the Apostles dayes, to have their Love-feasts, even then when they met together for the receiving of the Sacrament, as appeares in 1 Cor. 11. Answ. I grant it: there were such things in use, as with others, so with the Corinthians too, in those primitive times. The ground (it may be) where∣upon they introduced such a custome, was plausible enough, and their end answerable: I will not dis∣pute of that now. But, for their manner of perfor∣mance, the Apostle in the place by you alledged condemns it as faulty. Yea, it was faulty, not only for the manner, which was schismaticall and unso∣ber, vers. 21. but also with respect unto the time and place, which were unfitly chosen by them for such an exercise, vers. 22. In which regards, as in S. Pauls daies among the Corinthians, so in after-ages among other Churches, this custome heard ill, and was laid aside. But, that I may proceed unto your inference, how doth the mention of these Love-feasts make for you? Thus, They did not then hold it lawfull to receive the Sacrament with those, touching whom they were charged, no, not to eat with them. Answ. I could have wished you had set down your argument in forme. But, here again, as hitherto for the most part, you leave me to my own conjectures,
as if (notwithstanding you professe cleernesse) you were unwilling to be plain. Howbeit, that I may not be wanting to the Truth, I shall take some farther paines to search the meaning of this clause, which (if I mistake not) is to this effect. Such, as the Primitive Christians were required to exclude from their Love-feasts, might not law∣fully be admitted by them to the Lords Supper. Reason, because these Love-feasts and the Lords Supper were conjunct, and celebrated together at the same time. But, scandalous Brethren (though as yet not cen∣sured by an act of lawfull Authority) were such as the Primitive Christians were required to ex∣clude from their Love-feasts. Reason, because touching them they had received a charge, no, not to eat with them. Ergo, Scandalous Brethren (though as yet not cen∣sured by an act of lawfull Authority) might not lawfully be admitted by them to the Lords Sup∣per. Your premises are both faulty: and accordingly, I shall return you a twofold answer; one, to the ma∣jor; another, to the minor of your Syllogisme. First then, for your major, I affirme it to be un∣sound: and the Reason brought for confirmation of it, is of no validitie. For first, there was no ne∣cessitie, that their Love-feasts should be so conjunct with the Sacrament, as you pretend: yea, there was good reason to the contrary; in which respect,
S. Paul condemns this practice, and adviseth (at least impliedly) a Reformation, vers. 22. Secondly, e∣ven in their practice (such as it was) their Love-feasts were not so conjunct with the Sacrament, but that there was some interim betwixt them, and some distinction of persons partaking in them, as we may gather from the context of S. Paul. Their Love-feasts were either before the Sacrament, or after: and many were refused to the one, who were yet admitted to the other. You will say, this proceeded from their faction and partialitie. Admit that: yet, this is enough to shew the weak∣nesse of your proposition, which is grounded only upon their fact. Secondly, for your minor, it is all out as infirme as your major: neither doth the reason thereunto annexed any way confirme it. For, first it will be hard for you to prove, that the Corinthians at that time, when they thus used (or abused rather) their accustomed Love-feasts, had received such a charge from the Apostle, as you here pretend and take for granted, but without proofe. This charge (for ought I yet finde) came not till now by this Epistle, and consequently could not be to them as a rule of direction for the ordering of those acts which had passed from them before this Epistle was written, and which (as it is most likely) upon this Apostoli∣call admonition they did from thenceforth omit to practise. Secondly, the very charge it selfe, though in the sense of the Apostle of very necessary obser∣vance, is not yet of that nature, that universally and
absolutely at all times, and in all places, and upon all occasions, we are indispensably bound to the let∣ter of it. Circumstances doe much varie the con∣dition and quality of our performances: and as the circumstances are, the same act (for kinde) may be at one time both allowable and good, which at ano∣ther time is nothing lesse. Ordinarily, and need∣lessely, and out of an affected and familiar intimacy, to converse and eat with scandalous Brethren, is a thing forbidden by the Text. But, that simply & ab∣solutely, without weighing the circumstances, we should utterly forbeare all eating and conversing with such persons, it is farre from me to think, that either S. Paul intended it, or you believe it. Ob∣serve your own practise, and see, whether (for ends best known unto your self) you doe not often con∣tradict it. Neither can you be ignorant, how (many times) either through necessity compelling us, or opportunity (at least, in hope) of doing good, or preventing evill, inviting us, or conscience in obser∣ving required duties binding us, we doe suffer our selves to be mingled with such persons, whose com∣pany and consortship otherwise we are willing to decline. But, I hold him not worthy to be dispu∣ted with, who shall stand in the deniall of this so e∣vident and cleer a Truth. SECT. IX. PRoposit. 5. The Apostle having laid this ground in 1 Cor. 5.11. doth in vers. 13. adde this infe∣rence,
Therefore put away from among your selves that wicked person. Thereby meaning, not only that the in∣cestuous person should be repelled from the Sacrament, but also that he should be cast out of the Church by the sentence of Excommunication. Answ. Whether those words of the Apostle, vers. 13. be an inference from those other, vers, 11. or rather, a conclusive repetition of that charge, which (with respect to the incestuous person) he had laid upon them, vers. 4.5. I will not now stand to examine: though (with your good leave) I incline rather to believe the latter. And, as for the other branch of your assertion, That hereby the Apostles meaning was, that the incestuous person should be not onely repelled from the Sacrament, but also cast out of the Church by the sentence of Excommunication, I cannot but acknow∣ledge it as most true for the matter, though in your order of setting down the particulars I think you doe mistake. You seem to say, that the Apostle had before required, that the incestuous person should be particularly repelled from the Communion, and that now (in way of supplement) he addes, he should not only be so repelled, but also Excommunicated. Whereas it is plaine by the context, that S. Paul in all this discourse of his hitherto had not particularly and directly so much as mentioned the holy Com∣munion, or that parties exclusion from the same, but only implyed it, as consequentially and virtually contained in the sentence of Excommunication. Here then I doe observe a great disparity betwixt your exposition and S. Pauls expression. You say,
the meaning of S. Paul is this, Let the incestuous person be not only repelled from the Communion, but also excommunicated from the Church: as if this (namely, Excommunication) were a thing re∣quired and urged by him in the second place. But, S. Paul simply saies, and he had said it before in the 4, 5. verses (when as yet he had mentioned no∣thing touching those other things whereof he treat∣eth in the 9, 10, 11. verses) Let the incestuous person be excommunicated: and so leaves it to the Corinthians to consider, how the person so excom∣municated was consequentially secluded also from the Sacrament. But, this inversion of the oder was only a fetch of yours, to bring about some far∣ther thing which you intended. For, thus you adde. He meant not then, that these offenders should only be shunned, in respect of private and common fa∣miliarity: but, that they should be repelled from the Sacrament, and that their communion at the Lords Ta∣ble should be shunned. Answ. Your word [then] here is a note of inference, and so, argumentative: and your argument is taken à majori, from the grea∣ter to the lesse, thus. If the Apostle would have such offenders to be cast out of the Church by the sentence of Excommunication, it is certaine also he would have them to be repelled, not only from common and private familiarity, but also from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. But, the first. Ergo, the latter. I answer, it is true, he would have both: but each in their order. Let the party (if deserving it) be first legally convicted, and formally cast out by law∣full
authority:CHAP. 3. and then in Gods name, let him be repelled, and kept off from the Communion. The Ecclesiasticall Magistrate must doe the one, at least decree it to be done, as Saint Paul in this Chapter at the 4 and 5 verses: and then the private Mini∣ster in his own place, with the consent and appro∣bation of them who are concerned also in the busi∣nesse, may warrantably and safely doe the other; but, not before. CHAP. III. An Answer to Mr. Coxe his second proofe, groun∣ded upon 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. SECT. I. HAving thus farre considered what (in your opinion) you have so unanswe∣rably pleaded from the allegation of that single passage in 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. let us see now, how by your combi∣ned forces, in the superaddition of another place to second it, you goe about to overcome us quite, and so to carry us cleerly captive into your opinion. Thus then you goe on. That the force of this, which
hath been spoken, may yet more cleerly appear, consider what the Apostle saith concerning the Sacrament, in 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. The cup of blessing, which we blesse, is it not the Communion of the blood of Christ? The bread, which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of Christ? For we, being many, are one bread, and one bo∣dy: for we are all partakers of that one bread. Answ. So much for the Text. Now, for your glosse upon it: for, I am very attentive to heare what you will say. This Text (say you) assures us of the truth of these Propositions. Answ. Propositions (a good sort) we have had already: but you will gratifie us with more, it may be more pertinent to the cause in hand, as also more pungent and pressing upon us. They are in number foure, whereof the first two (if I judge rightly) are taken from the 16. verse, and the two latter from the 17. I shall transcribe them in order, as you have set them down. 1 True believers, rightly receiving this holy Sacra∣ment, are thereby assured of their partaking of the bene∣fits of Christs death. 2 All they that doe outwardly receive this Sacra∣ment, doe therein make an outward profession of recei∣ving Christ crucified, and partaking of the benefits of Christs death. 3 This Sacrament doth teach and assure all true be∣lieving Communicants, that they, being many persons, are yet one mysticall body: because they are all parta∣kers of one and the same Jesus Christ, of whose body the bread of this Sacrament is an ordained token and pledge.
4. They, that joyn together in the outward receiving of this Sacrament, doe both joyn together in the profes∣sion of the same faith in Christ, and also doe professe themselves to be (in the judgement of charitie, which they now mutually professe concerning each other) fel∣low members together of the same mysticall body, as be∣ing all fed with the same spirituall food. SECT. II. NOt to question your Propositions, either for the matter which they contain, or the manner wherein they are expressed, or the deduction of them from the Text (all which belong unto another dis∣quisition, and are from the subject which we now discourse of) but to take them (at present) for such as you would have them, .i. Orthodoxall, Logicall, and proper: I beseech you, tell us what it is, that from all these premisses you would inferre? You pretended, that, by the Text alleadged, the force of that which you had formerly spoken should yet more cleerly appeare. In expectation of this, we have considered the Text, and therein what the Apostle saith concerning the Sacrament, subscribing both readily and heartily to the divine light of truth therein ap∣pearing, to the comfort of our soules: and yet, where ever the fault be, we cannot discover what it is in the Text, whereby the force of that which you have spoken doth so cleerly appeare. From the Text, we had recourse to your Propositions: but, as yet, no light of argument appears, whereby your great
force so much pretended and spoken of is made ap∣parent to us. The summary of your Propositions, as I conceive, is, that to eat and drink with others at the Lords Table is an act of greatest familiarity, and neerest Communion. And from hence, if you intend any formall argument, I suppose it to be this, That if familiarity and communion with scanda∣lo u Brethren be forbidden at our common tables, then much more at the Lords table: for, he that forbiddeth the lesse, doth much more forbid the greater. If thus your meaning be (for I can but conjecture) your argument (to my seeming) is very weake and forcelesse: which yet, least I should say only, and not shew, it is meet in the first place, that we understand your antecedent, and then weigh your consequent. SECT. III. YOur Antecedent, as you lay it, is very invol∣ved, and needs explication. Thus therefore. The Subject whereof your Propositions treat, is the Communion of Saints. How? not at large, but as vouchsafed them of God in the use and exercise of this Sacrament, whether it be a Communion with the Head, of which S. Paul in the place alleadged, vers. 16. or among themselves, one with another, vers. 17. Now you know, how with respect unto both these branches) there is in this Sacrament a twofold Communion. The one, outward and sym∣bolicall: the other inward and spirituall. The first,
in the partaking of visible signes: the second, in the participation of invisible grace. That, is com∣mon to the good and bad: this, is proper to the good alone. Of the former you seem to speak in the first and third Propositions: of the latter, in the second and fourth. In the first and third Propo∣sitions you tell us, what is the use of this Sacrament to the reall mēbers of the Church invisible, who are called of God according to his purpose, viz. a mean of assurance, both of their certain participation in the benefits of Christs death, Proposit. 1. and of their undoubted coalition one with another into the same mysticall Body, Proposit. 5. In the second and fourth Propositions you tell us, what is the use of this Sacrament to them, that are only present mem∣bers of the Church visible, whose calling is onely according to the meanes, viz. an externall signe or token of their outward Profession, both in regard of fellowship with Christ the Head, as if they were his members, Proposit. 2. and in regard of commu∣nion with the rest of the Body, as if they were their fellow members, Proposit. 4. Now, if your antece∣dent be understood of the first of these, the Text al∣leadged is fully for you, and accordingly we doe and must acknowledge, that so to eat and drink at the Lords Table with such as are fellow-members in∣deed, is an act of the greatest familiarity and the neerest communion that can be. But then, it ma∣keth little to your purpose. For, our dispute is not about the inward and spirituall, but only about the outward and symbolicall Communion, to which
even hypocrites and castawayes may and doe many times presume to come, as well as those that are sin∣cere and approved of God. On the other side, if your Antecedent be understood of the latter sort, then indeed you speak home unto the point, but fall short of the truth in your Assertion. For, I de∣ny, that (in this sense) to eat and drink with others at the Lords Table is an act of the greatest familiari∣ty and neerest Communion. Neither will the Text by you alledged prove the same: that Text being chiefely and (in a manner) only to shew the inward and spirituall Communion, which right-believing Christians and worthy Communicants have among themselves in the use of this Sacrament. For, though the Apostle (while he makes mention of the Cup and of the Bread) doe indeed glance upon the outward Communion, yet he doth not intentional∣ly insist upon it, as meerly sch, and so as common both to good and bad: but concomitantly, and so far only, as it leadeth to the inward, and (through the blessing of God upon his own Ordinance) doth therein certainly receive a just accomplishment in the hearts of them, who worthily approach unto the same. You may see this partly in the Apostles manner of expression; for, thus, (if you observe it) the word [communion] is applyed by him. S. Paul doth not say, The Communion of the Cup, and of the Bread: but the Communion of the Blood, and of the Bo∣dy of hrist So then, your Antecendent (as by you applyed to he point in question) is not sound. A kinde f familiarity and communion there may be
between the good and bad in the outward partici∣pating at the Lords Table: but, the one, not so great; and the other, not so close, as you pretend. Yea, where the bad are notorious, and knowne for such at the present, there is not (upon the matter) any familiaritie at all betwixt the good and them. Right Communicants doe desire rather their room than their company. They meet them unwillingly at the Lords Table, and with hearts truly saded at their prophane approaches. If they had a power in themselves, they would surely keep them off: but, being destitute of that, they will patiently endure whom they cannot remove. And thus, while they gladly exercise communion with the Saints, a mat∣ter of duty and enjoyned: they doe withall grieve at the presumption of grosse and known offenders, whose presence though they doe not like, yet (seeing they will come) they cannot avoyd. So then, as one said well (and you know who) the com∣munion which the faithfull have with the scandalously wicked in this Sacrament, is not voluntary, but neces∣sary; not sought, but suffered; not procured, but con∣strained. SECT. IV. FRom your Antecedent, I goe on now to your Consequent, which I finde so feeble that it can∣not stand, either in its owne strength, or in the sength of that which you have added to prop it up. To shew this, I must once againe remember
you of what I said afore upon the like occasion. Familiaritie or fellowship in private conversation is one thing, and communion or society at the Lords Table is another thing. The first is a matter of choice, and in our own power: the second is a matter of duty, which we cannot dispense with. If we breake off fellowship with wicked persons in the one, we offend not in so doing against any precept; nay, we have a warrant so to doe. But, if for the very presence sake of such, we goe so far as to neglect the other, and so shun Communion with the Church; we doe not only proceed without a warrant, but we transgresse against the precept of God. Here in∣deed (as one hath well observed) if a separation must be made, it lyeth rather upon them to separate from us, than upon us from them. The reason, because this Sacrament is more ours, than theirs. Theirs it is, no otherwise, than by profession: ours it is, not by profession only, but in power too. And therefore, though they come, yet we may not de∣part, but abide still in our own right: The argu∣ment therefore is of no force; We must separate from ungodly persons in our familiar eating and drinking at home, Ergo we must much more sepa∣rate from them in our eating and drinking at the Lords Table. For, though this latter be a thing of higher consequence, yet the power of separating is not here so left to us, as in the former. These things should heedfully have been distinguish'd: but you, I will not say ignorantly, but (I am sure) im∣prudently confounding them, doe thereby both
deceive your selfe, and endanger others. But enough. Let us see now how you recapitu∣late. Judge then (say you) withwhat good conscience a Minister may give this Sacrament to those, with whom (for their open wickednes) we are charged not to be mingled, yea, not so much as to eat with them? Consider also with what comfort a Christian may com∣municate with such. Answ. And in this appeale I joyne with you. Let the indifferent and ingenu∣ous Reader judge, who hath more Truth and Com∣fort on his side, You in denying, or I in affirming, what we have hitherto discoursed of.
CHAP. IV. Of three other places alleadged by Mr. C. toward the proving of this first part of his Assertion: viz. Gal. 5.19.20.21.] 2 Thess. 3.6.14.] 2 Tim. 3. vers. 2.3.4.5. SECT. I. YEt you goe on still; and, with some en∣largement to your Position, tell us, that Howsoever in your Thesis, and in 1 Cor. 5.11. there is expresse mention made only of him that is a fornicatour, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner: yet, what is here expresly said of these, is also to be understood of every other that is called a Brother, and yet is knowne to live under the reigne of any other like sin. And, for the truth and soundnes of this also, you bid u see and consider these places, viz. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.] 2 Thess. 3.6.14.] 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Answ. As for your care of amplifying and extending your Position, I have nothing to except against you for it. With as good warrant you may include these, as any of the former, if so you can make good the point in either. The places you turne us to, are of note all: and, if need were, I could yet supply you with more Texts,
which (together with the rest) I doe intreat you also to consider, and be reformed by. Among others, these: Rom. 16.17.18.] 1 Tim. 5.8.] 2 Tim. 3.6.7.] a place somewhat warily declined by you in your quotation of the former verses; whether as conscious to your selfe of your owne guilt, I leave it between God and your soule. As for the Texts by you alleadged, I have both seen and considered them: but as yet, finde nothing in them, which can steed you. SECT. II. THat in Gal. 5.19.20.21. is altogether imper∣tinent. The Apostle there treats of the works of the flesh. The workes of the flesh (saith he) are manifest; and so proceeds to reckon them up, as you may see: and then, in the close of all, sayes, that they which doe such things, shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. Most true. But, what is all this to the Communion? Your argument from thence, if you have any, must be this. They who shall not inherit the Kingdome of God, may not be admitted to the Communion. But, men guilty of the evills here named, shall not inherit the Kingdome of God. Ergo, men guilty of the evills here named, may not be admitted to the Communion. A very doughty argument! and such, as I thinke you will be ashamed to owne. I am sure, you will never be able to prove your major.
SECT. III. THat other place in 2 Thess. 3.6.14. (you think, it may be) will come more home unto your purpose. In the examination therefore of this, let us consider three things: first, who it is, of whom the Apostle speakes; secondly, what it is, that he gives in charge concerning him; thirdly, to whom the charge is given. The Person of whom he speakes, is such a one, as by his profession passeth for a Brother, but in cariage and conversation walkes disorderly, and not after the tradition which they had received of the Apostle. Now, what was that Tradition? The 10. verse tells us it was this; That if any would not work, neither should he eat. This was the thing, which S. Paul had formerly delivered to them, and now againe repeates and presseth on them. And thereupon in the 11. verse, after he had given them to understand that he had heard there were among them some that walked disorderly, he concludes them to be such, as were either idlers, or busie-bodies: the one, as not working at all; the other, as intermedling with what did not concerne them, though to the disturbance and prejudice of others. These are the persons. Now, that which he gives in charge concerning them, is partly in the 6. verse, we must withdraw our selves from such: and partly in the 14. verse, We must note such men, and have no company
with them, that they may be ashamed. This is the charge. They, to whom this charge is given, are diversly conceived. Some think, they are the publike Offi∣cers and Overseers of the Church: and, if so you understand the Apostle, then the act here given them in charge [viz. to note these inordinate walkers] is that act of Overseers, whereby, after due tryall and conviction, they doe inflict upon their persons some publike censure, either of uspension, or of excommunication; upon which it is consequent, that the other members of the Church should hav no company with them, but with-draw themselves from them, yea, even at the Lords Table. A thing not controverted btwixt you and me, and conse∣quently your allegation of the words in this sense would be very frivolous. Others thinke, that the Parties here chaged are the Generality or Com∣munity of the Faithfull: and if so you take the A∣postle (as it seemes you doe) then, though your al∣legation of the place be somewhat more pertinent, yet your argument from thence is not so strong as you imagine. You cannot be ignorant, that this phrase [to note] as here used by S. Paul, is diversly expounded by grave and learned Authors, in their annotations upon this Text. Some say, it impor∣teth only to notifie or to give notice; and their ex∣position of the Text is this, That if any man obey not the Apostles word, but persist still in his disor∣derly walking, notwithstanding this admonition to the contrary; then the Thessalonians by some Epistle
of theirs should notifie or signifie that man to the Apostle, that so (according to the power of Disci∣pline committed to him) he might proceed against him somewhat more severely: and in the meane season, they should forbeare all unnecessary famili∣arity with such a person, not keeping him company, but withdrawing themselves from him to their power. But, this exposition maketh not for you. Secondly therefore, there are others, who by this phrase [to note] doe understand as much as [to observe or marke] or farther yet, and with respect to others as well as to our selves, [to set, as I may say, a marke upon such a Party, and to brand him with a note of infame, as a publike pest, poyson, and reproach:] and accordingly, upon this noting, our farther duty is, to with-draw our selves from such a one, and to have no company with him, more than of necessity we must, that so he (seeing himselfe neglected and shunned of all) may by this meanes so far enter into the due consideration of his own demerits, that he may there-hence come to be ashamed, and repent. But neither will this sense and understanding of the words be helpfull to you. For, as already hath been declared more than once, from our duty in with∣drawing our selves from lewd company in way of private and familiar conversation, it is grossely alo∣gicall to inferre a necessity of withdrawing our selves also from them in publike and solemn acts of Devo∣tion. We have a warrant, yea, a command for the one: but no allowance, no, not so much as per∣mission of the other. To conclude then my ani∣madversions
upon your allegation of this place; thus you argue. They, whom we must note, & have no company with, but with-draw our selves from, that they may be ashamed, must not be administred to, or communicated with at the Lords Table. But, Idlers and Busie-bodies are such as we must note, and have no company with, but with∣draw our selves from, that they may be a∣shamed. Ergo, Idlers and Busie-bodies must not be admi∣nistred to, or communicated with, at the Lords Table. Compare your major with that which hath been said, and then tell mee, whether it bee not as voyd of truth, as you have left it naked without defence. SECT. II. THe last place, which you require to be consi∣dered, is in 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4, 5, verses: where the Apostle having reckoned up divers sorts of sin∣ners, doth in the end conclude against them all, thus; From such turne away. Your argument from this place, if I rightly apprehend you, is to this effect. Such, as from whom we must turne away, may not lawfully be administred to in the Lords Supper. But, the sinners here named are such, as from whom we must turne away.
Ergo, the sinners here named may not lawfully be administred to in the Lords Supper. Your argument proceeds wholly upon a mistake, at least a misapplying of the Text by you alleadged. For, whereas the Apostle, in reference to those ma∣ny sorts of sinners which he reckons up, intendeth no more than a turning from them in point of life and conversation; you so extend and understand his words, as if he had meant a turning them off also from the holy Communion. Briefly therefore to dispatch this, I deny your major. For, though in S Paul's sense we must turne away from all those, whom we may not admit to the Lords Supper: yet it doth nor from thence follow (as you would have it) that we must not admit any of them to the Lords Supper, from whom (in some other respects) we must turne away. To turne from, and to turne off, are not convertible termes: the actions imported by them are very different, neither are they alwaies competible to the same subject. The first is an act of wisedome and discretion, and belongs to every Christian: the second is an act of power and juris∣diction, and belongeth only to a few. From a scan∣dalous mis-living Christian, it is true, I must turn a∣way, in respect of affection and imitation. I may not suffer my self, by a needlesse conversing with him, or (which is yet worse) a sinfull following of him, to be either endanger'd or infected. But then, for me, that am not armed with sufficient Authority, to turne off such a one from the Lords Table, or (which is as bad) to turne my selfe off from thence
because he is there, is (at the best) but a zealous presumption, indeed a very sinfull usurpation. I may not adventure to goe so far, untill I have a cal∣ling to it. CHAP. V. Of Mr. C. his foure aggravating circumstances, whereby to prove the act of the Minster in ad∣mitting such persons to the Communion, to be not a sin only, but a very grievous and hatefull sinne. With a briefe Censure upon them all. SECT. I. ANd thus, as I could now, I have ende∣voured to shew the weaknes of those grounds, whereby you went about to prove the sinfulnesse of the Ministers act in admitting scandalous offenders to this holy Sacrament. The next labour is, to con∣sider those aggravating circumstances, which in the second place you urge, to prove the Ministers act in so doing, to be not a sin only, but a very grievous and hatefull sin. Thus therefore you say. Whereas I say of the evill that I have reproved, not only that it is a sin, but a very grievous and hatefull sin: that I may
not seeme to charge it too heavily, consider.— Answ. Your advice is good: and accordingly, with the best heed that I can, I shal compose my thoughts to consider with you. Towards the proofe of your assertion, there are foure arguments which you pro∣duce, all of them taken from the evill consequents, which (as you say) must needs attend this act of the Minister, As SECT. II. 1. THat these persons thus admitted by the Mi∣nister to the receiving of the Sacrament, and outwardly joyned with by the rest of the Communicants, are by this meanes hardened in their security and crsed presumption: and thus the Devill is exceedingly ay∣ded to carry them easily to Hell. And whatsoever fig-leaves we now make use of to cover this shamefull evill, their blood will cry loud against us at the day of judge∣ment. So you. In answer to all which, that I may prevent exceptions, I must here call upon you to consider, how, on the one side, it is acknowledged, that when scandalous and unrepentant Christians doe thus offer themselves to the Communion with all their sinnes about them, they doe in that act of theirs very grievously transgresse, and expose them∣selves much more to the power and malice of the Divell, than formerly. On the other side, it is con∣fessed too, that all they, who in word or deed, by open consent or wilfull connivence, shall either a∣bet or approve the foresaid Parties in their wicked
courses, are justly to be reputed among the number of those men, who doe both hearten and harden them in their sin. Thus far I goe with you. But then, in the application which you make hereof to us, whether Ministers in admitting, or others in communicating with such kind of sinners, as if we in our so doing were become accessory to their evill, and a meanes of hardening them in their sin, when∣as yet we stick not openly to professe, that we would more gladly either reclaime them, or exclude them, if it lay in our power: your censure is more harsh and hasty than becomes a charitable man. As for the ncent Parties, if they, under the ap∣prehension of their opus operatum, or the meet out∣ward service performed by them (as if that in it selfe were of sufficient efficacy to salve up all) will flatter their soules into a fooles Paradise, and so harden themselves in their own sinfull wayes, (and by as good a warrant they my doe the same in all the o∣ther branches of Gods outward Worship:) if, I say, they will thus doe, we cannot help it. Howbeit, on our part, whether Ministers or People, there is no ground administred by them to us, whereupon to draw such wicked inferences. It is well known, we doe abhor their gracelesse practises, and accordingly (not seldome) bewray our just dislike of their grosse presumption. We bewaile, not only their present sin, but their ensuing danger: and in that respect doe wish them rather to forbeare, than to approach these awfull mysteries in so unhallowed a way; protesting in the mean sea∣son,
that though (for their sakes) we may not decline the performance of our required duty in celebrating this holy memoriall of the death of Christ, yet wee are no way delighted with their presence, nor (as the case stands) give them any the least encourage∣ment to be there. More particularly, as concerning them who administer, it is a plaine case, that though (hrough the want of legall conviction, and the con∣sequent thereof, as hath beene said) they may not lawfully repell such persons as we now discourse of; yet they are so farre from encouraging and inviting them to come, that, on the contrary, they doe what in them lyes, to keep them off. You might have ob∣served this, as in their Sermons often before the Sa∣crament; so in their exhortations to the people at the very time of celebration. In their Sermons, how frequently doe they apply themselves to distinguish betwixt the pretious and the vile? to call the one, and to deterre the other, under greatest penalties, as∣suring the unworthy, that, if they will come, they shall not be welcome, and that, instead of comfort which they presume to finde they shall reap nothing but damnation or judgement to themselves? upon this ground, how seriously doe they advise, that e∣very man would call himselfe unto account, and deale truly between God and his owne soule, and not presume to approach hither, till, having renewed his faith and repentance, he be in some measure competently fitted for so holy an action or employ∣ment? And then, as concerning their exhortations,
at the time of celebration, you may see how zea∣lously, even by publicke warrant, they doe therein, not only encourage the worthy, but also fright and fray away the unworthy by the severe and thunde∣ring denunciation of Gods heavy judgements to be inflicted, if they so come. Peruse the two last exhortations, together with the forme of invi∣tation annexed, and immediately preceding the prayers of the Communion, and you cannot but be convinced of this thing. Now, after all this, if the Minister (notwithstanding his threats and admoni∣tions) shall see these persons to approach, how can he tell, but that even then at least (if not before) they may have beene touched in their hearts with true remorse and kindly sorrow for their sinnes? (you know the words of our Saviour, The wind bloweth where it listeth, &c. Ioh. 3.8.) But, sup∣pose it be not so, yet the Minister hath done his own duty, and if they (notwithstanding his advice) will presume to come in their unworthinesse, they come at their owne perill, and their bloud will rest upon their owne heads. SECT. III. 2. THat these persons thus communicating must needs abuse Gods Ordinance in a high degree, thereby most fearfully encreasing, both their own sinne, and their damnation hereafter. Answ. I have no∣thing
to say against this assertion. It is the great wickednesse of prophane persons when they so doe. As you have heard now, they are advised to the contrary: but, if against advice they will presume, the fault is their owne, and the abuse is to them∣selves. It is true, this Sacrament is a very sacred thing, and accordingly there lyes a charge upon us all to preserve it (as much as may be) from pollution, whe∣ther by our selves or others. But then, having first ordered our owne hearts, and afterwards (according to our place and power) done our best also to con∣forme others: if some of those others (notwithstan∣ding) will wickedly rush upon the abuse of this holy Ordinance, we may not justly be reputed ac∣cssorie to that abuse. Our griefe it must be, but our sinne it is not, when we have done what in us lay to prevent it. SECT. IV. 3. THat this admitting of such persons to the Sa∣crament makes the whole lump to be sowred with their leven, 1 Cor. 5.6. Answ. I heare what you say. But, first let me aske the question, Doth the Apostle intend here such an absolute necessity, as that indifferently at all times, and without distincti∣on of persons, this sowre leaven must needs taint and corrupt all, who (though never so unwillingly) are conjoyned in place with unworthy receivers at the
Lords Table? If an unworthy person, whom I know to be unworthy, be but present with me at this holy Sacrament, must I needs be sowred with his leaven? what, when I have beene carefull to purge my selfe? when also (to my power) I have endea∣voured, either to purge him, or to keepe him off? Indeed, the corporall leaven is of that nature, that it necessarily sowres the meale, with which it is min∣gled: but this same spirituall leaven (whereof the Apostle here speakes) is of another kinde. It may sowre, yea it doth sowre many times, when men have beene negligent in seeking the reformation of their scandalous brethren: but, necessarily, and at all times, it doth not; as namely, when that neglect hath either beene prevented, or repented of. In this case, whether be the unworthy Communicant, yet if in some good measure I have discharged my duty towards him, his unworthinesse shall not pre∣udice my comfort.D.  As a good Man once said, It is most certaine, sinne infecteth none but the guil∣ty. They which act it, or assent to it, or beare with , or detest it not, are polluted by it: but, on the other side, they who doe mourne for it, and com∣plaine of it, though with all their endeavours they cannot redresse it, are free from the infection. It is a famous and pregnant Protestation, that of God by his Prophet, Ezek. 18.20. The righteousnesse of the righteous shall be upon him, and the wicked∣nesse of the wicked shall be upon himselfe.
But secondly, a little farther to shew the in∣validity of this allegation, let me aske againe, how unwarrantably doe you wrest the Text, in the application thereof to the point in hand, when the Apostle intended it another way? The meaning of Saint Paul is plainly this, That notorious offenders (if tolerated by the whole Church, without either sorrow, or reproofe, or censure) are thenceforth become unto that Church as a sowre leaven, transfusing, or (if you will) reflecting rather, a great guilt of sinfull ne∣glect upon the persons of them who so tolerate; especially, if, with the neglect of the foresaid du∣ties, there be joyned also that same pride and glo∣rying in themselves, which the Apostle implieth to have beene in the Corinthians, vers. 2.6. This is properly the meaning of this place, and upon this ground it is, that in the next verse Saint Paul urgeth the Corinthians to reforme them∣selves, that so they might prevent the evills else likely to light upon them for their negligence. But now, what is all this to the point we have in hand? Saint Paul indeed layes a blame upon the governours of the Church of Corinth, for that they had not cast out the incestuous person, but suffered him to abide still in communion with them. Hee taxeth also some from among the people, for that, under the apprehension of so foule a sinne, they had yet beene no more affected unto godly sorrow and humiliation for the same.
And he tells them all, that if they did not speedi∣ly reforme this neglect of duty, they were in dan∣ger to be over-runne by the malignity and infe∣ction of this sowre leaven. All this he doth. But then, as touching the faithfull that were among them (and we are not to doubt that there were many such) Saint Paul never blamed them for communicating with the incestuous person before he was cut off; neither did he ever intimate unto them, that, untill he did amend, or else should be cut off, they must either absent themselves from the publicke Assemblies, or depart away being come together, for feare of being sowred with that leaven. I finde no such thing, either expres∣sed, or intimated. If your quicker sight have made any further discovery, you may doe well to informe us. SECT. V. 4. THat this admitting of such persons to the Sa∣crament, and communicating with them, makes their wickednesse to redound to the shame and dishonour of the faith and Religion which we professe. Answ. The matter, which you here insist on, is of highest moment, viz. the honour and credit of Religion: a thing to be regarded more then life, by every cordiall sonne and daughter of God. Against this Religion, and the esteeme there
should be of it, the wicked life of such as do pro∣fesse the same is in great opposition. For, as you rightly say, Their wickednesse redoundeth to the shame and dishonour thereof. And, albeit this bee too much, yet as you sufficiently intimate, there is somewhat beyond this, which doth render that wickednesse (yet) more conspicuous, and so, more scandalous, and consequently also makes it more dishonourable to the Gospell. What that thing may bee, is worth our enquiry, that wee may learne to avoyd it; because, as you rightly judge, A man, who admitteth that, doth therein not only commit a sinne, but a very grievous and hatefull sinne. Thus farre I subscribe. But then, in that which you here adjoyne, I must crave leave to dissent and depart from you. For, you say, that the admitting of unworthy persons to the Sacrament, and communicating with them at the Lords Table, makes their wickednesse to redound to the shame and dishonour of our Religion. Answ. I conceive what in these words you would have us to acknowledge, viz. that the wickednesse it self redounds hither, but this makes it to redound much more. Doth it so? I aske then, how, and after what manner? A needfull Querie, and somewhat further to be insisted on by us. Thus therefore I conceive. A thing may be said to make wickednesse redound more to the discre∣dit of Religion, two wayes, viz. either really and indeed, when directly or interpretatively it ten∣deth
to the countenancing of a wicked act; or else imaginarily and in appearance only, when, though the thing it selfe be in it selfe good, and such as no way tendeth to the countenancing of evill, yet, men of weake (and it may be, perverse) judge∣ments will needs fancie it to be otherwise, whe∣ther out of ignorance, or prejudice, or causelesse jealously, I leave them to consider of. Of the first kinde, there are many things which make wickednesse to redound to the dishonour of Re∣ligion, and that, not only in the wicked party himselfe, as, when he justifieth his evill, and glo∣ries in it; but also in others, when (as lookers on, and it may be somewhat more) they doe either command it, or counsell it, or consent unto it, or defend it, or excuse it, or else (lastly) connive or winke at it, not seeking to reforme the wicked-doer, by bringing him under the restraint of Dis∣cipline, whether Domesticall, or Politicall, or Ec∣clesiasticall. A man, that countenanceth evill in any of these kindes, doth indeed make that evill (which he so countenanceth) redound more to the staine and blemish of Religion. For, when by this meanes the world shall see, how, among men which make profession of Religion, there are some who act such hainous wicked∣nesses, and others who (so many wayes) do coun∣tenance them in it, they will not sticke much, but be apt enough to say, Surely this Religion is not right, it hath not the true God for its Authour, and
so by degrees they will grow more and more into a dislike and disrespect both of God, and of his Truth. Now if thus you intend your assertion, it is most false; I meane, in the application of it to the thing wee now discourse of. For, our ad∣mission of unworthy persons to the Sacrament (while as yet they are not, either legally convi∣cted, or judicially sentenced) being accompanied (as it is, and ought to be) with so open and hearty a detestation of their lewd courses (which we doe mourne for, though we cannot amend) doth no way countenance them in their evill, or give the world any occasion to thinke of us, as if we plea∣sed our selves, either in their sinne, or in their so∣ciety. But, for this, I referre you to the reviewing of that, which I have formerly written in way of answer to some of your foregoing passages. In the meane season, I proceed to the second branch of my distinction. And here (indeed) I cannot but acknowledge, that, imaginarily and in appearance, there is some shew of scandall against Religion. But then, I adde, it is but in appearance only: and so the scandall is not given but taken, which we cannot helpe. But, you tell us a little after, out of 1 Thess. 5.22. That we must abstaine from all ap∣pearance of evill. Answ. We must indeed. But then, you must distinguish, or otherwise you will mislead us, and your self too. Appearance of evill relateth, and so in some sort adhereth, to things of a double nature, whereof some are indifferent,
and in our choice; others commanded, and so not left to our arbitrary disposing of them. In things indifferent, if we know that by omitting them we shall do good, but on the contrary by doing them we shall (if not doe, yet) occasion some hurt, Peccatum est, si fiat; it is a sinne, if it be done: here then, we must avoyd, even the appearance of e∣vill. But, in things commanded, especially of God, no imaginary appearance or shew of evill can warrant us to decline obedience. Here, the Rule holds, Petius scandalum admittatur, quàm veritas deseratur; Let rather scandall be suffered, than the Truth be deserted. No necessary duty may bee omitted by us, for the shew of evill (in some weak eyes) adhering to the doing of it. Though (as St. Paul sayes, Rom. 3.8.) no evill must be done, that good may come of it: yet, on the other side, you may not deny, but that we must doe good, although evill (by accident) succeed upon it; much more, when it is only a shew, a fancie, an imagination of evill that is annexed thereunto. It was a good observation of one,Dr. Sclater in locum. famous in his time both for Religion and Learning, Our Saviour, (saith he) cured a sicke man upon the Sabbath day; here was a shew of evill to them that stood by, and he knew they would be offended at it, yet he did not upon this ground, either at that time with∣hold his operation, or (from thenceforth) after∣wards forbeare, but did the like againe and again, as opportunity presented. Why so? Because he
knew, it was a good worke to shew mercy, even up∣on the Sabbath day: and, as for the shew of evill adhering to it, it was rather fancied by their igno∣rance, than afforded by his Act. Well then, to ap∣ply this. The thing, whereabout we discourse is, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Now, what thinke you? Is the celebration hereof a duty? Hath God injoyned it, on the one side to the Mi∣nister, on the other side to the Receiver? Are we hereunto bound, even by the necessity of Gods own precept? If so; then, supposing we may have this Sacrament intire in the essentialls of it, who dare be so bold, as to sinne against God, by omit∣ting this so necessary and comfortable a duty, for the avoyding of a bare shew and an appearance of evill, accidentally adhering to the performance thereof?
CHA. VI. The second part of Mr. C. his Assertion, affirming it to be unlawfull for the People of God to commu∣nicate at the Lords Table with scandalous livers; with a just examination of the places which he brings to prove the same, as namely, Ephes. 5.11. Lev. 19.17. 1 Thess. 5.22. Act. 2.40. 1 Cor. 6.17 SECT. I. BY this time, I hope the weaknesse, of the first part of your Assertion with the ground thereto annex∣ed, doth sufficiently appeare. It is time now, that I proceed to ex∣amine the other part, and what you doe alleadge for the confirmation of the same. To this you preface in these words. I shall not need now to insist on any farther proofe of the latter part of my Thesis, viz. The children of God must have no fellowship at all with this sinne, but re∣prove it; but only to presse the consideration of these places. Answ. What need you have of farther proofe, let the Reader judge; in the mean season, I shall consider your places. The first in order is that in Eph. 5.11. Have no
fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of darknesse, but rather reprove them. Answ. A most sweet and sa∣lutary instruction! But, by you how wrested, how misapplyed, that you might force it to your own purpose? Those unfruitfull workes, those workes of darknesse, issuing from a darkned minde, and lead∣ing down to the dark roomes & chambers of death, what are they but the works of sin? These workes we must not onely in our own persons forbeare to act, but we must have no fellowship with any o∣thers, that are employed about the acting of them. Nay, here our abstinence is not enough: there must be somewhat that is positive. S. Paul would have us, not only to decline them, but to reprove them too. And, what now from all this? The Sa∣crament (I hope) is no work of darknesse, either in the outward or the inward part thereof. And, when accidentally we meet with them at the Lords Table, who in their life and cariage are not so lightsome as we wish, and so communicate with them in the out ward signes of grace, and in them only, I trust you will not say, that we doe thereby communicate with them in a work of darknesse. Though they be e∣vill, yet our action with them is good: and that, wherein we communicate with them, is good too. It is not a seale of darknes, but a symbol of light. If it bee not so to them, it is their owne fault: but, through the mercy of God, it is so to us, if compe∣tently prepared thereunto. As for them, the dark∣nesse that is in them we bewayle, and bewayling re∣prove, and reproving would very willingly expell.
A plaine argument to prove, that we have therein no society with them at all. For, as the Text here by you alleadged doth imply, to reprove them is to have no fellowship with them. So then, as concer∣ning our present point, though they be there, yet seeing we cannot avoid them, we will not (for their sakes) with-draw our selves from Gods ordinance. The reason, because we are commanded to come, but have no dispensation to stay away. SECT. II. THe next place, which you object, is in Levit. 19.17. Thou shalt in anywise rebuke thy neigh∣bour, and not suffer sin upon him. Answ. A whol∣some precept for brotherly admonition: the ob∣servation whereof is as comfortable, as necessary. For, if we doe thus, we shall not only discharge a duty, but procure a blessing. A blessing (it may be) upon the soule of him whom we rebuke: but if not, yet certainly a blessing from God into our own bosom, if we do it in a right manner. This duty then must be performed by us, with a great deale of care, in any wise it must bee done; or, with a great deale of iteration, in rebuking we must rebuke: so it is word for word. It must be done too with strong intention of the minde, it is a rebuking by way of argument, even to conviction, so far as we are able to effect it. And all this, with compassion, and out of the bowels of love, that we may not suffer sin up∣on him; or, if we will expound this in reference to
our selves, that we may not beare sinne for him; for thus also it may be, and by some the words are thus translated. I have said this, not to informe you in the meaning of the Text; peradventure you could have done this better than my selfe. But my ayme was, hereby to let you understand, how fully I doe agree with you in the substance of that duty, which is here injoyned. A thing certainly, wherein we are but too defective, and for which we could not answer unto God, but that (in him) we have a good Master, and (in Christ) a compleat Mediatour. Our competencie in performance, if it be sincere, he will accept: yea, and our sinfull neglect too hee will surely pardon, if we doe heartily repent. Well then, to come home to that for which you have al∣ledged this present Text; if, from a consideration of mine own fayling in thus admonishing my Bro∣ther, you would have me to forbeare this holy Sa∣crament, I see not how you can more urge it from this Text, for the presence sake of some ungodly persons, than by the same argument you might also urge it though there were none there to communi∣cate but only Saints, for the cause in me still would be the same. But (it may be) you intend the alle∣gation otherwise. The duty of the Text is, to re∣prove a sinner. Now, if I see a man that is notori∣ous in that kind, and yet submit my selfe to com∣municate with him at the Lords Table, this is not (you say) to reprove him, but to harden him in his sin. I answer: the end of my comming is the glo∣ry of God in my own soules comfort, not the hard∣ning
of any that is by. What is done by me, I doe in obedience to the command of God, and dare not doe otherwise. If in the mean time any man be occasionally or accidentally hardned, the fault is in himselfe, he hath no encouragement thereto from me. But, of this I have said more above, and thi∣ther I refer you. SECT. III. THe third place you mention is in 1 Thess. 5.22. Abstaine from all appearance of evill. Answ. A passage, which in the latter end of the for∣mer Chapter I had occasion to reflect upon, and there also vindicated it from your misapplication of the same: and thither, if you will, you may repaire for farther satisfaction. SECT. IV. THe fourth place you take out of Act. 2.40. Save your selves from this untoward genera∣tion. Answ. They are the words of Saint Peter, containing a summary of many things which he had before spoken upon the close of that excellent Sermon of his, unto those famous Converts mentio∣ned in the context of this Chapter. For our bet∣ter understanding of the true meaning of the words, I shall fetch the matter a little higher: It is said before at the 37. verse, that when this people had heard that sharpe and cutting Sermon of Saint
Peter, ripping up their foule sin in the betraying and killing of the Lord of Life, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Bretheren, what shall wee doe? In answer to this question, it is immediatly subjoyned, how Peter in his own name, and in the name of all the rest, adviseth them thus. First hee layes a charge upon them to repent, i. e. to be tou∣ched with true remorse for that which they had done. Secondly, he injoynes them to believe in the name of Christ for the remission of their sinnes. Thirdly, in testimony of this Faith of theirs, he would have them submit unto the Sacrament of Baptisme. All these in the 38 verse: whereunto (for their better encouragement) he adds, how rea∣dy God is (on his part) to accept them, if they hear∣ken to his call, vers. 39. And then lastly, in the fourth place, he earnestly perswades, that to the end they mght continue & proceed on in the grace of God, they would not only thus joyne with the Church of Christ in the Communion of Saints, but also sever themselves from them, who were ene∣mies to the same. And this last thing he urgeth, as with much diligence, even with many other words: so with great authority and ferventnesse of spirit, for he testified and exhorted, saying, Save your selves from this untoward Generation. This unto∣ward Generation, who are they? More generally, it may comprehend the whole Communitie of the Jewish Naton, who most unworthily had shed the blood of Christ, and had not yet repented of that
sinne. But more specially (as I conceive) it is in∣tended of the Priests, Scribes, and Pharises, great men among the Jewes, of high authority, and much prevalency with the People, by whose instigation also the People had done that wicked act. Now, from this untoward, froward, perverse, distorted, crooked generation of open and professed enemies of Christ, whose hands were yet freshly embrewed with his pretious blood, and were no way touched with remorse for that their wickednesse, S. Peter ad∣viseth these new Converts to save themselves. To save themselves, what's that? To be subservient unto God, & to serve his Providence in the spirituall pre∣servation of themselves, as by submitting to the way and means which he hath ordained, of which afore: so by with-drawing themselves from those wicked and malitious Enemies of Christ and his Religion, who might otherwise, either by their Authority o∣ver-awe them, or by their subtilty circumvent them, or by their conversation corrupt them. And this (as I conceive) is the meaning of this place, which how it can serve to prove your Tenet, I doe not see. Let us make some paralells. The untoward gene∣ration here intended by S. Peter (as I finde it here observed to my hand) were the open and professed Enemies of Christ:The same Apologist against Brown. u supra. but the men, to whom you doe apply the words are (although faulty, yet) pro∣fessed servants and friends of Christ, baptized with us in the same water, and in the same name; main∣taining every branch of the same Truth, and using (for substance) the same divine worship, which we
doe. Surely, the Persons are ill-matched. From the Persons, let us go on to the act of duty, which with respect unto them is injoyned. Saint Peter cals upon these Converts, that, to the end they might the better continue in the Churches Communion, they would sever themselves from these gracelesse Aliens: You, on the other side, would hence rea∣son, that for the presence sake of some (who yet are no aliens) we must with-draw our selves from the Churches Communion. To conclude, S. Peter here calls his Auditors to participate in the Sacra∣ments with the rest of Gods People: but you, for an offence conceived, not against all, but only some of the People, would needs perswade us to forsake the rest, even the better part, the right people indeed, the Sacrament, and all. If this be not to wrest, and to pervert the Scripture, then I doe very much mistake. SECT. V. THe last place you refer us to, is in 2 Cor. 6.17. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the uncleane thing. Answ. A most divine injunction, and with great care by us to be observed: but then we must take heed we understand it in the right sense, lest other∣wise (mistaking) we rather idolize our own fancie, than submit to Gods command. The scope of S. Paul is, in the latter part of this Chapter, to disswade the Corinthians (who were Saints by calling, 1 Cor.
1.2.) from having any society with such as were without the Pale, whether superstitious Jewes, or (which I rather thinke) idolatrous Heathens. This councell or advice he first propoundeth, as just; secondly urgeth, as reasonable; thirdly repeateth, as of very necessary and high concernment. The proposition is set down in the former part of the 14. verse: Be ye not (saith he) unequally yoked to∣gether with unbelievers. Christians are of a conditi∣on far different from that of Infidels or Unbelievers; and therefore, if they be yoked together with them, they are unequally yoked. As under the Law it was forbidden to plow with an Oxe and an Asse together, Deut. 22.10. Reason, because by the le∣gall constitution the one was a clean beast, the o∣ther uncleane, and so the yoke unequall in that re∣spect: So even then, and now also, it is forbidden that beleevers and unbeleevers should draw toge∣ther in one and the same yoke, whether the yoke of Matrimony, or the yoke of neere and needlesse familiaritie, or (which I think here the Apostle mainly intends) the yoke of mpiety; Reason, be∣cause by meanes of the Divine calling, the one is holy, the other prophane; and so the yoke is un∣equall also in that respect. Summarily then, the meaning of the Apostles Proposition is, that the Corinthians, being Chri∣stians, should not maintain societie with Heathens, by communicating with them in their impieties, or (which is all one) by joyning themselves to them in their idolatious Assemblies, Temples, Sacrifices, or
Feasts, which they celebrated in honour of their Idols. This is the Proposition, which in the fol∣lowing words, viz. to the end of the 16. verse, he doth farther urge by a comparative argument taken from the nature of contraries, thus. As for those Infidels and Pagans, they are utterly estranged from all true righteousnesse: but ye are the righteousnes of God in Christ (2 Cor. 5.21.) and, what fellow∣ship hath righteousnesse with unrighteousnesse? They are in a dull and darke condition, yea, they are darknesse it selfe, but yee are light in the Lord: and, what communion hath light with darknesse? They are the chi dren of Belial, even of Satan that perverse and disobedient spirit; but ye are the mem∣bers of Christ: and, what concord hath Christ with Belial? They are Infidels and such as doe contemn the Gospell; but yee are among the number of Be∣lievers: and, what part hath he that believeth with an Infidel? Lastly, they are, as the worshippers, so in a sort also the very Temples of Idols; but yee are the Temple of God: and, what agreement hath the Temple of God with Idols? Thus the Proposi∣tion is urged. Lastly, in the 17. verse, the place which here you doe alleadge, he once againe repeats it, though in other words, yet in effect tending to the same purpose, & his expression is mostly borrow∣red from the Prophet Esay, chap. 52.11. Come out from among them, and be yee separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing. In which words, by way of allusion to that place of the Pro∣phet, or (if you will rather) by way of expository
application of that unto all Christians, which the Prophet particularly there gave in charge unto the Jewes, as a duty to be performed by them in the day of their deliverance from the Babylonish Capti∣vity; the Apostle exhorteth the Corinthians, and in them us, that we also being freed by Christ from our spirituall thraldome under Satan, would hence∣forth (even in memory of so great a benefit, and in very love and reverence to our gracious Redeemer) renounce the wicked conversation of the unchristi∣an, Antichristian world, and not communicate with thm in their Idolatrous & Superstitious abomina∣tions. And this (as I conceive) is properly the meaning of this place. Now, in the application hereof to your present purpose (whether wittingly, or else out of inadvertencie, I will not determine) let the Reader judge, how far you wander. For, SECT. VI. FIrst, as touching the Persons concerning whom the charge is given, Your application is more generall than the Text will beare. S. Paul indeed doth call upon us to with-draw our selves, and so to make a kinde of separation: but, from whom? I trow, not from the Church of Christ, because of some particular mixtures with the world: but from the world of unbelieving men, into the Church of Christ. That is, from Heathens and Aliens, who doe not so much as make profession of the name of Christ: and not (as you would have it) from pro∣fessed
Christians, who, though not so fully answer∣ing their profession, doe yet professe the Christian Religion. The ground of this exception against your manner of proceeding is so evident in the text, that you could not but foresee it, and accordingly have studied to take it off. Against the application (say you) of this last place, it wilbe objected, That it is to be understood of separation from wicked ones that are without; But then, let it be remembred, that we must estrange our selves more from known wicked persons that would seem to be within, than from open wicked persons that are manifestly without: for, so much wee have learned from 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. Answ. Wee have learned indeed somewhat, but not so much as you inferre, from that passage. Scandalous Christi∣ans, with respect unto their personall societie, are in some sort more to be estranged from, than unbe∣lieving Pagans: this is not denied. But, that this estrangement should reach so farre, as to make us (for their sakes, and in abhorrency of their presence, when we cannot lawfully prevent it) to forsake the meetings of the Saints, and to desert the performance of holy duties, particularly this duty of comming to the Lords Table, which God requireth at our hands, and with which we have no authority to dispense, is a thing altogether besides truth, and no way coun∣tenanced by S. Paul in this place. But, of this I have discoursed more at large above, and thither now I doe referre you.
SECT. VII. SEcondly, as concerning the thing about which the charge is given, your exposition also is too large. For, suppose here (for discourse sake) that the meaning of S. Paul had been, that we must sepa∣rate our selves, as from gracelesse Heathens, so from scandalous Christians too (which, if soberly perfor∣med, is no more than fitting, and wee have other places to confirme it by, though not so properly and directly here intended) yet then, let me ask you, what kinde of separation is it, which the Apostle means? For my part, I have both weighed the con∣text, and consulted Expositors upon the place, and in conclusion finde, that the separation here spoken of is farre different from that which you would have. It differs first in the matter, wherein or wherea∣bout the separation must be made. Our separati∣on (from whomsoever, if it be just) must alwayes be from evill to good: but never from good to e∣vill. We must have no fellowship with Heathens in their Idolatry, or scandalous Christians in their impiety: no, these are things which God hath ut∣terly forbidden, and such as no circumstances can make lawfull. But, on the other side, to separate (though but from Heathens) in a known and neces∣sary good, is in no sort allowable: much lesse may we thinke our selves obliged to separate (in such a case) from professed Christians. Now, our com∣ming
to the Lords Table (as I have often said) is good, yea, a thing enjoyned by Christ to every Christian, and to this injunction there is no such clause of dispensation added, as you pretend, That however, if we see others come and offer themselves (who yet to our seeming are unworthy) it may be lawfull for us to stay away. Their presence then is no sufficient plea for us. Evill though they be, yet we may not so far separate from that evill, as (upon that ground) to separate also from the good; that is, from communicating with Gods children, in the things of God. To separate from visible evill, so, as to separate also from visible good, is certainly not a good, but an evill separation. Besides, there is a difference too in the manner of separating. The separation which S. Paul inten∣deth, is not (as you urge) locall and corporall, but mentall and spirituall. It consisteth not in the with∣drawing of our bodies from their personall pre∣sence: but, in the with-holding of our affections from their sinfull courses. Though the former may be needfull at some times, and upon some occasi∣ons, which the Scripture elsewhere doth expresse: yet the latter is the thing which the Apostle in this place doth so indispensably require, as that which may not be omitted or neglected by us,Mscul. in Esa. c. 52. v. 11. Hy∣perius in 2 Cor. 6.17. Erasmus Sarcerius in eundem locum Apost upon any occasion, or at any time. For your fuller satisfacti∣on in this point, I referre you to those cleere and pregnant testimonies, which I have quoted in the margin from the pens and judgements of no meane or contemptible Authors. To conclude: The se∣paration
here urged by S. Paul, I understand not so much of a bodily recession from occasionall being in company with wicked men, as of a ghostly ces∣sation from actuall communicating with them in their wicked workes. This is generally the summe. But then (as Aquinas here notes) there are three de∣grees of expression in the Text. First (saith he) we must come out from among them: and this is done by a reall departing from their sinnes. Secondly, we must separate our selves: and this is done by not vouchsafing so much as a consent to their evill. Thirdly, we must not touch the uncleane thing: and this is done by a discreet and zealous reproving of their impietie. Shortly, this counsell is in effect the same with that other in Rom. 12.2. Be ye not conformed to this world: but, be ye transformed by the renuing of your mind. Or, if you will, with that in Ephes. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of darknesse: but rather reprove them.
CHAP. VII. Of Mr. C. his undertaking to answer objections made against his Tenet: with a vindication of the said objections from his exceptions. SECT. I. HItherto you have layd your owne grounds, which (as you say) are unanswerable: but, how truly that, indifferent Judges must determine. You proceed now to refell some few objections, which by some have been brought a∣gainst your Tenet. And here againe you goe on with such a confidence, and (indeed) so magistrally demeane your selfe in your definitive expressions, as if your very looks were of sufficient force to blast all arguments that are alleadged, or to lay all levell to the ground that shall stand in opposition to your will. All pleadings against that which you would have, are (in your wisedome) but presumptions, as being either silly arguments, weake niblings, poore objections, or at the best (if alleadged by them, whom it may be to curry favour with, in hope to make them your own Proselites, and by their ad∣herence
to extend the bounds and propogate the li∣mits of your new Congregation, you stile well-meaning Christians) yet confidently enough you beare them in hand, that while they thus object, they are indeed deceived by the error of their owne judgement, and by the false suggestions of others. Su∣perciliously enough, and not without the mixture of much scorne. But, Mr. Coxe, yur big words may not carry it. Sumes of resoluion, unlesse accmpanied with strength of Reasn, is but poore defence. For my part, I submi my selfe unto the judgement of men more learned and better versed in this controversie than either you or I. Mean while, so far as modestie permits, I shall once more make a triall of your strength, and not much feare your violent encounters. Well then, to our taske. SECT. II. THe first objection made against your Tenet was grounded upon 1 Cor. 11.29. The words, according to our last and best translation, run thus: He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to himselfe. [To him∣selfe] that is the word upon which the emphasis is set by the objector. He eateth and drinketh dam∣nation: to whom? The Apostle doth not say, to others; but, to himselfe. An expression very disso∣nant from your assertion, while you say, that he eat∣eth and drinketh (to wit, unavoydably and at all times) to the prejudice of others, who at the same
time communicate with him, though not in his un∣worthinesse, yet in his presence with him at the Table, which is crime enough. This is the summe of the objection. Now, to shew the sillinesse here∣of, you require us to consider these ensuing particu∣lars, viz. SECT. III. 1 THat the Apostle speaks this, with an intended ap¦plication to the Corinthians, who received the Sacrament unworthily (i. e. after an unmeet and irre∣verent manner) only in a measure, not being under the reigne of this sin, as the unregenerate are. And, that the word here translated [damnation] doth signifie only [judgement] and is hereto be understood only for such judgements, as God laid upon the Corinthians for their correction in that respect. And this the verses follow∣ing doe make manifest. Answ. There are two things here, which I take notice of, viz. your distinctions, and the application of them to the point in hand. You distinguish, first of the Persons, who may be said to come unworthily to this Sacrament. They are either unregenerate, or renewed. The one, such as doe remaine still under the power and reigne of naturall corruption, and consequently (for the present) are utterly void of all true faith and repen∣tance towards God. The other, such, who though repaired in their nature, and so turned to God by faith and repentance in their effectuall calling, have yet the remainders of corruption in them, though
not reigning as before, yet solliciting and draw∣ing them (not seldome) into the commission of new sinnes, for which ever and anon their humiliation and repentance ought to be repeated. According to this distinction of the Persons, you distinguish in the nex place of two degrees of eating and drink∣ing unworthily at the Lords Table. One, totall, when there is nothing in the persons that may in a∣ny sort answer to the grace of the Sacrament: and this is evermore to be found in the unregenerate, re∣maining such. Another, partiall, or (as you will phrase it) only in a measure, when, though grace be habited in the persons, yet it is not actuated at the time, they being not so carefull as they ought so to consider themselves and the actions they goe a∣bout, as to be in a meet and fit preparation thereun∣to, by reviving their faith, to the apprehension of the forgivenesse of their sinnes past; also their pe∣nitent resolution to live in all things more pleasing∣ly to God for time to come; together with earnest longing after the grace of God in Christ, as for the strengthening of their hearts, so for the increase of their holinesse, in respect of both: and this is inci∣dent (indeed too often) to the most renued Chri∣stians at some times. Consequently upon this, di∣stinguish in the third place of two sorts of penalties, which unworthy receiving at the Lords Table doth draw upon the Receivers. They are both stiled by one generall name, that is, a judgement from God: but this judgement is not all of one kind. To the un∣regenerate and such as doe come totally unworthy,
it is a judgement exending to condemnation. But, to the regenerate, who receive unworthily but in part and in a measure only, it reacheth no farther than to their correction: though their sinfull neglect, even because it is sinfull, do in it self contract a guilt suf∣ficient to condemn them, if God would; yet God, who hath begun a good work in them, and so hath entertained better thoughts towards them, will not take the advantage of that demerit, nor suffer that guilt to redound so farre upon their persons, but (overlooking the judgement which is eternall) he in∣flicteth upon them onely that which is temporall; and this too, not legally, as a severe Judge, in way of satisfaction to his justice, but evangelically, as a wise and loving Father, in way of castigation for their amendment. These are your distinctions. Now, in application of them to the point in hand, you seem to say, that S. Paul in this place is to be understood, not of the first sort of Commers, nor of the first degree of unworthines, and consequent∣ly also not of the first kinde of penalties: but of the latter only. And so, if I mistake not, even upon this ground you conclude, that this place maketh nothing against you. For, albeit (as the Apostle here saies) regenerate persons, receiving sometimes unworthily in some degree, doe thereby procure a judgement only to themselves; the reason, because their sinne being more in secret betwixt God and their own soules, it doth not so much appeare to the offence of others, and consequently cannot have that influence upon others, which else it would, if
it were more open and conspicuous: yet herehence (say you) it doth not follow, at least from S. Pauls words it cannot be concluded, that thus also the case standeth with the unregenerate. Unregenerate persons are more openly wicked, and so more grossely scandalous; and therefore, when they come in their unworthinesse, they procure a judge∣ment not only to themselves, but also unto others: the reason, because those other, though they know them so unworthy, will yet needs come and beare them company at the Lords Table. And this (as I thinke) is the summe and substance of your answer in the words fore-quoted. SECT. IV. NOw, to rejoyne a little. As touching your di∣st nctions, I am so farre from opposing them, that I have studied (as you see) to bring them more into the light: all the difference betwixt us will be about the application of them to our present con∣troversie. The maine thing you ayme at in the ap∣plication, is, thereby to limit the Apostles words to the regenerate alone: wherein yet, with good Au∣thours, and (I trust) upon good grounds, I do whol∣ly dissent from you; and the reason of my dissent is (in the generall) this, because the Apostle doth not thus limit and restrain himselfe, but rather the con∣trary. The better to demonstrate this, I shall first deliver my own grounds, and then answer your ob∣jections.
My own grounds I take out of the Text. The words (you see) are indefinitely uttered. S. Paul doth not say, He among you that believes, or, He that is regenerate, but simply and indefinitely, He. As if he had said; He, whosoever he be, that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgement to himselfe. A little farther to justifie this extensive interpretation of the word, look up∣ward to the two foregoing verses, viz. the 27. and the 28. of this Chapter, upon which this 29. verse hath an immediate and direct dependence. The ayme of S. Paul is, in all this discourse, to beat down the sin of unworthy communicating. More parti∣cularly, in these three verses, he endevours to effect this three wayes. First by describing the odiousnes of the sinne, vers. 27. Secondly by prescribing the meanes to prevent it, vers. 28. Thirdly by urging the use of this meanes from the danger of neglect, vers. 29. These three then, tending to one and the same thing, must necessarily be understood with the same extent of application, in regard of persons therein concerned. Whence it will cleerly follow, that, if the two first branches of the Apostles ad∣monition be indefinitely and universally directed to all, then it cannot be but that this latter branch also must be so intended and directed too. Now, that the former are thus indefinitely aymed, is most apparent. In the 27. verse, describing the odious∣nesse of the sin, Whosoever (saith he) shall eat this bread, and drinke this cup of the Lord unworthily, shalbe guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.
Marke, Whosoever. So (generally) the word is ren∣dered by Expositors, Quisquis, whosoever. And in the 28. verse, prescribing meanes for the preventi∣on of this sin, Let a man (saith he) examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drinke of that cup. Observe againe, Let a man, that is, every man, without exception, without exemption of any that hath any thing to doe in this busines. And thus (commonly) we finde the Greek word  here used in the Text, to be expressed by the Latine Qusque, every man, or every one. Examples of the like use of this very word are frequent in the Scrip∣ture, whereof you cannot be ignorant. Among others, I referre you to these places, Mat. 16.26. Joh. 3.27. & 7.46. Gal. 6.1. Though these things thus urged may abundantly suffice, yet, to the end the truth of my assertion may yet more appeare, let us consider in the next place who they were, to whom all this was written by S. Paul. Without que∣stion, this Epistle was intended by him to the whole visible Body of the Church of Corinth, wherein though all were called to be Saints, cap. 1.2. yet, it may justly be conceived, there were too many, who were nothing lesse than Saints indeed. S. Paul was charitable enough, and yet (without breach of cha∣rity) he saw ground sufficient, whereupon not only to suspect, but even to taxe them in plaine termes, as miserably defective in this kinde. And although, with respect unto the better qualified part among them, he did sometimes correct and mitigate his censure; yet upon the bad, who were mingled with
them, he lets it rest still in the full weight. You may see to this purpose what he writes in cap. 3. of this Epistle, vers. 1, 2, 3. Now then, he writing to the whole Body of this Church, wherein there was such a mixture of bad with good, and among whom he saw so many base enormities, savouring of no∣thing lesse than a regenerate condition; and these also breaking forth, as at other times, so particularly at the time of their solemne Assemblies, even when they met to celebrate this holy Sacrament, as you may see in this very chapter, vers. 17.18.19. &c. is it likely, that in his cautions and directions ten∣ding to amendment, in his comminations and threatnings frighting them from evill, he would only reflect upon the good, and not at all upon the bad? Had S. Paul no bowels of compassion in him? was there no longing in his soule after the conver∣sion and reformation of them, who as yet remained in the state of nature? Surely, if these were faulty as well as others, if their amendment were wished together with others, it cannot be, but that the ad∣monitions aymed to the rest, must be extended like∣wise unto them; and that inclusively with respect to them amongst the rest, the words we now discourse of were intentionally no lesse extended, than I have said. SECT. II. BUt, you have reasons to object against me. I see it: and the maine reason which you urge is ta∣ken
from the signification of the word  in the originall; which word (as you say) though tran∣slted [damnation] doth signifie only [judgement] and is here to be understood onely of such judge∣ment as God layd upon the Corinthians (to wit, the regenerate among them) for their correction, by reason of their unmeet and irreverent comming to the Lords Table. Answ. The word indeed which you insist on doth properly signifie [judgement] and so also our Translatours have observed in the Margine of our Bibles. Judgement I say, not only definitive, in God: but afflictive, on man. Now, this afflictive judgement againe is double. It is ei∣ther the guilt of sinne imputed, so the word is taken Rom. 5.16. or the penalty for sin to be endured, and so I understand the application of it in this place. And thus farre (for ought I yet know) we doe agree. To proceed then. This judgement inflicted as a pe∣nalty for sin, and expressely noted by this word, is taken two waies in the Scripture. Sometimes more strictly, and with limitation only to one kinde, im∣porting either a fatherly chastisement on the good, 1 Pet. 4.17. or a rigorous and revengefull punish∣ment upon the bad, whither inchoate here, or con∣summate hereafter, Luke 20.47. Rom. 3.8. 2 Pet. 2.3. And sometimes more largely, as comprehen∣ding under it not only one, but all sorts of penalties, though yet not equally and alike, but differently to be inflicted on the menaced parties, as they shall shew themselves either penitent or perverse, and so be more or lesse in Gods esteem, Rom. 33.2. Galat.
5.10. Jam. 3.1. And in this last sense (though you deny it, yet) affirm the word to be here used. And my reason is, because (as hath been said) the Apostle under one word so indefinitely threatning all, both regenerate and unregenerate, that one word of ne∣cessi y must be so taken, that to persons so different it may differently represent the penalty peculiar to their condition, that is, a chastisement to the one, but a revenge unto the other. SECT. VI. BUt, you goe on still, and will prove the contra∣ry, viz. that the judgements here intended by S. Paul were only temporall chastisements. And this (you say) is manifest by those rehearsed judge∣ments in the verses following, especially verse 30. where he saith, For this cause many are weake and sickly among you, and many sleep. And in the two next verses he farther intimates, that the intent of God in that infliction of his, was rather to nurture them, than to revenge himselfe upon them; for so he adds, If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged: but, when we are judged, wee are chstened of the Lord, that we should not be con∣demned with the World. Answ. Your instances are all right, as being taken out of the Text: but from thence you can have no sufficient argument to prove what you intend. These instances, if you observe them, are instances onely on one side, brought in by way of example to illustrate (in part)
what before he had more generally delivered. The commination at the 29. verse (as I have largely pro∣ved) is of the nature of a generall rule. Now, the generality of a rule is not infringed by the particu∣larity of an instane. In our common discourses you may oberve ths, that when a rule (containing under it more particulars than one) hath been pro∣pounded at large, the instancing in one part (for ex∣ample) doh not exclude the other: especially, wheret falls out that the instance is given in that part, which in ordinary apprehension is most que∣stionable, and which (if granted) will necessarily in∣ferre the proofe of the other, by an argument from the lesse unto the greater. A thing, which here is most apparent, as you may see by comparing these places of Scripture, Prov. 1.31. Jer. 25.29. Luke 23.31. 1 Pt. 4.17 8. St. Paul (if it had pleased him) might have instanced tke other way, and so have sent home the threatning in full weight to the hearts of the prophae: but, partly because this was gatherable from the other, as the fore-quoted places shew; and partly (it may be) for other reasons best known unto himself (whether out of modesty, as not willing to exasperate; or, out of tendernes of spirit, as loth to over-fright the weak-hearted; I cannot determine) he waves that, and gives the in∣stance only the milder way. Upon the matter, it is, as if in more words he had thus said. Take heed, O yee Corinthians, how yee approach unworthily to the Lords Table. It is not so slight a matter, as many thinke. The sinne certainly is hainous, and
the penaltie is grievous to them that doe it: for, in stead of eating and drinking to their comfort, as they would; they shall incurre a judgement, which they would not. Yea, so incensed will God shew himselfe against all unworthy commers in this kind, that he will execute his judgements, not only upon them, who (under a shew of godlines) are godlesse; but even upon them also (in some kind) who, though Beleevers indeed, as yet now and then but too too carelesse in preparing themselves for their worthy communicating in these high and holy my∣steries of Christ. And, for this, I need not goe far to seek examples: you may see it in part by that which hath of late befallen your selves; for, even for this cause, many ae weake and sickly among you, and many sleep, &c. SECT. VII. 2. THat this inference, He that eateth and drink∣eth unworthily, eateth and drinketh judge∣ment to himselfe; Therefore his sin cannot hurt any other; or, Therefore no man else ought to restraine him from his sin; or, Therefore no man else needeth to refuse to communicate with him: That this inference (I say) it so alogicall, false, and senselesse, as that a man which regards his credit, will be ashamed to owne it. Answ. Good words, I pray you: neither be so angry without a cause. The proposition, He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himselfe, is of S. Pauls own making; and we have sufficiently asserted that. But then, as for those three
inferences which you draw from thence, and so (with fine art) would father them upon others, they are all of them (in your way of understanding) Mr. Coxes own. And therefore, if they be (as you have said) so alogicall, false, and senselesse, that a man who regards his credit will be ashamed to own them; let Mr. Coxe look to it, for he must father these his own mishapen brats. The more cleerly to evince this, let us consider what you adde in the very next words, in way of opposition to the forenamed infe∣rences. It is every mans duty (say you) to keep him∣selfe  sptted from the World, Jam 1.27. And he deeveh not (say I) the name of a Christian, that  a Truth. For, as the  This is pue Religion and undefi∣led . So then, about this there  twixt you and me. You confess th duty as well as I; yea, and withall you set a special kinde of emphasis upon the pronoune, Himslfe. For, though (in this busines) a mans selfe be not the only object of his own care, yet Himself primarily and in the first place must be lookt unto. Our charitie must begin at hme, though it must not stay there, but still (as opportunitie serveth) walke abroad to others in good performances. All this (I thinke) is granted upon both hands. Where is then the difference? You will tell us that forth∣with in your interrogatorie inferences. For, say you, Though it be every mans duty thus to keep himselfe, yet, Doth it therefore follow, that a man is not to regard his Brother? or, That a Christian needs
not to turn away from those, that deny the power of god∣lines? Answ. I think not: for if I regard not my Brother, I am uncharitable, and keep not him; and if I turne not from those that are unworthy, I am unwise, and keep not my selfe. And thus, if it may doe you any pleasure, you have my answer in plaine termes to your interrogatories. But now let me ask you, to what end (having instanced in that pas∣sage of S. James) doe you propound these quere's? Is it, for that I or any other whom you oppose, did ever draw such inferences from that Text? I hope you have more modestie than to say so. What then? was your meaning hereby to let us know, that those two inferences (the two last of the three above-named) are no more deduceable from the words of S. Paul, than these are from the words of S. James? I suppose indeed that this was your intention. And if so, then it must needs follow, that these two paire of inferences (according to your understanding of them) are equivalent. That is, that, on the one side, Not to regard our Brother, and, Not to restraine him from his sin? and on the other side, Not to turne a∣way from those that deny the power of godlinesse, and, Not to refuse to commanicate with such; are in effect the same thing. And if thus you mean, as for ought I see you must, then doubtlesse you doe but vainly beat the ayre, as having no adversary (that I know) which doth gainesay your assertion, delivered to us under that supposition. For, what sober Christian did ever thus argue from the words of S. Paul, that because (as he saith) An unworthy communicant doth
eat and drink judgement to himself, Therefore no man else ought to restraine him from his sinne, that is (as you interpret) to have any regard towards him in that kind: Or, therefore no man else needeth to refuse to commu∣nicate with him, that is (as you expound) to turn a∣way from him, while he thus denies the power of godli∣nesse? If you would fasten any such thing upon us, you are manifestly injurious. And, if not: then, on the other side, your argumentation is most ridi∣culous. At least, if you will justifie your reasoning to be good, you must first prove, That to communi∣cate at the Lords Table in the things of Gd, where a wicked man is accidentally present, and we have no lawfull power either to with-draw our selves or to keep him off, is to communicat with him in his sinne, and to denie all good endevour of restraining him from the same: which (I believe) is more than you can doe. SECT. VIII. BUt, what shall wee say now to your third infe∣rence, which, though first named, is yet reser∣ved by you to the last place? S. Paul saith, He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgement to himselfe. The inference which you would draw hence (according to our opinion, as you pretend) is, that therefore his sinne cannot hurt any other, to wit, beside himself. Answ. In a right understanding, I conceive this inference to be justi∣fiable enough. A right Christian, duly prepared
in himselfe (as having bewayled his own sinnes, and, so farre as in him lyes, the sins of others) and so com∣ming (in the Gospel-sense) after a worthy manner to this holy Sacrament, is not by his bare communi∣cating with others (whom he suspects to be unwor∣thy) so farre hurt, as thereby to bee drawn with them into the societie of their sin, or to be made ly∣able (as a malefactor in that regard) to the judge∣ments and plagues of God. This wee constantly maintain, and doe believe it followes well from the fore-alledged Text, because S. Paul saies, He that eat-thd dinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh jg ment to himselfe. The Apostle had observed mny at uses in the Corinthians, and could not but conceive (yea, it is manifest he did conceive) that too many mong them did come very unworthily to the Lords Table: and out of all doubt, if he had been of your opinion, he would thereupon have ad∣visd the better sort to have with-drawn themelves for the time, even while they saw such unwor∣thy persons to approach, least oherwise, by com∣municating together with them, they might (in that act) be so farre hurt, as to be involved with them under the guilt and punishment of their sin. If S. Paul had seen any such necessity for this advice, here was properly the place wherein to have given it; be∣cause here, and not els-where (that I can fide) in this Epistle, he professedly treateth of this Subject. Yet (here) he is so farre off from doing any such thing, that (to my seeming) he doth the contrary. For, having reproved their abuses, and particularly
noted the hainousnes of this sin which we now dis∣course of vz. unworthy receiving, and then apply∣ing himselfe by way of Councell and advice toward the redressing of the same, He requires them every man apart to look well unto himself, and to see that he be in due preparation. Saith he, Let a man ex∣amine Himselfe. Well: and when he hath so done, what must he doe next? must he looke unto the company that are about him, and if he see there any whom he suspects to be unworthy, must he forbeare the action for which he hath so laboured to prepare himselfe, least, by communicating with him in the outward symbolls, he become defiled and unwor∣thy too? The Apostle giveth no such advice, but rather the contrary. Let a man examine himselfe, and so (aith he) let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. For, he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgement to himselfe. He saith not, to Others: but, to Himselfe. SECT. IX. BUt, you will prove notwithstanding, that he eateth and drinketh judgement, not to himself onely, but to others also: for, thus you adde. Who will stick to say that Achan by his sinne did draw judge∣ment upon himselfe? will any man of understanding conceive such a saying to imply, that his sin did hurt no body but himselfe? Answ. As touching Ahans sin, and the punishment thereof (which tuned to the destruction, not of him only, but of many others)
it is so plaine by Scripture, that a man of under∣standing will not question it. He was in that act the Troubler of Israel, 1 Chron. 2.7. And how far, and after what manner the whole Hoast of Israel was troubled by him, we have the story at large, Josh. 7. and the recapitulation thereof more in briefe, Josh. 22.20. But, how unfitly doe you alleadge this to prove your assertion? For, first how can you m ke it good, that, the purpose of God was, in the infli∣ction of that judgement upon the whole Congre∣gation of Israel (some more, some lesse) by occasion of Achans sin, to make that act of his a common do∣cument how he would ordinarily deale both with them and others in the like case? A secret reason of Gods justice (no doubt) there was in the dispensati∣on of that act, the depth whereof we are not able to found, much lesse may we adventure to declare. Only this I am sure of, and the storie of the Church doth make it good, that this was not his ordinary and usuall wont. If it had been, the Church and the World both must long ere this have had their fatall periods. For, neither before, nor then, nor since, was there ever in the world a Congregation so pure, wherein some Achan or other hath not lurked, al∣though not in kind, yet in equivalencie. I am not willing to lanch farther into this deep. If you desire more, you may peruse what is left unto us by the great S. Augustine in his Questions, as also by Andreas Masius and others in their learned Com∣mentaries upon this book of Joshua: who perad∣venture may more wise you in this point, than I
can presume so much as to attempt. Mean while, that you may not too much triumph in the strength of your argument, I shall endeavour (a little more) to shew you the weaknesse thereof, in the conse∣quent absurditie that must needs follow thereupon. SECT. X. SEcondly therefore, I answer; That, though this instance of yours be nothing at all concerning the Sacrament, yet if by way of analogie you will draw it hither, and make it a ground of separating from wicked persons at the Communion, you must hereby acknowledge your selfe obliged to separate, not only from open and notorious Offenders, but also from close and secret Hypocrites, who as yet liethid and undiscerned: for, such a one was Achan, who sinned, and the Congregation knew it not, till afterwards by lot hee was found out. And then, what have you gained by this allegation, but to goe farther off still, and never (henceforward) to receive the Communion with any, but such only as you know and are infallibly assured of, that they are sanctified and holy, prepared and worthy, accepted nd lovely in Gods eyes? which how you can at∣taine unto, but by an extraordinary revelation from God himselfe, I doe not know. And so (for ought I see) you must never more receive this Sacrament as a Communion: unlesse you will presume (with that late fanaticall Sect) to be able, by the very be∣holding of mens outward countenances and actions,
infallibly to discerne their Election and Regene∣rotion. Take heed; I beseech you, take heed. These fancies are dangerous things to be entertained or played with. How many hath the World seen, who by a wanton dalliance with their own petulant wits, have miserably undone themselves in this regard? Be not offended at my plaine dealing. I am still a∣mong the number of those your friends, who doe affectionately wish your welfare in all, but especial∣ly in the best things. And, from that affection it comes, that I am so earnest with you. SECT. XI. 3. AS touching those many that were weake and sickly among the Corinthians, and those many among them that were smitten with death; doth the text imply, that none of these felt this affliction for their sinfull fellwship with the sinne of others that did com∣municate unworthily? Answ. If any among the Corinthians, either by counsell, or connivence, or encouragement, &c. had any sinfull fellowship with the sinne of others, who so unworthily presented themselves to the Lords Supper: no doubt, they smarted justly for their own proper sinne in that re∣gard. But, that their very communicating at the Lords Table (where such unworthy persons were present) was a degree of having sinfull fellowship with them in their sin, neither doth the Text say it, no, nor imply it, nor doe you offer any reason to evince it. If you had had any thing of moment to
alleadge, here was the place, and you might have done well to have produced it. But your silence argues the smallnes of your provision in that kinde, and consequently the weaknesse of your cause. And yet, definitively enough, you adde: When the Apo∣stle saith, He that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgement to himselfe; his meaning is plainely this, Hee drawes misery upon himselfe by his owne sinne in communicating un∣worthily. Answ. By his own sin in communica∣ting unworthily? who ever doubted of this, if rightly understood? But here againe you doe in∣volve your selfe in ambiguities: at least, you doe not speak out your full meaning. To communicate unworthily (if we speake in proper termes) is to come to the Lords Table with a personall unwor∣thines adhering to a mans selfe, through defect of preparation before, devotion at the time, and the like. But thus you may not understand the phrase here: for, if so, your commentary would be no o∣ther than a meere tantologie. That which you ayme at, is some farther matter: for, you would needs have us to believe, that our very comming to the Sacrament (where others that are unworthy doe offer themselves, doth ipso facto make us also unworthy Communicants, though otherwise (in regard of our own persons) we be never so well fit∣ted by way of preparation, never so much filled with devotion. But, your bare saying is no proofe: and the proofe you have alleadged to bring, is in∣sufficient.
SECT. XII. A Second objection which you meet with, is, from the authority of Scripture negative, thus: The Apostle in that 11. cap. of 1 Cor. (where he purposely treateth of abuses in and about the Lords Supper, and giveth Rules of reformation) doth not there take order for the repelling of any from this holy Communion, or for refusing to communicate with them. Ergo. Answ. This argument I finde both propounded and pro∣secuted by a learned neighbourM Nath. Dur. Minister of yours, who undertook some paines for your satisfaction in these points, long before I either knew or suspected you to have been sowred with this Leaven; whose animadversions also came accidentally to my view, while I was meditating this answer to your Thesis: and accordingly I shall leave the farther managing thereof to his own penne, who can doe it well and worthily enough without my assistance. Never∣thelesse, because you have laid it in my way, and sent me this challenge for a punctuall and cleer An∣swer, I shall consider the exceptions which you have against it. Thus then you say, That the per∣sons, touching whom the Apostle in that place speaketh, were either indeed or (at the least) in the Churches judge∣ment of charity in some measure fit for the receiving of the Sacrament, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, 1 Cor. 1.2. Touching wicked persons (appearing to be such) he had already taken order in chapter 5. and needed not now to repeat it again. Answ. As for the
fist part of your reply, it is true, the Apostle, wri∣ting to the generall body of this Church, doth give unto them such elogies as you repeat from 1 Cor. 1.2. the denomination being taken (if in your way to be understood) from the better part. But it doth not from thence follow, that all persons (to whose consideration he recommendeth this part of his E∣pistle concerning unworthy comming to the Lords Table) were so unspoted in their waies, that (if your Tenet might then have taken place) the rest need∣ed not to have made a scruple of communicating with them in the Sacrament. No: the very Text importeth, that even then, and among these, there were some, who (for many very scandalous, notori∣ous vices) were not only ill-reported of by others, but also reproved by S. Paul himselfe, as you may see in the 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. verses. Here then, if there had been any such necessity of doing that, which you so presse and urge upon us, the Apostle (who was ever carefull to keep back nothing, but revealed to the Church the whole counsell of God) would not have been so farre wanting either to himselfe or them, as not to have given them (at the least) some hint of what they ought to have performed in this regard. And whereas, in the se∣cond branch of your reply, you tell us, that, as touching wicked persons (appearing to be such) S. Paul had already taken order in chapter 5. and therefore needed not now to repeat the same againe: it is an as∣sertion altogether without truth, as I conceive. We have seen that chapter, and cannot finde in
it any such thing as you pretend. But, these are your slights to captivate weak minds with over-bold as∣sertions. SECT. XIII. THe third objection, which you are pleased to take notice of, is (as you phrase it) some nib∣ling at these words of the Apostle, Let a man examine Himselfe. Answ. With scorne enough, this slight and supercilious glance, upon the well-deserving en∣devours of the ingenuous Authour of this allegati∣on! But, I shall leave you (for this also) to his gen∣tle correction, if at the least-wise he shall think it worth his taking notice of it. Meane while, I at∣tend to what you adde, and call upon us to consider. Consider, you say, 1. That the Emphasis there lyes, not in the word [himselfe] but in the verbe [examine.] Answ. There is indeed an emphasis in both. In the verb, as pres∣sing an important duety: and in the pronoune, as pointing out the more speciall object, whereabout that dutie in the performance of it must be chiefely conversant. In which regard (I think) the empha∣sis doth mostly lye in the latter. Neither am I (here∣in) alone. For though Piscator (whom I suppose you follow) have led the way to your opinion in this behalfe, yet the generall current of Expositors doe so interpret this clause as I have said. 2. That no man in his right wits will from thence inferre, that a man should not examine those of his own charge. Answ. If your meaning be according to
your words, I am altogether of your mind. Nay, I goe farther yet, and say, that (to the end a man may hve whom he may examine) it is fit he should in∣struct those of his owne charge (though as yet but tender in regard of yeers) in the grounds and prin∣ciples of Religion, in the wayes and courses of Christian life: which, whether it crosse your pra∣ctice or opinion, peradventure you will tell me some time hereafter, when you shall finde your self at lea∣sure so to doe. 3. That our present question is not concerning per∣sons, whose unfitnesse is to be sifted out by examination, but concerning persons, whose unfitnesse and wickednes doth already manifestly appeare. Answ. This consi∣deration is crosse to both the former. For, in them you plead, that toward the well-discharging of a mans own duty, and to the end he may not be invol∣ved in the guilt of other mens sinne in comming un∣worthily to the Lords Table, especially when him∣selfe shall come along with them, his dutie is to examine, not himselfe alone, but them too. Againe, this Position doth not onely contradict your two former considerations, but is also inconsistent in it selfe, the first part thereof being in opposition to the second: for indeed, unto the second we cannot cme, but by the first, however you deny it. You say, Our present question is not concerning persons, whose unfitnes is to be sifted out by examination: but concer∣ning persons whose unfitnes & wickednes doth already manifestly appear. Already manifestly appear, how so? You will say, they have been observed to be thus and
thus, and you finde them to goe on still in the same way. But I aske againe, how doe you find them to got on still in the same way? Have you looked and searched into their present practises, as now they are? Have you conferred and expostulated with them about their evill courses? And, after all your diligence, have they given you an assurance (either by word or actions) that such as they have been, such they are still, without remorse? If in all or any of these wayes you have seriously dealt with them, as a Christian ought, then certainly you have passed up∣on them by way of examination: for, examinati∣on (as we now discourse of it) is an act, as much re∣all, as verball. But, if in none of all these you have had to doe with them, nor they with you, then, though your jealousie may peradventure suggest unto you an ill opinion of them, yet their present unfitnesse and wickednesse cannot so manifestly appear, as you pretend. And take heed, lest while you judge without a sufficient ground, you doe mani∣festly break the rule of Charity, and incurre the cer∣taine judgement of God. To returne then to our maine question, from which you have wandered, unto which these consi∣derations of yours are nothing pertinent. I have al∣ready declared (in my reply upon your answers to the first objection) what I conceive the Apostle chiefely aymed at in this precept of his concerning self-examination: and thither (if you please) you may have recourse for a fuller satisfaction. As for that duty which lyes upon us with respect to others,
thus I think; That before a man (in himselfe in∣deed unworthy) may lawfully be shut out from the Communion, it is needfull he should be, not onely suspected, but also knowne, yea, notoriously knowne, to bee such a one indeed. And, no∣toriously knowne hee cannot be, unlesse hee be first of all observed, yea, and sifted too, I say not on∣ly in private, by way of friendly admonition; but in publike also, by way of legall conviction. As in other cases, so proportionably here, the rule is justi∣fiable and good, A man may not be condemned be∣fore he be tryed, nor executed before hee be con∣demned. SECT. XIV. THe fourth objection which you encounter, a poore one like the rest (for so you stile it) was taken (as you say) out of Mat. 22.11, 12. Answ. To speak rightly, This was not urged as a new ob∣jection, but only brought in to illustrate the first, by way of allusion to the Parable concerning him, who sate at the marriage feast of the Kings Sonne, with∣out having on his wedding garment. A high pre∣sumption! which when the King espied, he said un∣to the Party, friend, how camest thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment? The thing here pressed was, that the King said not to his servants, how is it that yee have admitted this man hither? nor, to the rest that sate at Table, why are yee come hither with such a guest? but, to the unworthy man himself, how camest thou in hither, not having
on a wedding garment? This was the summe. Now you, what? For answer hereunto you will us to consi∣der, That by persons called, spoken of inverse 14. of that chapter, are meant such persons, as have not only been invited to faith and repentance by the preaching of the gospel, but also in outward profession have seemed to an∣swer that call. Accordingly, by the man not having on a wedding garment are meant such, as in Gods sight were found to come short both of sanctification and justification, notwithstanding their faire outward pro∣fssion by which they hd deceived the eyes of men. What is this to the admitting of open wicked persons to the Communion, or communicating with them? So you. Answ. To speak the least first, and so to goe higher by degrees. If this may not serve us as an argument, to demonstrate: yet as a similitude, to illustrate, it may fit us well enough. And so it hath been by me alleadged, and not by me only, but by many other both learned and godly, as I think you will not, you cannot well deny. And this, though I should adde no more unto it, would be enough (as I conceive) to take off your exception. Neverthelesse, to the end you may not think I studie rather how to finde an evasion, than to give you satisfaction, let us look a little neerer into your words. Secondly therefore, whereas you ask, What is this to the admitting of open wicked persons to the Com∣munion, or communicating with them? I answer, ve∣ry much. For, even those open wicked persons (as you stile them) apprehended and known to have been such by some, perhaps by many, it may be also by the
Minister himself, but as yet not legally thereof con∣victed, nor judicially declared to be such still, are (in this case, namely, when they come and offer them∣selves to the Communion) to be lookt upon by us, not so much with respect to what they have been formerly, as with regard to what they are, or (at the least) seem to be for the present: And so must be reckoned among them, who, being inv ted to Faith and repentance by the preaching of the Gospel, doe now in outward profession seem to answer that call. You cannot say, but that they have been told, how great the danger is which men incurre and draw up∣on themselves, by an unworthy comming to these awfull mysteries. They have heard the judgments of God no lesse frequently than severely denounced and threatned against such offenders, as in the Ser∣mons before, so in the prefatorie admonitions read unto them at the time of celebration. Neither will you (I hope) deny, that (all this while) they are rea∣sonable creatures, and such as have in them a desire of selfe-preservation, as well as other men. And therefore (in charity) we have reason to conceive, that (the premisses considered) they will not so de∣sperately rush upon this action (from which, if un∣worthy, they are so deterred) as wilfully to plunge themselves into those dreadfull miseries, which they cannot but apprehend as consequent upon their so high a degree of impiety and prophanesse. Besides, we all know that at this Sacrament the whole trans∣action of the businesse is so ordered by the wisdome of the Church, even with such solemnity of action,
and such varietie of divine expression, one while confessing, another while deprecating, then petiti∣oning, thanksgiving, and the like; that men not al∣together stupid, and in any competencie touched with remorse, are there and then (even in the very act of celebration) abundantly furnished with meanes, whereby not only to make profession of, but devoutly to be exercised in the acts of faith and repentance. Well then, to apply this to our present purpose. When the Parties you speake of shall pre∣sent themselves, and make an offer thus to joyne with the Congregation in the reverent performance of these holy duties, doe they not therein professe themselves to be men inwardly touched with re∣morse for sin, humbly begging mercy at Gods hand for what is past, and unfainedly resolving by his grace to prevent the like sinnes and follies for time to come? Etiam, & hoc testantur, eo ipso quòd ac∣cedant ad Coenam, as one saith. That is, They doe te∣stifie so much unto us, even by their very comming and offering themselves to the Lords Table where all things are so solemnly and joyntly performed. Peradventure you will say, that all this (yet) may be done in hy∣pocrisie, upon base motives, and to by-ends. It may be so, and by the event of things (heretofore) we have sometimes found, that of many we have had but too just cause to be jealous afterwards, though at the instant of their communicating we durst not but hope them such as they would then seem. If they prove otherwise, the fault is theirs: and let them look to it. For, though by their faire shewes
they may escape our censures, yet they cannot so elude God. The Master of the feast will surely come, and finde them out at length. And thus, as Bullin∣ger sayes well, Whosoever (having been admoni∣shed) doth yet dissemble, and so come unto these mysteries (indeed) otherwise than he makes a shew of, Non Ecclesiam, Dominum, aut Ministrum decipit; se seipsum, & sibi judicium manducat. i.e. He de∣ceiveth not the Church, the Lord, or the Minister: but he deceiveth his own soule, and eateth judge∣ment to himselfe. SECT. XV. THe last objection which you meet with, is that, which (as you say) you have taken up from the mouths of some well-meaning Christians, deceived by the error of their own judgement, and by the false suggestions of others. And, the summe of what they doe alleadge (by your report thereof) is this: That it is their duty to receive the Sacrament; and they cannot be perswaded, that by the performing of their required duty, they should make themselves guilty of hardening others in their sin, or of any such like of∣fence against God. Answ. If this be that which they alleadge, then surely, though for your owne ends you have a little glosed and fawned upon them in stiling them (as you do) well meaning Chri∣stians: yet, in so peremptorily censuring them, as men deceived by the error of their own judgement, and by the false suggestions of others, (whenas yet in this
thing they have expressed more true understan∣ding, thn they seeme to doe who speake against them) you have done them greater wrong, than that smoothing stile can recompence. But, let us see how you will make good what you said concerning them. To this (say you) I answer, that men must take heed that they performe required duties in the right or∣der and manner, not transgressing the rule of Gods word in the pretended performance of a dutie. Otherwise, they wilbe found, not so much to performe a duty, as to provoke God to anger by a great sin. And, for a proofe of this, you adde: It was (say you) the duty of David to bring the Arke to Jerusalem: yet, because the Arke was then set upon a cart, and not borne by the Priests, the Lord was provoked to anger, 1 Chron. 15.13. It was the duty of the Jewes in the dayes of Zerubbabel to build the Temple: yet might they not suffer the Sa∣maritanes to build with them, Ezra 4.2.3. It was the duty of the Jewes to eat the Passeover: yet might they not eat it in Babylon, though they were enforced to tarry there 70 yeeres, because their eating the Passeover there would not have been according to the rule of Gods word. It was the duty of the Priests to offer Sacrifices: yet they that offered sacrifice, not in the Temple at Je∣rusalem, but on the high places, did in so doing sinne greatly against the Lord. Though it were the duty of all the Israelites to eat the Passeover: yet might they not eat the same, either in their own uncleanesse, or with those that were uncircumcised or unclean. Answ. Here is much adoe to little purpose, and many words used to prove that which is not controverted. For,
SECT. XVI. FIrst, as touching your admonitory assertion, that the performance of required duties, if not done in the right order and manner which God hath prescri∣bed, is so far from finding acceptance at his hands, that on the contrary it provoketh him to anger: who a∣mong us ever doubted of the truth thereof? We subscribe unto it most willingly in the generall, where God himselfe doth not dispense with his own positive commands. Nor may you think, that those well-meaning Christians, to whose consideration you propound this, did intend the omission of it in their fore-named allegation. Yea (peradventure) they did expresse it too, though you were pleased not to mention it till now, as if it had been a new word of caution only from your selfe to instruct their ignorance. And then, secondly, as concer∣ning those five instances which you produce, we acknowledge them (for the most part) to be such, as have their warrant from the Scripture, and so not destitute of force or fitnes to prove your fore∣said Assertion. Yea, we are so far from denying them, that (if need be) we would further cleere them to the apprehension of all that will not wilful∣ly shut their eyes against the light. And for this also (it may be) we shall find a fit place, when we have a little farther considered how you apply these passages to our present Controversie.
SECT. XVII. YOu may not think, but that we would expect your performance this way. And indeed, in the next words, you go about it as you can. So (say you) though it be the duty of Christians to receive the Sa∣crament, viz. when they may doe the same in a right manner and order: yet it doth not follow that they may safely receive the same with those, touching whom they are charged, no, not so much as to eate with them. Answ. No, not so much as to eat with them? what, not in the Sacrament? shew me such a charge, and (for my part) I am yours. Indeed, you would fain have proved this from 1 Cor. 5.11. A place, not oftner remembred, than abused by you in the fore∣going part of your discourse. That scandalous Christians (being and remaining such) deserve to be excluded from the Lords Supper; that (to the end they may not come unworthily) they ought to be admonished, and (if that serve not) o be complai∣ned of, and (if yet they persist) to be upon due try∣all and conviction either suspended or ejected by an act of lawfull authority; are things which we have often not only said, but urged in some measure. But that (when, after all our private endevours, even through a defect in some to whom the power of cen∣sure doth belong, these unworthy parties are not∣withstanding neither reformed nor kept off) sound Christians, who have studied nothing more than to come worthily, are by divine precept charged to for∣beare,
and not to eat with them at the Lords Table, is a thing which I could never yet finde, and I be∣lieve you cannot shew in all the Scripture. If you can, do: you shall not be more forward to perswade, than we to submit, upon the sight of such a warran∣table ground. Meane season, till you shew that, I commend to your perusall the few but pithy words of a right learned, reverend, and godlyD. Hall late B. of Exon, now B. of Nor∣wich, in Apolog. a∣gainst Brown. Sect. 54. Divine, whose remembrance with me, and (I doubt not) with many others, is deare and pretious. Saith he, God bids me come: he hath imposed this necessitie, ne∣ver allowed this excuse. My teeth shall not be set on edge with the sowre grapes of others. If the Church cast not out the known unworthy, the sin is hers: if a man will come unworthy, the sin is his: but, if I come not because he comes, the sin is mine. I shall not answer for that others sin; I shall answer for mine own neglect. Another mans fault cannot dispense with my duty. So he. You may consider (to the same purpose) the ma∣ny weighty passages of the renowned Calvin in the fourth book of his Institutions; also of Bullinger a∣gainst the Anabaptists; and before them both, of S. Augustine against the Donatists, particularly a∣gainst Parmenianus and Cresconius. Read them, but (take heed) without contempt or scorne, as un∣dervaluing their worth because they are not of your opinion. And, in reading, observe not only what they say, but upon what ground, even from the ho∣ly Scripture. If you had done this before, I believe you would not have stragled so farre from the path of Truth and Peace: and, if ingenuously you set a∣bout
it yet, my hope is you are not so farre intangled in this brake, but that these worthy hands may help you out againe. Suspect your selfe a little. Over∣much confidence may doe you overmuch wrong. SECT. XVIII. ANd here now I would have ended this answer to your challenge, but that it seemeth you had a minde (in the proposall of your reply to this last objection) to make choice of such instances, as might insinuate more than you expresse, and point out something which (analogically) might look toward the point in question, but in disfavour of our opini∣on. I shall therefore review them as I can, and as they lye. The first instance you give is the act of King Da∣vid in assaying to bring the Arke unto Jerusalem, not on the shoulders of the Priest, but on a Cart. A main∣fest deviation from the order set by God, as is con∣fessed by himselfe, 1 Chron. 15.13. and may more largely appeare by the very precept, Numb. 4.15. and 7.9. to which the practise of the Church was very conformable, both before, Josh. 3.6. 1 Sam. 14.18. and after, 2 Sam. 15.24. 1 King. 2.26. and 8.3.4. But this instance (as I conceive) is so farre from squaring with you, that on the contrary it makes a∣gainst you. The bearing of the Arke (as the places fore-quoted doe declare) belonged to the Priests the Levites. Observe, not to the Levites in com∣mon, but to the Priests that were among them in
speciall. The other Levites (who were not Priests) had their offices and places to attend about the ser∣vice of God: but, the Priests only had this office, to beare the Ark. A good instruction (me thinkes) a∣riseth hence to us, viz. how carefull wee should be to keep within the lists and limits of our own cal∣ling, lest otherwise (transgressing them) we fall in∣to the displeasure of God, as King David and those that were about him did, even at that very time wherein you instance. Private men in the Church may not step up (as you would have them) into the place of publike government. And ever we shall finde, that, when men have presumed beyond their calling, they have been made to feele the smart of their presumption. And that, not only when they have done it out of ambitious ends, as you may see in Corah and his complices: but also with good in∣tentions, as appeareth by the breach which God made upon Ʋzza at this very time for his rashnes in putting forth his hand unto the Arke, 2 Sam. 6.7. and 13.10. The intention of Ʋzza (I believe) was good: but his action was ill, because it was without a warrant, yea, against the rule; for he, being no Priest, although a Levite, might not touch the Ark, Numb. 4.15. It were well you would consider this a little better, ere you perswade Ministers (under the pretence of a pious end) to adventure upon an act beyond their power, as here you have done.
SECT. XIX. YOur second instance was the practise of the Jewes, who returning from their Captivity, and applying themselves to the building of the Temple, would not suffer the Samaritans to build with them. It is true indeed, they would not: and (I conceive) justly. For, besides that these Samaritans (who now offered themselves unto the worke) were known enemies unto the Jewes, and such as tende∣red their service onely in hypocrisie, that so with more security they might worke them the more di∣sturbance: the whole Body of the Samaritans were long since grown a kinde of mongrell People, cor∣rupted both in Blood and in Religion, retaining in∣deed some outward shews of Truth (whereof they boasted) as Circumcision and the like; but in the substance of Truth farre deffering from the true Church, witnesse their generall Apostasie, professed Idolatry, and many other Heathenish abominations, as you may see them related in 2 Kings 17. through∣out. Upon these grounds (as it is there said) God rejected them and all their seed, and cast them out of his sight, cutting them off from being a People to Himselfe, and not receiving them again (as he did the Jewes after their Captivity) no, not so much as into the externall and outward Covenant, as by the stories of the Church in those dayes doth manifestly appeare. This was the state of those Samaritans, and for these causes (among others) the Jews would
not endure that they should joyn with them in the building of the Temple, Ezra. 4.3. Now, if you will inferre any thing from hence unto the purpose, you must first shew us, that those scandalous Chri∣stians of whom you speake, and whom you would have us to refuse communion with at the Lords Table, are in the like condition with these Sama∣ritans, that is, men rejected of God, cast out, and cut off from the Church. Shew us this, and then we shall be as forward as your self to keep them off, till they have duly reconciled themselves. Meane while, this instance makes nothing for you. SECT. XX. THe third thing you instance in, is another pra∣ctise of the Jewes, in their forbearing to eat the Passeover for 70 yeeres, while they lived as exiles from their own Country, during their Captivitie in Babylon. It is very probable indeed, that they did thus for∣beare: and it was most necessary that so they should, because God had laid upon them a strict charge not to celebrate the Passeover any where, saving where the Sanctuarie was. Indeed at first, when the Passe∣over was first instituted, they kept it in Egypt: that was the place then. But as for future times, the Law (indispensably from thenceforth) was, that the Passeover should be kept only in the place which the Lord should chuse to place his name in, Deut. 16.5.6. This place (at first) was the Tabernacle, but afterwards it was the Temple, as you may see,
2 Chron. 30.1.2. &c. and 2 Chron. 35.1.2. &c. Thither the People were to come, and there the Priests were to slay the Lamb, whence againe (at the Priests hands) they did receive it, and so ate it in their private houses, every family apart, as is easily gatherable from those fore-quoted places, and from Exod. 12.3, &c. to which I doe referre. Now, by reason of this institution, because the Passeover (by Gods own ordinance) had so necessary relation to the place of the Sanctuary, it came to passe, that (during the time of their Captivity) wherein their Common-wealth failed, and their persons were re∣moved from Jerusalem and the Temple, where this and all other such like solemnities were to be obser∣ved, the distressed and exiled Jewes did not keep the Passeover, as in former times. And this was in∣deed the true cause, why they did omit it, during their 70 yeers Captivity in Babylon. So then, here was a command from God to justifie their for∣bearance. yea, they had sinned, if they had not forborn; and all this, by vertue of Gods command. Shew us the like command for what you urge, and then (as I sayd before) we will submit. SECT. XXI. THe fourth instance you present us with, is the Priests not offering sacrifice in the high-places, but only in the Temple at Jerusalem. A thing also of very necessary observance, by reason of Gods Law, as hath been partly shewed in my reply to the fore∣going
instance, nd you may yet see it more particu∣larly expressed, Levit. 17.4. compared with Deut. 12.2. &c. to the end of the 14. verse. This was properly the ground of this observance, the like whereto (I believe) you cannot shew me in any part of the Bible, towards the justifying of that which you affirm in opposition to our Tenet in this present Controversie. Now, what it is, which by this instance you would insinuate on the bye, as con∣tradictorie to us, I must confesse I doe not appre∣hend. Sure I am, our Communion-Tables are no such high-places as the Scripture doth forbid, nor are they made so (accidentally) by the mixed com∣pany which there meet. But, if you would needs have suggested any thing in this kinde, me thinkes you might much better have applyed it against the Founders and Patrons of High-Altars, together with those officious and forward men, who (for ends best known unto themselves) have voluntari∣ly and of their own accord complyed with those Altar-services, and other such like Innovations of the time. Wherein if you know any that have been faulty, you may doe well (yet) to lay it home unto them (yea, though now biassed the other way) that so, ere they busie themselves too much with o∣thers, they may see and be ashamed of their own in∣constancie.
SECT. XXII. THe last instance which you give, is concer∣ning the Israelites their not eating the Passeover either in their own uncleanesse, or with those that were uncircumcised or unclean. Answ. Uncircumcised, and unclean persons (though circumcised) were in∣deed forbidden (for themselves) to eat the Passeover. Concerning the one, you may see Exod. 12.48. Ezek. 44.9. And for the other, compare those passa∣ges, Lev. 7.20, 21. Num. 9.6, &c. If, notwithstand∣ing this prohibition, an uncircumcised person should offer to intrude himself, no question the rest (if they knew him to be such) both might and did exclude him from their company, without expecting any farther warrant than that generall Law above re∣hearsed, because (so long as uncircumcised) he was not actually and by solemne admission a member of their Church; no, though in some respects a Prose∣lyte: an uncircumcised person being to the Jews, as an unbaptized man or woman is to us. But, as touch∣ing an unclean person that was circumcised, how he was to be dealt with by the rest, in case he made an offer to himselfe, is a thing that would be somewhat farther scanned. It is agreed upon by all, that these legall Pollutions (whether from within, by Issues and Leprosies; or from without, by touching any uncleanesse of man, or any unclean beast, or any un∣clean thing) did figure out pollution by sin of all sorts: and the act of men (authorized of God) in
severing such polluted and unclean persons (known and convicted) from the Sanctuary, and so from the holy things of God (as you may see, 2 Chron. 23.19.) did figure out the removall of unrepentant sinners from Communion with the Church. Now, if this be that whereto you ayme in this your argumenta∣tive allegation of the thing, I have nothing to ex∣cept against it or your application of it to the point in hand. For, it is readily acknowledged, even by them whom in this controversie you oppose, that they (in the Church) who have the power of censure ought to suspend and keep off known and convict∣ed unclean persons from comming to the Lords Supper, which is (as I may say) our Evangelicall Passeover: and, if they doe not, they doe by that omission contract a guilt of sinfull negligence upon themselves. But, it seemeth you goe farther, and would faine insinuate, that, if any unclean persons came unto the Passeover, and the Priests did not put them by, the rest were to withdraw themselves, lest otherwise they should be polluted by their com∣pany. As yet, I see no precept enforcing a necessi∣ty of so doing: but (if I mistake not) I finde an ex∣ample to the contrary. What think you of that re∣lation in 2 Chron. 30. where it is more than intima∣ted, that, among them who came and did eat of the Passeover which King Hezekiah caused to be kept, there were many who were legally unclean. In so comming, it is true they faulted, and were accor∣dingly prayed for by the King: but, upon their comming, did any of their Brethren refuse to eate
with them? or, did the company of those unclean persons pollute them that were clean? consider well, and see if you can finde either of these so much as intimated in the Text. So then, as I conceive, your insinuations against us, under the pretence of this halting instance, is of no validity. Conclusion. Exhorting Mr. C. to ingenuity and humility for the preservation of the Churches Peace. SECT. I. ANd thus, having dispatched what I undertook in way of answer to the ground which you had layd, and every part of the same, as you require: I doe now recommend all that I have writ∣ten to your more serious and second thoughts,
beseeching you by all the bonds of duty which you owe both to God and to his Church, that (laying a∣side all partiality of affection, and heat of discon∣tent) you would regulate your selfe both in judge∣ment and practise by the cleer light of Truth, so far as it appeares unto your Conscience. If you finde your selfe to have erred, be not ashamed to retract that errour: it is one of the greatest honours that you can acquire, to beare witnesse to the Truth, though against your selfe; and in so doing you shall be so farre from being foiled, that you shall ob∣taine a noble Conquest. SECT. II. BUt one thing more, and I have done. Master Coxe, thinke it not a glory to become the Au∣thor of a Schisme. The peace of the Church, espe∣cially in these times, is more worth than our blood: and they that glory in the disturbing of that, let them feare lest God in anger disturbe them, when willingly they would be most at rest, and so turne their glory into shame. By-ends, though varnished over with never so fair shews, and seconded (it may be) with some perfomances outwardly specious in the eys of weak Beholders, are yet discernable enough to God, and will finde little acceptance with him, when he shall come to judge the secrets of mens hearts. I am not willing to put the worst interpre∣tation
upon that, which may be fairely construed. But surely, I cannot thinke that the strength of Mr. Coxes parts (if at the leastwise I have rightly judged of him) can be overcome by such weaknesse, I say not only as I find here, but (as report tells me) his extravagancies otherwise both in speech and acti∣on doe declare unto the World. Retire a little into your selfe; and consider, not only your doings, but your aymes, together with the issues of them both. The distractions of the People, the unsetling of their devotion, your endeavours to bring them into an ill opinion of our Church, as if (indeed) no Church at all, because it goeth not the independent way with you; and all this, with such heat of spirit, and heighth of confidence, as if you and your abet∣tors were the onely wise men of the world, and the most inflamed with holy zeale: whereto (I beseech you) tends all this? Here indeed is a kinde of stri∣ving, and that for masteries: but woe unto that stri∣ving which is destructive to Religion, and can have no better issue than the bringing of Confusion into the Church! If you can please your selfe in these courses, and goe on, it is a wonder. I can but pittie your wandrings, and now (after all my poor ende∣vours) pray for your returne. In the meane season, my desire is, that (all wilfulnesse and stoutnesse layd aside) you would consider, not so much how you would answer me in what I write, as how you can answer God for what you doe. I end with those words of the Apostle S. Paul, 2 Tim. 2.7. Consider
what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all things. So I rest, A studios Lover of Truth and Peace, MARTIN BLAKE. A Copie of this Answer sent, and delivered into Mr. Coxes own hand, Julii 5o. 1642. FINIS.
