c4166 e599_10 50805939 165611
A FORME OF PRAYER, USED IN THE KING'S CHAPPEL, UPON TUESDAYES. In these Times of Trouble and Distresse. HAGE: Printed by SAMUELL BROUN. Anno M.DC.L.
A FORME OF PRAYER FOR MORNING AND EVENING. PSAL. CXLIII. II. Enter not into judgment with thy Servants O Lord, for no flesh is righteous in Thy sight. &c. to the Venite In stead whereof This Psalme is said. PSAL. CXXI. 1. I will lift up mine eyes unto the Hils; from whence commeth my help. 2. My help commeth even from the Lord; who hath made Heaven and Earth. 3. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved: and He that keepeth thee, will not sleep.
4. Behold He that keepeth Israël; shall neither slumber, nor sleep. 5. The Lord himself is thy keeper: the Lord is thy defence upon thy right hand. 6. So that the Sunne shall not burne thee by day; neither the Moone by night. 7. The Lord shall preserve thee from all evill: yea, it is even He that shall keep thy soul. 8. The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy comming in; from this time forth for evermore. ℣. Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost. ℟. At it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shalbe; world without end. Amen. Then these Psalmes following; PSAL. I. 1. PReserve the King O God: for in Thee hath he put his trust.Psal. 16.1. 2. Heare the Right ô Lord; consider his Com∣plaint, and hearken unto his Prayer, that goeth not out of feyned lipps.Psal. 17.1. 3. Let his sentence come forth from thy Pre∣sence; and let thine Eyes looke upon the thing that is equall.Psal. 17.2. 4. O hold Thou up his goings in thy Paths; that his footsteps slip not.Psal. 17.5. 5. He hath called upon Thee O Lord; that Thou mayst heare him; incline thine Eare unto him, and hearken unto his words.Psal. 17.6. 6. For his own people are risen up against him; & Tyrants which have not set Thee before their eyes, seeke after his Soul.Psal. 54.4.
7. Shew thy merveilous loving kindnes Thou that art the Saviour of them that put their trust in Thee; from such as resist thy Right Hand.Psal. 17.7. 8. Keep him as the apple of an Eye; hide Him under the shadow of thy wings.Psal. 17.8. 9. From the ungodly that trouble Him; his Enemies compasse Him round about, to take away his soule.Psal. 17.9. 10. They that hate Him without a cause are more then the haires of his head: they that are his Enemies and would destroy Him guiltles, are mighty. 11. They are inclosed in their own fat; and their mouth speaketh proud things.Psal. 17.10. 12. They lay waiting in his way on every side;Psal. 17.11. like as a Lyon that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a Lions whelp lurking in secret places.Psal. 17.12. 13. Vp Lord, disappoint them, and cast them down; deliver his soule from the ungodly which is a Sword of thine.Psal. 17.13. 14. For the Sinne of their mouth, & for the workes of their hands, let them be taken in their pride; and why? their Preaching is of Cursing and Lies.Psal. 59.12. 15. Deliver Him from these his Enemies, O Lord: defend Him from them that rise up against Him.Psal. 59.1. 16. O deliver Him from the wicked Doers; and save Him from the bloudthirsty Men.Psal. 59.2. 17. Make them afraid even where no feare is, and confound their devices; because Thou, O God, hast despised them.Psal. 53.9.
18. But for the King; Be mercifull unto Him, ô God, be mercifull unto Him, for his Soul trusteth in Thee; and under the shadow of thy wings let his Refuge be, untill this Tiranny be overpast.Psal. 57.1. ℣. Glory be to the Father, &c. ℟. As it was, &c. PSAL. II. 1. Like as the Hart desireth the water brookes; so longeth my soule after Thee O God.Psal. 42.1. 2. My soule is a thirst for God, yea even for the living God: when shall I come to appeare before the Presence of God?Psal. 42.2. 3. My teares have been my meat day and night; while they daily say unto me, where is now thy God?Psal. 42.3. 4. Now when I think thereupon, I poure out my heart by my self; for heretofore I did goe out with the Multitude, & brought them forth into the House of God.Psal. 42.4. 5. Why art thou so full of heavines O my Soule? and why art thou so disquieted within me?Psal. 42.6. 6. Put thy trust in God; for I will yet give him thankes for the help of his Countenance.Psal. 42.7. 7. I will say unto the God of my strength why hast Thou forgotten me? and why goe I thus heavily while the Enemy oppresseth me?Psal. 42.11. 8. My bones are smitten a sunder as with a sword; while mine Enemies that trouble me, cast me in the teeth.Psal. 42.12. 9. Namely, while they say daily unto me; where is now thy God?Psal. 42.13. 10. But give Thou sentence with me ô God, and defend my Cause against the ungodly people; O de∣liver me frm the deceitfull and wicked Man.Psal. 43.1. 11. For Thou art the God of my strength,
why ha'st Thou put me from Thee? and why goe I so heavily, while the Enemy oppresseth me?Psal. 43.2. 12. O send out they Light & thy Truth, that they may lead me; and bring me unto thy Holy Hill, and to thy Dwelling.Psal. 43.3. 13. And that I may goe unto the Altar of God, even unto the God of my joy and gladnes; and then upon the Harp will I give thanks unto Thee O God, my God.Psal. 43.4. 14. Why art thou so heavy ô my soule? and why art thou so disquieted within me?Psal. 43.5. 15. O put thy trust in God; for I will yet give him thankes, who is the help of my Counte∣nance, and my God.Psal. 43.6. ℣. Glory be to the Father, &c. ℟. As it was, &c. PSAL. III. 1. O GOD, Thou ha'st cast us out, and scat∣tered us abroad; Thou ha'st also been dis∣pleased, O turne Thee unto us againe.Psal. 60.1. 2. Thou ha'st moved the Land and divided it; heale the sores thereof, for it shaketh.Psal. 60.2. 3. Thou ha'st shewed thy people heavy things; Thou ha'st given us a drinke of deadly wine.Psal. 60.3. 4. Ha'st Thou not cast us out, O God? wilt not Thou, O God goe out with our Hostes?Psal. 60.10. 5. O be Thou our help in Trouble; for vaine is the help of Man.Psal. 60.11. 6. Through God wee will doe great Acts / for it is He that shall tread down our Enemies.Psal. 60.12. 7. Thou art my King ô God; send help unto Iacob.Psal. 44.5. 8. Through Thee will wee overthrow our E∣nemies; and in thy Name will wee tread them down that rise up against us.Psal. 44.6.
9. For I will not trust in my Bow; it is not my Sword that shall help me.Psal. 44.7. 10. But it is Thou can'st save us from our E∣nemies; and put them to confusion that hate us.Psal. 44.8. 11. But Thou ha'st been farre off ô Lord; & ha'st not gone forth with our Armies.Psal. 44.10. 12. Thou ha'st made us to turne our backs upon our Enemies; so that they which hate us spoile our goods.Psal. 44.11. 13. Thou ha'st suffered us to be eaten up like sheep; and ha'st scattered us among strang Nations.Psal. 44.12. 14. Thou ha'st made us to be rebuked of our Neighbours; and had in derision of them that are round about us.Psal. 44.14. 15. Up Lord, why sleepest Thou? Awake, and be not absent from us for ever.Psal. 44.23. 16. Wherfore hidest Thou thy face; and for∣gettest our Misery and Trouble?Psal. 44.24. 17. For our soule is brought low unto the dust; and our belly cleaveth unto the ground.Psal. 44.25. 18. Arise and help us; and deliver us for thy Mercies sake.Psal. 44.26. ℣. Glory be to the Father. &c. ℟. As it was, &c. PSAL. IIII. 1. LORD, how are they increased that trouble me: many are they that rise up against me.Psal. 3.1. 2. Many one there be that say of my soule; there is no help for Him in his God.Psal. 3.2. 3. But Thou ô Lord art my defender; Thou art my worship, and the lifter up of my head.Psal. 3.3. 4. I will not be afraid for ten thousands of people; that have set themselves against me round about.Psal. 3.6.
5. Up Lord, and help me, ô my God; Thou cans't smite all mine Enemies upon the cheek bone, and break the theeth of the ungodly.Psal. 3.7. 6. Salvation belongeth unto the Lord: let thy Blessing be upon the people.Psal. 3.8. 7. O Lord my God, in Thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that persecute me, and de∣liver me.Psal. 7.1. 8. Least he devoure my soule like a Lyon; and teare it in pieces while there is none to help.Psal. 7.2. 9. Why standest Thou so farre off, ô Lord; and hidest thy face in the needfull time of trouble?Psal. 10.1. 10. O let the wickednes of the ungodly come to an end; but guide Thou the just.Psal. 7.9. 11. Be Thou, ô God, a defence for the oppressed; even a refuge in due time of trouble.Psal. 9.9. 12. Have mercy upon me O Lord, consider the trouble which I suffer of them that hate me; Thou that liftest me up from the Gates of Death.Psal. 9.13. 13. How long wil't Thou forget me, ô Lord, for ever! how long wil't Thou hide thy face from me!Psal. 13.1. 14. How long shall I seek counsell in my Soule, and be so vexed in my heart! how long shall mine Enemies triumph over me!Psal. 13.2. 15. Consider & heare me ô Lord my God; lighten mine Eyes, that I sleep not in Death.Psal. 13.3. 16. Wherfore should the wicked blaspheme God? while he doth say in his heart, tush, Thou God carest not for it.Psal. 10.14 17. They murther the Innocent; and put the Help∣lesse to death.Psal. 94.6. 18. And yet they say, Tush, the Lord shall not see; neither shall the God of Iacob regard it.Psal. 94.7.
19. Surely Thou hast seene it; for Thou be∣holdest ungodlines and wrong.Psal. 94.15. 20. That Thou may'st take the Matter into thine own hand, the poore committeth himself unto Thee; for Thou art the Helper of the friendlesse.Psal. 94.16. 21. Break Thou the power of the ungodly and ma∣licious; take away his ungodlines, and Thou shalt find none.Psal. 94.17. 22. O help the Fatherlesse and poore unto their Right; that the Man of the Earth may be no more exalted against them.Psal. 94.20. ℣. Glory be to the Father, &c. ℟. As it was, &c. The first Lesson. (At Morn. GEN. XXVIII. ℣. 10. unto the End.) (At Even. 11. CHRON. XX. unto ℣. XXI.) In stead of the Te Deum, and Magnificat, PSAL. CXXX. 1. OVT of the Deep have I called unto Thee O Lord; Lord heare my voice. 2. O let thine Eares consider well; the voice of my Complaint. 3. If thou Lord wil't be extreme to mark what is done amisse; O Lord, who may abide it? 4. For there is Mercy with Thee; therfore shal't Thou be feared.
5. I look for the Lord, my soule doth waite for Him; in his word is my trust. 6. My soule flieth unto the Lord before the Morn∣ing watch; I say, before the Morning watch. 7. O Israel, trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is Mercy; and with Him is plen∣teous Redemption. 8. And He shall redeeme Israel: from all his Sinnes. ℣. Glory be to the Father, &c. ℟. As it was, &c. The second Lesson. (At Morn. S. LUKE. XXI. to ℣. XXXVII.) (At Even. 1. S. PET. II. the whole Chapter.) In stead of the Benedictus, and Nunc dimittis. PSAL. CXXIII. 1. Vnto Thee lift I up mine Eyes; O Thou that dwellest in the Heavens. 2. Behold, even as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their Masters, and as eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her Mistresse; even so our eyes waite upon the Lord our God, until He hath Mercy upon us. 3. Have mercy upon us O Lord, have mercy upon us; for wee are utterly despised. 4. Our soule is filled with the scornfull reproof of the wealthy; and with the despitefulnes of the proud. ℣. Glory be to the Father, &c. ℟. As it was in the beginning, &c.
After the Creed, and the Lords Prayer, &c. THE FIRST COLLECT. At Morning Prayer. LORD, wee beseech Thee, let thy continuall pit∣ty cleanse and defend thy Church: and because it cannot continue in safety without thy succour, pre∣serve it evermore by thy help and goodnes, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. THE FIRST COLLECT. At Evening Prayer. LORD, raise up (wee pray Thee) thy Power, & come among us; & with great Might succour us; that whereas through our sinnes & wickednes wee be sore let & hindred, thy bountifull Grace and Mercy (through the Satisfaction of thy Sonne our Lord) may speedily deliver us; to Whom with Thee, & the Holy Ghost, be all Honour & Glory world without end. Amen. After the Letany, and the Prayer [Wee humbly beseech Thee, &c.] At Morning. And after the Collect. [Lighten our darknes, &c.] At Evening. ℣. O Lord, guard the Person of thy Ser∣vant CHARLES our King.
℟. Who putteth his trust in Thee. ℣. Send Him, and all that are Loyall to him, help from thy Holy Place. ℟. And evermore mightily defend them. ℣. Confound the designes of all that rise up, or conspire against Him. ℟. And let no wicked Hand come neere to hurt him. ℣. O Lord heare our Prayer. ℟. And let our Cry come unto The. The Prayer. ALMIGHTY Lord God, the Ruler of Princes when they are in their Thrones, and their Pro∣tector when they are in Perill; Looke down merci∣fully from Heaven, wee most humbly beseech Thee, upon the many and great Troubles of our Gracious Soveraigne. Defend his Person from all dangers both by Sea and Land. Blesse his Counsels. Prosper his Enterprises. And command thine Angels so to pitch their Tents round about Him, that He may be preserved from the hands of all that seeke his Hurt, & may be speedily established in the just Rights of his Throne, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O LORD our heavenly Father, high and mighty King of Kings, &c. With the Other Prayers, At the End of the Letanie.
AT THE SECOND SERVICE. Immediately after. THE X. COMMANDEMENTS. These Verses, and the Prayer following, are to be said at E∣vening, be∣fore the Collect, for the Queen, and the Royall Issue.]DEliver the King O Lord from the Evill Man; and preserve Him from the wicked Doers. 2. Which imagine Mischief in their hearts; and stirre up Strife all the day long. 3. Keep Him O Lord from the hands of the ungodly; and from the wicked that are purposed to overthrow his goings. 4. The proud have laid a snare for Him; they have spreed a Net abroad with cords, and set Trapps in his way. 5. But O Lord God, Thou Strength of his health; doe Thou cover his head in the Day of Battail. 6. Let not the ungodly have his desire ô Lord; let not his mischeivous Imagination prosper, least he be too proud. 7. Deliver the King from his Enemies O Lord; for he flieth unto Thee to hide Him. 8. O let Him heare thy loving kindnes betimes in the Morning, for in Thee is his trust; shew Thou Him the way that He should walk in, for He lifteth up his Soule unto Thee.
Let us pray. O GOD of all Might and Wisedome, by whom alone Kings reigne, and People are made obe∣dient unto Them; wee most humbly beseech Thee, to defend thine own Ordinance in the Defence of our distressed King; that as Thou hast given Him a most just Title to his Father's Kingdomes, so Thou would'st be pleased speedily to bring Him unto the rightfull Possession of them. And to that end, that Thou would'st vouchsafe to put the Spirit of Counsel, of Courage, & of Unity upon them that are loyall to Him. And for those that either openly oppose Him, or those Strang Children that dissemble with Him, that Thou would'st infatuate their Counsels, and blast their Endeavours, turning their hearts both to Thee their God, and to the King. Which wee beseech Thee to grant for Iesus Christ his sake, our Lord and only Saviour. Amen. THE EPISTLE 1. TIMOTH. 11.1.
I EXHORT therfore, that first of all Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and Giving of Thanks be made for all Men: for KINGS, and for All that are in Authoritie; that wee may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all Godlines and Honestie. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; Who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the know∣ledge of the Truth. For there is one God, & one Me∣diator betweene God & Men, the Man CHRIST IESVS.Who gave Himself a Ransome for All, to be testi∣fied in due time. Whereunto I am ordeined a Prea∣cher & an Apostle, (I speak the Truth in CHRIST, & lie not) a Teacher of the Gentiles in Faith & Verity. I will therfore that Men pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. The Gospel. S. MARK. X. ℣. XXVIII. THEN PETER began to say unto Him, Loe, wee have left all, and followed Thee. And IESVS answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no Man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my sake & the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in his time, houses, & brethren, & sisters, & mothers, & children, & lands, with persecutions; & in the world to come Eternall Life. But Many that are first, shalbe Last; & the Last first. After the Creed, and the Prayer for Christ's Church. This is also to be said at Evening, immediate¦ly before S. Chry∣sostome's Prayer.GRANT, Mercifull Lord, thy Protection, and thy Blessing to our Gracious KING: that in all his wayes He may be defended from all Kinds of Perils, & may so prosper in his Endeavours, that all his people may, by the might of Thy Hand, be brought to obedience vnder Him, to serve & honour Thee, through IESVS CHRIST our Lord. Amen. The Blessing; THE PEACE or GOD, &c. FINIS.
