C6586 E989_26 99867218 168652
THE Court Career, DEATH Shaddow'd to life. OR SHADOWES OF LIFE and DEATH. A Pasquil Dialogue Seriously perused and highly approved by the clearest Judgments. depiction of a naked long-haired male figure or Charles I, wearing a crown surrounded by a halo, holding a lit torch among classical columns; and a naked long-haired male figure or Oliver Cromwell, holding a lit torch in a cave surrounded by flames Printed in the Year 1659.
The COVRT Career. Charles. HOW now NOLL! what wind blew you thither? Noll. The fiercest and furiousest Whirl∣wind that ever breathed on the middle Region. Charles. Sure, Nol, you could not be sensible of any such Blast, having entred such streight Lists in your combate with Death: and after so many Parliamentary dissolutions, to prepare for your own. Nol. It is true, if any hope had been left to such a forlorne wretchling, it was high time for me to prepare for that which I never before thought on. Furies without me; fears and frights within me constantly encountred me: horror, horror; despaire and horror, my sole dis-consolate consorts at my de∣parture. O how hard a task is it for that man to die, who has no other hope then to die for ever! And such was my ir∣reparable condition. Char. In this so fiery and furious a conflict, your eares surely, Nol, were secured from the noise of any Whirlewind: your storm within barracado'd your senses from hearing any tempest abroad. Nol. It did so, but after my hapless and hopeless descent to this infernal Lake, the just portion of my usurped com∣mand; Eridamus an active nimble Spirit; by Pluto's express order, being appointed our State-Scout or Emissary, (this re∣lation is true upon my Naked Honour) he returned me a Pas∣quil
from the middle Region, writ by some stigmatizing pen (as what quil now not set a work to divulge my shame?) in these lines: 'Tis an ill wind does good to no man bring,To Oliver Protector, upon the Whirl∣wind. Sep. 3. 1658. Which was made good by our usurping King; Whose braving pomp farr lighter then a feather Flew in a Whirlwind, the Lord knows whither. Char. But by this, Nol, you know sufficiently to what coast the wind has blown you: and to what port Charon has brought you. Nol. O do not jeer me in my misery! your piety has sea∣ted you in a Throne of glory; my tyranny has stated me in a depth of boundless infelicity. Do not forget your former goodness: you had a heart richly indew'd with princely pitty. Charl. So should it be heartily opened unto thee, though my profest enemy, if my pitty could redeem thee, or that it were law∣ful for me to pitty thee. I may safely appeal to those who have persecuted me and mine without a cause; if my heart has not been ever a stranger to revenge, but a ready harbourer of remorse: None ever came to me with a tear in their eye, which my hand could not wipe off. Oli. This is all true; yet the jealousie of our Councel was such, as they durst not believe you. Which distrust, it was our part who were fishing with others lines in troubled waters, to foment and inlarge; lest those who by Covenant had made themselves ours, might by confiding in your clemency, fail and fall from us. It was mine highest artifice therefore to de∣liver other principles then they had till then received: such doctrinal grounds as I by the assistance of my faithful Chap∣lain Hugh Peters, (whom after the recovery of his wits, I hope to see here ere long) infused into the credulous ears and malleable hearts of our Church militant: as our godly hearers disavowed all trust to your promises; holding them onely such
as served for your own interest, and no further. Char. Pray thee Nol, what arguments or instances might thou and thine active complices use to caiole thy assembly into this belief. Oli. Surely you cannot forget your ingratitude to your wisest and faithfullest servant Strafford; in so highly approving and publikely attesting the actions of his life; and after all this in signing and subscribing his commission for death: this it was, I must freely tell you, that much disadvantaged your cause, and advanced ours. For we told them, and they easily acquiesced to our reasons, how could they possibly believe him, who deceived his own Creature, the Rudder of his State, who so constantly relyed on him? Char. I must confess that was prest to purpose: neither did any thing in my thoughts ever un-king me more then that unprincely action; but timing Rabbyes, God forgive them, if they may be prayed for, wronght too strongly by force of their opinions on my re∣senting conscience. Fathers and Doctors of the primitive Church they alledged, but whether truely or falsely quoted, the importu∣nity of the state, and necessity of mine own condition would allot me no time to examine. Only one real Prelate I had, who well de∣served that reverend Title: and like a person of a pious and consci∣entious quality advised me in that case to do what I ought, and not what I might. And how derogatory it was from the preroga∣tive of a Prince, either to be inforced by menaces, or induced by promises, to act any thing below his Honour or course of judica∣ture. In the recollection of these I have no less ingenuously then peni∣tentially acknowledged my error; nay, so pretious was the memo∣ry of his life, and so resentive the impression of his loss, as I be-became nothing amated at the sight of the Block, nor present∣ment of the Ax: holding the Sacrifice of my Head unfit to hold in competition, with the inexcusable though not inexpiable qua∣lity of his death. So much have I published to the whole world, wherewith I hope it rests satisfied: howsoever, sure I am, that His indignation, to whose mercy I appealed, became appeased.
Ol. O my tormented soul; how happy thou, if thou wer't in the same condition! Char. Yea, NOL, but all those wishes now will not make thee so happy an Houshoulder; thou seest now in that eternity of thy affliction, what difference there is betwixt a just Monarchy and an usurped Tyranny. Ol. O how I fry in the renewal of that ambitious story! Char. Desist then to aggravate my mistakes, in disesteeming my own; and fostring those Snakes in my Bosome, who designed my ruine. Thou feelest now by bitter experience that in the passage of injuries, it is far better to suffer, then inflict, to appear a patient, then an Agent, be it in relation to our selves never so important. This was my temper, and it has re-doubled mine honour. Ol. But my humour was clear of another nature; there was nothing of harder digestion with me, then bearing of an injury; one disgust once imbosom'd, would raze out an Ili∣ad of years service. I was ever a serious observer of that example of Dionysius, who was said to use his friends, as he did his bottles; when he had use for them, he kept them by him; when he had none, that they should not trouble him and lie in his way, he hung them up. This might be instan∣ced in my disregard to LAMBERT for whom, though I ever cunningly reserv'd a familiar hugg, and a civil carress, yet I never appeared really the same I profest: witness my dis∣commissionating of him, and the prejudice I did to his Relations: Not one of them scap'd my scourge. Char. Trust me NOLL, this was ingratitude above all de∣grees of comparison; for how couldst thou in common civility so sleight or disvalue him, who had been such an incomparable assistant in all your State-service? Ol. It is confest; no Commander expos'd himself to more personal danger, advanc'd our State-service better, nor came off with more gallantry and accomplish'd honour: But whereto tended all this? All this, or whatsoever dis∣plat'd the Sails of his Victorious Fame, (as none ever archiev∣ed more with less strength) begot in me more hate then love. Envy is ever Ambitions Darling: Soveraignty partaks so much of self-interest, as it will admit of no Competition.
Seianu's splendor struck him quite out of Tiberiu's favour Had not his success brought him to swell so high, he had ne∣ver shrunk so low. And to unbosome my self unto you (for now it skills not much if all my thoughts were legible) it was my firm purpose, as I had intimated to T H. with others of my secretest and confidentest Favourites; not onely to make his name odious, but all such as had performed any eminent service; that their Eclipse might inlarge my light, their contempt secure my rising. For howsoever I pretended or had formerly dis-avowed, a Diadem was my aim; so as Lamberts opposition of it, and his disswading me from it, was the first occasional ground of that irreparable breach betwixt us; and had fallen heavy upon him, if Fate had not prevented me, and given him new breath. For so inveterate grew my hate, as my resolution was to change his plantation by removing him from Wimbleton: and bestowing on him an Habitation more obscure, and less popular. The York∣shire General likewise, could not for all his retirement secure his person from censure; though I feared not his Head, I knew he had a doing hand, and a daring heart. In a word, I had a yellow eye over all such persons as had been observed to ap∣pear eminent in any action; and lest their spirits should rise above their just bounds, I brought them by one device or other under a cloud: or cooled their courage by enjoining them to more remote and inconsiderable quarters. The main work was done, which made me neglect the workmen; whom I removed from the building lest they should boast of the work they had done, and consequently detract from my fame, wherein my continued success reflecting on the glory of mine actions, would admit no Corrival. In making Barkstead Lieutenant oth' Tower, I pleased my own fancy; holding him not much unlike those Beasts that were kept there: and usually shewn rather for affrighting those that lookt on them, then preserving those Places that kept them. In his advancement to that place, I had my design. It was my intendment to create him my Ieweller: wherein as it was his office ignorantly to admire them, and numerously gather
them; so was it in my thoughts when he least lookt for it, to seize on them, and adorn my Relative Damasella's with them. Char. Mean time Nol, it seems you kept a brave Quarter at Court. Oli. Neither much state, nor great store. Not a dish but it was served up with more care then cost: More providence in preserving the scattered fragments of a needy reversion, then former times had done for a whole months provision. Ch. It seems your frugal Court was wholly guiltless of surfets. Olli. In very deed, it was more frugal then frolick, unless at the marriage of some of our own Relations, and then upse freze, He was not modish that would not be drunkish. Nol himself knew then how to lay aside his staff of state. No Page nor Lacquey in the Lobby could play the Tom-boy more nimbly nor actively; for throwing of cushions, ruffling young wenches, snatching Allamodian favours, scrambling of jun∣kets, bowzing of bride-possets: (one draught now of such coo∣ling liquor were worth an Empire:) all this I did to the honour of those Nuptial Revels, & to congratulate the aery happiness of my relations. For matter of entertainment nothing could be too dear for my new initiated Son in Laws, nor indeed more cheap for my self, for I payd them no Portions: my Exchequer was empty; so as they must rest satisfied with the enjoy∣ment of a naked fancy: with some fruitless hopes and golden promises, which proved as windy. No matter; to enter mar∣riage with the Protectors Daughter; was a portion without Exception: and to press the contrary, might no doubt in time have inclined to a Branch of treason. Char. O Nol, how unhappy it is to have beene once happy! Nol. O how happy I, if I had never been happy! Since the stream of mine unhappiness runs through so many Channels, as it terminates not with me; but derives it selfe in a line to my Posterity. Char. That's not possible; it was your wisedome (as none could outstrip you in the dangerous track of humane policy) to ordaine and nominate your sonne Richard lineall Successor, or Successive usurper. Ol. Never any such matter; my Secretary highly traduced
me. I left the Succession to Divine Providence: that as it had unexpectedly fallen, so it might descend to whom Fate had decreed it. And though many disturbances in the State, had bred desperate distempers and distractions in my brain; espe∣cially those sad meanacings and impressive admonitions which my dearest daughter BESS CLAIPOOL left with me, & near the hour of her departure, recommended to me, which I must freely confess, did most startle me. Notwithstanding all these madding occurrences & dis-passionate incounters, I never wal∣ked so irrationally as to make my cross-graind Progeny Heires to your Family. Onely a very little time before my landing at this Port (a place not to be compared to my Back-staires at Westminster) ambition had rais'd such a flame in my thoughts, as my only Note was a Crown, a Crown; neither did my ambition admit a period, till my breath expired. Such desire I had to own, what my self could not keep, nor my own attain. Neither indeed, did I hold any branch sprung from my extraction, in relation to their abilities, fitting to execute the place of an inferiour officer, much less the office of a Protector: and rather born to be State-pensioners, then Commanders in a State. For I could never account of them, upon a due survey of their actions, and discovery of their tempers, for Cocks of Game, nor native Osiers of an Oliver. Thus justly might I play the part of an expert and bitterly-experienc'd Limner in portraying, and Herald in deblazon∣ing my infelicity, not in my self alone, but in my degenerous Posterity. High Flyers, but their flight is for feathers in the ayr; the highest pitch of their ambition. So as (and for one of my Tortures I take it) my Divination touching them became true: for by Eridamus our Intelligencers transitive relation, they have already acquiesced to a weak mercenary submission. Whence I conclude, that as my blemish'd fame was formerly blasted; so the memory of our Family on earth is quite razed, my posterity shamefully debased; and all to their former obscurity reduced. Char. This was a just judgement, NOL, and you are to ac∣knowledge it; It was your Design sometimes, and you pursued it by your power and policie to an Act, that none of the STUARTS
Race or Line should ever be in a capacitie of Election either of Protector, or any other office or place of Command in the Common-weal: and are you not now in your own discarded Name and Famiie justlie requited?Sir T. W. The Speaker, you know, modestlie opposed it: but so strong grew your Faction, and so de∣spicable my condition, as poor CHARLES adn his were made Aliens to their own, and wholly excluded. And was not this hard measure? Ol. O me! this aggravates my torments above measure, especially when I recollect my self, and reflect upon you, seated in a sphere of glory; to take a view of my misery; where I am become a spectacle to Angels in my suffering, and a reproach to men in their censuring. Char. Surely NOL, thy fury appear'd towards me implaca∣ble, not only in my life, but after my death: where in humanity hatred should sleep,Christiani nunquam inventi sum Cassi∣ani. Ter∣tul. and Revenge, were it never so deeply rooted, should resolve into remorse. For mine Head divided from its liveless Trunk could not satisfie thy groundless wrath: (for my innocence never wronged thee) but to insert this amongst ma∣ny other of thy matchless cruelties, the relation whereof will re∣quire large Annals to succeeding ages; re-call to mind, and it cannot chuse but affright thee, how ingloriously thy domineering State insulted over my dislaughter'd Corps; using these words with a scornful contempt over it: Go to; thou wer't shaped better for an honest Subject, then a good King. Ol. It is true, I sad so, and ever held so; for my opinion was from the first time I saw you, or took observation of you, that you would partake more of an honest then heroick temper. Char. This NOL, I impute rather to an error of your dis∣affection towards me, then any grounded reason for your aversion from me: But it was that turbulent spirit within you, which brewed those disloyal whimsies in your brain. My actions were so clear and harmless, as they could not fomentate in you such di∣stempers. If Masks or Theatral presentments could so strangely operate, as by the free and frequent use of them, to depose Prin∣ces, and aliene Subjects from their allegeance, it were an act that exceeded all Presidents.
Ol. And this it was which the purity of our Zeal first wrought on: but your Corrupt Councel epecially; the eager pursuit whereof afforded swifter wings to our Designs. Char. Unhappy wings that spread themselves to the ruine of the Flier, by making the Pursuer a prey to his Follower! But af∣ter thy pittiful Triumphal over my breathless Trunk, (the poor remainder of an unfortunate Prince) what might be the occasion of thy delaying of my Burial? Ol. That neither tended to your disadvantage nor disho∣nor, for your Tragical Scene was alreay acted; this was purposely done for the Souldiers benefit: where, as your ene∣mies breathed nothing on your Corps but words of ignomi∣ny; so your few Funeral Attendants made gain their aim, receiving money for sight of your Body. An useful Specta∣cle of Mortality. Char. How pittiful my usage! expos'd to sale both living and dying! Ol. Yet never any less pittied: for the Scots, who were your first Chap-men, could not: and we who were the se∣cond, would not: so marble-temper'd were we both, as our neglect to your Obsequies, exprest the coolness of our affecti∣on to your self. Tears, unless they steam'd in he eyes of your own Relations, were held too precious Victims for such Funerals. For mine own part, though I could feign a tear as well as any Crocodile, I was so infinitely pleased with your passage out of the world, as I could not change my countenance for a world. I was steel'd all over: and as diffe∣rent to a Niobe, as compassion could be to the heart of an Enemy. Your death secur'd my Title: wherein, though many might by way of proprietie challenge as much right, and shew as fair Cards as my self, being equal sharers in the Conquest: yet it was ever my happy fate (O how unhappy now may I call it?) to be esteemed the prime Agent in that succeseful service. Char. It is true; yet I found others more destructive to my proceedings: for it is well known how in the very first beginning or infancie of those Civil Warres, your accompt was but in the rank of inferiour and inconsiderable Officers, y, of so low and
despicable a qualitie, as your place scarcelie merited the Title of a Commander; being as then, not admitted to the trust of a Colours. Ol. That redounded more to mine honour. For it could not be ascribed to any thing less then my indefatigable industry or incomparable policie, or what else you please to term it, that rais'd me from that low quality, to such a pitch of hu∣mane felicity. Char. Miserable felicitie, that for a blossom of humane glorie, no sooner appearing then vanishing, forfeits his interest in that state of Eternitie. For who is he, if sensible of a future condition, that for a moment of delight, would willingly suffer a perpetuitie of torments: or lose his Claim in the fruition of Happiness, for the fading pleasure of one Nights dalliance? Ol. Why, Sir, you need not seek far for this till you find it; I my self have done it: and my honest Colleague too TOM PRIDE, (for I dare not call him Lord, for fear of the Prohibition) who now snorts in Lucifers bosome,Tom. Pride did wisely in pre∣venting Censure, and dying in his Honour. and la∣ments nothing more then his Butchery of the Bears: cursing his rash valour in committing so hidelous a slaughter: wish∣ing with all his scalded heart, that he had repriev'd one Bear at least, if it had been but to stop the foul mouth of that bauling Curre cerberus, who keeps such a racket, as he will not suffer his Hon. Taplash, having discharg'd his shoulders of his barmy Dray, to take any rest: nor his ears nor eyes, hour∣lie affrighted with Lightning and Lapland Thunder, to allay the horror of those affrights with one minutes slumber. Char. Alas, poor Tom. Ol. Not so poor neither. His Name is so anciently preci∣ous, and of such general alliance to our principal Grandees here in Tartarie, as he is lately made Prime Tapster for the Regiment of the Scullerie; an office of credit and profit: for nothing here so dear as liquor: nor can any courtesie be more thankfully tendred to a thirstly Sojourner, then a bottle of clear Stygian-water, lightly spiced or sprinkled with Sul∣phur. O had we such Wassel-cups, we should hold them more precious then Rivolets of delicious Nectar! Mean while, I cannot chuse, amongst many other melacholly
dumps which incessantly seize on me, but remember how pit∣tifully (though destitute of pitty) my servant PRIDE howled out last night: (as what is all our Plantation but a Region of Night? or the surface of our Soveraignty but a Tragick Stage hung round with Sable Ensigns of baleful me∣lancholly?) Would you hear, I say, how that Infernal Lord bellowed, being seated, on a Kilderkin of Lethaean liquor? I shall not detract one tittle, nor vary in one syllable from that doleful complaint of his Honour. Oh that I were now (said he) haling those refractory Members, which some∣times displeased brave OLIVER, into Hell at VVEST∣MINSTER! how cheerfully might I quench that thirst which now torments me! O then, so far had a blast of Honour transported me, or security belulled me, as I vain∣ly thought there was none but that: but I feel One now of another nature: and which I never dream'd on, till I came thither? O that those Parishioners, who first found me, and charitably made me a Child of the Parish, had left me swathled as they found me: so had their care been less, and I less sensible of my misery! The shrieks of one to my self so well known, and who from his Mash-fat had serv'd me so long, inforc'd me to look back upon my self; and recall to mind that momentany sha∣back upon my self; and recall to mind that momentany sha∣dow of earthly felicity which I here partak't: my frequent visits and progresses to HAMTON-Court and VVIND∣SOR, where your incensed and unrevenged Ghost oft-times affrighted me: which caus'd me to discontinue my visit of that place; so strongly did your Apparition work upon me? and so terribly did my guilty conscience check me, and com∣bat within me, as that Progress which I took for pleasure, discomposed my soul, and made me in my return disconso∣lately heavy. Buy Musick and frolick society, quickly cur'd the bite of this Tarantula.— Oh me! How now it gripes me to remember those Court-ayrs, Pavans, Almans, Coran∣to's, Sarabands, all my Court-frolicks, with that merry Mu∣sical ayr of my never to be forgotten Oliver; which though it spitefully plaid on me, it acted infinitely upon my fancy: being heated, and heightned with exquisite wines and socia∣ble
humorists, who held it their highest honour, to fit the humour of their OLIVER. But all that jollity is now past, and I alone left to my self (and well were it for me, were I so left:) the Court-gate shut, White-Hall made black with suffering, set at sale; Saint Imaes waits for a Purchaser; Greenwich to her ver Materials become a sufferer: No ac∣cess to Hyde-Park, nor Spring-garden, nor Oxford Kate may be admitted to friendless Oliver. — My Studds and Stallions dispatcht by a Contagion: and their Master by a phrensie, to quicken his dissolution. My deserted Parasites, like Beetles or Dung-worms return'd to their Ordure: My Family with infamy branded; my Race rooted; my Line razed; my Allyes by marriage disgraced; my titular Lords degraded; my old Mab fool'd into a Quaker. House & Houshold all indisorder. Char. Why, NOL, all this is nothing to what thine actions have deserved, if duly weighed, and answerable to their qua∣lity, judicially measured. Superiour Powers, though they have leaden feet, they have iron hands. Their judgements may sleep, but they never slip. Thou exclaimest amongst other of thy aggrievances, how some Princely houses were set at sale; whereto thou couldst pretend no Title. While I reigned and on earth sojourned, the impudence of malapert Subjects was such, not long before these Civil VVarrs broke forth, as they stickt not to paste on my Gate at VVhite-Hall, This House is to be Let. Neither was it sufficient for them to derogate from my personal honour, but to throw aspersions on the purity of her fame, whose blameless demeaner had rais'd its splendor above the reach of censure. And for my self, to such an indigent condition hand my misfortunes brought me, as there was no House left me, which I might properlie call mine own, to lodge in nor Bed to lie in; no, nor after my death, any other Burial Place for my di∣slaughter'd Corps to rest in, but an obscure and unprincely inter∣ment. Ol. There was good reason for that. I had read so much in Plutarch, How there was nothing that inraged the people more against the Actors of Caesars murder, then the shewing of Caesars gastly wounds by Mark Antony: that was the sight which begot in the people compaision generally.
This it was that sprung a tear in every eye, and a now of re∣venge from every hand. The only was to bring discontents asleep, was to bring you to your rest in quiet. And for your bed of earth, sure I am your private unpolish'd vault accrued more to your honour,With this Inscripti∣on on the Wall: Great in Policy, but matchless in Tyranny. then all my costly forty thousand Fu∣neral Structure. Mine was more magnificent; but yours more permanent. For our sprightly intelligencer Eridamus, informs me upon his return from that Coast, how my Shrine was no sooner raised, then it was razed; no sooner erected, then defaced: and upon the splinters of it, these wormwood lines endorsed: Upon his Shrine. NOLS Statue broke in pieces! what hand could, Had it Briareus sinews, be so bold? Why not? It by those sractures nothing lost, Pieces were Emblems of the coyn they cost. NOLS Funerals are past, his shrine set up; Hey Boyes let's Cant it o're our Wassal-Cup; Had NOL such liquor as we birle here, Hee'd think he were in Hell at VVestminster: But such a censure has befaln this Hector, As he must Sulphur bouze instead of Nectar. —O Huntington, Huntington, little didst thou dream That NOL should by Charon lancho're the Stygian stream: Or become such a Brewer where now he remains, As to furnish all Tartary with Ala and Grains! O ye Ptotectors Brood, observe his Fate, And cease from seizing an usurped State! For though the Bait seem pleasing to Ambition, The wound is mortal, and disclaims Physitian. Char. It seems NOL, thy crueltie had so far abroad spread thine infamie, as it whetted pens in all places to inveigh against thee. Neither was it wisdome in thine to bestow on thy
Monument such cost; when the sight of it could present nothing less then an Object of scorn, or a Spectacle of shame, shose might be the charge? Ol. Only His, whose command might not unfitly be com∣pared to those short-liv'd Flies that breed neer the banks of Hymetus, who no sooner begin to quicken then they expire: for so it fared with the short life of his Protection. VVhence I observe the levity of popular favour: and how inconsistent it is to the foundation of honour. O with what humble Ad∣dresses have I and mine been courted! what vows of Allea∣geance and Fidelity tendred! what left unpresented, that might either oblige them, or assure us of their zeal and de∣votion towards us? And these Congratulations came from all places and persons of all qualities. But sure, those Coasts are either sunk, or those good-pretending people dead; for those Addresses in very short time run themselves quite out of breath. Neither was this all; for some I had near me, and whom I had made mine by my bounty, (an act which I was never much addicted to) who knew how to protest, and seemingly to ingage their persons in any action for my sake, while I was living; who could sport and skip like Satyrs at my dying: Yea, even in that last and longest conflict which I had with Nature, and wherein I expostulated with my Ma∣ker, saying, How doest thou now mean to deal with me! I might hear a soft whispering voice uttering these words near the Curtain, Roughly enough, if he mean to deal justly with you. Char. This was cold comfort from your own Family: but the Hare may insult safely over a dead Lion. Ol. VVhich a Critick of my Court, and to whom I had shown some civil favours, made use on: who, to ingratiate himselfe with one who never wish'd me well, bestow'd his pen upon a Poem, enttling it my VISION; which he bit∣terly pursu'd in this manner.
His Vision. Who are you that distract my Soul with fear? — Torture and horror! — What art thou stalks't there? Ay me! my Soveraign Liedge reft of his head By thy perfidious hand.—Whence streams that blood, That Purple Ocean which invirons me? From those pure hearts that di'd for Loyaltie. What mean those Scarlet veils hung in that sort? The Sanguine Hangings of thy Iustice Court. Who's he finds fuel to my boundless fury? THURLOE.—who doomes me? A supernal jury. — What hostile noise is this! whence may it come? It seems thy Guard's approching by the Drum. 'Tis all in vain; what guards can shelter him Who has so many enemies within? —O how this Warr-charge doth my spleen provoke!Here he displayes his vari∣ous di∣stemper'd passages during the time of his sicknesse. Send forth commands they do not strike a stroke. This sound of Drums and Trumpets which I hear Presents a frightful language to mine eare. Leave me; oh leave me; i'm for ever lost; And for a Crown in Baths of torments tost. Farewel to earth; my Burden is so great, I find no Mercy, though I see the Seat. PETERS be gone; I'm run upon that shelf, Thou canst not save me, nor I fear thy self. So raw's thy Doctrine, and so ripe my sin, PETER will find no keys to let us in. — Avant despair! my Convoy mounts to bliss,Quic∣quid ex me mihi deest, usurpo mihi ex visceribus domini mei. Aug. Manual. c. 21. Though Sin abound, Grace more abundant is. A brave exchange beyond comparison, For three rent Kingdomes, to inherit one. One, and a rich one too; a glorious Nation; Where th'Stat's secure, though got by Vsurpation. Char. It seems, Nol, though he begun with you roughly, he ended smoothly. It had been happy for thee Nol, if this Poet might
have had such influence over Pluto's Court, as to procure thy re∣move, or so much favour as to change thy lodging: or a fair pro∣gress after thy late exile from Hampton to the Elysian fields: but there is such a report of thy field-service, as it is much to be feared: that the keepers of those peaceful fields would appear shy in admitting so fiery and furious a blade into their society. Truth is, thou hadst no more right to England, then thou hadst to Elysium; who then could blame thee in doubling thy files, or aspiring to some new-created Protection in another region. Oli. O Sir, could I dispence with my suffering as I can now with Ambition, I should account my self happy, in the low∣est and obscurest condition that could befall me. I should neither repine at others greatness, nor bemoan my own low∣ness. I should never spend time in remembring what I was, or how great I was, but in labouring to appear what I was not. But my heavy fate hasting my fall through the Career of my unexemplary actions, has thrown me upon that Prcei∣pice; as my complaints would in all ages return me pitti∣less; and my forlorn condition remedless. Char. It is reported Nol, that thou hadst a Dream which di∣vin'd no less. Oli. I had, indeed; then which none ever wrought more strongly nor strangely on the sences of a sleeping man: but imputing it to some melancholy fancy, whereto, by giving way to choller and other incident distempers, I was much inclined; I made so small account of it, as I would not suffer it to act, as it had done formerly upon my thoughts. Till one day,Ad Scep∣trum ma∣num, pro∣cax am∣bitio ver∣tit; in Centrum fallax mentis conditio vergit. Emblem. being in a merry humour, I chanc'd to repeat it; wishing a quick wit then in presence, to render it in verse; which he did in this sort: NOLS Dream. I rode me thought, ith' Chariot of the Sun, With six black Barbs, by journying grown Dun. Impal'd with Sun-beams was my Head to th' Navel; But waking, found those Beams resolved' to Gravel. A Triple-Crown, me thought, was my adventure, But reaching fail'd, and made the Earth my Centre.
Char. This was a good divination, and well rendred, if thou hadst seasonably made use of it; but the confluence of thy victo∣ries; the applause of thy flatterers: and the forreign fame of thine actions; begot in thee an oblivion of the injuries thou hadst done; with a secure confidence against all oppositions whensoever or wheresoever they came. Small doubt may be made, but that thou couldst wipe off all those matchless indignities done to me and my Distressed family with a light spunge. Thy continued success in affairs had not onely estranged thy thoughts from a con∣eit of loyalty, but from a sense of thy Sovereigns in∣jury. Oli. Nothing more true; long time were your wrongs steeped in Lethe, but now they return fresh to my memory. Neither shall I stick now to discover freely to you, what I should never have done, if I had lived Nestors years, in the world. But my commands being now shut out oth' House, and no hope of succession to my kace, I shall not be nice in discovering what did sometimes highly concern me, and which now conceal'd, would little avail me. Char. Thy Genius argues thee more ingenuous dead then li∣ving. hold on and be mindful of thy Catalogue. Oli. I shall go on in order, though I remain confin'd here, where there is no order but horror: You cannot, Sir, but remember the necessitated remove, which your misfortunes had forc'd you to, and with what mean equipage accommodated in your adventure from your dear Foster-mother the City of Oxford to Newark: and with what beamelings of hope you were enlivened (but those weak beams struck out from a Scottish Horizon) in that so te∣dious and incommodious a journey. There by means of mine useful agents did I set mine Engine on work. The hopes which you reposed in old LASHLEY and his adherents, were soon blown up by mine Ordinance, being loaden with no other shot, then fear of our power, and promise of reward; which being at Newcastle accordingly effected; your ground∣less hopes became frustrated, your trust betrayed; and your person to my commands delivered. Afterwards, having you
then in my hands, and resolving to delude the world with a pretended clemency, or shroud of honesty; you were orde∣red, or rather cunningly trapan'd, for the Isle of WIGHT; where out of our tender zeal to your safety, you were to have your cause judiciously debated, and by convenient addresses to our Parliament, seasonably composed: But then and there, Sir, and never till then did I play my Master-prize. My Sceane was acting along in that grand treaty. No action undertaken, no article of agreement propos'd, whereon my negative voice, though not publikely, yet with a peaceful in∣nocence and smooth privacy, (as a close conservator of the rules of policy, the main principles of my religion) ever had a speciall influence. The purchase of your peace was the on∣ly Rock to my aims. It behov'd me then to obstruct all waies of condescention. Which I found to be an easy work by plow∣ing with your own Heifers: and making the neraest to your Person, the onely instruments for mine advantage: and who were these, but those Divine Organs that sounded so sweetly in your ears? and was not this a gallant Prelacy, that could for self-interests, dispence with Loyalty! But truth is, Sir, pro∣motion was their idol. This made them feed upon the better side oth' hedge. They wisely considered, how by my thriving discipline and weakness of your forces, you were going down the weather: The onely way then, as they conceiv'd, both to secure their persons, and to feather their nests (a principal which they found not in all Hookers Ecclesiastical policy) was to imitate those Persian Priests, whose superstitious adorati∣on became reserv'd onely for the Suns rising, but none for his setting. Thus went the game on, but shuffled ever to your disadvantage.Solinus. In a word, I neither slept nor slipt any oppor∣tunity that might decline your peace, or advance mine aime. Your proposals, by my party were wholly slighted, your let∣ters misconstrued; all future addresses barred; and this Trea∣ty, contrary to all hope and loyal wishes, no less suddenly then unexpectedly dissolved. Which done; holding secrecy and celerity to be the main moving wheels of every weighty action: and that more advantage did arise by dispatch then delay; present course was taken for hurrying your from that
Isle to Windsor; ther to measure out your Grave; for so it was irrevocably intended. Char. I expected no less upon my first approch at that place. Nothing was presented to my sight; nothing sounded in mine ears, which rendred me not formidable Accents and Omens of my ensuing ruine. So sad was every object to my apprehension. Oli. You could look for nothing else. For it had been my care to fit to you with such Attendants, as presented nothing less then death, and horror in their countenance. And by these were you accompanied, as became a remorseless guard, to your judicial Doom, long resolv'd on, before you were senten∣ced. Char. I might easily understand that by the Charge drawn up against me; and the face of the Iury impanneld to try me. Wherein none ever partak't of more justice with less equity or mercy. Oli. O Sir, you were no ordinary offender, and therefore not to be proceeded withall in ordinary manner. And in all these, it rejoiced me not a little, to be the principal Agent, and yet undiscovered or suspected. Wherein, me thought, (and this imagination pleased me) I might be compared, for my winding and subtile conveiances to the River Alpheus, that by subterranean passages runs a while unseen through the Countrey of Elis, but afterwards breaking out, repairs to the Sea, though with no great Stream. Such was my course: and as I then held it, no less prosperons my chance. For you found that our justice, were it right or wrong, and wings to quicken your dispatch for the Block. Where you had many spectators but few open mourners: for the Souldiers threats and fury attach't them with that fear, as they stopt the Current of their tears: and still'd the noise of their groanes. Char. I had once a purpose to resist your Executioner; till I was by my pious and Reverend Chaplain seasonably-disswaded from it. Ol. That would have avail'd you nothing: By my com∣mands (being jealous of such resistance) secret Engines, Hooks and Pulleys were contrived, forcibly to hale you to the Block; if you had not submitted to it. You might rather
wonder, how it could possibly come to pass, that you at your Court gate, and in the eye of your eminent'st City, where some could not chuse but love you, should act such an unex∣emplary Tragedy, and have not one revenging hand held up to defend you: nor tender the zeal they ought you. Char. O blush at thy self, Nol, in this Relation. who more obliged to thy Soveraign then thy self, yet who more treache∣rouslie tyrannous to thy Soveraign? Finchinbrook abhorr'd thee. None had relation to thy loyal Uncle OLIVER, but ab∣jur'd thee. Ol. Yet all this wrought nothing in me. I gloried much in your Death, but more at the Place of your Death. For my imbosom'd Soveraignty told me, it inlarg'd my Power, and abridged my fear: For what could he fear, who had the power to sacrifice without resistance his Princes life at his own door? In which action, (the wonder of all ages) though Some might have oppos'd me, they could not have o're∣powr'd me. So strongly had I won in upon the affections of the Souldiery; as my Commands gave them Laws: my Pro∣posals were their Interests. Char. This was such an Interest as my Lenity culd ne're attain to. Ol. O CHARLES, you had never the knack on't: your Grandfather could have told you that Kingship was a quaint kind of Craft, and that there were many wayes to the wood, which stood with the expedience of a Prince to dis∣cover, before he came to be a prudent Governour. It was one of my Arts (neither did I lose my self in it) to mint Treason, purposely to make the ignorant admire my Clemen∣cie: wherein it was my glorious gloss to pretend Mercy in pardoning those whom I knew to be innocent. But in this Iuncto, wherein I seemed to sail as on a calm Sea; I could not walk so closely in the Clouds, but I might shew the fierceness of my fury, and eagerness of my talons. A large Rubrick Calender of the Innocent Blood I have shed, is hourly here presented to me. LOVE, GERRARD, VOW∣EL, &c. infinitely torment me; and of those, my ingra∣titude to Love for his friendly office and faithful service done
to our Cause at VXBRIDGE. But there is no torture af∣flicts me more, then when I call to my unhappy memory, (for many things am I forc'd to remember, which I would gladly forget) that HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE, and those unpresidental proceedings of my Obsequious President LISLE: whose Labell (for Libell I cannot call it, being so near truth) I shall mention, as it was brought me by Erida∣mus from the middle Region. A President for Presidents. LISLE, let these Presidents of Judgement win thee, Lest vengeance raise such fatal Furies in thee, As that High-Court of Justice where thou sate Hung round with Scarlet, manifest thy State Of all most cursed, since thou hadst th' sense To act such Sins against thy Conscience. So strangely Names, from Natures disagree, As may appear by Sir GEORGE LISLE and thee. He shed his blood in zeal unto his King, Thou shedst their guiltless blood who honour'd Him. He lost his Being to support a Crown, Those who support it, thou hast thrown them down. Never sit more in a Judicial Court, Lest th' Court of Conscience impeach thee for't: And cry O'sace through all this Purple Isle, "No Crimson-Dyer may compare with Lisle. HEWYT'S affrighted Ghost shall startle thee, And ach thy guilt to all Posteritie; And tell this Grand Conveene, whereon relies Th' redress of those who suffer injuries, That if this Murder which for vengeance calls, Sleep still secure, the Sentence heavy falls O Those who by Discussion fully know it, And may revenge his Blood, yet will not do it. NOW, do not think, thou horrid man of sin, That Price, Pray'r, Power shall a Connivence win; It were a lasting stain to Womanhood Who Wedlock love, to sell their husbands blood. Such satisfaction must not stand for pay Lest th' purchase style the field Akeldama.
Eye for an Eye the ancient law decreed, Then for an Head what ransom but an Head? Yea, more then that should b requir'd in reason, For his was loyal, thine a mint of treason. "Though Titus head were like another mans, "'Twas worth a thousand of Domitians. Char. This struck home, NOL, so far as it went: but His pen should have given thee a touch of more butcheries committed by thy command, and that instrumental President. Oli. O Sir, that had been needless; I have them all in red Capital Letters writ within me: and as they are houtly pre∣sented to me; so they hourly torture me. Your Capel, Lucas, Lisle, Slingsby, Ashton, with other numberless objects (such is the terror of an afflicted conscience) constantly affright me. Neither was it my meaning, but that others should by sen∣tence of that Court, have speedily followed them. So as, there was nothing that inraged my spirit more then the hea∣ring of Mordant and Bennet to be freed. That indulgence, though just enough, ranckled ong within me, and begot in me a fatal distemper. For thirst of blood was grown in me so insatiate, as guilt and innocence fell together in the scale: and became equally liable to a censure. Upon my review of these, and my tyranizing in these, I cannot but acknowledge my self worthily branded with all infamy on earth, but justly suf∣fering all torments here where I am eternally to remain: Yet being plunged in this depth of misery, me thinks, huma∣nity should afford me more pitty, then to Libell me. Nei∣ther would it so much greive me, if they disgorged their poy∣son in strong lines: but in base Ballad stuffe to bring in my Ghst, calling upon my Son RICHARD; and he not to believe me to be his Father (as he might well, for never was NOL known so void of Sense) were unsufferable, if mine arm could reach so far as to punish it. Char. It seems then, that NOL will sooner loose his hair then his condition. Fury and revenge lodge in thine heart, wheresoe∣ver thou keep'st Garrison. Ol. O What other Musick then Division can be heard in these quarters, where we are all enemies before we know one another! where we act revenge without ground: and practise hostility at first sight! Thus men divin'd; and this have I found
That I should pass o're the Stygian Lake, And as I had brew'd, so might I bake. And have I not brew'd bravely, when I thirst perpetually, and can find nothing to quench me? —O that this surly Go∣vernour here would take my Parole, how it would refresh me! Char. True NOL, But what security wouldst thou enter for thy return? What Bondsmen would untertake for thee? Ol. O none, none. I have forfeited the Bond of my fideli∣ty so often, as none will credit me. O that the English Peerage had been indued with more valour; so might they have clipt my wings: and staid me in my Career: the pursuit whereof rendred me in this most unhap∣py; in that I never felt what misfortune was, being ever ac∣companied with success and victory! and what has all this purchased me, save dishonour on earth; torture in my recede from earth: and a mark of infamy to the remainder of my scornful family, so long as they shall live upon earth? Now, was not this continued conquest a pretious purchase? O how I am enforced to see, what my discontented eyes would glad∣ly turn from! Methinks I am now smoothly contracting with Davy Lashley for foreslowing his March, or making him an easy enemy by his cool assistance: which chaffer or martial merchandise went on prosperously: for I found him by mine Agitators as ready to receive, as they were to offer. So as, though he were colourably taken Prisoner, he was privately a State Pentioner: living where he may be most secure; for in his own country, he cannot promise himselfe any safety. So despicable he is to those that know him: being rich in for∣tunes, but poor in friends. Such is the reward of his disloy∣alty, as he knows not whom to trust, nor with whom to con∣sort in his times of discontent. Charles. Surely, NOL, thy calamity hath read to thee an ex∣cellent Lecture of Loyalty. Which timely perused and digested, had salved thine honour: and secured thee from those terrors and tortures which thou dost now suffer. —O NOL, hadst thou known how betwixt Finite and Infinite there is no proportion, thou wouldst never have given such reins to thy restless ambition! Ol. O Sir, but he that has his Heaven upon Earth, never takes time to think on any other Heaven then earth! This moves
me though all too late, to recal to mind that momentany sha∣dow of earthly felicity (as I formerly term'd it) which I there partak't: and to compare it with the present condition of my remediless pitiless and endless misery; where I can neitehr expect release, not hope of mercy. And amidst these, to re∣member my Court Gamboils, musick, exquisite wines and sociable humorists; and compare them with those Sulphur brimstone Carouses, and ugly fiends I consort with: into what a gulfe of bitterness am I plunged? the fluentest tongues would appear mute in these expresses. Char. I wonder, NOL, how such an Head-piece, in compa∣rison of whom, Machiavel might be justly accounted a Novice, could retain, after so many successefull battels and titular ho∣nours, so little sage in your magnetick sconce, as to exchange the specious splendor of an imperial Britanny, foir the hideous horror of an infernal Tartary. Ol. In answer, it was PROVIDENCE; a change not by my choice. But my hope was, before I descended to it, to make it mine own, and erect a New Court of Iustice in it, as I had formerly done in other countries. And being now removed, and taken napping before I was prepared; I wonder much how the Cardinal MAZARINE, that Arch-Engineer of all Division, and profest enemy to ci∣vil peace, should have his term of life so long continued, and mine so soon contracted! Should I relate to you shadowing∣ly our secret counsels, association, with our mutual and in∣tercursive Characterisme, by way of intelligence, touching the taking in of Dunkirk and Mardike, our transactions in relation to Flanders; you would hold poor Nol a simple So∣phister in the School of Machiavelisme, compared to the Cardinal: being of a prompt wit, and profound judgement. One so sociably wise, as his company would infinitely con∣tent me. And he demeans himself so as I hope, e're long (if his Relations will give way) to see him here, and enjoy his company in this Region. Ch. If he should, NOL, he would not thank thee either for thy society, or that Courts hospitality. He holds himself well where he is: and would not change his lodging in Paris for all the small hope he has in Paradise: much less for Pluto's bustling Court, where there are no conferments of honour, nor projectments suit∣able
to his humour: His Check roul there would be both too numerous, and too regardless: The Cardinal is a person of reser∣ved State: and stands mainly on his punctilio. Ol. Howsoever, it would glad me much to see him; if it were but to chide him, for the dis-esteem he had of me, after my remove from him. Char. How; dis-esteem from your sworn Brother! Ol. Or else he forswore himself.—Yet no sooner had the report of my phrentick death (for so they fam'd it) crost the Sea, and sounded in his ear; then with winged speed he ad∣drest his course to your sWiddow-Queen; telling her, that he had brought her the happiest tidings that ever befel her: for her greatest enemy she had in the world, was dead: which he exprest with such cheerfulness and alacrity, as if it infinitely concern'd himself. Char. And so it did: for then he might hold himself the only wise man in Europe. Ol. Pray Sir, was not this done like a Brotherly Cardinal? But, indeed, my long experience of his pretended intimacy had school'd me sufficiently, if I had retain'd so much grace as to have made use of it: for there was never any exploir nor design tending to my disadvantage or dishonor, which I was not put upon by him, or his Beagles. Witness that unfortu∣nate voyage to Iamaica, wherein so many old Souldiers layd down their lives, finding graves where they could find no ground to fight. But that was nothing Souldiers might be re∣cruited; but the vast charge which was in that dishonourable attempt expended, neither is, nor ever will be, I think, dis∣charged. In which pittiful adventure, I appeal to mine atten∣dants in ordinary and private assemblies, with what extempo∣rary prayers, dissembling tears, and heartless sighs I wearied heaven as well as my hearers for the good success of those sea∣faring Souldiers: wherein I am perswaded, as the time was af∣terwards computed, that my devotion was liable to a Romish error, being offered long after they were masacred. So little available were all our Fasts and Humiliation to those distres∣sed and dislaughter'd Souldiers. The more I held forth to the people, the worse news heard the people of them. Other Ports and Holds too by his advice took I in; the
holding whereof cost more, then the revenues or convenien∣ces of those Places would defray. And one of the considera∣blest which I there left, will be shortly, I am pereswaded, by a Trustee of your betraying Nation, freely rendred: and for a money matter, by way of sale, just as they dealt with you, clearlie acquitted and conveyed. Now, from whence came all these mercenarie contracts, or bargains of sale, but from the Cardinals Hat? which has found a Cap of Maintenance fot those factious spirits of France, for many years together. Char. Vice having once got an habit is not quickly removed. Ambition when it rides on Cock-horse, scorns to be dismounted, till it be unhors'd. So fares it with that Statizing Prelat; who, though it be his securest way to fish in troubled waters, he must perish on dry land, when his pretending Favorites shall desert him; and the Queens side leave him to himself. His unfea∣ther'd policie will not then save him.—But tell me NOL, why wouldst thou have that Cardinal translated? Ol. That he may more sensibly feel what I through his counsel and my own designs shall and have suffered. Char. No, NOL, that's not it. I smell thy drift; thou wouldst have the Cardinal remov'd, that by his descension thou might be made his Chaplain. Col. Not so Sir; though I have been in my time a stipendia∣ry predicant; I would not stoop so low as become any such Machiavilian Deacon. I was lately the enjoyeer of your Royal Exchequer; having the State-purse at command: wherewith my necessities made me so bold, as by my vast expence occa∣sioned from some desperate and unfortunate adventures, I have laid such an heap of stones at WALLINGFORD Court-gate, as will not be easilie removed: six millions thick (the Commonwealth being already so much exhuasted) will not be so quicklie discharged. This makes me grin and laugh beyond measure amidst my sufferings. Ch. And I will leave thee in that posture of malicious laugh∣ter.—Bid thee farewel, I will not; that salute were useless. Thine actions were such strangers to all goodness, as they have estrang'd thee from all hope of happiness. Rest in thy rest less condition,Elysium Charides, Hic Acha∣rontam petit. hapless, helpless, hopeless.—Adue, adue. Ol. Thus must I here remain ever dying, ever living, relin∣quish't of all humane Society, reft of all visible comfort to E∣ternity.—Adue, adue. FINIS.
