C7120A E1073_4 R210155 99868980 170634
PAX QVAERITVR BELLO OLIVARIVS DEI GRA: REIPVB: ANGLIAE, SCOTIAE, ET HIBERNIAE, &c PROTECTOR seal of the Commonwealth
AN ORDER AND DECLARATION OF His HIGHNESS the LORD PROTECTOR and His Privy Council, appointing a Com∣mittee for the Army, and Receivers Ge∣neral for the third Six Moneths Assess∣ment, commencing the 24th. of June, 1658. part of the three years Assessment of Thirty Five Thousand pounds by the Moneth, commencing the 24th. of June, 1657. WHereas by an Act of Parlia∣ment, entituled (An Act for an Assessment, at the Rate of Five and thirty thousand Pounds by the Moneth upon England, Six thou∣sand Pounds by the Moneth upon Scotland, and Nine thousand Pounds by the Moneth upon Ireland, for three years, from the 24th. of June, 1657. for a temporary Supply towards the Mainte∣nance of the Armies and Navies of this Common∣wealth.) it is amongst other things enacted,
That the several Rules, Directions, Clau∣ses, and Provisoes, mentioned & contained in an Act of Parliament, entituled, (An Act for an Assessment upon England, at the Rate of Sixty thou∣sand Pounds by the moneth for three moneths, from the 25th. day of March, 1657. to the 24th. day of June then next ensuing,) and the Powers & Authori∣ties thereby given to all and every the persons therein named or mentioned, shall endure and have continuance, until the said three years Assessment shall be fully and duly Collected, Levied, and Paid in, according to the true intent and meaning of the said Act; By which last mentioned Act, it is Provided and Decla∣red, That in case the Ordering and Payment of the Moneys by the said Act appointed, into the immediate Receipt of the Exchequer, shall be found inconvenient, so as the Moneys rai∣sed thereby cannot be paid in by the times li∣mited in the said Act, for the seasonable Sup∣ply of the Publique Service; That then it shall and may be lawfull for His Highness the Lord Protector and Council (if they shall so judge it fit) to Order and Direct the Mana∣ging, Levying, and Payment of the said Mo∣neys, in such a way, method, and manner, as the Monethly Assessments for the Army have been formerly managed, rated, and paid: Any thing in the said Act to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. Now forasmuch as the Moneys payable upon the Third Six Moneths of the said As∣sessment for three Years, by the said first reci∣ted Act, cannot be paid in by the respective times limited, into the immediate Receipt of Exchequer, so as the same may be a seasonable
Supply for the Publique Service; and that for payment of the Army in their several Quarters where they lie, there will be a ne∣cessity of assigning some part of the said third Six Moneths of the said Three Years As∣sessment, in the Counties where the said As∣sessments are raised: Therefore for the more effectual and orderly managing, levying, pay∣ing, disposing, and issuing forth of the Moneys payable upon the said third Six Moneths As∣sessment, commencing the 24th. of June, 1658. part of the said Three Years Assessment, and of all and every other Sum and Sums of Money already set apart, and appointed for the use and payment of the Forces of this Commonwealth, or that hereafter shall be set apart, and appointed for their use, before the 25th. Day of December now next coming: It is Ordered by His Highness the Lord Pro∣tector, by, and with the Advice and Consent of His Privy Council, That John Clerk, Ri∣chard Lucy, Edward Horseman, James Phillips, Gervase Bennet, and John Hildseley, Esquires, or any three of them, shall be, and are hereby ap∣pointed and authorized to be a Committee for the Army. And it is further Ordered, That all and every the Powers and Authorities, Rules and Directions, which were by an Ordinance of His Highness and Council, Entituled, (An Ordinance appointing a Committee for the Army, and Treasurers at War,) published the 28th. of Ja∣nuary, 1653. or by any Act or Ordinance there∣in mentioned, expressed to be given to the Committee for the Army, for the bringing in,
disposing and issuing forth of the Assessments, and Moneys, in that Ordinance mentioned, or to any other Purposes whatsoever, shall be, and are hereby given and continued to the Committee for the Army herein named and appointed for the managing, bringing in, dis∣posing, and issuing forth of the said third Six Moneths Assessment, commencing the 24th. of June, 1658. part of the said Three Years Assessment of Thirty five thousand Pounds by the Moneth, commencing the 24th. of June, 1657. and of all other Moneys that are, or before the said Twenty fifth Day of Decem∣ber next coming, shall be set apart, or appoint∣ed for the use of the Armies of this Com∣monwealth; and to all other uses, intents, and purposes whatsoever. And it is further Ordered, That the Treasurers at War, and also the several and respective Commissioners, Receivers, Colle∣ctors, Sub-Collectors, and all other Per∣sons whatsoever, who are, have been, or shall be intrusted or imployed in the Assessing, Col∣lecting, Levying, and Paying of the said third Six Moneths Assessment, and other Moneys before mentioned, or any part thereof, shall ob∣serve such Orders and Directions, as shall from time to time be made and given forth by the said Committee for the Army, or any three or more of them, in the due execution of the Powers and Trusts hereby given and com∣mitted to them. And it is further Ordered, That John
Blackwel, and Richard Dean, Esquires, (the present Treasurers at War) shall be, and are hereby appointed Receivers General for the said third Six Moneths Assessment, com∣mencing the said 24th. of June, 1658. part of the said Three Years Assessment of Thirty five thousand Pounds by the Moneth, com∣mencing the said 24th. of June, 1657. And the Receivers of the respective Coun∣ties, Cities, Towns and Places in England and Wales, and every of them, are hereby au∣thorized and required from time to time, to make Payment of the several Sums, which shall be by them received of all and every Col∣lector and Sub-Collector, upon the said third Six Moneths Assessment, unto the said Receivers General for the said third Six Moneths Assessment, at Guild-Hall, London, (or at such other Place as hereafter shall be by His Highness and Council appointed and directed) to be Paid by them into, and Ac∣compted for in the Receipt of His Highness Exchequer. And all and every the Acquit∣tance and Acquitances of the said Receivers General for the said third Six Moneths As∣sessment, shall be unto the said Receivers for the said Respective Counties, Cities, Towns and Places, and every of them, a sufficient Discharge. Provided always, That none of the Pow∣ers hereby given or continued, shall extend, or be construed to extend, to Authorize or Im∣power the said Committee for the Army, or
any other Persons, to Raise or Levy any of the Moneys aforesaid by Free-Quarter, or Quartering of Souldiers. White-hall, June 3. 1658. Hen. Scobel, Clerk of the Council. LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills and John Field, Printers to His Highness, 1658.
