C7105 E641_5 R206704 99865817 118068
A LETTER From the Lord General CROMVVEL, Touching the Great Victory obtained neer WORCESTER: SUPERSCRIBED For the Right Honorable William Lenthal Esq; Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. Together with an Order of Parliament for observing a Thanksgiving to Almighty God for the same. Friday, September 5. 1651. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Order, and Letter from the Lord General to the Speaker of the Parliament, Dated this Third of September, 1651. be forthwith Printed and Published. Hen: Scobell, Cleric. Parliamenti. London, Printed by John Field, Printer to the Parliament of England. 1651.
For the Right Honorable WILLIAM LENTHAL Esq; Speaker of the Parliament of the Common∣wealth of England. SIR, BEing so weary and scarce able to write, yet I thought it my duty to let you know thus much, That upon this day being the Third of Sep∣tember, (remarkable for a mercy vouch∣safed to your Forces on this day twelve moneth in Scotland) we built a Bridge of Boats over Severn, between it and Tame, about half a Mile from Worcest∣er; and another over Tame within Pi∣stol shot of our other Bridge: Lieute∣nant General Fleetwood and Major Ge∣neral
Dean marched from Ʋpton on the Southwest side of Severn up to Poyick, a Town which was a Pass the Enemy kept; we passed over some Horse and Foot, and were in Conjunction with the Lieutenant General's Forces, we beat the Enemy from Hedge to Hedge, till we beat him into Worcester: the Enemy then drew all his Forces on the other side the Town, all but what he lost, and made a very considerable Fight with us for three hours space, but in the end we beat him totally, and pursu'd him up to his Royal Fort which we took, and indeed have beaten his whole Army: when we took the Fort we turned his own Guns upon him; the Enemy hath had great loss, and certain∣ly is scattered and run several ways, we are in pursuit of him, and have laid For∣ces
in several places, that we hope will gather him up: Indeed this hath been a very glorious Mercy, and as stiff a Contest for four or five hours as ever I have seen; both your old Forces and those new raised, have behaved them∣selves with very great courage, and he that made them come out, made them willing to fight for you; the Lord God Almighty frame our hearts to real Thankfulness for this which is alone his doing. I hope I shall within a day or two give you a more perfect Account, In the mean time I hope you will par∣don, SIR, Your most humble Servant, O. Cromwel. Near Worcester, Septem∣ber 3. 1651. 10 at night.
Friday, September 5. 1651. THe Parliament being very sensible of the wonderful and seasonable Mercies God hath been pleased to vouchsafe unto this Na∣tion, by his great Blessing upon their Army near Worcester, in Routing the Army of Scots on Wednesday last, As is expressed in a Letter from the Lord General to the Speaker of the Parliament, herewith Printed, and intending to set apart a day of Solemn Thanksgiving unto God, to be observed through this Com∣monwealth; Do in the mean time Order, That the Ministers in all Churches and Con∣gregations within the late Lines of Commu∣nication and weekly Bills of Mortality, on the next Lords day, give Publique Thanks to Almighty God for this great Mercy; And that the Lord Major of this City of London, Do take care that timely notice be given to
the said Ministers for that purpose; and that the said Ministers do then read the said Let∣ter. Friday, September 5. 1651. ORdered by the Parliament, That this Order, and the Letter from the Lord General to the Speaker of the Parliament, Dated this Third of September, 1651. be forthwith Printed and Pub∣lished. Hen: Scobell, Cler. Parl. FINIS.
