D2012AA 99897300 137029
A SIGN Given them being entred into The day of Iudgment To set their House in order. For the High Court of Parliament assembled. From the Lady Eleanor. Psal. 97. The Lord is King (or reigneth) let the earth rejoyce; let the great Isles be glad. London, Printed in the Year 1644. rinted with some words of addition for the Year present, 1649.
A DISCOVERY Unto what Nation the last Day aforehand to be in the last days Revealed: Contained in the XX. of Kings, Isaiah 39. AS had no other assigned then The word of God, touching the Resurre∣ctions then being at hand, but that of Jonas the prophet; so in point of like incredulity at his return again turned Sadduces, appointed no other, but this of King Hezekiahs days (Kings, &c.) that for a sign or
assurance had, the third day of his uprising, going up to the Lords house to seal it; that of the shadows going back, for the third of his life out length∣ned, a lease made him of thrice five years, like a shadow when past. VVithout which token, not in a capacity of obtaining so high blessing passed not without being by the pro∣phet Isaiah advertised (the Lord of Hosts Ambassador) his house after∣ward how swept; and sons under what slavery issued from him, not for facility such onely, but difficulty of belief dangerous not a little. Of which days come about again, this great Revolution ushering the day of Iudgement, his coming in the Clouds; whereof as follows, of Ja∣cobs ladder reaching to heaven gate,
thus, The express Epitomy of King James's life of Great Britain, where beside no smal plague accompanying his first coming, afore never visited so with those tokens, of his like reco∣very, here giving to understand be∣yond expectation; such a solemn Thanksgiving for which at Pauls Cross: which long Sermon in was re∣lated, how in his late sickness unto death, he likewise justified his upright walking with God: and there with how pluckt off his Cap, and cast it on the ground, in such a passion professing in point of witting Injustice, he would not so much as ask God forgiveness; by which way of purging himself, as came not behinde Hezekiah neither in some gross failings: like that good King his hearkning to those charm∣ing
Babylonian Ambassadors or Spies with letters sent to congratulate from Baladon son of Baladan. Also who shewed them all his store and armory, coming from those Au∣strian Philips, &c. overcome with like jugling slights, a few figs and jun∣kets, suffered that Gundamore having surveyed the Tower, to carry away as many great Ordnance and Guns as he pleased, preserved for Truths defence, and Kingdoms safety, in no less peril of home bred friends such, then for∣reign foes, requisite with Arms and Forces to be secured: And then how sent his Son after, forced for whose Ransom to send over All the precious things and goodly, laid up by his Prede∣cessors, to be bestowed amongst those in∣satiable Eunuchs and Officers distribu∣ted.
And lastly the good man him∣self, in whose days flourished Truth and Peace, thus over-reached, for all his King-craft and Learning, that brake his heart shortly after. And the rest of his Acts, and all his might (or greatness) and how he brought water in∣to the City, and made a Pool and a Con∣duit, that Idol the cross are they not written in the Chronicles, &c. And thus this Hezekiah slept, and rested with his fathers, and Manasses his son reigned in his stead; that came not short of Ahab: and he awakened thus, for him so much suffices, be∣come a sign himself, no inferior one, had the Suns retiring for a sign, O∣beyed Joshuahs command (no feign∣ed Phaeton) stood  Moon mo∣ving neither they rrid that longed
after Rest, so now before removed, carried thence away, shows them the way accompi  it were, sets  the East: Moreover for whose additional years, fiveteen wedded to those ten degrees, these crowning the first of his Reign, 1625. forbids any more Coronations of Kings: No more rising or setting here of theirs. Kings xxi. Chron. xxxiii. ANd this Manasseh twice twelve years old, when he began to reign over Great Britain; How he reared Altars to Baal, and set up his Roman Altars, built Altars in the house of the Lord, adored that Babylonian Image the Crucifix, manifest are they not on re∣cord? Beyond Heathenism abomi∣nation
execrable: Moreover to the overthrow of them and theirs, how many seduced, beside shedding so much Innocent Blood; insomuch that the Catalogue of his sins, Ma∣nasses great wickedness, the hateful Amorites Cup, wherewith paralleld and worse; which Tyrants but light in comparison, weighed with this MANS, since 1625. the Remon∣strance of the present. To whom the Lord spake, and to his people likewise, but both by regard alike improved in his Command∣ments; as the Suns course the con∣trary way gone as many degrees a∣stray, and so both alike whether re∣warded, recomended to the behold∣ers, whose high looks brought down, here see whose Sons coat this? therefore
thus saith the Lord, Behold, I am bring∣ing an evil upon them, that whose hear∣eth it, both his ears shall tingle: where thus again, whether Jerusalems line stretched over us, CITY and Country both; And I will wipe Jeru∣salem, as a man wipeth a dish, which he wipeth and turneth it upside down; as in a glass whether presents not the face of the present, spares neither side; who not amiss deriving from Brute their denomination, from the Ass as wel who understands his owner, no such stranger to the dumb. And so much for this Manna set at nought, these judgements of the Lord foreshewed, light by set; notwithstanding speak∣ing the Canaan language unto this our Age, to all whosoever hath ears, in their Native tongue, shewed them
their unnatural motion gone back∣ward how far, offended thereat or no, whereof as ensues. This for another making up the number, he when made his supplica∣tion, how was heard, also returned to Hampton-Court; however mis-led by sinister Counsel, or betrayed, not un∣humbled either, unknown not unto all who agreed to whatsoever, about two years after who slew him in his own house, attended with glowing ears not a few, such a spectacle. And how the people of the Land slew them again that had conspired, &c. Rainsborough and our Holland Am∣bassador, taking essay of it, Drunken∣ness added to blood-thirstiness, were the first saluted with which unex∣pected cup.
And with expedition (a few words to the wise) on this wise passing on, what Baptism first past on his Sons, visible in the Seers book; withal how servile on the other side to his Priests Bishops, charmed by their subtile Gospels: whose Service book because allowed by his Father, what an Idol made of it, where that for another, recorded in their Prophetical Re∣monstrance, gave himself to them that had Familiar Spirits, bringing up whoso named by him, the gods and others; as Plays his night exer∣cise. And the rest of his folly, and other of his judgement, making his Prayer∣book also equivolent with the Alsuf∣ficient Scriptures, evident as his grove made, daily at Ball where sacrificed
his time, graced with one of his Fa∣thers unhappy acts, that Baals or James Chappel, prodigious Tvvins, the other his Babylonian Theatre, from James's to vvhich fatal place made his last progress or march, e∣rected in Commemoration of the Ark as had been, also the seventeenth Century current; as from Adam to the Flood so long, not unforevvarned of it by him that was the son of Adam, that was the son of God; that as vvere those days before Noah, so shall be his coming again, concerning not onely Tim golden vial or glass, by vvhich account its being at a stand: But hovv it stands or fares with faith put to the question (Luke, &c.) whe∣thr found such a thing as fh, how preparid then?
As for the fit time, or vvhen. Lo, the present generation:  Masters, for setting your house in order here dis;charges her calling or place b farther giving you in the next place notice, from Manasses fifty five years Reign, of his second coming at hand, goeth hand in hand vvith that of Caesar Augustus his five and fifty years, in vvhose Reign The Prince of Life, The Beginning and Ending of Monarchy, came, about the fortieth year, into the world, that began to be a∣bout Thirty years of age, in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, (Luke, &c.) even the sum of it bids turn to those sure Chronicles, penn'd by the holy Spi∣rits command, thus saith the Spirit, from the return of Manasses days to expect his coming again, aforehand,
as shewed unto his servants the Pro∣phets, expresly pointing to the year 1655. at hand, being the time vvhen the flood came, 1655. from the Crea∣tion, as computed by the Ancients and other Noah and his (Baptisms figure, at mans estate all) preserved in the Whales womb, ten moneths ful∣filling, before any window in the Ark o∣pened: and thus one deep calling to an∣other, as when the waters prevail'd, the snowy Dove found no footing, the Ra∣ven afore sent forth, no other presa∣ging then the Spirit of Prophesie, at such a time again though ceased long at last salutes the nations with the O∣live leaf in her mouth, so seasonable now for their healing, without which Angelical leaves applied, an evil in∣curable, promised The Tree of life, yielding its monethly fruit.
And so be it known, That the a∣foresaid blessed period of years 55. containing Moneths 666. (Rev. 13.) called The number of a MAN (to vvit) that Roman Emperors Reign shevved afore the Moneth of August bearing his Name; by vvhose Pre∣decessor the Calender corrected: and 666 Hours fulfilling a Moneth, all bids Tyrant Time and his Genera∣tion or Offspring Adieu, subscribed vvith Emanuel Jesus, its Numerals MVILV. Anno 55. FINIS.
