d197 e449_21 99864463 161864
A DANGEROVS FIGHT AT Pembrooke Castle, BETWIXT The Forces Commanded by Lieu∣tenant Gen. CROMWELL, and the For∣ces Commanded by Major Gen. Laughorne, and Collonel Iohn Poyer. WITH The number that were slain and taken Prisoners on both sides, and Poyers Declaration to his Souldiers, concerning Sir Mar∣maduke Langdale. LIKEWISE, Another Fight near PONTEFRACT Castle in York-shire, between the Cavaliers Commanded by Col. Bonevant, and the Parliaments Forces, Commanded by Col. Fairfax, and the successe thereof. TOGETHER, With the proceedings of the Lord Gen. Hamilton, concerning the bringing of his Army into England, and 3. Acts of the Parliament of Scot∣land, touching the same. Proclaimed and read at the High-Cross in the City of Edenburg. LONDON. Printed for R. G. 1648.
Certain Acts agreed upon by the Parli∣ament of Scotland, concerning the managing of a Warre against Eng∣land. Proclaimed at the High-Crosse in the City of Edenburgh. Honoured Sir, THis Parliament here hath adjourned for two yeares, knowing well that Parliaments are not the best at Government, at least in time of Warre. A Committee of 36. is to manage Affaires, D. Hamilton Generall, and Governour of Edenburgh Castle; most sutable: there is no doubt of an Army that will come for England. For when it was askt in Parliament, where was money for to maintain the Army, it was answered by the Gen. let the Lads come into England once, and then shift for themselves, the number of this Army in view is 3550. Horse, 500. Dragoones, and 6000. Foote, be∣sides the forces which Major Gen. Langdale, for Sir Tho. Glemham is Gen. and the most Courted Eng∣lishman
that ever set foote on Scots ground: the Countries here are in sad condition, the peoples adversnesse to the War occasions their flight; that flight is accompanied with plundering of their houses, and if taken, imprisonment, and if in Armes death: is this War for Presbyterian Government jude; that there may nothing be wanting. For compleating his expedition, certain Acts are past, Sanc Le Roy: First, that no Minister publikely or pri∣vately speak against this engagement: (will not their sighes and teares think you be Registred) on pain of being distmist his place and imprisonment, and who ever relieve him are to be proceeded a∣gainst as Malignants their persons imprisoned, and goods seized. 2. That what Parliament man or Minister of justice that will not joyn with them in this engagement shall lose his place, his person im∣prisoned, and his goods seized. 3. An oath to im∣pose upon all that they shall sweare to approve and consent unto, and with their lives and fortunes to maintain any Act or Acts, and all the proceedings of this Parliament, and of this engagement: this power is given to recommit of estates to execute: the refusers to be proceeded against with imprison∣ment, and ceasing their estates. The Lord Marquis Argile, Lord Eglinton, and Lord Cassils, with divers others are fled into the West of Scotland for security, against whom is gone the Lord Calendor and Middleton, with 2500 horse and 3000 foot (for the Presbyterian cause) who wil undoubtedly overcome the other, because they have no horse: the Scots in Ireland halt between
their good quarter in Ireland, and a War in England but, because they will seem willing, they offer some of them to come upon receipt of money which its said was sent, and fell short of them: Lord Lowden Lothian Car and Warison with others are gone from Edenburgh as it is thought to Argile. Edenburgh June 17. 1648. Sir, The action in these parts between Major Gen. Lambert might have been before this time, but the first hath no minde to fight, expecting suddenly by an incraease of power to overflow England: car∣ryng all before them, unlesse gravell; he hath made severall flourishes but still drew back, yet so as to leave straglers behind him. Major Gen. Lambert is now about Perith, and Langdalo at Carlile, in case he be flighted, he may step into Scotland. You would little think what joy would be in Scotland to heare that the English Army were drawing Nor∣therly: and how soon hereupon they in Scotland would be formidable against the forward party for England. The Lord Balmerino plundred for not ta∣king armes, and some killd, the like meanes is used to others, and that this War may be charged on by Sea and Land, their is past lately towards: Scotland a fleet of 14 sayle. The Admirall of them is Mr. John Gilapsby, as they passed they gave Barwick a salute, they came from Holland, brought ammuniti∣on & other necessaries for War. Many of Langdales men run from him, 3 Ministers & 15 of the Coun∣trimen that came with petitions to Edenburg against the War are imprisoned: From the present state of affaires in Scotland appeares a War in Eng∣land,
but sure not so dangerous as to fright into any unsound accord, if circumstances be weighed and powers on each side considered. Sir, Upon the 16. of this instant, Major Sparrow, joyned with part of the Lieutenant Generalls Regi∣ment, having notice of about 500. foot, and 100. horse about Walden resolved to dispute their quar∣ters, but upon arrivall, found the birds were flown, about 3 in the afternoon, to a place called Hinton, (a small market Town in Cambridgeshire, 4. miles from thence) their wearinesse inviting them to a re∣freshment for certain houres, and therefore resolved to take what pleasure a grasse Close within a mile of Walden, and a rainy night would afford; the enter∣tainment of the place affords them little encou∣ragement to stay, and therefore they advance with the Phosphers first dawning to Walden; the reso∣lute forlorn advances, and Captain Wallington, with the Lieut. Gen. own Troop, who had the Van, (the rest of the party cheerfully following) equa∣lizes their resolutions; but the work seemes diffi∣cult, by the enemies barre cadoing of the way with Carts, in the face of some Musketyers, and Pikes, who wanted no valour, nor sparred any indeavours to maintain it; and Captain Wallington was gal∣lantly opposed by Major Muschampe, with 20. Musquets, a stand of Pikes, and 20. resolute horse, the service was hot on both sides, but disputed in a short time. A Trumpeter of Wallingtons was shot through the hand, some of our horse hurt; of theirs; slain Maj. Muschame, and 10. more, Col. Thornton, Mr. Steward, (who was very active in the rising
at Mindel hall in Suffolk) Sir Barnaby Scudamore, and Mr. Henry Sanders, taken prisoners, but not in this action; our party then entered the Town, scour∣ed the streetes, and made all clear till they came to the Church, where the main Guard, of about 100. foote, was Commanded by an old stout Souldier; the passages thereunto being very narrow, caused our men to retreat, and upon debate it was resolved to summon them, upon which, a Treaty was desired and granted, and the result thereupon thus. 1. That the Countreymen should go to their own homes, leaving their Armes behind them, and en∣gaging never to bear Arms against the Parl. for the future. 2. That 6. horsemen should march away with their horses and Swords: There were taken for the publike store, 100. Armes, besides 100. more the Souldiers had amongst them, 2. Colours of foote, 4. Drums, and 2. Barrels of Powder, a considerable party of horse, but few prisoners, (in respect our party was not able to surround the Town, and effect the surprize at once.) This knot had been stronger tyed by 11 a Clock that day, if not timely broken. From the Head Quarters Iune 22. 1648. Another Fight near Pontefract Castle in Yorkshire. SIR. THe enemy in Pontefract Castle, taketh much liberty, and goeth where they please, on the other side of the Castle, and upon Sunday last about three of the Clock in the morning; we receiv∣ed a stron Alarm from them on this side the Castle,
the manner thus: Col: Bonevant (the Governour) made a salley, with a party of horse and foot to surprize some of our men who were upon the guard, and Officers in their quarters: but his designe were frustrated; for we received the Alarm very timely, and prepared to receive them, and upon their advance towards the Bridge, our musquetiers gave fier, they answered them with another valley insomuch here began a very hot encounter, and sharpe dispute, but after a furious and violent con∣flict, Col. Fairfax with a party of horse advanced over the Bridge, charged the enemy in the streets, and performed his action with aboundance of gal∣lantry, kil, d 3 of the Castle Soldiers, took 6 prisoners and persued the rest to Pontefract Towns end, with the losse of 20. men, the Cannons plaid from the Castle, but did no execution. Bonevant threatens a sudden revenge upon Col. Fairfax. Ferribridge, 19. Iune 3. in the morning. 1648. SIR, THis Town is almost at the last gaspo, being much dis∣contented & divided, occasioned some want of Victuals; but Col. Poyer studies, how to delude the Souldiers declaring to them, that before Munday next, he wil warrant them relief, from M. G. Langdale: Our great Guns have plaid against the walls, & a breach was made by battery, & the assault attemp∣ted, but fruitles, being repulsed with the losse of 23. and 4. on their part: Since which time, we have had another fight with them, upon a salley forth with their horse, the busines was not long in dispute, but very hot, and gallantly maintained by both parties, but at the last, we put them to flight, killed 9. of them, took 20. prisoners, with the losse of few men, as is said, Maj. 6. Laughorne made one amongst them; we also took: about 30. horse, and some Arms, M. G. Laughorn is recovered of his late wounds, & it is supposed, there are 2000. fighting in the Town, We doubt not but to be masters both of Town and Castle very suddainly. Pembrook June 19. 1648. FINIS.
