D642 E390_26 99862043 114192
THE DECLARATION OF THE ARMIE UNDER His Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, As it was Lately presented at Saffron-Walden in Essex, unto Major-Generall Skippon, Lievtenant-General Cromwell, Commissary-General Ireton, And Colonell Fleetwood, Members of the House of Commons, and Commissioners there for the Parliament, by Colonell Whaley, Colonell Rich, Colonell Hammond, Colonell Lambert, Colonell Okey, Colonell Hewson, And Major Disborow, With the names of two hundred thirty and more Commission-Officers annexed. Which Declaration is to manifest and set forth to them, they being Members of Parliament, and of the Army, the Armies reall love and diligent care to discharge that duty for which they were raised, as will manifestly appeare in time to all that wish well to Mercy, Peace, and Justice. The time is coming when God will execute justice and judgment on the earth. Printed by the appointment of the Officers, whose names are hereunto subscribed. 1646.
To the honourable, Major Generall Skippon, Field-Marshall for Ireland, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, Commissary-Gene∣rall Ireton, and Colonell Fleetwood: The Officers of the Army now convened at Walden, whose names are sub∣scribed, humbly shew, THat whereas according to the direction received from you, the two Votes of the honourable House concerning Indempnity and Arrears, have been faithfully communicated to the Soul∣diery under our respective Commands; and thereupon there have been returnes made from the severall Regiments, of the grievan∣ces that yet stick upon them; out of which there hath been drawn up by the Officers, and consent of private Souldiers (for more brevity) a Summary of all such heads, wherein the returns from all did agree: All which have been presented, and shewed unto you; by which it doth ap∣peare, that in the Army there are sundry discontents, which we are sorry to see. Now for the clearer discovery (according to our best obser∣vations) of the originall grounds, together with the rise and growth of these discontents, and the occasions that have happened to increase the same; as also of our owne and other Officers proceedings, in rela∣tion thereunto: We do here humbly tender this faithfull and true ac∣compt, as followeth. THat we have long found our Souldiers and inferiour Officers (as we have also been our selves) generally much troubled, That since the Kingdome was (through the goodnesse of God) cleared, and free for the Parliament to raise money in, the Army should yet not be sup∣plied with pay to enable them to discharge Quarters, but compelled to be burthensome to friends, beholden to enemies, and oppressive to all, for their necessary subsistance, which, in the way of Free-Quarter (besides the unequall burthen to those parts where the Army hath been occasioned to lie) hath put the Kingdome to almost double the charge, (dammage or debt) that it would have been, if noys had been time∣ly raised to enable the Souldiers to pay Quarters. And the considerati∣ons of this to the Souldiery hath been the more grievous, in regard of
the advantage which the envy and malignity of many against this Army hath thereby had to bring the souldiers under scorne, con∣tempt and odium with the Countrey, and to render the reproa∣ches and calumnies cast upon the Army the better accepted with the people. We have found them also verie sensible (both from their owne reason and the experience of others) how tedious, chargeable, difficult and uncertaine it is for Souldiers after disbanding to get their particular accompts audited, and Debenters for Arreares, and much more to get the money, and therefore having not out of their small wages got mo∣ney enough before hand to maintaine them in prosecution of that bu∣sinesse, nor the sum of their Arrears so considerable as to countervaile the expence of time and money in their necessary attendance at London or elsewhere about it, every man for himselfe; they have been apt to ac∣compt for as good as lost whatever part of their Arrears they should not (before disbanding) either receive or get debenters for, and a certaine appointment where and how to have the same. That the many examples before our eyes of bitter and rigorous pro∣secutions at Law against Souldiers for things done in the War have oc∣casioned us and them with some amazement and anxiety to fore-thinke if the Parliament sitting, and the Army yet standing such things were dared and done, what measure we were like afterwards to find in case (sufficient provision being not made before-hand for indempnity in such things) we should be left to the sence of a Countrey-Jury or Judge at Law concerning the exigence of war and duty of a Souldier, especially considering how many of those under whose verdicts it were like to fall are either Malignants or Newters, and the latter (though in other things indifferent, yet in the matter of the war disaffecting the Parlia∣ments proceedings) doe distaste none so much as Souldiers looking up∣on them as their immediate disturbers, and the same consideration makes the Souldiers also feare that upon all future occasions of pressing they shall bee most aimed at by dis-affected or maligning Neighbours, if that businesse be left to their discretion. We have found them al∣so sensible of the neglect appearing in most Countreyes towards maim'd Souldiers and the wives and children of men slaine in the warre. We have also found in the apprehensions of many some dissatisfacti∣on in relation to those publike ends, for which principally both in the
Parliaments invitations, and their owne intentions, they were induced to ingage in this warre. In all these respects premised, wee have found the Souldiery very earnest to have their grievances and desires in these things represented to the Parliament by way of humble Petition, and (as there is right and reason enough in the things themselves, so) we know nothing that might absolutely debarre us, or render it unlawfull for them or us to have used that liberty of petitioning which belongs to us in common with all other members of the Common-wealth: But yet considering how subject to ill resentment or misconstruction a Petition from an Army might be, and with what jealousie all our actions and proceedings in this Army have by many been looked upon, and how watchfull and ready many have been to make misrepresentations and raise misappre∣hensions of the same. We did apply our selves to disswade from peti∣tioning at all, or at least to put it off as long as we could, in expectation of what the Parliament of themselves would doe in those things that might prevent the need of petitioning. Thus we delayed so long, till at last the Souldiers grew jealous of their Officers, and began to con∣ceive, that the Superiour Officers (their Arreares being more considera∣ble, and more worth their expence of time, and money in attendance for them, and they better able to prosecute the same for themselves, as also to save themselves from molestation or pressing, after disbanding) did neglect thir Souldiers concernments and mind only their own, in∣somuch as having been long put off in their desires of petitioning, the Souldiers of divers Regiments sent some of themselves at the first con∣veneing of Officers at Walden, to know whether the Officers (having long understood the common grievances before) would effectu∣ally fall upon some Petition in their behalfes, and to let them know, that otherwise they must speedily fall upon something by themselves to make knowne their grievances and desires while they had time. Hereupon to prevent the Souldiers acting of themselves in any irre∣gular way, or intermedling with any thing which might breed offence or inconvenience, finding there had been many draughts of Petitions car∣ried about in the Army which did extend to things of divers natures, and some beyond the proper concernments of Souldiers; the Officers then convened took one draught which they found least obnoxious that way,
and leaving out ltering such passages as they thought might (for ) prove dstfull or inconvenient, they brought it to  Petition, whereof a copie is hereunto annexed, (not touching  any thing but the due and necessary concernments of Souldiers) and this they directed to the Generall, so as, if any thing  escaped their consideration, it might through his hand receive a further examen and correction, ere it should come to the Parliament. And thus to concurre with the Souldiers in such a Petition, we were in∣duced the rather because (there being ill-affected spirits in all places, rea∣dy to stirre up discontents in the Army against the Parliament) we doubted, that if we did not thus give some vent to their just grievances and desires, in those things which generally concerne the Souldiery, such spirits might (upon the Souldiers generall discontents therein, and the Officers declining them) have a great advantage to ingage the Souldi∣ers, by those things, in an implication of other matters: And we knew no better way to prevent such discontents from being blowne up into any mutinous distemper, as by giving timely vent to their common and just desires in a regular way, and thereby to keep them within the bounds of due order and relation to their Officers in all they should do; and we are confident that what was (chiefly to this end) then agreed on by the Officers in the businesse of the Petition, if it had been permitted to go on, and not found such an absolute check and restraint as it did, would have proved answerably effectuall to have prevented all further inconveniences, and (with a reasonable answer from the Parliament) would have rendred the Souldiers easily satisfiable with what the Parlia∣ment would do in the things petitioned, and would have inabled the Officers the better to keep them in all due order. Having upon these grounds agreed upon the said Petition, most of the Officers then at Walden took a copie thereof to their quarters to let the souldiers understand what was agreed upon for their better satisfaction, intending after they had done that, to have presented it to the General, but before that could be done, some that were then at Walden (whom whoever they be, we can judge by the carriage and sequele of the bu∣sinesse, to be no better then malicious Incendiaries indeavouring to be∣get mis-understanding betwixt the Parliament and their Army) having surreptitiously got a copie of the Petition intended, did unseasonably pro∣possesse the Parliament therewith, and that (as we cannot but imagine by the effect) with such misrepresentations of our intentions and pro∣ceedings
therein, as to delude the Parliament into high suspitions of some dangerous designe in it, insomuch as the honourable House of Commons was induced first to send order to the Generall for suppres∣sing the Petition, and to summon divers ominent Officers of the Ar∣my to appeare at their Bar about it, and after that a Declaration in the name of both Houses against all that should proceed therein, was sent downe, with order to the Generall for the publishing of it through the Army, of which Declaration here is also a copie annexed. The said Declaration censuring the Petition as dangerous, tending to put the Army into distemper and mutiny, to obstruct the reliefe of Ireland, and to put conditions upon the Parliament, and declaring the Petitioners if they should proceed therein no lesse then enemies to the State and disturbers of the publike peace; we confesse, both we and our souldiers could not but look upon it with great trouble and amaze∣ment, we could not apprehend or imagine wherein the Petition tend∣ded to put the Army into mutiny or distemper (being by us intended and conceived as the surest way to prevent the same for the reasons before expressed) nor wherein it tended to obstruct the reliefe of Ire∣land, being rather the way, as we conceived, of gaining that just satisfa∣ction to the souldiery which might incourage both this Army more una∣nimously, and all other souldiers more cheerfully to ingage in any fu∣ture service for the Parliament, when they should find a due considera∣tion in the Parliament as farre as they were able, for services past; nor wherein it tended to put conditions upon the Parliament, when as the things it desired were such as the Parliament had long since volunta∣rily (without any bodies capitulation) promised and offered to all that should engage in their service or else declared to be a generall right, neither could we understand why our desiring of things (though not due, if yet they were but reasonable, and offered by way of hum∣ble Petition, with submission and reference of it to the Parliament, as we professe our desires were) should be apprehended as a putting of condi∣tions upon the Parliament, more then all other Petitions have been, from Counties, from Corporations, and especially from the City of London, being a Body more numerous, more closely compacted, more neere to the Parliament, and more plentifully furnished with money, and all things else to back and carry on their desires, then the Army is: neither could we bethink our selves of any passage in the Petition that might be any ground of offence, except that clause concerning the Royall
Assent; for which we clearly professe, that the assurance we desired for indempnity, was an Ordinance of Parliament, and our intention in that claus was but this, That what Ordinance should be past for indempnity, might be proposed amongst those other things, to which the Parliament would of themselves desire the Royall Assent; and that being denied, we should and shall acquiesse in the authority of Parliament for that, as we suppose the Parliament also will for those other things. And wee could not see, how that clause (weighed as it stands) can reasonably be understood to import any more. Neverthelesse we have that honourable esteem of the wisdome and gravity, and that regard to the authority of the Parliament, as that though we (looking only upon th tion censured, and upon our own clear intentions in it) cannot see the ground of suppressing the Pe∣tition, or passing such a censure upon it, yet we are induced to believe, that the Parliament either had such misrepresentations of our carriage a∣bout it, and suggestions of dangerous designes therein as (if true) might justly raise them into an high resentment thereof, and jealousies thereupon, or els were some other way abused or surprized in the pro∣posall or passing of such a Declaration against it: But since the Parlia∣ment hath not, either in the Order for suppressing it, or in the Declara∣tion, exprest any particular ground of their  and censure, either from any pas∣sage in the Petition it selfe, or from their informations concerning the carriage of it; we find, that both common Souldiers, and other that look singly upon the said Order and Declaration as they stand directed against the Petition it self, the matter whereof they account to be undeniably just and due, are carried away with this apprehension, that in the one they are denied and debarred the common libertie of petitioning, and in the other are judged no better then traytors, for but going about to desire what they conceive their due, and dearly earned; and are apt to include themselves in a bondage below an equall to the worst of ives, if in any case whatsoever they have no way left or al∣lowed to represent to their Officers, and by them to their Generall, their grievances and desires in  concernes them meetly as Souldiers, though it be at a seasonable time, when there is not present action to impde or disturbe thereby, and though in a re∣gular, quiet and submssive way, as this in their conceptions and intentions was: These last particulars (ere we passe them over) we cannot but denote, as being, to our best ob∣servations, the maine root and bottome of what later discontents, or unusuall proceed∣ings have since appeared amongst the Souldiers; to give accompt whereof, we shall in discharge of our duties, clearly proceed as followeth. The Souldiers (as is premised) finding, o at least conceiving themselves debarred from the usuall and regular wayes of making known their grievances and desires, and finding the Officers generally discouraged from acting or medling any further for them in that way, have fallen into other wayes of correspondence and agreement a∣mongst themselves, for promoting, as they conceive, their just and necessary desires, and for their vindication in what they had formerly done, as they thought, upon just grounds; and have to that purpose appointed, or chosen, out of themselves, a certaine number for every Regiment, or Troope and Company, to agitate for those ends, in behalf of them all.
And thus in pursuance of those grounds (which they thought just & necessary) many things have been proposed amongst them, written and done, which to others may appeare irregular: and particularly we find, there was indeed such a letter (as the Parliament has had no∣tice of) sent to the Generall, Major General, and Lieu. Generall, from the Soldiers of eight Regiments of Horse; but we cannot find, that that, or ought else has been done by those their agents which hath not been with the consent or allowance, or approbation of the generality of the Soldiers. And we find it hath been also agreed and resolved amongst them, to send up to the Parliament by their said A∣gents, all the heads of the former Petition already; onely in forme (directing the same immediatly to the Parliament) and wee per∣ceive there have not wanted some in all quarters (upon their dissatis∣faction in those things) ready to engage them in an implication of things of other nature, which though not evill in themselves, yet did not concern them properly, as Soldiers.) And that purpose of sending up their desires to the Parliamiament, had (as we find) been done or attempted ere now, but that (upon the sending downe of your selves from the House of Commons, to quiet distempers in the Army) those appointed to goe up, were stopt, upon expectation of what you might bring down from the House towards their satisfa∣ction; or, in hope, at least, to have their grievances and desires in reasonable things again admitted into some regular way of being made known, and that with clearnesse, and candid dealings on your parts, and without such misrepresentation, as by others (the precedent officious informers) had formerly been put upon them. And since this expectation bred amongst them, we have not found any procee∣dings amongst them in other wayes, that might be counted disorder or distemper. Now for the effect of those two votes of the House on Friday, April 30. sent down by your hands, which according to our duty have been faithfully imparted to our severall Troops and Companies, we gene∣rally find as followeth. 1 That the Ordinance for indempnity (mentioned in the first Vote) will clearly satisfy as to that point, if once past and full to the purpose, as we presume it will be. 2 That upon the second Uote concerning arrears, we cannot find or expect the like effect, and that amongst diverse other rea∣sons) principally for this; because all the assurance the Uote gives concerning arrears to be paid at disbanding is this, viz [That the
house has resolved that a considerable part of the arrears, shall be paid at disbanding] and no mention being made what proportion; but those words, [the house has resolved] seeming to referre to some proportion formerly resolved; It is generally vnderstood to imploy any other then that of six weeks pay. Now that Uote for six weeks pay at disbanding, as it came forth at a time of much disadvantage in respect of the discontents prece∣ding, so in the effect and circumstances of it, It conduced much to heigthen increase and fix the same; the summe being generally lookt upon as very inconsiderable, in relation to the great arreares incurr'd, not under the new Modell alone, but also in former Ar∣mies and services of the Parliament. For the Officers of this Army generally, and amongst the horse, most of the Souldiers and very ma∣ny of the foot are such, as have been engaged for the Parliament on where or other from the beginning of the warre, and have their arrears incurr'd under the Modell, superadded to what arrears all former Armyes and forces (where they have served) were in, at their severall reducements or disbandings. And that ground which moved the Souldiery from affection to the cause, to be content with lesse of arreares upon former reducements in times of necessity, viz. (because the Parliament could then doe no more,) that ground (wee say) doth with some, seem now to be something impaired since the Parliament hath had the Kingdom now a good while wholly under their power. We find some other things that have concurred not a little to increase discontents, from the carriage of some of the Commissio∣ners that came downe hither for the Irish service; as particularly their imprisoning and sending up to London a Commission-Officer of the Army, (Ensigne Nichols) which (whatever the ground may be) yet being without any concurrence of the Generall, or those left to command in his absence, and their own authority not appearing, nor any produced by them) seemes an absolute breach both of the subjects liberty, and Soldiers usuall right, and an affront to the au∣thority appoynted by the Parliament over the Army. And this par∣ticular, together with many other carriages of some of them, seeming to concurre all to one end, viz. the pulling of the Army in peeces, and provoking it to distempers by their violent wayes, rather then the service of Ireland should be supplied, or the quiet of this King∣dome assured in any other way, wherein this Army might passe with∣out a dishonour.
Lastly, we find that discontents, discouragements, and some ani∣mosities, have been much occasioned and increased in the Army by the high indignities, the manifold reproaches and calumnies of all sorts most unworthily cast upon the Army, in false reports raised, and industriously divulged in Sermons, in printed bookes, (licensed and passing without check to bee published through the world) and in petitions accepted, (most of them) with thanks. And here we cannot but take notice of the ingratitudes & unworthy requitals ap∣pearing especially from a great party in that City (whose Trade since this Army began to open it) hath been advantaged above a million thereby; and yet they have not onely long with-held their contri∣butions appoynted by the Parliament for this Army, (which hath occasioned a great part of its arreares:) but have in all other wayes indeed contributed their endevours, to have it paid with dishonour, and unworthily turn'd off. And though all reproches and indignities have been born by the Army with patience and absolute silence hi∣therto, (not to be exampled, we think, in other armies; yet it cannot but trouble men, when they have followed the work of the kingdom with diligence and faithfulnesse; and have (at least) endevoured to do the whole Kingdom good, and to doe no man any wrong or damage where ere they have come (that the Being of an Army could avoyd;) they should yet by spite and falshood (even from that party that reaps the advantange of all what they have done) bee rendred the scorne and hate of men, while (to avoyd the Kingdomes disquiet) they have been silent in their owne behalfe. We have thus (we hope) discharged our duty in a faithfull & clear account of the generall discontents (not to trouble you with the nu∣merous particularities) that we find in the Army, together with the grounds, occasions, and growth of them, and of our own proceedings in relation to them, we hope the full discovery of the bottome, if the soare may give the least advantage to the cure: towards which, if we may offer any thing as we have done for the other: we hum∣bly conceive that nothing can so fully reach, and surely remove the ground of those discontents, and prevent all further inconveniencies hereupon, as these things following. That if the order for suppressing the Petition, or the censure past in the declaration against it were not (in the Parliaments sense and intention) meerly in relation to the act of petitioning, or the mat∣ter petitioned, but chiefly upon information of ill carriages, or sug∣gestions of some designe in the managing of it; The Parliament would bee pleased to declare so much, and to cleare their owne
sense and intentions, as to the just liberty of Soldiers in representing their grievances and desires (as Soldiers) to their officers, and by them to their Generall, in a quiet and regular way, and also as to the right or reasonablenesse of the things petitioned. 2 That if the Parliament have ben by false informations abused, or oherwise surprised, or indirectly dealt withall by any persons what∣soever, in what hath there passed in relation to that businesse, they would be plased to vindicate ad cleare the hoo of the Parliament from the evil practses and destuctive designs of al such men & cause them to be discovered and deal withall according to their demerits. 3. That, next, since the Palaent is already (though by some an∣ticipation) possest with the effect of the petition they would be plea∣sed to take the matter of it into timely consideration, and give there∣in what satisfaction they may. 4. That the Parliament would discountenance all unjust calum∣nies against the Army, and give way, that before it bee disbanded, and disperst, the army may agree upon, and publish a sober and tem∣perate vindication of themselves, from the many scandals cast upon them, first presenting and submitting the same to the Parliaments approbation. And thus, notwithstanding all discontents, and past provocations, we dare be confident for our Soldiers, and the body of the Army, that they will be sway'd and saisfied with justice and reason, will suffer much in their own particulars for the quiet and wale of the publick, and will be ever faithfull and serviceable to Parliament and Kingdome. We have in all this discharged our consciences and duties to God, the Parliament and Kingdome, as well as to the Army, for the pre∣vention of any further inconvenience on all hands. And the Lord is whose hands all issues are, direct all counses hereupon for the best. A List of the severall respective Officers interested herein. Field-Offcers. Ioh. Hammod Collonel. Iohn Lambert Collonel. Iohn Hewson Collonel Richard Englesby Collonel Edward Waley Collonel. Iohn O Collonel Nicholas Cowley Cm: General. viz, Lieutenant Collonells. Izick Ewers Lieuenant Coll: Thomas Pride Liut: Col: Iohn Iubbe Lieu: Col: Marke Grms Lieut. Col. Edward Salmn Liut: Col. Thomas Rae Lieu: Col:
Robert Huntington Major. Iohn Disbrow Major. Thomas Horten Major. Gorge Sedasive Maj. Capaine Lawrence Martiall of Horse. Al these Field Offcers. Wrth Rogers Major. William Cowel Majr. Thomas Smith Maj. Danill Axil Major Iohn Wade Major. Horse. Iohn Reynolds Captaine. Azaliah Husbands Captaine Richard Sand Captaine Robert Gibhouse Captaine. Robert Kirkby Capt. Lieutenant Iseph Waento Cap. Lieutenant Tobias Brigs Capaine. Smuel Garner Cap. Jose Blsse Cap. Liutenant. Ion Pithfo Capaine. Wliam Evnsn Cap. Adam Lawrenes Cap. Iohn Gladman Cap. Liutenant. Thomas Ireton Cap. Iohn Gve Capt. Wiliam Rainborough Cap. Thomas Pennefher Cap. Hnry Cann Cap. Genralls. Francis Whte Cap. Wlliam Lg Cap. Lwis Audly Cap. Lieutenant. Hose. Bng. Burgsse Cap. Francis Hawe Cap. Imes Lughton Cap. Daniel Dale Cap. Lieutenant. William Colmn Capt. John Ienin Cap. Walthr Bethel Cap Henry Pritty Cap. Hamonds. Thomas Disney Cap. William Siraton Cap. Iohn Boyce Cap. Edmona Ralph Cap. Israel Smith Cap. Iohn Puckell Cap. Edward Humphrey Cap. Lieu. Wallers. William Goffe Cap. George Griphin Cap. Iohn Mason Cap. Waldine Lgoe Cap. Thomas Pasons Cap. Roger Alsop Cap. Iosph Sallile Cap. Lieut. Lab. Iohn Bsco Cap. Mathew Cawell Cap. William Disney Cap. Gul. Sandes Cap. John Grims Cap. Robert Read Cap. John Spuer Cap. Edward Open Cap. saell Smith Cap. William Weare Cap Lieut. Robert Anderson Cap. Samuel Roe Cap. Lieut. Huons Jh Carter Cap. Saul Grimes Cap. Thomas Price Cap. John Tappildi Cap. Henry Davi Capt. Alexander Bfied Cap.
Thomas Atkinson William Arnop Jeremy Tolherst Abraham Hopkins Henry Lilbron Cap. Captaine Deslodden. John Clocke. Horse lieu, Edward Sooten James Flood Thomas Shears Henry Johnson Feorge Enson Nathaniel White Griffith Looyd Sampson Twogoed Benjamin Giffard Stephen White Iohn Franke Lieu. Philip Prine Iohn Merryman Thomas Johnson Henry Barton Lieu. Samuel Axtill George Elsemore Edmond Chillenden Tho. Chamberland Iohn Savedge Thomas Alridge Iohn Peck Foote. Lewis Nothcut Iohn Filkens Nathaniel Chats Briant Smith William Ward Gabrell Earwood Ethelbert Morgan John Topping Roger Lewis Ralph Wilson Iohn Watson Iohn Nichlas Henry Dorney Edward Turner Francis Clarke Abraham Davis Thomas Daye Lieu. George Smith William Hill Lieu. Thomas Baker William Shelley Edmond Singleton Ran: Warner William Gougha Andrew Edwards Jenken Benam Iohn Beab George Jeckes William Farly Heugh Jenkins Iohn Miller Thomas Casinghurst, Iohn Potter Mar: Jubbs Cornets. Peter Wallis Cornet Wig. Barrington, John Spenser. Thomas Euse Will. Whittington Richard Winstanley Thomas Barker William Quints James Wilson Christopher Kemer Iohn Clarke Samuell Parker Iohn Fox Iohn Ledbrooke. Richard Essex Abel Warren. Charles Whitehead Iohn Ward Iohn Southwood Henry Miles Ios. Saberion William Cob. Richard Weeb. Iohn Chyman. Sammuell Balls, William Rance, Quarter-masters. James Goodwen Thomas Savedge. Edward Waren Henry Ward Robert Stanard. Will. Williams Caleb Lee Nath. Philips Paul Chrisine George Sanders. Q. Hurd John Due W. Miler John Kennet. Will. Wilmate. Rob. Agurd. Ensignes of Foot. Charles Bolton, En∣signe to his Excel. Robert Smith, Ensign George Clerk. Sam. Wise. Henry Williams. Joseph Grovey. Tho. Rawlins. Thomas Lewis. Ier. Camfield Lisle Thomas, Wil. Bird Sam. Chase.
Will. Ererrard. Iohn Mason Rob. Besdin Will. Jones. Evan Jones Tho. Newman. Morgan Portree. John Davis Richard Bourn William Jayse Ferdinando Green. Francis Farmer Henry Hoadworth. Edward Houre. Morgan Portree. Tho. Newman. John Davis Robert Munings Edward Evans. Wil. Allen. Morgan Porter. The Armies Petition. To his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Generall for the Parliaments forces. The humble Petition of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army under your Command. Sheweth, THat ever since our first ingagement in the service for the preserving the power of this Kingdome in the hands of the Parliament, we have in our severall places served them with all faithfulnesse, and although we have laine under many discouragements, for want of pay and other necessaries, yet have we not dispared their Commands disobeyed their Orders, nor disturbed them with Petitions, nor have their any visible discontents appeared amongst us, to the incouragement of the enemy, and the impediment of their affaires, but have with all cheerfullnesse, done Summer service in Winter seasons, improving the utmost of our abilities, in the advancment of their service, and seeing God hath Crowned our endeavours with the end of our desire (viz. the disperseing of the publick enemie, and reducing them to their obedience) the King being now brought in, our brethren the Scots now satisfied and departed the Kingdome, all danger seemingly blown over and peace in all their quarters. We (imboldned by the manifold promises and Declaration, to defend and protect those that appeared and acted in the service) do herewith humbly pre∣sent to your Excellency, the annexed representation of our desires, which we humbly beseech your Excelency to recommend or represent in our behalfe unto the Parliament, and your Petitioner shall ever honour and pray for your Excel∣ency, &c. The humble Representation of the desires of the Officers and Soldiers of the Army, under the Command of his Excellency Sr. Thomas Fairfax presented first to his Excellency, to be by him represented to the Parliament. 1. Whereas the necessity and exigency of the Warr hath put us upon many actions, which the Law would not warrant, nor we have acted in a time of setled peace, we humbly desire that before our disbanding, a full and sufficient provision may be made by Odinance of Parliament (to which the Royal assen: may be desired) for our indempnity and security in all such cases. 2. That Audicers and Commissioners may be speedily appointed and autho∣rized to repair to the head quarters of this Army, to audite and state our ac∣compts,
as well for our former, service as for our service in this Army, and that before the disbinding of the Army, satisfaction may be given to the Petitioners for their arrears, that for the charge, trouble and losse of time, which we must otherwise necessarily undergo in attendance for obtaining of them may be prevented, we having had xperience that many have been reduced to miserable extremity, even almost starved for want of releife, by their tedious attendance, and that no Officer may be charged with any thing in his accompts, that doth not particularly concerne himself. 3 That those who have voluntarily served the Parliament in the late warre, may not hereafter be compelled by presse or otherwise, to serve as Soldiers out of this Kingdome, nor those who have served as Horsemen, may be compel∣led by presse, to serve on foot in any future case. 4 That such in this Army, as have lost their lives, and the wives and children of such as haue been slain in the Service, and such Officers and Soldiers as have sustained losses, or have been prejudiced in their estates, by adhering unto the Parliamen, or in their persons by sicknesse or imprisonment under the enemy, may have such allowance, and satisfaction, as may bee agreeable to justice and equity, 5. That till the Army be disbanded as aforesaid, some course may be taken for the supply thereof with money, whereby wee may bee inabled to discharge our quarters, that so we may not for necessaries forc'd to be beholding to the Parlia∣ments enemies, burthensome to their friends; or oppressive to the Countrey, whose preservation we have alwaies indeavoured, and in whose happinesse wee shall still rejoyce. A Declaration of the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, Die Martis 30. Martii 1647. THat the 2. Houses of parliament having received information of a dangerous Petiti∣on, with representations annexed, tending to put the Army in a distemper and mute∣ny, to put conditions upon the Parliament, and obstruct the reliefe of Ireland, which hath been contrived and promoted by some persons in the Army They do declare their high dislike of that Petition, their approbation and esteeme o their good service who first discovered it, and of all such Officers and Souldiers as haue refused to joyne in it, and that for such as have been abused, and by the perswasion of others drawne to subscribe it; if they shall for the future manifest their dislike of what they have done, by forbearing to pro∣ceed any further in it, it shall not be looked upon as any cause to take away the remem∣brance and sence the Houses have of the good service they have formerly done; but they shall still be retained in their good opinion, and shall be cared for with the rest of the Ar∣my in all things necessary and fitting for the satisfaction of Persons that have done so good and faithfull service, and as may be expected from a Parliament, so carefull to per∣forme all things appertaining to Honor and Iustice; as on the other side it is declared, that all those who sha l continue in their distempered condition, and goe on in advansing and promoting that Petition, shall be looked upon and proceeded against as enemies to the State, and disturbers of the publike Peace. Die Martis 30. Martii 1647. Ordered by the Lords assembled in Parliament, that this Declaration be forthwith printed and published, Iohn Browne Cler: Parliamentorum. FINIS.
