e100aa 99897414 132828
Answer to all the material Objections against the Present East-India-Company. THE common Causes assigned for framing a New East-India Company by Act of Parliament, or making a change of the Present East-India Company, are such as these following, viz. I. Objection, Because the present Company have procured illegal powers from the late and former Kings of England, and have executed those powers severely to the destruction of Interloping, the great dammage of many honest Men that were Interlopers, and have caused five men to be executed by an illegal Commission of Martial Law in the Island St. Helena. II. Object. Because the present Company is grown up unto a kind of Monopoly by some few Men, and one especially having purchased such an exorbitant share thereof. III. Object. That the present Company have not Stock enough to carry on the Trade, and that a greater Stock ought and may be employed in that Trade, and more and greater numbers of Men parti∣cipate thereof. IV. Object. That one Man has aspired to such a power and influence upon the present East-India Committees Councils, that nothing can be done without his approbation, nor any person be brought into the Committee by Election of the Adventurers without his consent, by Reason of the great influence he has upon the Voices or Suffrage of the Electors, and the great number of his own and his Relations Votes. To the first Objection, The Company Answer, 1. They have neither procured nor executed any Powers or Authority in India, but what is absolutely necessary for the preservation of the English Dominion and Trade there; nor other than such or less powers than the Dutch and every European Nation in India do enjoy and exercise, to an infinite greater degree of severity than ever the English Compa∣ny did, and that if ever there be a new Company establisht by Act of Parliament, all those Authorities which the Company have by any Charter must be allowed to the New Company, or else the English Dominion in India will be inevitably and suddenly lost, and the loss of the Trade follow that, as certainly as the shadow does the body. 2. The Company say it becomes not them to dispute so high a point of the Prero∣gative, or the Authority of the Kings of England in granting Charters, or making Laws in Forreign Plantations, extra England, Wales and Berwick. But this they know, very ma∣ny thousands of men have dyed upon several occasions by the Sword and common Execution∣ers in the several Foreign Plantations. But they never heard of any Law in any Foreign Plantation, extra England, Wales and Berwick aforesaid, nor any Rebellion supprest but by Charter Law, or such Laws as were made by men Authoriz'd thereunto by the Kings Char∣ter, and not by the Common or Statute Law of England. 3. The severity charged upon the Company is a notorious falsity, the Company being rather chargeable with hazarding the loss of India by too much lenity, having procured from his late Majesty K. Charles an Indemnity to all the Inhabitants of Bombay, and the Inha∣bitants of St. Helena after three several Rebellions. Which excess of Lenity in all probability occasioned the 4th. and last most dangerous Rebellion at St. Helena, at the same time that Bombay was in Rebellion; which if it had succeeded at St. Helena as it was very likely to do, had any less wise or worse Souldier been Governour than Sir John Blackmore, it had in all pro∣bability carryed with it by contagion the loss of all the English Dominion in India, and the sale of those Places by the Rebels to the best Foreign Chapman. 4. It is well known where the English have executed one man in India, these last 20 years, the wiser Dutch Company have executed many hundreds. There being hardly a considerable Factory of theirs in India, where there is not standing one or too common Gibbets for the Executing of Malefactors, besides several Islands unto which they banish for Life, and to hard labour many refractory insolent mutinous people of their own Nation as well as others; which they find to be of absolute necessity to support their Empire upon which their Trade depends, well knowing that generally speaking men that Travel so far from home are not of the mildest tempers, nor of the most regular lives, nor indeed governable at all without severe Laws and speedy Execution. To the second Objection, viz. Because the present Company is grown up unto a kind of Monopo∣ly by some few men, and one especially having purchased such an exorbitant share thereof. 1. The Company say, First that the foundation of this Company, is as large as the foundation of the Dutch Company, that is as large as the bounds of the whole Earth. They (that is the English and Dutch Company respectively) refuse admittance to no Chri∣stians of any Nation to buy Stock, neither to Turks, Jews nor Infidels, the more the better. All that buy Stock of what ever Nation they are, are therein subservient to the publick good of that Nation to which such East-India stock belongs. 2. It is well known and will not be denyed, That the Jews have at all times the greatest
share of actions in the Dutch East-India Company, and that one Jew, Swasso by name, has had at one time more stock in that Company, than ever any English man had or hath in this. 3. If any English man had the courage to buy and increase his stock to a greater proporti∣on than ordinary, in the times when wiser men ran from the house, fearing it would immedi∣ately fall on their heads, by the practice of Interlopers, That man certainly deserves rather the commendation that the wise Romans gave to Terentius Varro at his return to the City, after the loss of the Battle of Cannae, Quod non desperasset de Republica, than to be blamed for his standing up at such a dangerous time to preserve the Interest of his Countrey, which was just falling into the hands of Foreigners, if great application had not been used to prevent it. 4. To assist vigorously to defend and improve the English Dominion and Trade in India, requires great and constant thoughtfulness, and an extraordinary measure of experience; and the person that does that to purpose, must have some not inconsiderable reputation in the World: And it is not to be imagined that any such person will be at the requisite pains in such an affair, except he has a great share therein, or be a man that will carve for himself to the prejudice of the publick; And if he be so, he shall not hold it long, For the adventurers are wiser than to trust such an one much or often. It is well known that neither the Dutch or English East-India Company were ever without some one man, that did principally carry on and force themselves to understand the general Affairs of the Company. That man in the English East-India Company was formerly the late worthy Sir William Thompson deceased, and before him Mr. Cockain, who was Governour for 15 years together, and Mr. Massingbird that was Treasurer, and before them Sir Morice Abbot, who was Governour or Deputy 22 years toge∣ther, and in Q. Eliz. and K. James the Firsts time, Sir Thomas Smith was often Governour and the Principal Manager; And that man now living in the chief conduct and managery of the Dutch East-India Company, is that ancient most experienced and prudent Mr. Peter Van Dam. 5. If we may credit that contemned but wise Author Machiavel, he tells us, The state of Florence when it was a Commonwealth never prospered, but when some one Citizen arrived at Reputation enough to moderate the Councils of the Commonwealth. 6. We dare appeal to the Honourable Sir William Temple, who we think has made the best inspection into the management of the Affairs of that flourishing Protestant Commonwealth of the seven Provinces, whether even in their state Affairs, that Commonwealth was not al∣ways most prosperous, when some one man, as lately the incomparable Monsieur Fagel had the greatest influence upon their Councils; Further, we dare adventure to say that never any publick society did well when it was otherwise. But notwithstanding the Answers aforesaid to this Objection rather than the Nation should suffer by doing such a mischief to England, which can never be cured by Re∣pentance, if the present East-India Company be dissolved, broken or impolitickly inocculated or grafted upon, That Gentleman, who hath the greatest share of the stock, being wearied with the fatigue of it, and want of health occasioned thereby, is content to be totally excluded from any concern in the management of the East-India Affairs, or giving in any of his Votes at the Annual Election of the Governour, Deputy and Committees. To the Third Objection, viz. That the Present Company have not Stock enough to carry on the Trade, and that a greater Stock ought and may be employed in that Trade, and more and greater Numbers of Men participate thereof. The Company say, and are ready to prove, First, That this is a most Notorious Falsity, and peradventure such an One, as never any English Men before had the Confidence to impose upon so Great and Venerable an Assembly as the Honourable House of Commons: If this had any Truth in it, how comes it to pass, that the East-India Company have now more East-India Goods at home than the Dutch (except Spices) and all other Nations put together; and had in India, upon the coming away of their last Ships, which the Company do affirm for Truth, a very great Treasure in Gold and Silver, undisposed of, according to their latest Advice and Information; besides great quantities of Goods and Stores in their Forts and Factories, which is well known to the Dutch East-India Company. Besides, the Company can't compute their dead Stock in India, viz. Forts, Castles, Cities, Towns and Territories, Phirmaunds, Husball Hookum and Priviledges, to have cost them less than a Million of Pounds sterling. All which are worth, and would be a good penyworth to the Dutch Company at above double that Sum. Secondly, But the Gentlemen who fram'd this Objection, say, The Company are greatly in Debt in India; and if they did say the Company are greatly in Debt at Jerusalem, the Company can give them no other Answer to such confident groundless Assertions, but to assure the Parlia∣ment upon the Word of Honest Men, Honour, Conscience, and all that amongst good Men com∣pels Belief, as they do hereby, that there is no truth in this Assertion, more than that where there is great Dealings between private Men or Nations, there will be alwayes some Debts on both sides, but more, are due to the Company than from them. The Company do believe, and are modest in saying no more that this Company is as rich in quick Stock in India, all Debts deducted, as the Dutch East-India Company; although in Empire and Dominion, the Dutch have much the ad∣vantage of the English in India, Because the English were not formerly empowered by the Kings
Legislative Authority, to make such progress in that most necessary work of acquiring Sovereignty or Dominion in several parts of India, for the benefit of this Kingdom. And this Excess of Quick-Stock on the English part, was so well known to Monsieur Van Beuninge when he was Ambassa∣dor here, that he did in Discourse with some of the Committee, frequently talk what great things the English Wealth, and the Dutch Power conjoint might do in India: And this was in time im∣mediately before the surprize of Bantam. But the Gentlemen who frame this Objection, which they neither know nor understand themselves, would prove it by an Inference: They say, if the Company be not in Debt, nor want Stock to carry on the Trade, Why did they permit private Ships to go for India, while they exclaim so exceedingly against Interlopers? The Answer to which is very easie; First, Such Ships went with the Companies Allowance, and under such Li∣mitations and Stipulations as were agreed by Charter-party with the Company, under the Masters and two substantial Merchants Hands and Seals, and were to contribute an adjusted satisfaction towards the Companies Garrisons and other General Charges. Secondly, The Company gave those permissions only in time of War against the Mogul; but do it not now, nor will hereafter, except there should be the like occasion of having more Ships to carry out Ammunition, Stores, Provisions and Souldiers, than can be loaden home with proper Goods for Europe during the War, where such small Ships as they gave Permission to, might notwithstanding find some small Em∣ployments in Trade in the Country Flagrante Bello, while our more Warlike Ships were only to attend the Enemy in several Places, and to defend that unvaluable Island of Bombay, as it is lately improved, Fortified and made the Seat of the English commerce on that side, as Batavia is of the Dutch on the other side of India. This Objection about the Free Ships, was made in the Late King James's time by the Interlopers and others their Abettors, and answered in Writing; The Queries and Answers are extant which silenc'd that Objection, but are not so fit for publick View. To the Fourth Objection, viz. That One Man hath aspired to such a Power and Influence upon the Present East-India Committees Councils that nothing can be done without his approbation, nor any Person be brought into the Committee by Election of the Adventurers without his Consent, by reason of the great Influence he has upon the Voices or Suffrage of the Electors, and the great number of his own and his Relations Votes. The Company say, This Objection is sufficiently answered before, but if any Man through unacquaintedness with East-India Affairs, or indeed in any other Affairs of the World, shall yet think this a fault in the Companies Constitution, which ought to be mend∣ed, (which is a meer mistake in Politicks) such Gentlemen may satisfie themselves, that Nature will cure the Company of this Disease without the application of Art, in a little time, that Gentle∣man being near Sixty Years of Age and sickly, and it may be concluded, his Son will be too much at ease in his Fortune to be at the Drudgery of making himself understand the East-India Affairs to such a degree, as to over-influence the Councils of the Committees, which never any Gover∣nors Son did take the pains to do, since the first Foundation of the Company in Q. Elizabeths time. Yet there is another cure of this Distemper, which is what that Gentleman would think no hard∣ship, finding the greatest Diligence, Fidelity, and even good Success and Victory it self will not generally please, viz. of being excluded from any further concern in the Management of the East-India-Companies Affairs; It being his greatest Consolation, that God has been pleased to spare his Life hitherto, to see the English Interest in India in such a prosperous way, and to leave it in that Condition. The Company having in this and a former Paper answer'd every thing they think to be sub∣stantial, do not conceive themselves obliged to give any further answer to the several Scurrilous Papers which daily come out, with scandalous and untrue Reflections upon the Companies Ma∣nagement from persons unknown to the Company, whether they be Interlopers or the King of Syams Factors or Foreigners, which write in the stile of Interlopers; who are really angry not at the Companies mis-management, but at the Excellent Conduct of their Affairs, which has enerva∣ted and defeated all the Designs of Foreigners, and such Natives, which in Combination with Foreigners for these last Seven years, have endeavour'd to destroy the present thriving East-India-Company. Such Writers are not answerable for any thing they say, true or false: Or else they would not have had the confidence to out-face the World by their bold affirmations, that there is no peace yet between the great Mogul and the English in India, and that the Narrative of the Rebellion at St. Helena, and the proceedings of the Court Martial, received from the Governor and Council under their own hands, are Forgeries, or Fictions made and contrived here. Are such mens furious Discourses or self-ended Notions to be relied upon in such important Publick Affairs? But the Company are a Society which stand upon their Honour, and dare not, nor will lledge any thing, but what they are ready to make out to Their Majesties, the Lords or Com∣mons of England at their Peril. The Company hope it will not be forgot, That the French Court hath spent of the Kings Money, sides the French Companies, above a Million of Pounds Sterling to attain some Empire and ade in India, and yet so difficult a thing that is, as the French Policy could never attain in ove Twenty years pursuit, any considerable Trade, or any one strong fortify'd settlement of ir own. The Company hope likewise, That the Honour obtain'd to this Kingdom, in compelling the Great gul in open War by force of Arms, to such advantagious Articles in favour of the English Na∣, as are extant in Print, which is the wonder of Foreigners, and will be admired and ap∣ded in the next Age, shall not be treated with contempt at home in this.
