F1961 E934_7 R202178 99862571 114734
TO THE PROTECTOR AND PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle, neer the West end of Pauls, 1658.
The Heads of the Contents of this Book. THe true ground of all just Lawes. For whom the Law was added, and what is trans∣gression. What is the higher power to which every soule must be subject. True weight and measure discovered; justice and truth whence they spring. Considerations touching sellers of Ale, Wine, and Beer. Touching Beggars. Prisoners. Goalers. Thieves. Officers and their wages. Taxes. Swearing and other particulars. What was the state of the Apostles, and what was and is the Apostacy, and who are in the Apostacy, and what is the state to which out of it people must re∣turn. Who is Antichrist and the false prophets, and when they came, or whether in this age they be risen, and this be the last time. What and where Babylon is the mother of Harlots, and the seat where the Beast sits, and the great whore which all the world has wondred after, & committed
whoredoms with, and the Kings, Inhabitants of the Earth committed fornications; and what are her names, heads, crowns, and horns, and the waters upon which she sits. The difference between the true and false Churches, Mi∣nisters, maintenance, and the false prophets found out, and the Sheeps clothing plucked off, and the Wolfe seen and discovered. Many of the doctrines and principles of the Ministers of England weighed, and found too light; Concern∣ing the Church, Baptisme, Word, Light, Law, and Testimony, Gospel, original perfection, singing of Psalms, trying of spirits, speaking in the Church, false teachers, swearing, & many other particulars, shewing also that neither they nor the Papists are ever like to convert the Jewes. With some Cautions and Counsel to the Protector and Parliament, needful to be duely observed.
TO THE PROTECTOR, And You His Council The Parliament. YOU who are in place to make Laws, see that they be agreeable and answerable to the just principle of God in every one, that is it that breaks the jaws of the wick∣ed, then you will be eyes to the blind, and help them that cannot help themselves; then to you shall all the lofty bow, and before you shall all the haughty bend, as your Law does reach, and answer that of God in every one; For the Law was added because of transgression, and so the Law goes over the heads of all transgressors, and this is that which is called the Higher Power, higher then the transgressors, higher then the evil-doers power, higher then the unrighteous, higher then the unjust, which would usurp Authority; higher then all the Inventions of the heathen that be in transgression; for the Law was added because of transgression; that which is pure in man, that is just, holy, good, and righteous, and e∣qual, being transgressed, then had not every man his right; So the Law being just, (which is added because of transgressi∣on) holy, equal, pure, and right, answering that of God in every man, which is transgressed, which when that being trans∣gressed, and the Law (added because of transgression) cast behind the back; Truth fell in the streets, Equity could not
enter, the helplesse complained, and the jawes of the wicked are not broken; but wherever he can get in, he tears: There∣fore the Law is perfect, just, holy and good, and it is to keep perfect, and it is to keep in the good, keep in the just, and keep in the holy, and takes hold upon the unjust, and upon the unrighteous, here is the higher power, and the Law ad∣ded because of transgression. Moses that had the Law which went over the heads of all transgressors, and all transgression upon the earth, he saw before the Creation; he saw the Cre∣ation, he saw how all things were made good, he saw him that abode not in the Truth, he saw man before the Fall, in the Image of God; he saw before any transgression was, he saw before the Fall, and then the Fall, and then had the Law which went upon all transgressors; he saw the heathen that were in their Inventions, in the transgression. All Laws, Acts whatsoever they made were called inventions of the heathen, because they were set up in the nature that had transgressed the pure, and had not received them from God as Moses did. Now he witnessed the higher power, that saw the Image of God before the Fall that man was in, which if any of the Jewes did transgresse the Law (added because of transgressi∣on) the higher power went upon them, and answered the just principle of God, transgressed in them. Now the heathen being from that of God in them, they followed their inventi∣ons. When the children of Israel transgressed the Law of God, they came into their nature, and mingled among the heathen that knew not God, and the Law of God goes over the Jews, over the Gentiles, answers that of God in them all, and cuts down that which man doth invent, and the inventer both, therefore the Law was added because of transgression, & that is the higher power which goes over all transgressors, and who transgresse goe from that of God in them, and this Law was not made for the righteous, but for transgressors, who transgresse that which is pure in them, then the pure Law of God takes hold upon them, and answers the pure principle of God in them that they have transgressed, so who are led by the Spirit of God are not under the law it is a terrour to evill doers, those that goe from that of God in
them, and a praise to them that do well; and this Law was not made for the righteous, but for the sinners, and it puts a differ∣ence, and for them that do well it is a praise. And here's the higher power, to which the soule must be subject, which God hath ordained, which is of God, which we must be subject too for conscience sake; every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, for the punishment of evill doers. Now the higher power goes over all evil doers, all transgressors, whether they be Jewes or Gentiles, and that which invents a Law, or an Act which does oppresse, whereby the just comes to suffer by a Law, as in the dayes of Daniel. It is made and invented by that which has transgressed the pure in his owne particular, and that is it which compels the just to bow down in the ge∣nerall, and to suffer, where the just there comes to obey God rather then man, and that he has set up in his will, and com∣pels them to suffer by a Law; but alway the children of light and the righteous, was one with the higher power, which went over the head of all transgressors, that fathomed and comprehended all the world; which higher power and the Law gives to see before any transgression was; which higher power and Law being over the heads of all transgressors upon the Earth, it answers the thing transgressed in every one, which Law is just and equall, which answers the the just, ho∣ly, and equal principle of God in every man upon earth, and here is the higher power a terrour to the evill doer, where the dread of the Lord is which is not made for the righteous, but sinners, transgressors, and disobedient, to that of God in them, disobeying that of God in them, which is just, holy, and good; then they do evill, then they transgresse, then they go aut from the higher power, then they go from the righteous principle, then the higher power takes hold upon them; then they goe under it, and it takes hold upon them. Therefore take heed all ye Law-makers, how ye make Lawes, that ye may be kept in the fear of God, and to wait in his Council to receive his instruction, and directions, and Law from him, and not your own Inventions, for that will be tyrannical, and that you may with that of God, which you receive from God, stand in his counsel, come to reach to that of God in every
one, under all your Dominions, then in that will the pure blesse you, and be joyful and glad, and with meeknesse, and innocency, and truth, and love; and wisdome, and power, and authority, rule in your family; and all the Nations be as a Family. You being kept down in the feare, comes to receive the secret Councel, from all lightnesse and presumption; For that which answers that of God in every one, is the higher power, which when he has transgressed it, and this is that that's higher then the evil doer, higher then the transgressors, that which is righteous and good, that which answers that of God in every one; That which brings all Nations to be as a Family, the higher power governing that is righteous, holy, just, and good, answering the thing, the pure principle of God, in every one that is transgressed; This keeps downe the evill doer, keepes downe the disobedient, keeps downe the transgressor, the sinner; for sinners, disobedient, evill doers, transgressors (marke) go all from that of God in them, and in that lyes all the spiritual wickednesse, power of darknesse, which the higher power goes a top, destroys it, and cuts down. Now Christ is the end of the law for righteousnesse sake, who was made under the law, to every one that believes. For the Law is righteous, just, holy, and good, and perfect, answering the righteous principle, just, holy, and good in e∣very one; which who does not just, holy, nor good, the righteous Law just, holy, and good, takes hold upon him, keeps him under, judges him downe; The Law which is per∣fect, holy, just, and good, answers the perfect, just, holy, good, and righteous principle in every one: So the Law is righteous, and there is the higher power over all transgressors upon the earth, and Christ the righteousnesse of God, him by whom the world was made before it was made, is the end of this righteous Law to every one that does believe, for righteous∣nesse sake: So the Law, the higher power (added because of transgression) it keeps down the destroyer; for disobedient, a destroyer, a sinner a destroyer, a transgressor a destroyer, an evil doer a destroyer, not a doer of righteousnesse: So the Law that is just and righteous, goes upon him; disobedient unreasonable, and sinners unreasonable, and transgressors un∣reasonable,
and evill doers unreasonable, the Law is reasona∣ble, just, and good; disobedient ungodly, and disobedient unjuust, and evill doers unjust, and evill doers unholy, and transgressors unholy, and transgressors unjust and not good; So the Law is just, holy, and good, goes upon the holy, un∣just, ungodly; here is the higher power the terrour to the e∣vill doer, a praise to them that do well, not made for the righte∣ous, but for the sinners, transgressors, disobedient, and evill do∣ers Disobedient from that of God within, and doing evill, he goes from that of God within, and the transgressor he goes from that of God within, from the Spirit of God within, and does evill; he hates the light, goes from that of God in him; he hates the light so therein, that is all the inventions and wickednesse acted, so upon that the higher power goes and takes hold, for there is all the unjust measures, all the unjust weights, all the unjust ballances; when they disobey that of God within, the true measure is forsaken; when they trans∣gresse that of God within, the true weight is forsaken, gone from that of God within, and does the evill, the true ballance is lost, is gone from, and out of that ground ariseth all the oppression upon earth, and tyranny, who first goe from that of God in their own particulars, that being quenched there in their own particular, and disobeyed, and transgressed, then he does the evill and not the good; So there the Prince of the Aire comes in and rules in the children of disobedience, and there comes in the god of the world, that blinds the eye; when he hath transgressed, the Prince of the Aire gets in and rules. He profers them the world & glory of it, he presents to them gifts and rewards, which blinds the eyes of the wise, the Eye of the wise put out; then disobedient to the pure, when the pure is transgressed, and the evill is done, he does the evill, and then the wisdome that is below gets up here, and man sets up himself in his own will, and rules in his own will there from that of God in him, does the evill, disobedient to that of God in him transgresses it, doth many things rashly, in his own will; which when he hath done, then after it may be that he hath disobeyed, and done his own will, checks him when it is too late, then for shame and fear he will not undo the
thing that he hath done, though the power check him for doing of it; so he will rather yeeld and give up himself to his own will, and to the unrighteousnesse which hath led him to all things, which after the righteous principle checks him for, and tels him he should not have done so; he checks the inno∣cent, therefore that he should have obeyed, and yeelded too, and lived in, and that led him to act, and then there wisdome is given and granted, by which all things were made and cre∣ated, with which wisdome man must order, and use the crea∣tures, and order the Creation to the glory of God, by which wisdome they were created, with which wisdome man must be ordered to the glory of God; and then in this, in acting things after he shall not be condemned for it, but shall have joy and peace with God. The feare of God is the beginning of this wisdome from above. The feare of God is to depart from sin and evill, and he that departs from sin and evill, comes out of disobedience, comes out of transgression, comes out of the sin, and out of the doing evill. Here's the wisdome from a∣bove, that's pure, and peaceable, and gentle, and meek, and easie to be entreated, with which wisdome man comes to use and order the Creation, by the wisdome by which they were created, with which wisdome he comes to answer that of God transgressed in every one for the wisdome thats below, this which is above is in the transgression, disobedience, such as do evill that goes from that of God in them, and sins, here is the earthly, sensual, devillish out of the light, and life of God, and out of the peace with God: So the Devill shall be taken, and all transgressors, and disobedient evill doers, sin∣ners, for they goe under his power; transgressors, sinners, evill doers, disobedient under his power, that abode not in the truth, that went out of it: So transgressors goes out of it, the disobedient goe out of it, sinners and evill doers go out of it; that which the Devil, sinners, transgressors, evil doers, dis∣obedient went out of, into that I am come which fathoms them all, which tramples all under foot, and answers the just principle of God in every one which hath been transgressed, whereby life and glory comes to be known; so wait that you may come to distinguish between the precious and the vile,
for to that, the Devil went out of, disobedient goes from, transgressors goes from; sinners, evill doers goes from, into that are the children of light, children of God, the heirs of God, heirs of life come, therefore wait for the wisdome of God, that you may put a difference between them whom the Law is made for, and them whom the Law is not made for; it is not made for the righteous, and such as come to the true beliefe in Christ, who is the end of the Law for righteousnesse sake, and the just is come to receive Christ Jesus, who does enlighten every one that comes into the world; and all disobedi∣ent sinners, transgressors, evill doers, and he that abides not in the truth, but is out of it, the truth, the light condemns to the fire, and will burn up, and neither leave root nor branch. Glory be to the Lord God for ever; the floor is to be purged, and the wheat to be gathered into the garner, and the chaffe burnt with unquenchable fire, and nothing shall raign and rule, but life and power it selfe, and all things that are contrary shall be burnt up with the brightness of the Lord God, and nothing raigne and rule, but the power of God it selfe. And again Friends, let none be Brewers in your Dominions and Nations, (I am moved of the Lord to lay it upon you) but such as are wholsome people, fearing God, and not de∣structive to the Creation of God, to the Creatures, for lodg∣ing Travellers or Passengers, or letting others have a little Beer who cannot themselves brew for their necessities: But as for all other Alehouses up and down the Nations, there are multitudes, that are not able to lodge Travellers, Passengers, for the nursing up of young people to loosenesse, folly, and vanity, this is not a sweet savour amongst them called Chri∣stians; but such Hosts as Paul speaks of, which are upon re∣cord for ages, that gives a good savour for the lodging of passengers: But as for all the rest their houses are onely for the destruction of the Creature, and breed up people only for destroyers of the Creation, who can drink most, and then doth the bad thoughts rise in them to steale, whereby to get money to serve their lusts, so stealing the creatures from o∣ther creatures, those creatures coming to be destroyed for
want of the creatures, they selling the creatures, run to such places, spending their money in by-places and corners, con∣suming upon their lusts, destroying the creatures. Again here for their own ends will such let forth the creatures, Drink, or Ale, or Wine, so they can get money, whereby they may be enriched. Now by this meanes comes the earth to be corrupted, and people loathsome; Therefore this is the Word of the Lord to you all, and a command in the presence of the Lord God, let none brew but such who are savoury, that are come into the wisdom of God, by which the creatures of God were made and created, with which they must come to use and order them again to his glory, and are wholsome and fit to lodge Travellers; then you will feel a sweet savour amongst you. Such as have mastery and power over their houses, where loose people bad people, those that doth baldly dare not venture. And then again friends, you that be called Christians, take heed and see that there be no Beggars amongst you, going up and down begging, for want often brings them to steal; Some are full of plenty, destroying through superfluity; o∣thers being in poverty, which are ready to perish for want of the creatures, raise up thoughts in them to steale; which them that are rich; and have abundance in distributing in such like cases, might take away the occasion, and prevent temp∣tation, or take them in into some employment, and this shews the nobility and Christians life: And the children of Israel before they transgressed, and lived in the Law of God, there were no beggars amongst them; Them that believed in Christ the righteousnesse of God, the end of the law for righte∣ousnesse sake, they distributed to every one as they had need (mark) that had need. Now since the Apostacy, men having had the Christians words, the Apostles, Christs, and the Pro∣phets words; but being out of the life, they have been out of the measurable compassion. Therefore friends mind the life, mind the state of the Jewes before transgression, no beggar amongst them. Minde the state of the Christians before the Apostacy; no lack amongst them, but every one had distri∣buted to them as they had need. Here's a sweet savour, here's
an example for you that are called Christians, Churches, and Ministers, that a savour of a Christians spirit may be amongst you, the savour of a Christians life, that to Nations about you, you may be a good savour being in the life. And friends, take heed of letting prisoners lye long in Goales, of what sort soever; for lying long in Goals, a great company together, twenty or thirty together, they learn more wickednesse of one another in a lazy and idle life; they bring more hurt to them in keeping them long in prisons and Goals, then when they went in, and they learn more wicked∣nesse one of another. And take heed of letting any Goalers that be Drunkards, Swearers, selfeish, keep prisoners, for they do them hurt too if they will follow drinking, gaming, sports; as they have their Shovel boards, their Bowls, their Cards, their Dice, many of them in their houses to play, and so fetc up their prisoners for pleasures, and to drink till they be drunk, as of∣ten in many Goals hath been seen, which grieves the righte∣ous, seeing that men are made worse by putting in hither. Therefore let none stay long in Prisons, nor let none be kee∣pers of Prisons, but such as feare God, and hates covetous∣nesse, gaming and drunkennesse, that they may be rather pat∣terns and examples, and instructers to Prisoners; by good ex∣amples and instructions, they may do good of them while hecy be with them In this you will be a sweet savour, come to or∣der your family aright. And take heed that none be put to death for Cattel, or mo∣ney; for those were restored four-fold, or seven fold, or to be sold for their theft. And friends, take heed of putting any in places that look for great gifts, great wages, for that will exalt the tyrannical power in him, and make him forget God, and lift him up in the flesh, whereby after such come to fall with shame. There∣fore to that which keeps down and plain in great places, take heed; great wages and great places, exalts the high minded, and that is it which grieves the righteous, and honest heated, For when the Judges judged for reward, and the Priests taught for hire, and the Prophets divined for money, this brought Je∣rusalem
all on heapes, and the wise eye was blinded with gifts. And of laying great taxes upon people, take heed lest ye oppresse the just, and lay heavier burthens upon them then they can bear, by which the just comes to groan under, but minde equality, measurablenesse, true weights, true ballances, and equality in all things, man with man, that whereby you may govern in righteousnesse and in justice. For oppression, and heavy burthens, and heavy taxes from some, give to some the great wages, whereby others are oppressed; therefore wages being lesse, the taxes come lesse, then you all come to the feeling principle of God in you, by which you all feel and consider, that which is exalted with fulnesse, and ease the op∣pressed, and not feed that which is full and exalted; and the one with his fulnesse is exalted above his measure, and the other with his heavy taxe is oppressed through the care. Therefore now you have ease, take heed all you that be in offices, and having fulnesse, of growing fat and forgetting God, through places and abundance of riches and great wages; therefore your wages lesse, your taxes lesse, you keep chaste and low in the fear of God, and then there will be lesse dan∣ger. For such as are exalted by high places, or great gifts, the Lord God brings one plague or judgement or other upon them, or upon the Nation where they dwell; therefore keep down in the feare of God, that you may be ordered with wisdome, and come to order in the creation with it, to the glory of the Creator; Here you all feele the blessings of the Lord God of life amongst you, and with you,, and both the exactor and the exacted, the one his jawes will be broken, the other will be relieved, and helped, and that which helps is blessed, and the will of men must be crossed in the earth∣ly, and that mountain broken down, as the stone riseth that is cut out of the mountain without hands; for abundance of judgements must come from the Lord God, and plagues and misery before men be seasoned, and be in the savoury of life, for that which did ever oppresse first, went from that of God in them; for the first Murtherer, he went out of the truth, and destroyer. Therefore Esaus birth, Esaus stock, that
looks for the fat of the earth, and beares the sword against Jacob, must be as the stubble, and a wildernesse, and a place for Dragons: Therefore Isaak knew the second birth, which is the seeds called; and Jacob knew, that riseth and reignes o∣ver the high places of the Earth, that the elder you may come to witnesse to serve the younger; here is the election known. And friends, take heed of making any Laws and Acts a∣gainst them that cannot swear, that abide in Christs doctrine, that are the royal Christians, and of the royal Priesthood, and in the everlasting Covenant, Christ Jesus, him by whom the world was made, who are brought to the yea and nay in all their communications. And Christ saith, Swear not at all. And the Apostle saith, My brethren, above all things sweare not at all, lest ye fall into condemnation. So who obeys Christs doctrine, and the Apostles, be out of the oaths, and in yea and nay, in all communication: And if you will have any more, in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word is established. If you say the Prophet did swear, and Solomon did swear, and Jacob did swear, and David did swear, and men in strife did swear, and the oath ended the strife. I answer, who comes into Christ, are come into peace, yea and nay in their communications: This is my beloved sonne (saith God) heare ye him, who saith, swear not at all; To whom the An∣gels must bow, who is the end of the Prophets, and greater then Solomon, before Abraham was; and David called him Lord, the end of the first Priesthood, the end of the first Co∣venant, the end of Moses, who reignes over the house of Ja∣cob and Joseph, who was glorified with the Father before the world began; who doth enlighten every man that cometh into the world, that all men through the light might believe; who saith, learn of me. And many are fined, and many are imprisoned, because they cannot swear, because they cannot transgresse the com∣mands of Christ, and Apostles doctrine, which never such thing was heard of upon the earth in all Christendome, that Christians should put in Prison such as cannot swear, that o∣beys Christs dooctrine, and the Apostles, and are kept to
yea and nay, in all their communication: And if they would have any more, they shall have two on three witnesses, that shall establish every word they speak; That such should be fined and imprisoned, and lye till death, as one did at Nor∣wich, and many are detained in the Fleet at London, and o∣ther places. Was it ever so amongst the Apostles? that any should be fined and imprisoned till death, because they could not swear, and detained in prison for years; doth not this shew that men from the Apostles doctrine are apostated. And friends, take heed of casting them into prison, or fi∣ning them that cannot pay to the mending of Papist houses, called the Steeple-house, which hath the Crosse on the end of it, or paying to a Clerk wages; Such as meet together in the feare of God, that cannot hold up those houses with Crosses in the end of them, and pictures in the windows, nor those Ministers that hold them up, nor cannot own the Clerks to give them wages; for the Prophets and Apostles had never any such, but they are come up since the dayes of the Apo∣stles; and the houses with the Crosse on the end of them, in the night of the Apostacy, and so they call them their Chur∣ches since the dayes of the Apostles, who saith the Church was in God 1 Thes. 1. Now if you say some of their crosses are thrown down; yea of some of them there is, but many of them they are still; but he that set up the Crosse set up the House, and so it cannot be repaired as a Church, or a Tem∣ple, or a place for worship which was ordained for Popery: Therefore that Priest-hood and people, that hold up that which they call the Church, or the Temple with a Crosse on the end of it; and if that Minister and people that uphold it are not able to maintain it, that declares the beggarlinesse of it. Now for the repairing of any poor mans house, which is his covering to keep him from rain, that is a deed of chari∣ty and savours. But for the Ministers and people that have their houses, and the Clerk, and is not able to maintain it, nor to maintain their Ministry, but they will sue and cast into pri∣son such as be not of their Church, because they cannot put into their mouths, and cast them into prison, and there keep them till death; yea, for their bellies, not because of their
worship, but because they will not put into their mouths; therefore what would these doe, if they had a Lw to compel to their worship, that imprisons to death for their bellies, as witnesse Lancaster Goal, and many other Goals in the Nati∣on, where prisoners lye, and have lain, because they cannot give them wages, & tyths, that they do no work for. Did the Gentiles repair the Heathens Temple after they were conver∣ted? or maintain their Priests? Did the Jewes that were con∣verted maintain the Jews Temple, and hold up Priests, and give them tythes after they were converted? Did not they witnesse against the Priest-hood, and Temple, and Tythes, as it is in the Corinthians, and Hebrews, and Acts? Hath not Tythes, Temples, Pulpits, Priests, these offerings? Easter reckonings, Midsommer dues, come up since the dayes of the Apostles, in this night of Apostacy? and are these Temples, Tythes, Priests to be measured with the Jewes, which God commanded, or with the Gentiles which God never com∣manded? Did not Christ come to put an end to the Temple, and true Priest-hood, and their offerings, and their Covenant, saying, a greater then Solomon is here that built the Temple, so the Jewes that had the many Priests, the Christians, the one everlasting Priest-hood; the Jewes the many offerings, the Christians the one offering; the Christians the blood of Jesus, the Jewes the blood of Buls and Goats; the Jewes the first Covenant written in Tables of stone, the Christians the last Covenant written in their hearts. So these Temples, Tythes, and Priests, which have come up since the days of the Apostles, was not the Pope & the Papists the author of them? and of these Houses, and Clerks, and Pulpits, and Glasses, their preaching by an hour? And did not the Apostle witnesse against the time, and preached the everlasting Covenant to Jewes and Gentiles: So these that are come up since the days of the Apostles, in the night of Apostacy, which should con∣tinue a time. Now who are come to be turned from this, and that which hath apostated since the dayes of the Apostles, these Temples, Tythes, and Priests set up since the dayes of the Apostacy; Ministers made by Schools and Colledges, made by the will of man, having named their Colledges and
Schools by Saints names, and Christs name, and of Jesus, ha∣ving named their houses by Pauls and Peters, or Maries, &c. Having set Crosses on the end of their Churches or Tem∣ples, framing them after the manner of the Temple, as they imagine, setting them East and West, having their Clerks in them, having their tythes, having their offerings, Midsommer dues, and Easter reckonings, all this stuffe having come up since the dayes of the Apostles, in the Apostacy, who are come to the truth, that which the Apostles were in, and from Popery they cannot hold up these houses, nor hold up these Colledges, nor hold up these Ministers, made by mans will, nor tythes, nor their Temples, nor their Clerks, nor minde their Popish houses with Crosses in the end of them, and for that cause many have their goods spoiled, their Cattel driven away; and what is this but like unto the Spiritual Court, for were not they presented in that, that could not maintain the Steeple-house, pay their tythes, Easter reckonings, Midsomer dues, and offerings. Now doth not truth comprehend all this? and did not the Apostles deny the true Temple, true Priest-hood, and true Tythes? and are these to be measured by the true Priest-hood? Nay, we cannot measure them; So the true Ministry hath been lost, which hath been made by the will of God, which went out freely without a bag, since the Apostles, that this Apostacy hath come up, so hath got up Tythes and Priests, and Colledges; here you may know who set up the Colledges, there is Christs, and Jesus, and Tri∣nities and Emanuels, and you may know who set up the great houses, for there is Peters and Pauls, and Maries, with Crosses on the end of them. Now how do you think we can maintain all these things; these Houses, Ministery, Colledges, without maintaining Popery; for these things are not re∣nounced, and the old Court of Popery must be purged out. And neverthelesse that friends be moved of the Lord to goe into these houses called by the names of Saints, or go into these Colledges called by the name of Christ and Jesus, to speak to them, as they are moved of the Lord God, they are haled out and sent to prison, have not the priviledge of the place, and yet they must maintain the place, and cast into prison, and
there lye till death, and are cast into prison by the Priests for their bellies, and lye till they are dead, and then carried out. Now this is not a good savour, but savours of popery; for never did the Prophets, never did the Apostles imprison any to death for their bellies, as witnesse Thomas Shaw, cast one to prison, and there kept him till death in Lancaster Goale, whom he did no work for, even for his belly. Now because we say such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bel∣lies, who minde earthly things, and the love of money, they call it railing; which, such the Apostle saw coming before his decease, which since the Apostacy have had their rule and dominion, and so to maintain a house and Ministry, and Col∣ledges, to make Ministers; and yet if any be moved of the Lord to speak to them at their Colledges, great houses, they imprison them, and persecute them to death. Does not this shew that they are such that makes war against them that keep the testimony of the Lord Jesus, the spirit of prophesie, and they themselves ravined from the Spirit, and are not all these of such that Christ said should come, Mat. 7 24. that should be inwardly ravening wolves (marke) wolves, yet the wolves should have the sheeps cloathing, that is, the outside. Here Christ prophesied of them, and said, by their fruits you shall know them. And let us further to understand, whether men did gather grapes of thornes, or figs of thistles. And moreover said, that a good tree cannot bring forth evill fruit, nor an evill tree good fruit, therefore by their fruite you shall know them: And it was not every one that cryed Lord, Lord, should enter in∣to the kingdome of God, but they that did the will of God: So that which Christ said should come, Matth. 7.24. to his Dis∣ciples, and gives the marks by which they should know them, and bade them not go after them. Now before the Disciples decease, as you may read in 1 Joh. 2. and 1 Joh. 4. saith John, Little children I write unto you, it is the last time, (mark) it is, then whereof you have heard say, that Antichrist should come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we do know it is the last time: And they went forth from us, that it might be manifest that they were not of us; for had they been of us, no doubt but they would have continued with us. But they went
forth from us, that it might be manifest they were not of us. But you have an anointing which abideth in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing doth teach you; and as it doth teach you, so ye shall continue in the sonne of God, and the Father. So Christ bids them not goe after them, and John keeps them to the anointing within them, agreeable to Christs words for Christ said they should come to his Disci∣ples; John said they were come, and he said it was the last time, whereof ye have heard say that Antichrist should come, for Christ had told them before, whereby we know it is the last time; for now, even now there are many Antichrists al∣ready in the world, and false prophets in 1 John 4. even now already in the world. So those that went forth from them, in the Revelations you may see how all the earth went after them and then came up the first beast out of the Sea, and the se∣cond beast out of the earth, and then came the earthly things to be established and worshipped, and these were them that inwardly ravened (marke) that inwardly ravened, that went forth from the Apostles, that all the world went after and worshipped, but whose names were written in the lambs book of life, before the foundation of the world was, and so that which inwardly ravened went forth from the Apostles, turned against them that kept to the Spirit the testimony of Jesus; here they made war against the Saints, and should overcome them; and so here the beast and false prophets came to reign, and then came up the Beast who is able to make warre with them, and here is the beast and false prophets, and all his names, and marks, and heads, and crowns, and horns, pushing one against another. For how should they do otherwise but burst into names, when they went forth from the Apostles, inwardly ravened, yet had the sheeps cloathing, the outside, the wolfe hath been covered with the sheeps cloathing, and now the cloathing is taken off the wolfe is seen; Was there so many names amongst the Apostles before the Apostacy, the true Christians, no, they were of one minde, and heart, and soule; so all nations have drunke, saith John (mark) have drunke the cup of the wine of her fornication, Rev. 18. And the Kings of the earth, and inhabitants of the earth have com∣mitted
fornication with her, mark, that which inwardly rave∣ned, which went forth from the Apostles; whored, as the chil∣dren of Israel when they transgressed the command of God, they played the harlot, so all Nations come to drink of the whores cup that inwardly ravened, had the sheeps cloathing, which went forth from the Apostles, (mark) these went forth from something, these were not the heathen which had not the sheeps cloathing, but such as inwardly ravened, and went forth from the Apostles, which all Nations came to drink their cup of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth. Fornication before they were married, before they came to the husband, and so all Nations have drunk this cup, and the Kings of the Earth, and worship, and goe after her; they were more like to go after them that inwardly ra∣vened and went forth from the Apostles, then goe after the Apostles, the Kings of the Earth, and the world: So all Na∣tions having drunk the whores cup, and the Inhabitants of the earth, and the Kings of the earth come to drinke of her fornicati∣on. All the earth came to be corrupted with her fornications, all Nations having committed fornication with her, and the Kings of the Earth. And the waters which thou saw st where the whore sits are people (sayes he) and nations, and tongues, & languages, and multitudes (mark) the waters are peoples. Now the teachers of the world have told us that this whore of Babylon is the Pope, and yet the false prophets are come but now, and now is the last time; now how hath these two stood together; and all nations have drunk of the cup of her for∣nications; and all nations worshipped the Beast, whose names are not written in the lambs book. And the water which thou sawest are multitudes, peoples, tongues and nations (mark) peo∣ples. Now the Papists are a people, we say they are of her, of the whore, but peoples. Now the Papists are called a people, as the Jewes were called a people, and nations, and tongues, and multitudes; what Nations, waters, where the whore sits, peo∣ples waters, Tongues waters, Multitudes waters, no better e∣stablished then waters. Nay, how should it be, when that which is inwardly ravened, went forth from the Apostles, all Nations came to drink of this cup; how should they be other∣wise
but like waters, wallow, wallow, when they were raven∣ed from the spirit, and here is Babylon, Mystery, Babylon, and the mother of the harlots, where all Nations and people have been wallowing in these waters; and here hath been all the Names, running out of one name into another name, for that which whored and inwardly ravened, the world went after, so the sheeps cloathing amongst them they have had, and the Lambs they worried. Inquisitions and Prisons, nay others imprisoned to death for thir bellies, and the spirit when they ravened from it, how should they do otherwise but burst in∣to heaps, and sects, and parties, and heads, and horns, and names, and all like waters, and so have wanted the unity of the Spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures, in which is the unity, which is the bond of peace. Now that the whore that ra∣vened, and went forth from the Apostles, should fit upon Nations, upon Peoples, upon Multitudes, upon Tongues, and all Nations, and Kings, and the Inhabitants of the earth should drink her cup, and commit fornication with her, was not this like to defile the earth, to corrupt the earth? So all these names, horns, and crowns since the days of the Apostles are found in her, and amongst her and them the beast and false prophet, she sit upon Tongues, the waters are Tongues, so sits upon them which cals the Tongues, your Original here, upon you the whore sits, upon your waters; what Tongues waters, Nations waters, Peoples waters, and Multitudes wa∣ters, and all Nations have drunk the cup, and yet they would tell us they come bt now. Again, the best and false prophet should be taken, which made war against the Saints, and overcame them. Babylon came in remembrance of God, and fall; the judgement of the great whore came and burnt, and double given to her, as she had given to others; The Devil taken, the old deceiver, and with him the false prophets, and the beast, and cast alive into the lake of fire, and the great whore that hath drunk the blood of the P ophets, drunk the blood of the Saints, drunk the blood of the Martyrs, for these have been all wrestlers a∣gainst flesh and blood, and slaying the creatures, which we wrestle not against flesh and blood, before the Apostacy, said
the Apostles, so these that wrestled against flesh and blood since the Apostles, slaying the Saints, and the Martyrs, and the Prophets, the Saints and Lamb should overcome, over the beast, over the old deceiver, the beast, and false prophets, over his names, over his horns, over his crowns, which all that dwell upon the earth hath worshipped, over the mother of harlots, over the great whore which hath corrupted the earth, which hath made war against the Saints and overcome them: The woman fled into the wildernesse, and the man-childe caught up unto God, and all nations having drunk of the cup of the wine of her fornication, and all that dwell upon the earth worshipped the beast and false prophets; the man-child brought forth which should rule the nations with a rod of iron; for they have been waters, and drunk the whores cup; and e∣verlasting Gospel shall be preached to them that dwell upon the earth, the Saints and the Lamb shall have the victory. Rejoyce ye holy Prophets over her, over that which Christ said should come, John saw was come, and all nations went after, and drunk the whores cup of fornication: So John doth not say it is the last time, when that all that dwelt upon the earth went after the Beast, and worshipped, and drunk the cup, he did not say then it was the last time; but when ma∣ny Antichrists, many false prophets were already in the world, then it was the last time. Therefore from that which Christ said should come, John saw was come, which all Nations went after, and drunke the cup of, is people now coming. This is to the pre∣sent age, to that which they all ravened from, is people come, and coming, whereby the Christ is rising amongst people, who comes to drink of the water of life freely; and the Taberna∣cle of God comes to be witnessed amongst men, and the hea∣venly Jerusalem comes to be witnessed; So that which Christ said should come, John saw was come, which went forth from them, which all people that dwelt upon the earth went after, and should worship, and all Nations drink the cup of forni∣cation. These have been them that set up worships, and com∣pelled others to worship; that set up Teachers, and compel∣led others to heare them, and set up maintenance, and com∣pelled others to give it them; and set up Tythes, and Priests,
and Temples, and Colledges to make Ministers by, and Clerks and Bels to gather them together; for the Apostles denyed the true Temple, and true Priests, and true Tythes: and so they that set up another Temple, Priests, Tythes, went out from them, and another Pulpit are them that went forth from the Apostles; and all this prisoning to death for tythes for pretended Ministers made, and hath these Popish houses are set up since the dayes of the Apostles, for they were made by the will of God; so with the power of the Lord God must all this be overthrown, root and branch, head and tail, and the power of the Lord God is gone over, and that is a true word, worshipping the Beast, when they went forth from the Apo∣stles, and all the earth went after them; for they were not like to worship in the Spirit, and it's a true word, the whores cup which went out from the Apostles, which all Nations came to drink of, and so all nations hath been waters, Tongues wa∣ters, Peoples waters, Multitudes waters. Now must not vy∣als, and plagues, and thunders, and earthquakes, and shakings come before the Mistry to be revealed upon the Beast, and false prophet, and mother of Harlots; therefore the judge∣ment of the great whore is come, and God will be avenged of her; and so it is not a strange thing, that which Christ said should come, and John saw was come, that all nations should drink the cup, which inwardly ravened, which went forth from the Apostles, that Nations should be standing against the light within, and word within and anointing within, and Christ within, and Spirit within; them that has inwardly raven∣ed, went forth from the Apostles; raveners that whored from the Apostles, tell them of the light within, the annointing within, the Spirit within, Christ within, this is a blasphemy with them; nay they made warre against them which kept the testimony of Jesus, the spirit of the prophesie (marke) they say prophesie is ceased, and false prophets are come but now, who made war against them that had the spirit of prophesie, that kept the testimony of Jesus. Was it the beast and false prophet, they say revelation is ceased. Now if they had said the fear of God had been ceased; for where the fear of God is, the secrets of the Lord revealed: And rejoyce ye holy Prophets
over her, the Saints and the Lamb shall get the victory, sing ye Saints Hallelujahs, the Lord God omnipotent reigneth, and his Tabernacle was with man, and the everlasting Gospel shall be preached to them that dwell upon the earth; and with a rod of Iron shall nations be ruled. So fear God and worship him, and not the Beast, for that which inwardly ravened and went forth from the Apostles, such are they who worship the Beast, and who worship that worship the beast: So who comes to feare God and worship him, comes to that which they ravened from, so from all these Temples, Tythes, Priests, from all the Jewes Temples, Tythes, Priests; from all the Gentiles Tem∣ples, Tythes, Priests, and all those set up since the days of the Apostles. Is God bringing his people into the life of the Pro∣phet, of Christ and the Apostles, and the seed is risen, which gives to see before Jewes Temples, Priests, and Tythes were, which were but the figure, & over all these Temples, Tythes, Priests, that inwardly ravine from the Spirit, which have had the sheeps cloathing, the out-side; but the wolfe hath been under, the devourer, and here hath been all Priests worships upon the earth, maintenance teachers. So from all these since the days of the Apostles, is God bringing his people, and sees them to be set up in the same nature, as the heathens were in, in the transgression, and to that which the heathens trans∣gressed, and to that which them that went from the Apostles went from, is God bringing his people, and to that which the Jewes Temple, Tythes, Priests figured forth, to Christ Jesus the substance, him by whom the world was made, are people come and coming; which gives to see before the Jewes Tythes, Priests, the Gentiles Tythes, Priests, Temples, and these Tythes, Temples and Priests set up since the days of the Apostles, and the seed of God overthrows them all, & gives to see to the beginning, before the Jewes was, before the world was, before the Gntiles was, or these set up since the dyes of the Apostacy, the seed of God overthrows, and brings to the beginning to the promise of God, over all that which Christ said should come, John saw was come, which a l the world went after, over that the Saints and the Lamb have victory; glory to the Lord for ever, the Saints and the Lamb
have victory over all. Rejoyce ye holy Prophets, for to that which they went from, is the Saints come. Now are the Priests do you think ever like to convert the Jews, that have Temples, Pulpits, Priests made by Colledges, Tythes given unto them by man? Do you think that these are ever like to convert the Jewes? What, we must forsake one Temple which God hath commanded to be made, and come to your Temple with a Crosse at the end of it, set up of your own invention which God never commanded? What, we must forsake our tythes which God hath commanded, who have a store-house to put our Tythes in, & Priests to pay their tythes, as to take their tythes, and all the strangers and fatherlesse to be filled within our gates, that there might be no beggar in Israel; and we must come to your Tythes invented and set up by man, and have no store house; and your Countrey full of beggars and widows, and strangers, and fatherlesse are not satisfied. What, we must forsake our Priests made by Gods Law, and come to your Priests made by Schools, Colledges, and by men, and serve seven years at a time at their Schools and Colledges, do you think ever to convert the Jews? Nay, the Jewes see that you are apostatized from the Apostles, and forsaken their principles; for say they the Apostles and Chri∣stians, and many of the Jewes which followed the Apostles, they denyed our Temple which God commanded, and denied our Priests and Tythes which God commanded, whose lips were to preserve the peoples knowledge and witnessed the e∣verlasting Priest-hood, the treasure of wisdome and knowledg; and said the light that shined in their hearts should give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God; so you have forsaken their principles. For the Apostles did not set up a∣nother Temple, which denied the Jewes, and another Tenths, and another Priest-hood that took tythes; but this is come up since the days of the Apostles. So for the Jews to forsake their tythes which God commanded, to come to your tythes which God never commanded; and to forsake their Temple, to come to your Temple, which hath a Crosse on the end of it. And to forsake their Priest-hood made by Gods Law, which had a commandment according to Gods Law to take
tythes of the people; and they had a store-house where all the widows, and strangers, and fatherlesse were filled And so they must forsake their tythes, store-house, and Priests, and come to your tythes which God never commanded, who have no store-house, and your Priests made by your Colledges, and served seven years Apprentiship to it, and made by the will of man, which have their tythes, and casting into prison such as will not pay them, that be not of their Church, till death; and suing and haling them up and down Courts. This was ne∣ver the Law among the Jews to cast into prison untill death; this was never among the Jews for tythes. Now if they be like to convert Jewes, they must come into the Apostles doctrine, who denyed Pulpits, Tythes, Temples, Priests of the Jewes and Gentiles, and witnessed the substance Christ Jesus, the everlasting Priest-hood, Covenant, and the one offering. Now you are gone from the Apostles princi∣ples, and got up another Priest-hood which takes tythes, and hath no store-house neither for widows, strangers, or father∣lesse: So you are broke into Sects, and heaps, and names. The Apostles and Saints were of one heart, and minde, and spirit. Again the Apostle said, we wrestle not against flesh & blood, who preached the everlasting Covenant to Jews and Gentiles, a new Covenant to the Jews who had the old; a Covenant, a light to the Gentiles, salvation to the ends of the earth, a∣mong all the sons of Adam drove from God; preached Christ Jesus the Covenant of light, the second Adam, the power of God, the righteousnesse of God, the wisdome, the truth, the life, the way to the Father. For the first Adam being drove from the Father, Christ the second Adam the way to the Father, which doth enlighten every man that cometh into the world, that all men through him might believe, and that they might know what to believe in the light; and he that believeth in the light hath the witnesse in himselfe. Now they did not wrestle against flesh, and blood, and cre∣atures; but they held forth the everlasting Covenant, Christ Jesus the second Adam, with God and man, preached him to all the sons of Adam on the earth, and was to goe into all
nations, not to strike, and wrestle against flesh and blood, and creatures, but they struck at the power, and rulers of darkness, and spiritual wickednesses in high places; that they wrestled a∣gainst that captivated, that kept the creature in bondage, and struck at that, whereby creatures might come into the liber∣ty of the sons of God, and to believe in the covenant of God, the covenant of light, by wh ch they had peace with God: and struck at the enmity wh ch was among the creatures, and so wrestled not against flesh and blood, nor creatures, where∣by many sons and daughters come to glory. And the Apo∣stles before their decease, that struck at principalities & pow∣ers, and rulers of darknesse, and the spiritual wickednesses in the high places, whose weapons were spiritual, and not carnall, said before their decease to Timothy and Titus, speaking of Mini∣sters and Bishops, First they must be proved and tryed be∣fore they must minister; he said they must not be covetous, they must not be given to wine, they must not be strikers (mark) Striker, nor covetous, nor given to filthy lucre. Now since the days of the Apostles, in the Apostacy, is not strikers got abroad, and covetous, wrestling against flesh and blood? Such as cry knock them down, knock them down, take them away, to Stocks with them; If their heads were chopt off, if they were hanged, to prison with them, house of Correction, have them before the Justice, whip them; are not all these wrestlers against flesh and blood, who would have creatures hurt? So instead of striking at the power which captivates te creature, (and to bring the creature into the liberty of the sons of God) they are wrestling, and striking, and wrestling with flesh and blood. These are all apostatized from the A∣postles like mad men, and never are like to convert people. For who ever have but read the Apostles Epistle, and the four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, and the Reve∣lations, see that these works and fruits be quite contrary to the manner and practice of Christ & his Apostles, where is loving enemies, where is overcoming evill with good? While so many have dyed in Goals, and suffered in Goals as Yorke, Norwich, Colchester, Durham, Lancaster, Bristol, Exeter, by this priest∣hood, since the dayes of the Apostles; yea, for speaking to
them, and many lye in Goals, been cast into prison because they cannot pay them tythes. Are not these covetous? are not these given to filthy lucre? Did not the Apostle see such as were covetous should make merchandize of the people be∣fore the Apostles decease? Did not Jude, and Peter see such should make merchandize of the people, which went in Cains and Cores way; Cains way to envy, a murtherer, and have not many suffered death in prison by these Priests in their ge∣neration? and many lies in prison because they cannot give them means, and give them tythes; yea, till death in prison? Now are not all these wrestlers agianst flesh and blood, in stead of striking against the enmity (which is among all people and the creatures) and wrestling against that power, and spi∣ritual wickednesses, and to bring the creatures into the liberty of the sons of God, out of bondage, striking and imprisoning the creatures, yea for speaking to them, and for their bellies. Is this like unto the Apostles work? Doth not this shew apo∣stacy from them? Therefore take heed all ye men in authority, how you to∣lerate wrestlers against flesh, and blood (to be Ministers of Christ) and imprison men to death, because they will not give them maintenance. How farre are these off of the Apostles, which would not use their power to eate, to keep the Gosp l without charge, though he had power. Oh! alack consider what hath ruled and reigned since those dayes. For the Mi∣nisters of the Gospel, they preached Christ the everlasting Co∣venant of God, to bring people into Covenant with God. They did not go to wrestle with creatures, or flesh and blood, but the power which captivated creatures, and causeth the enmity one with another, and so bringeth them into the li∣berty of the sons of God from under the power that hath cap∣tivated them. These are the preachers of the Gospel, which is the power of God, which strikes at the powers of wickednesse; that which Jude & Peter saw coming in, which went in Cains, Cora's and Balaams way. Separate themselves, sensuall, and had not the Spirit, these went from the Apostles, which spoke the high words in hypocrisie, admired mens persons be∣cause of advantage, agreeable to them that Christ said should
come, Matth. 7.24. who should be inwardly ravening wolves, having the sheeps cloathing, as John saw was come, 1 John 2.4. as went forth from them, which were not of them, which all the world wondered after them, as in the Revelations, which separated themselves, had not the Spirit. Now these came to teach, and speak the high words in hypocrisie, having mens persons in admiration because of advantage. See the Scri∣ptures people have had, but the Spirit that gave them forth have been wanting (and their Teachers have been in Cora's, and Cains, and Balaams way) in which is the unity, which is the bond of peace. So people having had the Prophets words, Christs words, and the Apostles words, and wanting the Spi∣rit that gave them forth, which is the bond of peace, in which is the unity. They would destroy one another about what the Prophets said, and did, and Christ said, and did, and the Apo∣stles said, and did. Now if you say we take away the Ministers maintenance, and the next time we will pluck down the Gospel and the Mi∣nisters both of Christ. I say nay, the Gospel it is the power of God, and that cannot be plucked downe, for all things are upheld by his word, and power. The Ministers mainte∣nance we pluck not down neither, but establish: and the A∣postle doth say, Have not we power to eate? power to drinke? But if ye should question the Apostles, who gave them their power to eate, and power to drink, seeing the Apostle denies the Temple, and the Sacrifice, and the holy things about the Temple, and the Priest-hood that took Tyths, and the Store-house both; and said, the Priest-hood was changed, and the Law was changed, and the command disannulled that gave them tythes, and tythes which was paid to the similtude Melchisedech before the Law: The son of God is come, the end of all similitudes and likenesses, and yet the Apostles have power to eate and to drink; but he did not say that he had power to take tythes, great sums of money, stipends, Augmentations, Glebe lands. Now Christ when he sent forth his Disciples, the second Priest-hood, he bid them take no bagge, nor silver in their purses; Freely they had received, freely give, and as they went
preached the Kingdome of God; and into what Countrey or City they came into, enquire who was worthy, and there go, and there abide; and what they set before them, to eate, for the work-man is worthy of his meate. And those came back again to Christ, and he asked them if they wanted any thing, and they said nay. They came back again with joy; and he bid them not rejoyce that the Devils were subject to them on∣ly, but that their names were written in the book of life. Now saith the Apostle, have not I power to eate? have not I power to drinke? But he doth not say, have not I power to take tythes? have not I power to take Augmentations, Glebe-lands, Sti∣pends, and great sums of money? Have not I power to eate and to drink? And Christ said to them which he sent forth, he gave them power to eat; for Tythes were stablished in the first Priest-hood, which had the Tythes. And they that prea∣ched the Gospel, the power of God opened their hearts, and made them come, and lay all at the Apostles feet. Now you may see, that the Ministers now in our age is in another doctrine, then the Apostles were in; for how many of their hearers have their preaching made to lay their goods at their feet: Nay, but they are fain to cast into prison for tythes, for maintenance, for lucre, for their bellies, yea till death; and they that Christ sent forth to enquire who was worthy; and what Town they come into, to quere who was worthy, if they set meat before them to eate it; but was not to come to a Town and to quere how much Tythes, Augmen∣tations, Stipends, Glebe-lands belongs to a Minister, and call the Town together, and agree with the Town for their lives, (as these doth) but to quere who was worthy, and what was set before them, to eate. Now if they did not set before them, and receive their do∣ctrine, they were to passe away, not to call the Magistrates together, and to cast them into prison, because they would not give them maintenance. All may see what a habite these Ministers have got on, and how different from the Apostles and the Disciples, and how they are apostatized. Now if you say, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Oxe that treadeth out the corne. I say nay; that Oxe that gets the
wheat out of the chaffe, out of the straw, not to muzzle his mouth: But saith the same Apostle, Evill beasts, that minds earthly things, and teacheth for filthy lucre; who serves not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies their mouths must be stpt: Which while they covet after money, they erre from the faith, and pierce themselves through with many hurtfull lusts, but the man of God is to fly these things. But follow faith and charity, not coveting. Now since the dayes of the Apostles (such as are gone af∣ter covetousnesse, erred from the faith, pierced through with hurtul lusts) the unity hath been lost; for the unity is in the faith, that which gives victory over the world in which God is pleased Now cryes these, while men be upon the Earth, they must not have victory; there is a body of sin while he is on the earth: So not the victory, and not in the unity, the faith having been erred from, and reprobated from. So te unity hath been lost from the people, which hath had the victory, for the unity is in the faith, and faith is that which gives victory over the world, by which men please God, and have unity one with another. Now if you do say, he that plants a vineyard may eate of the fruit of it? and he that keeps a flock may eate? I say then, But let them see that they have planted a vineyard, and have a flock that will give them milke, and fruit to eate on, and let them not trouble the Magistrate with Petitions, which are to keep peace in a Nation, with petitions for maintenance for them; but see that they have gotten a vineyard, that it be a vineyard, and that it is a flock, and lye not like a wildernesse. And they that sow spirituals should reap carnals, and they that preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. But how is it that ye are casting them out that be not of your vineyard and flock into prison, and suing them up and down Courts, and troubling the Magistrates, and troubling people, and casting into prison till death, because they cannot give you tythes, and maintenance; doth your fruits appear like planters of vine∣yards, gatherers of flocks, plowers in hope, threshers in hope. The Ministers of the Gospel never covet after earthly
things, to trouble Magistrates, and make them as their Exe∣cutioners upon others, because they would not put into their mouths, and give them maintenance, because they spoke to them. And the Lord hath opened some of the understandings of the Magistrates, that will not be your Executioners, but there is a minde raising up in some of them, that will say, Wuld to God all the Lords people were Prophets. And if yee have been seven years a Schools, and Colldges, and have the Origial your learning: and if a company of plain simple men, husband men, or yeoman men, you are not able to encounter withal, it is time for you to lay aside your Ministry, and your Doctrine, and Schools, and Colledges; if ye be not able to resist their spirit, but ye must be fain to prison them, to stock them, and whip them, because they speak to you, and never lift up a hand to you, but bid you repent, and feare God, and will not give you Tythes; this is not like unto the Apostles, who saith, quench not the spirit in the Prophets, nor limit the holy on: And try all things, and hold fast that which is good; and sons and daughters shall prophesie. Now though the Apostle said, Have not I power to eate, & power to drinke? Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Oxe that treadeth out the corn. He that planted a Vineyard should eate of the fruit of it; he that keepeth a Flock should eate of the milke; he that soweth spirituals, should reap carnals; they that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel. Saith he, I have not spoken this, or written this, that these things should be so done to mee, though I thus speak; for I have not used my power, nor have used any of these things; for it were better for me to dye, then to make my glorying voyd that he might keep the Gospel without charge. How have you been the Apostles successors to keep the Gospel without charge, and to use none of these things; when ye are suing men for tythes, prisoning men for tythes, haling up and down the Na∣tion, and many lie in prison till death. Now read the 1 Cor. 9. whether all your glorying is not void: and ye cannot say ye have kept the Gospel without charge, when ye cast so many into prison, yea till death, and so many hundreds up in Courts, and so many have their goods driven away, and Cat∣tell
driven away, and goods strained, and treble damages, yea and of some double and treble, which to all sober serious peo∣ple is a bad savour, and a grief. So this hath had a time since the days of the Apostles (in the Apostasie) the true Ministry hath been lost, and such as have had the sheeps cloathing, the ravening wolves have ru∣led and raigned, whose fruits have been bryars, thorns, and thistles, and the world hath laid like a wildernesse; and their Teachers fruits have been like thorns, and thistles, and they corrupt trees, and their Ministry would not maintain them, but they were fain to get it by compulsion, by prisons, writs, and Petitions. This was never like the Prophets, nor the A∣postles, but apostatized from them. Now if any man come to our houses, and have found us worthy; and minister unto us spiritual things, we should set before him of our carnall. But if he come to our houses, and quere for Stipends, Tythes, Augmentations, Glebe lands, Easter reckonings, Midsomer dues, and offerings, we say they serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their owne bellies. And they are not like the Apostle, that kept the Gospel without charge. Nor like unto Christs Ministers, that he bid them give freely. Nor like unto the Prophets, that said, come with∣out money, without a price. Nor like unto the Apostle, who said, the gift of God was not to be bought and sold for money. Such we see differs from the Prophets, Christ, and the Apo∣stles, therefore we deny them, and see they are evill beasts, and serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, that minde earthly things, that teacheth for filthy lucre, and the love of money, and covet after it, which they ought not, and disapproved by the Apostles doctrine in 1 Tim. 3. Now as concerning of Vagabonds, it hath been said, if a man or a woman have gone out into the next Countrey, he hath been a Vagabond, he hath bin called so. Now upon this account all the Apostles might have been called Vagabonds; for they was to go into all nations to preach the Gospel, and they did declare they had no certain dwelling place. And the son of man had no where to lay his head. And Abraham, of whom Christ came according to the flesh, had not a foot of ground,
no not whereon to set his foot. And the Prophets that pro∣phecyed of Christ, passed up and down in many places to Na∣tions; yet these were not Vagabonds, but all had habitations in God. Now Cain was a vagabond, yet he built a City, and called the City after his son Enoch's name; yet he was a vagabond, who built a City, for he was in envy and wrath. So he is a vagabond that is in envy and wrath, whose countenance fals, though he may have a great habitation in the earth; yet ha∣ving not a habitation in God, is a vagabond. And having not a habitation in the earth, having not a foot of ground, having a habitation in God, is no vagabond. Having no certain dwelling place, nor having no where to lay his head, is no vaga∣bond, having an habitation in God. Now concerning the Ministers principles. They have told us the Steeple-house was the Church, and the Scripture tels us the Church is in God: So apostates from the Apostles, they told us that sprinkling Infants was the Baptisme; that when Circumcision went out, then came sprinkling Infants (their Baptisme) n. The Apostle saith, which brought the people off of the outward Circumcision, which men were circumci∣sed, he brings them to the inward circumcision (off of the outward) with the Spirit made without hands, in putting off of the body of sin, so both men and women witnesse the Spi∣rit putting off the body of sin, which circumciseth, witnesse the Spirit wherein is the unity; and saith, the promise was with Abraham before he was circumcised, and that promise was with the Seed. And so doth not tell them, that when the outward circumcision was ceased, sprinkling Infants came in; but he brought them from the outward Circumcision, to the inward which was of the Spirit. So we see now, that both male and female must be circumcised with the Spirit of God, which putteth off the body of sin, and the promise of God is to the seed in the male, and female. And they told us that the houses set up by the Papists with a Crosse at the end of it, was the Temple, because it was set East and West, it was the Temple, and Church: And the A∣postles which witnesse the substance, were haled out of the
Temple, and Stephen who was stoned to death for denying the Temple, and witnessed the substance, and saith, their bo∣dies were the temples of the holy Ghost. So we do see those things set up in the Apostacy, since the dayes of the Apo∣stles. And they told us that the Letter was the Light; and the Apostle saith, The letter kills, and the light shines in the heart. And Christ saith, I am the light. And they told us the Letter was the Word; and the Apostles, the Ministers of the Word tells us in the Scriptures, that the Word is God, and Christs name is called the word of God; and the Scriptures is a decla∣ration, Luke 1. They that were Ministers of the Word took in hand to set forth in order a Declaration, and in the Acts it is called a Treatise, Acts 1. And Christ saith, my words. And Moses saith, God spake all these words, Exod. 20. And John in the Revelations saith, If any take away from these words of this book, &c. So he calleth them words: and Christ came to ful∣fill the words, whose name is called the Word of God, him by whom the world was made. In the beginng was the word, who fulfils the words. So here is the Word that spoke all these words, it is the Word of God and Christs name is called the Word of God; and he came to fulfill the Word. So the Scrip∣ture of truth was given forth to be believed, to be fulfilled, to be practised, to be read; and the thing to come to be en∣joyed that it speaks of, that is Christ, that Abraham saw, Prophets wrote of, Moses saw, the Apostles preached, and shewed the fulfilling of Christ, who is called the Word of God, who came to fulfill him by whom the world was made, whose name was called the Word of God, who was in the beginning before the words were written forth. So that is the Word of God by which the Heavens were made, and all things are upheld by the word and power. And the Word of God is in your hearts, and that is the word which divides asunder the precious from the vile, precious thoughts from bad thoughts, precious affections from vile affections, precious desires from bad desires, precious words from bad words, savoury words from corrupt words, and this is the word like unto the ham∣mer, and fire, and a sword that hammers down the vile, that
puts a difference, and hammers it down, that reconciles to the Father, that sanctifies by the Word, for the Word is truth, and Christ is truth. The Papists told us that was the Crosse that stands upon the Steeple-house end, the Apostle tels us, 1 Cor. 1. the Crosse of Christ it is the power of God, which we do believe, and feel, and know, and deny their Crosses, and the founder of them. Though the world and professors tell us, what hurt do they to stand in the high wayes, or to stand on the Stee∣ple-house end, or their Church, we see they are set up since the dayes of the Apostles, in the apostacy, by them that have lost the Crosse, which is the power of God, both Ministry and Church tythes, Pulpits, Temples, and Crosses, which is all denyed by the power of God, which is the Crosse of Christ, and that brings us to the everlasting Priest-hood and the Temple of God. They told us, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John were the Gospel; the Apostle saith, many have the forme of godlinesse, but deny the power thereof; the Devils may bring Scripture: but the Apostle saith, I am not ashamed of the Gospel, for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes. The Gospel is the power of God preached to Abraham be∣fore the four Books were written, wh ch was given forth from the power, which many may have, the four Books, the form of godlinesse, but deny the power, deny the Gospel; For the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation to every one that be∣lieves, Rom 1.16. It is the power of God, and the Gospel was preached to Abraham, and them that inwardly raven, which Christ said should come, and John saw was come then, in the Revelations, and saw the world went after them, they had the sheeps cloathing, they had the out-side that covered the wolfe, that made war against the Saints which should o∣vercome; And they that had the form of godlinesse, but not the power, were to be turned from. So the beast and the false prophet hath been taken, the mother of Harlots brought down, Babylon fallen, the Saints and the Lamb got victory, the everlasting Gospel came to be preached to them that dwel upon the earth, which is the power of God. For they that
ravened went from the Apostles, which the world went after, and worship the Beast, and all drink the whores cup, though they had the sheeps cloathing, they went from the power, so from the Gospel; so the everlasting Gospel is now preached to them that dwell on the earth. And they told us that the Hebrew, Greek, and Latine was the Original, and they them the orthodox men to open the Scripture to us. And Moses saith, all the earth was of one Language before Babel: and Nimrod the mighty hunter be∣fore the Lord which came out of Hams stock, his Kingdome was the beginning of the building of Babel, whom God did confound the many Languages, Gen. 11. And when Christ was come that Moses prophecyed of, they crucified him, and when they had crucified him, they wrote a superscription, and set it over him in letters of Greek, and Latine, and Hebrew. Now here stands the Orthodox mens originall, which hath been so long at their Schools, over Christ, over the life, over truth. And Pilate could not open the Scriptures, who had Greek, Latine, and Hebrew, which they have so long been learning at Schools, the worlds Original, but crucified him, though he had the worlds Original. Neither can they open the Scriptures with that Original, for all the people are as heaps about words of the Scripture, and they themselves are haling, and casting into prisons about meanings of Scripture, and tythes, so are not in that which opens the Scriptures, & u∣nites people together. And John saith in Rev. 17. that they must be redeemed out of Languages, & the whore sits upon them: So here is the path that the Orthodox men may walk in, be∣twixt Babel, and Babylon; and see their many Languages a-top of Christ, a-top of the life if they learn 20 years: when they did begin to build Babel, they went from the life; God confounded them in their many Languages, they went into their imaginations. And they that did build Babylon, they ravened from the spirit, and went from the Apostles, and so into confusion of Tongues and Languages, upon whom the whore sits, Revel. 17. which have been among them called Christians, all the beasts names, and horns, and crowns; and Babylon is among them which are confounded, the many lan∣guages
as at first. So that they that begun to build Babel, they went from the life; and they that begun to build Baby∣lon, went from the spirit into the many Languages, which are the Languages which is to be redeemed from; and they that set up the many languages over Christ, they was from the life, they was from the spirit. Now the life is risen which had the many languages set o∣ver it, is risen, is risen over the many Languages, over the Or∣thodox men, which have the Original bred up at Schools, which is set a-top of CHRIST the life is risen over them. Christ is risen that gives to see before Babel was, or Babylon either, or Pilate either, who set the many Languages a-top of him, which stains their pride, defaces their beauty, marres their glory that they have in their Tongues; for they have a pride in their Original, a pride in their Tongues, in their Naturals. So if men learn 30 years, 10 years, 7 years. at schools, and is a perfect Orthodox man, hath the Original, he must open the Scripture, he hath Hebrew, Greek, and Latine. Now Babel is the beginning of his Original, the many Lan∣guages, they stand a-top of Christ the life, as in Luke the 23. They must be redeemed from Languages, as in the Revelati∣ons. So now I say, as I said afore, the life is risen that fathoms Babel and Babylon, which gives to see before Pilate was, that set the many Languages over him, the life is risen over them; and so the pride, and beauty, and glory is marred and stained (which they have in their Original) with the life which they were set over, which brings to see the beginning before the world was made. They told us, that the Law and Testimony was the Old, and New Testament, meaning the books of Moses and the Prophets, and the four books of Matthew, Marke, Luke, John, the Epistles, and the Revelations; and Isaiah the 8. saith come to the Law, and to the Testimony, and that was before the four books, and the Epistles, and the Revelations was written in the days of Isaiah. And the Scripture saith, The te∣stimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophesie; And the law is light, saith Solomon, Prov. 6. Now Isaiah had the Law, and had the Testimony, for he had light, and the spirit of prophesie,
for he saw Christ and his sufferings, and said, a virgin should have a childe, call his name Imanuel, which by interpretation is God with us. Mark, God with us. Man drove from God in the first Adam, man brought to God in the second Adam. Now who comes to witnesse the interpretation, God with us. Christ in you the Imanuel, in the Male, and the Female. So the Saints words people have had, but the life that gave them forth hath been wanting: so people have not been in unity one with another, nor with God nor with Scriptures, there∣fore is God bringing his people into the life that gave forth the Scriptures; with which spirit they shall come into unity with himself, and one with another. And the Ministers of the world they have told us, that we shuld try the spirits. Now such spirits as the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles cryed against, who was in the true spirit wee cannot own. For those spirits that taught for filty lucre, love of money, were covetous, were strikers, were envious, admired mens persons because of advantage, went in Cora's Cains, and Balaams way, that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, minded earthly things, which the Apostle calls evill beasts; which Christ called hirelings, which will fly because they are hirelings, and cares not for the sheep, because the sheep are none of his. Such as beare rule by their means as preach for the fleece, that divine for the money, that teacheth for hire, that will preach peace to peo∣ple, that will put in their mouths, if not prepare war against them. These bring the people all a heaps as they did Jerusa∣lem, Mar. 3. That seek for their gain from their Quarter, that teacheth for the price, and have a price almost in every Pa∣rish. Such spirits, the spirit of the Prophets, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of the Apostles proved, and tryed, and dis∣approved, and was always contrary to those spirits, and the Apostles spirit, and Christs spirit judged them, as you may see recorded in Scripture. And the Prophet said ho every one that thirsteth come freely, without money, or without price. Mark, without a price; and them that runs with prices, doth not obey the Prophets words. And he must lift up his voyce like a trumpet, and cry aloud and spare not. And Christ saith,
who is the end of the Prophets, Freely ye have received, freely give. And the Apostle that preached Christ, he that would have bought the gift of God, and sold it for money, the A∣postle told him he was in the gall of bitternesse, in the bond of iniquity, under iniquities bond, to compare the gift of God, or value it, or equall it or measure it, or liken it to out∣ward things, perishing things, corruptible things, gold or sil∣ver. Here was the promoters of the Gospel, here was the high exalters of the gift of God. A company of dreamers, sellling and buying the Apostles words given forth from the spirit of God, how many thousand pounds a yeare doth men gain by it, it shews that they have not received the gift. If they had received the gift of God, which is perfect, they would know the worth and preciousnesse of it. But it shews that they have nothing but what they have bought at Schools, and had out of Books, and old Authors, and so sell that again by the glasse to get a lively-hood by to maintain their wives and children, and these have gone under the name to preach the Gospel. When doth their Gospel bring any to lay all their estates at their feet? And so if they cannot get their means, their stypends, their tythes; so preaching for Glebe lands, Augmentations, Easter reckonings, Midsomer dues; and if they cannot get it, if others now for conscience sake cannot give it them, they sue them at the Law, and pri∣son them, yea till death. Now are not these the Ministers of unrighteousnesse, messengers of Satan, that will sue men at the Law they do no work for, for tythes and maintenance, and prison men for tythes and maintenance, that they do no work for? So let but all ye Magistrates, let the Ministers see how they can live of the Gospel, by preaching of it, preaching the Gospel, how they can live of it, and how they can plant a vineyard; how they can work, and how they can thresh in hope, and plow in hope; and how they can get a flock that will give them milk; and how they can get out corn, they muzzle not their mouths. But the evill beasts mouth that minds earthly things, that teacheth for filthy lucre, for the love of money, and serves not the Lord Jesus Christ, but his own belly, his mouth must be stopt.
And the teachers have told us, that if they was covetous, and if they was envious and contentious, and full of strife, yet the Apostle rejoyced at such preachers, and Christ bids, heare Pharisees, and do as they said. Yea, that was a time before Christ was offered up before the Law and the Prophets was fulfilled and finished; and so they was to heare the Law and the Prophets, and do it, for then they did as they would be done by; the Pharisees said and did not as they would be done by: So when Christ was offered up, hee said it was fi∣nished. Now the Pharisees said the words of the Law and the Prophets, but did not do them; so the woe Christ pro∣nounced was to them who was hypocrites, and the word is to them that say the words of the Law and the Prophets, and do not do them. And so Christ who is the end of the Law and the Prophets, who said it was finished, said, goe preach the Gospel. Christ then did not bid them heare the Pharisees, then they went into the Temple to bring them off of the Priests, off of their offerings, off of their Covenant to the everlasting Co∣venant, everlasting Priest-hood; their bodies the Temples of God, and one offering Christ. And as for preaching of Christ of envy and strife, and contention, that was a time when few did believe in Christ. So it was a spreading of Christs name abroad; he suffered envious men, contentious men, men of strife to spread his name abroad among the Jews, and among the Gentiles, the everlasting covenant, the one offering, the blood of Jesus. That tormented the Jews that had their Priests, their Temple, their tythes and offerings, for they was in dan∣ger to be cast out of the Synagogue, that confessed the name of Christ. Now when his name was spread abroad, that man that had got the forme, but denyed the power, from such the A∣postle bids, turn away; envious men, contentious men, men of strife. So if they have the form of the Gospel, the form of the Law, the form of Christs words, and not the power, they are to be turned from. Again, the fruits of this Ministry & Church since the dayes of the Apostles, doth manifest it self in the apostacy. For if any thing be revealed to him that sits by, bid the other hold his peace: You may all speak one by one, that all may learn, and
all may be comforted. He wil bid the Magistrate take him a∣way, he troubles me, and so they take him to the stocks, or to prison, was not this Queen Maries law? and doth not this shew apostasie from the Apostle, who saith, if any thing be re∣vealed to another, let the first that sits by hold his peace; they may all prophesie one by one, that all may learn, and all may be com∣forted. And the spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets; and God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, and this was in all the Churches of Christs order, 1 Cor. 14. But this to say something is revealed to me that sits by, hold thy peace, sets all your Church into confusion, and distraction, take him away, take him away, he hath disturbed me, to stocks, to prison with him, knock him down, to the house of Correction with him. You may see how ye have quenched the spirit here, and despised prophesie, and apostatized from the Apostles doctrine. They may all prophesie one by one, saith the true Apostle, not made by the will of man. Now this is con∣fusion among all those made by Schools, in the will of man, which hath Tythes, Stypends, Augmentations, Glebe lands, Midsomer dues, Easter reckonings. Now men may teach men to read naturally, and yet are not the Ministers of Christ; for Paul could read that when he was not a Minister, but a per∣secutor. And again, they have given us Davids fastings, Davids reproaches, Davids prophecying, Davids quakings and trem∣blings, Davids prayses, and prayers to sing in a meeter, and told us which we must sing with the spirit, and with the un∣derstanding, and sing in grace. And we see neither the giver, nor the singer was in the spirit, and in the understanding; for the spirit gives to see that time, and to understand that time of praising, that time of fasting, that time of praying, that time of reproaching, that time of roaring, and quaking, and trembling; and people; it gives to understand each in its place. The Spirit doth distinguish praises from prayers, pro∣phesies, reproaches from fastings, quakings, tremblings, & peo∣ple must sing, that they were not puft in mind, & had no scorn∣full eye; when they were so puft in minde they could scarce look upon one another, and to sing in the grace, and to sing
in the spirit is owned. The grace that teacheth to deny un∣godlinesse and worldly lusts, to live godly, righteously, and sobeply in this present evill world; and the grace of God hath appeared to all men, which brings salvation, and in this grace here is singing praises to God and Halelujah, Amen Halelujah. And the truth hath been held in unrighteousnesse, while all peoples minds have bin reprobated from that of God in them; and all the people of the earth must come to that which may be known of God in them, before they come to retain God in their knowledge, retain the Covenant, Gods Covenant, or hold the truth in the righteousnesse which the sin and enmi∣ty is out of; as the Jewes held the truth in unrighteousnesse, while their minds was reprobated from that of God manifest∣ed in them, and was not like to retain God in their know∣ledge, nor his covenant of light. So have these holden the truth in unrighteousness since the days of the Apostles, which Christ said there should come inwardly raveners, John saw went forth was come, and all the world went after, and all the Nations have drunk their cup, these have holden truth in unrighteousnesse; how should they do otherwise? when their minds was inwardly ravened from the spirit that was in them, and run into names, and heads, and horns, and crowns. So holding it since the days of the Apostles in the unrighteous∣nesse, inwardly ravened from the spirit, so from the unity and bond of peace, and in that which God was worshipped; the enmity having been in every ones minde, and hath been from the life tha gave forth Scriptures, they have had the sheeps cloathing, and that hath covered the wolfe, and truth being holden in the unrighteousnesse, in the sin, in the enmity, they being ravened from the spirit; It hath not been a likely thing, nor is it, that such should own the light within them, that are ravened from it, and own the word of God within them, and Christ within, and the anointing within, when they are ravened from it; nor like to retain God in their knowledge. Therefore this is the word of the Lord God to ye all, and to the present age & generation, to that which they are all rave∣ned from, inwardly ravened from, must all people come be∣fore
they worship God in the spirit, or hold the truth in the righteousnesse; that is that which sin and evill is out of. Nei∣ther is there any likelinesse to retain God in their knowledge, untill they come to that which they ravened from, that which may be known of God manifest in them (which all the world who runs after them which breaks into heaps be from it) to hold the truth in the righteousnesse that sin, and the enmity is out of, or retain Gods covenant, the Rock, that Jesus him by whom the world was made, that which they ravened from, which Christ said should come, John saw was come, which went out into the world, which all the world run after, to which now many are come, with which they retain God in their knowledg, and know his Covenant. Now the Jews say, God is worshipped at Samaria, and at the mount where Jacobs well was, or at Jerusalem. The Priests tell us he is worshipped at the Steeple-house, the Papists hou∣ses, which the Papists set up, with the Crosse at the end of them. Christ saith, he is worshipped in the spirit, and the truth, that which the Devil is out of, and in the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures; in which is the unity and fellowship, and the bond of peace, which spirit never changes. Steeple houses may change, Samaria may change, Jerusalem may change, and these worshippers change, the spirit that gave forth the Scripture never changes, and the Truth doth never change; that which the Devill abode not in, which changes not, and who be in that, are in that which is out of, in Covenant with God, in pece with God. And the Priests told us of creeping into houses, leading silly women captive laden with sin, and divers lusts, which alwayes were learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; which the Apostle compared them to be as Jannes and Jambres, who with stood Moses when the children of Israel was to come out of Aegypt; and he saith, they was covetous, lovers of themselves, and these kept people always learning, & never able to the knowledg of the truth, laden with sins; and then that Doctrine crept in, which is now past over the world, they are such as are lovers of themselves, covetous, leading people till they be 30. 40. 50. 60. 80 years of age, and they be al∣wayes
learning never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, having a forme of godlinesse, denying the power, from such turn away. And they telling people while they be upon the earth, they must have the body of sin, then they are led away with divers lusts that feeds the body, and these are said was repro∣bate concerning the faith that gave victory, in which is the unity. So they might have said to the Apostle, doth not thou creep into a house? hast not thou taught in thy own hired house for two years together at R me? and dost not thou de∣ny the Temple which God commanded, and preach in thy own house? Yea, the Apostle was in the power, and taught the Kingdome of God to all that came to him, he was in the substance, he was in the authority. Now they that had the form, and denyed the power, denyed the authority, and these kept people alwayes learning, and never able to come to the knowledg of the truth. For the Apostle could leave his people, and go into other Nations, and tell them the light that shined in their hearts, would give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And told them the Word of God was in their hearts to obey it, and do it; and told them, the anointing was within them, and needed no man to teach them, but as that did teach them, and as it did teach them they should continue in the son of God, and the Father, 1 Joh. 2. Rom. 10. Cor. 2.4. Now that Doctrine which is crept in, is passed over the world, which keeps people alwayes learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; which are covetous, and lovers of themselves, planting themselves in Par∣sonages, Tythes, Augmentations, Medsomer dues, Easter reckonings. When did these leave their people, and tell them they need no man to teach them, but as the anoynting within tea∣cheth, and the word within, and the light within, which would give them the knowledge of the glory of God, and so have such as crept into houses led people alwayes learning, and ne∣ver able to come to the knowledge of the truth, have kept them laden with sin, and divers lusts, have kept people in spiritual Aegypt and Sodome, as the others strove to keep them in the dayes of Moses in Aegypt, the children of Israel. Now spiritual Sodome is come to light, and spiritual Ae∣gypt
is come to light, darknesse: and so they that doth deny the light that doth enlighten every man that cometh into the world, keeps people in spiritual Sodome, and spiritual Aegypt, that is filthinesse and darknesse. So they are not like ever to be able to come to the knowledge of the truth, while they are led that are reprobate from the Faith, and keeps men in spiritual Aegypt and Sodome, and none upon the Earth doth ever come to the knowledge of the truth; but who come to the light which Christ the truth hath enlightned them withal, which doth enlighten every one that cometh into the world, and every one that cometh into the world have a light from the truth, hee being turned to the light which Christ hath en∣lightned him withal, is turned to the truth Christ from whence it came, who is the way to God, the covenant of light: and here cometh every one to the knowledg of the truth, the light that shines in his heart to give him the light of the glo∣ry of God in the face of Christ Jesus. So when the false Apo∣stles, Devils ministers, Devils messengers, ministers of unrigh∣teousnesse, was got up among the Corinthians, it was the work of the true Apostles, true Ministers, true Messengers, true Ambassadors, to bring the Corinthians to the light that shined in their hearts, and told them that would give them the light of the knowledg of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. That was the work of the true Apostle, when such was got up among the Romans, that served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own b llies, to bring them to the word of Faith which was in their hearts, in their mouths, to be obe∣dient to it. And then he set up some objections and queries, How should they heare without a preacher? and how should he preach except he were sent? Then he queries again, Have they not all heard? and he answered his own query, he saith, Yes verily, the sound is gone out throughout all the world, and the words to the end of the earth, but they have not obeyed it, Rom. 10. And it was the work of the true Apostle John, when that Antichrists were come, and false prophets were come, and entered into the world, (which Christ had said to them, they should come, which should be the inward raveners, and he bid them not go after them) he brought them to the anoint∣ing
in them, and told them that would teach them; And they need not any man to teach them, but the same anointing to teach them, which abideth in them; and as it should teach them, they should abide in God the Father. From this are ye apostati∣zed Ministers, Teachers, and hearers; and the other must be accounted strange Doctrine: And these things did John write to them concerning them that seduced them. And the Mini∣sters, and Professors, and Teachers, since the days of the A∣postles, say, and have said, that the light that John bare testi∣mony of, which doth lighten every man that cometh into the world, is a natural light, or a created light, or a made light, or light of conscience; and saith, what, is drunkards enlight∣ned? and heathen enlightned? and swearers, and thieves, and murtherers enlightned? I say yes; for drunkennesse is an evill deed, add murther, and theft, &c. And they will not come to the light, but hate the light, and will not come to it be∣cause it reproves them, because their deeds be evill, and so loves the darknesse rather then the light because their deeds be evill; because it will reprove them, and will not come to it, therefore it is their condemnation. And this is the condemna∣tion that light is come into the world, and men love darknesse ra∣ther then light, because their deeds be evill. And as for hea∣then, saying, the heathen are not enlightned. I will give him for a covenant, for a light unto the Gentiles, and these are cal∣led Heathens. I will make a new Covenant with the house of Is∣rael & of Judah. And those are called the people of God, in which Covenant Jewes and Gentiles come to be one, and I say, all things that was made was made by the light; and all things that was crea∣ted was created by the light, and the light was before the name and the word Conscience was, and it is that which ex∣erciseth the conscience towards God, and towards men, the light which cometh from Christ the Author of Faith, which faith is held in a pure conscience. And as for the created light, and the made light, and na∣tural lght, he made the Sun, he made the Moon, he made the Stars, these be the made lights, created, that are na∣tural, the natural eye may see, and all those lights was
made by Christ the true light, which was before they was made, before they was created; for all things that was made was made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. So he was before any thing was made, any light was made, created, who was glorified with the Fa∣ther before the world began: Who came a light into the world, and lightneth every man that cometh into the world, that all men through him might believe. In this light men might come into the Covenant of God; and all who hates light; and be∣lieves not, are with it condemned already. So the light was before the Word, or name Conscience was; for all things was made by him before they was named, and things was made by the light before they was named, and conscience may be scared, and yet the light is the condemnation of him whose conscience is seared. And these Ministers, and Teachers, and Professors (that are got up since the dayes of the Apostles) deny perfection, overcoming of sin while they be upon the Earth, or being made clean from sin, or be cleansed, or made free from sin, so have made the offering of none effect; which by the one offer∣ing he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. And if ye walke in the light as he is in the light, then ye shall have fellowship one with another (therefore it is that people have not fellowship) and the blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all sin, so have made the blood of Jesus Christ of none ef∣fect, John 1. And he was manifested to take away sin; the second Adam (mark) to take it away. This the Apostles preached, and they say men may have it while they live upon the Earth; therefore whose Ministers are they? Ye are cir∣cumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, putting ff the body of sin (those that are made by the Colledges denies this) and the new covenant which blots out sin and transgres∣sion. I will make a new Covenant, saith the Lord God, with the house of Israel and Judah, I will blot out your sins. And we speak wisdome among them that are perfect, saith the Apostle in the Corinthians. And he ascended on high, he gave gifts unto men, for the worke of the Ministry, for the perfecting of the Saints, and the gifts of God are perfect; Some Apostles,
some Pastors, some Teachers, untill they all come to the unity of the faith (that is that which gives victory over the world, by which they have unity with God, and unity one with ano∣ther) and to the knowledge of the sonne of God, and to a perfect man, and to the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. This was the work of the Ministry, the Ministers work, the Prophets, the Pastors, the Teachers, the Apostles that had re∣ceived their gifts from him that ascended on high. Not from Schools and Colledges, as our Ministers since have, and deny perfection, Which gifts they had received, which was per∣fect, was for the Ministry, which was for the perfecting of the Saints. Mark, for the perfecting of them, untill they all come to the unity of the faith, and to the knowledge of the son of God, and to a perfect man, and to the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ. This was the Ministers work. Now all that say they are the Ministers of Christ, and deny perfection, they deny the work of the ministry of Christ, which received the gifts of God which was perfect, from him who was perfect, which gifts was for the perfecting; for e∣very gift of God is perfect; that I may impart some gift to you. Imparting the gift, he imparts that which was perfect, that was before their stablishing. Now the Apostle that declared the work of the Ministry, that was for the perfecting of the Saints, that Ministers work; he declared of other Ministers, and of other Doctrine, that tossed too and fro, is the windy doctrine and sights of men, and cunning, and craft, whereby they lay in wait to deceive, and speak not the truth in the love. So here is no perfection, here is no overcoming; here is the body of sin, here they sin while they be upon the Earth, here they must have the chaff, and their windy doctrine: Mark, windy, that carries about with their cunning, and slights, and craftinesse, which they have learned at their Schools, and Colledges: So no perfe∣ction, no establishment, but tossing too and fro; Men carry people about, therefore is people tossed up and down by so many, and tossed too and fro; here is no gift of God recei∣ved, and witnessed, and these are all made by mans will; they may tosse the chaffe with their windy doctrine, but they
cannot tosse the Wheat, the seed of God, the elect before the foundation of the world was they cannot deceive; that which the Ministers of God, which receive their gift from God, which is perfect, strikes through the chaffe, the imper∣fect to the seed of God, which inherits the promises of God, whereby people comes to be heires of God and of life, and inheriting the promises of God, and so established and perfe∣cted in every good work, and not tossed up and down with every winde, and cunning wiles and craft which they have got at Schools. And so here is the difference of each Ministry, Ephes. 4. The pearl is found, and the Field is purchased in England. The Teachers and Professors have told us of Sunday and Monday; the Scriptures never told us of Sunday, nor Mon∣day, the first day, second day, third day, fourth day, 5, 6, seventh day among the true Jews, among the true Christians. But we heare by the old Autors, and Almanacks of the Hea∣then, that worshipped the Sun, that did worship the Moon, that they call the Suns day, and do worship the Moon, and that they call the Moons day, and so after their gods, and their Planets they name them. We see they are neither like unto the Jewes, nor like unto the Christians practice. And Christ saith in Matth. 23. when he spake to the mul∣titude, and to his Disciples both, and gives the marks of the blinde guides, how the multitude should know them, and the Disciples know them; The hypocrites and blinde guides, he saith, that they love the uppermost rooms at feasts; he saith; they are sayers, and not doers; he saith, they lay heavy burthens upon the people; he said, they loved the salutations in the mar∣kets; he said, they had the chiefest seats in the assemblies; he saith, they stand praying in the Synagogues; he saith, they should put out of the Synagogues, and persecute from City to City, that all the righteous blood might come upon them, shed from righteous Abel to Zachariah. He saith, they are called of men Master; and be not ye called of men Master, for ye have all one Master even Christ, and ye are all Brethren. And now we doe not read of Mr. Paul, Mr. Peter, Mr. Timothy, Mr. Titus, Mr. Matthew, Mr. Luke, Mr. John. So wee
finde them not in the steps of the Apostles, but they are suc∣cessors of the Pharisees. If I was one of the multitude, I could tell if my guide was called of men Master, had the chie∣fest place in the Assembly, the uppermost room at Feasts, went in long roabs; and if he were a sayer, and not a doer, and layd heavy burthens upon the people, which Christ saith, be not ye so, that are called of men Master, for yee have one Master even Christ, and ye are all Brethren, and pronounced seven woes against them: So if I was one of this multitude, I could know them by these distinctions. Because that Friends have declared to the Nation, they cannot sweare, therefore doth many great men in their Courts, their Bayliffs, and many Justices make a prey up∣on them, fining of them, strayning of their goods, because they cannot take an Oath, and thus are they glad when men can make spoil. And likewise Priests which knoweth friends, and the Impropriators knoweth that Friends cannot pay Tythes, therefore do they never heed them, as knowing the Law will give them treble damages; so they come and take five times the value, that untill they have taken the Cattel, and goods, and bedding, platters, pots away from people, that they have not had a Cow to give them milke, nor a pot to dresse them meat, nor a bed to lye on. And so they ne∣ver matter for taking their Tythes, so long as they have the Law to give them treble, and then they can make havock, and spoile their goods, and then boast, and say the Law hath given it them. And if this be the life of a Christian, it is a grievous one. While the Priests and Professors are crying against Popery in words, and they themselves have the Papists Crosses up∣on that which they call their Church ends, and have Papists names to them, and Papists names to their Colledges, and have their Midsomer dues, and their Easter reckonings, and their offerings, and their Popish names to their Dayes, yea, upon their very childrens Battle doors as they learn, there is a Christ-crosse (as they call it.) Now whilst the Priests, and Professors, and Teachers, cry against Popery in words, and have all these things in practice among them, the Pa∣pists
in the meane time laugh at them. And they are talking of taking of the Oath of Abjuration, and swearing against popery, and in the mean time are gravel'd in it, stick fast in it. When did a Priest or Professor take the oath of Abjurati∣on, that was made a Minister at St. Johns Colledge, or Christs Colledge, or Jesus Colledge, or Imanuel Colledg, or Trinity Colledg, or of St. Peters Steeple-house, or St. Maries, or St. Andrews, or St. Johns, or St. Philips, or St. Pauls, or St. Michaels, or Saint Lawrence, &c. and have other Steeple houses with Crosses at the end of them, and have Easter reckonings, Midsomer dues, and offerings, and tythes, and their Steeple-houses stand East and West built in imitation, and calling their days by Saints names, as Saint Thomas day, Saint Peters day, Saint Matthews day, Saint Johns day, &c. Popish names. When did these Priests take the oath of Abjuration, or Professors, and deny Popery in the life. Now while they are making a pudder, and a stirre of denying Popery, and live in the steps of Popery, the Papists laugh at them. And their putting their oath of Abjuration to such as cannot swear, but are in Christs commands, and are come out of the Apostacy and Popery. Where do you read of the Apostles; or but since the days of the Apostles in the apostacy, call the dayes by the name of Christmas, where do you read of Christmasse, and Candle∣masse; where do you read of Candlemasse day, or where do you read of Michaelmasse day: Mark, Masse, or Lammass, or Saint Jammass, or Martin masse, Mark-masse. Now how are ye out of Popery, when Masse is mentioned so up in every word of your dayes. So now is not all this up since the Apo∣stles time in the Apostacy? and hath not the Pope given the names of these dayes? Now if ye deny Popery, deny the Popes authority, and the Popes teaching, and for him to give names to these days, and away with this Masse. Now to make a prey upon them as Papists, because we know they cannot sweare, nor take an oath, and because they deny the Steeple-house the Papist house, and will not
come at it, and deny Tythes, whose beginning of was the Pope. And so because ye will not sweare, and break Christs commands, who saith, sweare not at all; therefore will you put them in as Papists, whereby you may spoile their goods, make havock of their goods, render their names odious a∣mong the Ignorant; but thus to the whole Nation you will render your selves ridiculous, and a known act contrary to that of God in your consciences, in causing your Constables to put in the names of such as Papists, as you know are not Papists, nor popishly affected, nor your Constables neither. And so some simple, and wicked people, that are Constables, may revenge themselves, and revenge your envy upon the in∣nocent, and glad they can have such an opportunity. Though the Protector said that the oath of Abjuration was never intended for Quakers, but only for Papists and popish∣ly affected; this spoke he to Colonel Benson, and Anthony Pearson, who gave him an answer from the Quakers to the Oath of Abjuration, who deny all Popery; who told him that seeing an Oath of Abjuration was given forth into the Nation to be taken, for Papists to take it. There is many corrupt Justices, as knowing friends could not swear, and not take an oath, they would make a prize upon them, and a prey upon them by it, and be glad they had such an oppor∣tunity to make spoil, or to make sport upon the innocent. Saith Oliver Cromwel the Protector, it was never intended to the Quakers, he never intended it. So some Justices must ren∣der their names odious to the honesthearted, by making a prey upon the simple and innocent, that their loftinesse might ap∣pear, and not their sincerity and singlenesse in doing the thing to what it doth intend. For it is known to the whole Nation, that the Quakers cannot take an oath; if they take all the goods they have from them, they dare not break Christs commands, who saith, Swear not at all. It is not a popish oath that they stand against onely, but all oaths what∣soever is called an oath: For they that swear do fall into con∣demnation, saith the Apostle James. And as saith Christ, Swear not at all.
Now dissembling hypocrites can swear and for-swear; but true Christians cannot swear, that abide in Christs Doctrine; and they make a prey upon them that cannot swear, and can∣not take an oath, but are come to yea, and nay, in their com∣munication. Therefore all ye Justices take heed of rendering your names odious among sober people, by making a prey upon the In∣nocent, by forcing any to swear against the Innocent, and making a prey upon them as ye know cannot swear as Papists, because thereby ye have an advantage to spoil their goods, and make a prey upon them because they cannot take no oath. Now it is so, that yee may proffer them any oath be∣sides the oath of Abjuration, but they cannot take it; for Christ saith, swear not at all. Now if you say the Prophets swore, or Moses swore, or Abraham, or Jacob, or Joseph, or David swore; or Samuel, or Moses. Christ is the end of Moses and the Prophets, and before Abraham was; the end of the Priests, which raigns over the house of Jacob, and Joseph, who saith, sweare not at all, Matth. 5. Now if you say men of strife swear; who be in strife, are out of yea and nay; and out of Christs Doctrine. Now if you say the Angel swore in the Revelations, behold I bring forth my first begotten into the world, let all the An∣gels worship him; Christ Jesus who ends strife, and sets peace betwixt man and God, Gods Covenant. So make not a prey upon the Innocent, but deliver the Innocent out of the snare, that God requires of you that is your duty that be faithfull Magistrates: and break the bond of iniquity, ease the oppres∣sed, break the jaws of the wicked, that tears and rents the In∣nocent in pieces; then ye are Judges like Job, like Moses, like Solomon; who saith, afore honour goes humility. Now because they say thee, and thou to you, and cannot doffe their hats to you, and come to your Popish house, and cannot swear, which is known throughout the Nation, and Ireland and Scotland; that those that are in scorn called Qua∣kers dare not sweare, and take an oath, and the Islands a∣bout it. Therefore will you make a prey upon them? cause
them to be summoned to Courts; which ye know cannot swear, and to have all people here laugh at you secretly, and see it is out of spight and malice, and that ye act contrary to that ye know against your own knowledge, and conscience: and is that justice, or is it spleen and wilfulnesse? But it is not estates, that friends looks at, nor at them that you suffer to spoil their goods. For when they could not swear to their Tythes, the Priests would spoile their goods; and now be∣cause they cannot take an oath, will ye come to make havock of them. Render not your names ridiculous? bring not your names to evill report in the Nation, but do that which is savoury, and of good report. And because friends will not hold up a company of Priests made at popish houses at the popish Col∣ledges, and are held up at the popish houses, and have tythes, whose ground of it was popish; therefore these things lye weighty upon you; though now ye be high, yet to the wit∣nesse in you all I speak, the light which will be your condem∣nation if you hate it, who can transgresse Christs commands, and the Apostles commands so easily; and make havock of them that cannot transgresse Christs command, and number them among swearers, among Papists, that can sweare: For ye know that they cannot swear. And so ye put no difference between the precious and the vile, and such as the Law was not made for; and so in this is putting no difference betwixt the precious and the vile, the Law was made for, and the Law was not made for; between the lawlesse, and the righte∣ous; ye turn your sword backward upon the righteous, and act as blinde men, which all along in the Scriptures are cryed against: For the law was not made for the righteous, but for sinners, and transgressors. So ye goe and tye your Law upon them that cannot swear, nor take an oath, and make a prey upon them, and number them with Papists that ye know can swear, which the witnesse of God in all consciences will cry against, and not blesse ye and God will help the innocent, and deliver them from the net of the fowlers, who is a present help in time of need, and can deliver them out of the jawes of
the wicked, such as can transgresse his commands, though now they may boast-like proud Pharaoh, and Nebuchadnez∣zar, and say, who can deliver them out of my hand? who is God? or who is Christ? who saith, swear not at all. When he gives you a reward according to your works, ye shall know the wrath of the Lamb, and the judgements of God to be right and just, who had time to do good, and did it not, who might have broken off the bonds of iniquity, and shew∣ed mercy. G. F. How can you expect that the Saints should come to the Steeple-house which you call your Church? And how can they take the Oath of Abjuration, and deny all Popery, and the popish house? For the Papists themselves would go to that house if they had authority, and be glad they might meet there, for you may see that the popish Crosse stands upon the end of it in many places. And now do ye suspect friends to be Papists, because they will not come to the Popish house. Nay deny them to be any Ministers, or hearing of them, that were made at popish houses. And suspect friends to be Papists because they will not swear, and take an oath, and ye know Papists will sweare for their own ends: and if friends would minde their own ends, they might sweare for their own ends. But who abides in the doctrine of Christ denies himself and oaths both, and all the Popes authority. There was not a crosse set upon the Steeple-house end, but in the Popes au∣thority; had not they the names given unto them by the Popes authority? Nay, had not they the names given to the Colledges by the Popes authority? and had ye not yout names given to your dayes by the Popes authority; as your Christ∣mas, and Candlemas, and Michaelmas, and Martinmas, and Saint Johns day, and Saint Peters day, &c. Now how can ye deny Popery, when all this was set up by the Popes authority? And how can you now have any desire to have any to goe to Steeple-houses with crosses at the end of them;
and some of them have been thrown down by this age. And Christ saith, they that worship God must worship him in spirit, not at Jerusalem, nor at Samaria; so we say not at the hou∣ses which the Papists have set up, but he is worshipped in spi∣rit, and in truth, in that that gave forth the Scriptures, and in the truth the Devil is out of. G. F. Friends, take heed of setting up that which God will throw down, lest yee be found fighters against God. And take heed of setting up Ministers made by the will of man; for such goe in their own names, and such man will receive, but such could never owne them that came in the name of God, by the will of God, by them that stood in their owne wills; For such as be in their own wills, made by the will of man, such are they that be in strife with their Parishes, for tythes and maintenance up and downe the Nations, and in most of the Courts of the Nation, are the Priests summoning up the people with Writs, haling them before Courts and Benches, and Sessions for maintenance, such as they do no work for. Now this gives an ill savour up and down the Nations, and shewes that their Ministry is not as the Apostles was that hath not the effect with it, and the operation, but is apo∣stated from it; for Christ said, freely ye have received, freely give againe to the people. And you see, they sold their possessi∣ons, and came and laid it downe at the Apostles feet. These were the Ministers of Christ, in the power of Christ, to whom the hearts of the people are opened. Now these that are made by the will of man, since the dayes of the Apostles, and hath not received freely, not cannot give freely again, but are fair to petition you, and summon many of their Parishes, such as be not their hearers up to Courts, an hundred, or two hundred miles, for main∣tenance, such as they do no work for, and hath not hired them. These are a disgrace to the Truth, and dishonour to the Gospel, that such should be the Ministers of it.
Now if you be such as propagate the Gospel, and owne the Gospel, which Gospel is the power of God, and free Gospel. Now that ye may tollerate the preaching of that, and then as for the maintenance and meanes of Ministers, leave that to the people, and see if the preaching of that will so open the hearts of people as to lay down their possessions at the feet of Ministers, and so let a man plant a Vineyard before he eate of the fruit of it; let him get a Flock before he eate of the milke, so thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Oxe that treadeth out the corne, that treadeth out the wheat, then the Oxe may eate, and they that preach the Gospel, may live of the Gospel. Now establishing of maintenance for Ministers, and giving them a set maintenance, and they taking it by compulsion, by an outward law, this is never likely to open the hearts of people, nor ever likely for men to plant a vineyard, nor get a Flock, not ever likely to bring men to live of the Gos∣pel, when they have a set maintenance set them. For the Jewes Priests that had Temples, Synagogues, they had tythes: The Priest-hood that was made by a Law, he had a commandement to take tythes of the people. Now the Law being changed, and the Priest-hood being changed also, and the commandement disannulled that gave them tythes, as Hebrews 7. So Christ sent forth his, that as they had recei∣ved freely, freely they were to give; and when meate was set before them, they might eate. He sent them forth as sheep amongst wolves, and you see many were moved to lay downe at their feet. And the Apostle said, he had the pow∣er to eate and to drink, but he had not used his power to the Corinthians, that he might keep the Gospel without charge: So since the forme of godlinesse, men have ravened from the Spirit, and the form of godlinesse they have had amongst them; but the power being denyed and not in it, therefore that is denyed that they should open the hearts of the peo∣ple, and is wanting, and they have ravened from the Spirit, and the sheeps cloathing they have had, that hath covered the wolfe.
Some have been almost stoned to death, laid for dead sor rebuking sinne in the Gates and Steeple-houses, knocked downe and bruised, blood shed; some beare in Markets and High-wayes, who never lifted up a hand against any. Some prisoned to death for speaking to the Priests as they have been moved of the Lord; many prisoned because they cannot pay tythes, and have their goods distrained, and houshold goods and Cattell taken and driven away, pans and beds, and Plow gear carried away, because rhey can∣not pay the Priest tythes; and are cast into prison, and pri∣soned till death; yet Priests, and Professors, and many cor∣rupt Magistrates, without the feare of God will say they are Papists, and cast them into prison, and ready to burn: and they that brand us with that name of Papists, they cast into prison till death, and the Papists they cast into prison till death for denying their worship, their Priests, their Cros∣ses, their Images, as witnesse the innocent man George Baily, who was moved of the LORD to goe into France, who was cast into prison at Paris, and there kept till he dy∣ed, there prisoned till death, whose innocent and righte∣ous blood lies upon that nation, upon the heads of all Pa∣pists, and upon them that hath branded us with the names of Papists. They were not content in France the Papists, till they had prisoned to death, and tasted of the blood of the righteous and innocent; and they the Papists in France would have burnt Christopher Birket; but the Judges fell out one amongst another, and this is the mad generation of men, whose madnesse never appeared so in any age. God hath a glorious seed to rise, the sprinkling of it is gathering, and with the life shall God be known, and into the life is he bringing his people the Saints neer, in that he gave forth the Scriptures, and selfish principled men that hath made a trade of them, and professed them for their owne ends, shall be ashamed and confounded, and their rage, and madnesse, and folly shall appeare unto all men,
that they be in another spirit then they were in, who gave forth the Scriptures, whose words they professe; and co∣ver their wolfish spirits, who are ravened from the Spirit, and hath had the forme of godlinesse, and the Earth hath been like a wildernesse, while the mindes of Gods people have bin from the Spirit of God in them, but now to the Spi∣rit of God in people is the Lord turning them, that with it shall they know him, in which he will be worshipped, in which people shall have unity with him, and with the Scrip∣tures, and one with another, and know the Scriptures, and know one another in the Spirit, and know God the Father of spirits and come to live in love and unity and peace one with another; and of all the worlds Teachers and Churches, will the Lord God bring his people to teach them himselfe to the Church in God, Christ Jesus the way to the Father; for such as have made a trade of the Scriptures made by the will of man, and preached for their selfe-ends, are them that ravened from the spirit, and erred from it, and ad∣mire mens persons because of advantage, hath kept people from the spirit, and so they are grown like a wildernesse; so by that meanes come they neither Priest nor people to know God, taught by mans will, made Ministers by mans will, which is all judged by them made by the will of God, which answers that of God in Ministers and people, which they must come to if ever they own God. The mighty day of the Lord is come; Christ Jesus is come to reigne, the Lamb of God, who doth enlighten every one that cometh into the world: Every one having a light from him, being turned to the light, yee are turned to Christ, with which light you come to see Christ, all loving it; with which light ye will all come to see your Saviour; but hating it, it is your condemnation.
And now oh Protector! who hast tasted of the power of God, which many generations before thee hath not hardly so much since the days of a∣postacy from the Apostles, therefore take heed that thou lose not thy power; But keep Kingship off thy head which the world would give to thee, and earthly crowns under thy feet, lest with that thou cover thy self, and so lose the power of God. When the children of Israel went from that of God in them, they would have Kings as other na∣tions had, as transgressors had, and so God gave them one, and what did they do then? And vvhen they would have taken Christ and made him a King, he hid himself from them; he was hid from that which would have made him a King, he who was the king of the Jewes inward, who hath the praise of God, to that he was known, but hid from the Iew outward, whose praise is of men: And ye powers of the earth, take heed of making earthly Kings, or looking after earthly Kings, lest ye hurt and undo your selves and others, but minde the witness of God in you, that you may see that wch the children of Israel went from, when they set up Kings as other Nations, & that mind that in them would have made Christ a King, and did not know that he was a king, therefore mind the wit∣ness of God in you, that you may see over all the Kings upon earth, and may answer that which is transgressed in every one: Ye heathen that sets up Kings, and knows not the Lord the King, the Law-giver and Judge, and knows not Christ the King, therefore minde that that will let you see
out of transgression, and let you see another King, Law-giver, and Judg, with that you may answer that of God in every one, and then you wil feel God wil be a blessing to you. And oh Oliver! take heed of undoing thy selfe, by running into things that will fade, the things of this world that will change. From a lover of your soules, and the eternall good and establishing of righteousnesse, truth and justice, and a lover of mercy, truth, equity, justice, true measure, true weight: And be faithfull to the Lord God in your places, that to other Nations round about you may be patterns and examples: and then to all your enemies you will be a terrour, & joy to the good. Be subject and obedient to the Lord God. Geo: Fox. Read this through, and you may see what hath a∣postated since the days of the Apostles. THE END.
