F42A 45578371 172295
Courteous Reader, If these Arguments are so weak and frivolous, that you judg it not worth laying out so small a matter of Money, notwithstanding you are wellcome to read it gratis; only desired not to daub it, in order to return it in an hour.
A NEW LETTER, TO ALL Drunkards, Whoremongers, Thieves, Disobedience to Parents, Swea∣rers, Lyers, &c. Containing a Serious and Earnest EXHORTATION, THAT They would forsake their Evil Ways. SHEWING ALSO, How many Inconveniences the Practice of these Vices brings upon them, as impairation of good Name, destruction of Health, ruin in Estate, making themselves worse than Beasts, rendring then seven Clowns and Fools, and edious to God and all good Men, bringing themselves to untimely Ends, and ma∣ny more Inconveniences; but, what is worst of all ruin both of Soul and Body in the World to come unless repented of. To which is added, Some Rules how to lay the Founda∣tion of Repentance aright, and how, by the Grace of God, to perfect the same. With Exhortations to put all in Practice. By J. F. Licens'd, April 15. 1695. D. Poplar. And Entred according to Order. London, Printed by J. Bradford, 1696.
To all Drunkards, Disobedient to Parents, Whoremongers, Thieves, Swearers, Lyers, &c. THE Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, dear∣ly beloved Son of God, who was mani∣fest in the flesh, and who suffered such olorous pangs upon the Cross, on purpose that inners might find remission through his Blood; hat Grace and Mercy light upon you abundantly, nd reclaim you from all such sins, and from every evil way. My Brethren, what pity it is? nay further, what  shame it is? That men who profess so holy a Re∣ligion, should live such monstrous wicked lives? You who profess the best of Religions, do pro∣nce the worst of lives, and render your selves orse than Men of the worst Profession. But this is not all. For, In many things you render your selves more ile than the vilest of Beasts. And now I earnestly exhort you, that you ould diligently and reverently hear, what God himself says unto you out of his Word, hich is his revealed Will unto us. Why it says plainly, You shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Look into 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. and there you will find hat terrible Word directly pointing you out, and hich (if your Hearts were not as the Adamant
stone) should strike you into horrible Amazemen For thus it says, ver. 9. Know ye not that the un∣righteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?  not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Idolater  not Adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of them∣selves with mankind. Ver. 10. Nor Thieves, nor Covetous, n Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, sh inherit the Kingdom of God. Again, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. Ver. 19. Now the works of the flesh are manife which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Ʋnclea∣ness, Lasciviousness. Ver. 20. Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Varian Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Sedition, Heresies. Ver. 21. Envying, Murders, Drunkenness, ∣velling, and such like; of which I tell you before,  have told you in times past, that they that do  things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Where I pray you seriously consider what is sai And first of all, the Apostle expostulates w them thus, Know ye not? And what is it he inquires if they knew not? why it is, That The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of Go Form whence I do infer. That they were not ignorant, that the c∣miting such sins (unless repented of) was d∣nation, by his wriing to them, Know ye and as it were in an angry Tone too. And now I beseech you bear with me, alth apply it nearer, and I pray God for his So
s Christ's sake, that what I am now writing  you, may have its desired effect. And to the end it may, I pray you seriously to consider and examine ur selves, as though you were to appear be∣re God this very moment, even before you uld have time to read two lines, these four lowing particulars: First, Whether of these Mens case be not your case? ether you can safely and confidently tell God, (if you e to breath no more till you were to appear before ) that you did not know that the unrighteous shall  inherit the Kingdom of Heaven? I doubt not:  take it for granted, that most of you know it well gh, only I rather believe, that your Hearts are d in sin, and so you do not consider it. Secondly, Consider whether or no in your own Judg∣t, that that servant that knows his Lords will, and  not do it, doth not deserve to be beat with many es? Thirdly, Consider if you were now at the Tribunal od, if you could alledge any thing in excuse for  sins, that may in any probability bring you off; dering also, that you were not ignorant that you  not to have done them? Fourthly, Consider whether you are able to bear Wrath that shall be poured out on you for these s? the next place, the Apostle exhorts them to be mistaken, saying, Be not deceived, & then vely affirms, that neither Fornicators nor Ido∣, nor Adulterers, &c. shall inherit the Kingdom
Oh that the serious consideration of these things ight make you walk circumspectly! Oh that I could tell what to write to make you leave off these things! that I could terrifie you, to rather, that I could win you by love from the; and that I may, I will write something concerning each sin in particular; and I earnestly beg your dili∣gent attention to my Advice, though a poor weak frail Creature. And first concerning Drunkenness. I beseech you so many as are addicted to this Vice, consider, that you render your selves Beasts, so far are you from being Men, but much more Christians. A Man differs from a Beast, in that he is endu∣ed with Reason; but when that is depraved with Drink, pray what is he then? Secondly, You are worse than Beasts; a Beast may rise in Judgment against you and condemn you, for an Ox or Ass, turn him to ever so much Meat or Drink, and he shall not Eat or Drink to any intemperance: now you that are indued with Reason how will you answer that? Thirdly, you become a Fool and a laughing Stock; for how many, (even his own company too) deride a Man in Drink. And here I will take occasion to reprove all those, of what degree soever, that delight t make Men Drunk, and care not what trouble the are at, or what money they spend, so they do bu do it: This is the very Picture of the Devil. Is it not sufficient, that you have your own si
to answer for, but that you must draw upon you other Mens also? I pray God you get well off of your own. I pray refrain from such impiety. How much better were it to give that mony to the Poor, & so lay up for your selves Treasure in Hea∣ven, than thus to purchase a Place with it in Hell? Fourthly, You bring your selves into disgrace; for unless it be your own mad Crew, no body else esteems you. A Drunkard is a Clown, and his practice is rude and ill bread, not agreeable to that good Manners that is used in Conversation. For if a drunken Man were to go make a Visit with Company, would not his Company be ashamed of him? Yes they would, though per∣haps they could not in Civility get rid of him: Or if a Man were at a Feast, or at a publick Assembly either of Church or State, and were Drunk; is this good Manners? Why then as I said before,  Drunkard is a rude, ill-bred Clown. Fifthly, You bring Sickness on your selves; How many hereby have destroyed their Healths! Those good Creatures which we ought to receive ith thanksgiving, are basely abused to the dis∣honour of God, and the destruction of our selves. Sixthly, You ruin your Estates, what it may e your Parents have painfully got; and in get∣ng it too, may be, have done many good orks; you use it to bear your Charges on the ay to Hell, and it may be use great endeavours, at it may last to your Journeys end, Men that rhaps are void of the grace of God, yet com∣on Frugality teaches them others things.
Seventhly, That which is worst of all, You destroy y Souls; for be not deceived, you shall not inherit the Kingd of God. For nothing that doth not bear his image sh come there, and I am sure, to be Drunk doth not. It is  ugly deformed Image, the very Image of the Devil. A Pa∣ter cannot assume a better humane shaps for the Devil th these two, to wit, a drunken Man, and a malicious furi Man. A Whoremonger, or any thing else, will not make h so bad a Picture; besides it is an in-let to many other sins. I pray God incline you to leave it. And now a word or two to all disobedient to Parents. Though I am very brief, pray give never the less heed it; but rather it being short, you may with more ease ∣member it, and put it into practice. You find it commanded not only from God by Men, whi is Authority enough for it, but by his own mouth in the Mou saying, Exod. 20.12. Honour thy Father and Mother, th thy days be long in the Land, the Lord thy God giveth thee. In these words, Honour thy Father and thy Mother, th Duty is positively commanded; and for thy encouragemen Length of Days is promised thee; and no doubt but all pro∣sperity shall attend thee, But on the other hand, it is as positive in God's Word th shalt be miserably cursed; for it says, Cursed be he that despis his Father and Mother; wherefore look to it, for God's Wor is as certainly true as himself is true, who is Truth it self. And now concerning Fornication and Uncleanness, which ought not to be named, much more practised among Christi∣ans. Your Bodies ought to be the Temple of the Holy Ghost and not joyned to an Harlot. If it were well considered, it were enough to consider the weight of that punishment God sends for this sin. To perticu∣larize in any of those numerous and dolorous tortures, would hardly be modest If a Man were to apply himself to one who hath endured it, he may no doubt, receive so good an Exhor∣tation, as not to engage therein, except he hap to light on a very Monster in Impudence and Villany. But a further inconveniency is, it blasts the Reputation, so tender whereof are many, that they would willingly suffer much more so they could but conceal it.
d oh that all Men, would have such that act this, and her Debauchery, in much more derision, that they might ss incouraged to act it. Paul advises, 1 Cor. 5.11. Not to keep Company with an one, no, not to Eat. nd how in the next Chapter doth he argue and exhort from  Cor 6.15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. where he says, ver. 15.  ye not that your Bodies are Members of Christ? I doubt ut many flatter your selves ye are Members of Christ, h cannot be: He then proceeds, Shall I then take the Mem∣ of Christ, and make them the Members of a Harlot? God d. Here you may see, to do it is a horrible wickedness; t cuts you off from being united to Christ. Then it follows ver. 16. What, know ye not that he that is join  a Harlot, is one Body? For two saith he, shall be one flesh. Ver. 17. But he that is joined to the Lord, is one Spirit Then ver. 18. he exhorts, saying, Flee Fornication; and  for many reasons; which follow to the end of the Chap∣ which ought to be great Motives to you: The first of ich is, Every sin that a Man doth is without the Body;  he that commits Fornication, sins against his own Body. Ver. 19. What, know ye not that your Body is the Temple the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and are not your own? Ver. 20. For ye are bought with a Price, therefore glorifie d in your-Body, and your Spirit, which are God's Consider what little has been said; I might have been ger, as to set down, that sin also destroys your Estate, d more Inconveniencies; but I study to be Brief, and the ord incline you to learn to poiess your Bodies in Sanctifica∣on and Honour, not as the Heathen which know not God, t as Christians: And as you profess that holy Name, so I seech you walk worthy of that holy Calling, free from spot nd defilement here, that you may be made meet to enter nto that pure and undefiled place hereafter, into which o unclean thing shall enter. Come I now to Swearers, that belch out and dart up Oaths gainst Heaven; but in effect, pull down a Curse upon hemselves from Heaven. It is madness and folly; For,
It is disgraceful and ill-manners, as I said before of a Drunkard, so I may say of this too, were you at a Visit, and there Swear, and Curse, and Ban, in common Discourse, (if they were sober People) would they not think you to be mad and ill-bred? Or an Assembly, or in any other Com∣pany that loves Sobriety, is it not despisable? But in conver∣sing with your own Hellish Crew, nothing is more glorious; a goodly glorying indeed! or which ought rather to be your shame. It is most unaccountable also. For, A Whoremonger may alledge, he was drawn away by De∣light, (though when he has done, it will not excuse him) but the Swearer, what can he say? The Drunkard may say, the Delight of Taste entic'd him and prevail'd: the World∣ing may say, the Desire of Riches overcame him: the am∣bitious Man may alledge, the golden Bait of Honour: But the Swearer can plead no excuse. He does it, because he will be like the Devil. He must not expect Mercy at the Bar of God, nor indeed so much as crave it, but go to Hell directly from thence. For if these Men fall short of Mercy there, how much more shall he? Furthermore, it is monstrous wicked: It is the very Language of Hell: Hell abounds with it: It is full of Cursings and Execrations for very Torture and Pain: those that delight in it here, shall have enough of it hereafter: there is no praising God, bur blaspheming there. The Tongue was made to praise God. To celebrate and shew forth God's great Wisdom in his Works, in so wisely contriving and making them: and when made, so wisely ordering and disposing them, and not to Blaspheme and Dishonour him. Secondly, The Tongue was made to Praise God for his great and Almighty Power after they were so wisely contri∣ved and ordered, that it was able so powerfully to make and sustain them. But above all, abundantly, we ought to Praise God for his goodness and mercy. God's goodness to us, claims a double Portion of Praise: His goodness in so plentifully seeding both Man and Beast. But above all, abundantly, his goodness in the Redemption of the World
means of Grace, and hope of Glory we have in him, and through him, of which the Swearer shall never taste, unless he leave that practice. If foolish Jesting (which is not altogether so illegal) be not convenient, but rather giving Thanks: how inconve∣nient is Swearing? Here is abundant matter of Praise, but no obligation to Blaspheme so Wise, so Powerful, but aove all, so good a God. I verily believe, that if God in the Creation had given to the Beast the use of the Tongue, that they would not so use it and abuse it. And now with respect to Thieves: Those that ar so monstrously wicked, as to become High∣way-men, House-breakers, Pick-pockets, &c. I rather pray for them, than offer them any Exhortation: for it is much if it be not in vain. Oh! that God by his holy Spirit infused into them would turn their Hearts from Darkness to Light, and from this power of Satan to God; that those that are now hurtful and injurious to their Neighbours, not only in their Goods, but many times in their Lives, might see the Error of their Ways, and now become sociable Creatures; and learn to do to all Men as they would they should do to them. That it would please God for the sake of Jesus Christ, to reclaim them from their Lust, the satisfying whereof induces them to act such Injustices and Cruelties, that he that hath stole, may steal no more, but rather live honestly, that they may have something to give them that need, and so escape the Justice of Man, that in this World brings imparation of Name, and untimely End; and the Justice of God in the other World, that will bring Eternal Destruction both of Body and Soul. Oh that they would hereunto say Amen, and do accord∣ingly And as to others that are not openly professed Thieves, but private ones, such as Servants that wrong their Masters, and the like, perhaps a word of Advice may reach them; and I hope it may. Be advised and refrain: For You are in the Devil's Road, he never brought any to that height of Impiety they are at, at once; but by degrees: It
is an old saying, and very true, first begin to steal a Penny, then afterwards a Pound. Should he tempt them to com∣mit the greatest Crimes, before they were fitted for it first by the smaller, I believe many would resist, & not perform them. Also I believe you would think it hard if God should send you such purloining Servants; which if he does, he is very Just in it. Neither let the thoughts of privacy encourage you to it many of you, it may be, for all the World would not be known; let these Considerations move you who stand upon your Re∣putation, to forbear. First, Though you think you are private, how do you know you are not mistaken, the smallest Chink, or one unad∣vised word you have let drop and have forgot, or an hundred things more may discover you, and then perhaps for a small trifle, you fall into that disgrace with your Parents or Friends, that your whole Fortune is ruin'd. Secondly, I believe the Devil is most apt to discover those that stand most on Reputation, that so through shame they may make away themselves, or commit other wickedness. But above all, forbear out of a due sense of the Wrath of God against you, both in this Life and the World to come; for though you escape the Eye of Man, you cannot escape his All-seeing Eye; and be not deceived, for Thieves among o∣ther sinners, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Lastly, To all Murderers, Lyars, and all that are addicted to Envy, Hatred, Strife, Covetousness, or the like; for I must be large: Therefore I will conclude with a Word of Exhortation to all in general. You ought all of you to put away these sins, and be sorry for the same; and I speak it for your comfort, God will free∣ly forgive you, though your sins are as Scarlet, he will make them whiter than Snow, through the most precious Blood of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. And be renewed in your Minds, resolving never to do the like again; for to be sorry for Sin only, is but the one half of Repentance. Now this being a Work that some may not understand to go about rightly, and so after some finall endeavours in a wrong way, some may let it fall again, I will give you some small direction therefore that you may go through with it; and
Therefore, First, Descend down into you self, seriously re∣flect upon your course of Life, and examine it by the Law and Word of God, if it be not the High-way to Hell, if you do not Repent. Labour I say, first to see your sins; for if you do not see them, it will be but to little purpose. This is the first Step, and a good Step Secondly, From the consideration of the displeasure of God against it: Labour to be sorry for it, you may find matter e∣nough of Sorrow too, if you diligently search God's Word for it. Thirdly, Confess your Sins to God, though he knew them well enough; and be as particular in your Confession as you can: It is of great use and benefit. Fourthly, So much of it as hath been against Men, make what satisfaction for it you can. These two last will give you great Ease of Mind, and Peace of Conscience. Fifthly, Forgive freely all Injuries others have done unto you; and be in perfect Love and Charity with all Men: For if you forgive not Men their Trespasses, how can you expect God should forgive you? Sixthly, Resolve by the Grace of God never to do the same again, without which all the former is not worth one Farhting, being but half Repentance. Having brought your self thus far, now you are prepared for the pardon of your sins: To get which, observe my fur∣ther direction. Seventhly, Approach to the Lords Table; for in this State you are throughly fitted for it, and there receive the Body and Blood of our dear Lord and Redeemer, though under the Ele∣ments of Bread and Wine; and receiving it thus fixed, you shall with it most assuredly receive a free Pardon for all your sins, for his most precious Blood sake, and be at perfect Peace of Conscience▪ and have great Joy in the Holy Ghost. Now are you a Christian indeed, & never till now; any thing less than this does but barely bear the name of a Christian. By partaking of this blessed Sacrament thus, you shall be united unto Christ, Christ shall dwell in you, and you in hm; it entitles you to be a Son of God, a Member of Christ, and to an Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven. Stop not here neither, but make a thorow work of it; And therefore, In the eight place, Receive this free Grace and Mercy and  and being thus washed
from sin being thus ad to sin, rise to Righteousness an Holiness put those Holy Resolutions you had before you com∣rated, into practice, you ought now to produce good Wor as meritorious, that so you may have Reward, but out of a of Love and Gratitude to God, that hath so freely pardone for his Son Jesus Christ his sake. Let good Works; I say, from you as a Stream of Love to God again, for his abu love shewn to you. Ninthly, Daily pray for Grace to stand and persev this Estate, and continue in Love and Charity with all Be Charitable to the Poor, freely forgive all Injuries,  no body any, and assure your selves, if you sincerely des he will give it, you, though he may deny you temporal t because of his infinite Wisdom he may not see it good fo but Grace he will never deny you, if really desired. Tenthly, As when all is done, we are still subject to ∣ty, and may sin through the same, though not as before w and wickedly, therefore renew your Repentance and P so often as the Blessed Sacrament shall be administred; a∣ter the same, strive to keep your selves for the time to con to persevere unto your Lives end; and at your Lives en shall not fail to receive the Crown of Life that s laid  all those that sinceely love the Lord Jesus Christ, and a∣ient to him; you shall not miss of Salvation by his mo∣cious Blood: To which Salvation, the Lord grant that y all come for his Son Jesus Christ his sake: To whom with ∣ther and the Holy Ghost, be all Honour and Glory for eve And now, my Brethren, is not such a State as this than to be Drunk, to Whore, to Steal, to Swear, &c And so to Roar and Cry to all Eternity with the da there to dwell in Everlasting Pain and Torment, pr for you, and the Devil and his Angels. Consider what hath been said, and the Lord add his sing to it; where I conclude, having been briefer t thought to have been; because I should ele have out Sheet of Paper. I do design further to excite you a∣thers, (that it may be, may not be so debauch) to the ∣ctice of Holy and Religious Duties, as our keeping the bath, our Duties of Prayer, Praise, Faith. Charity Lord's-Supper, &c. and therein I will use great Br In the mean time Farewel.
