F894 E668_9 99866053 118313
A FIGHT AT Dunin in Scotland, between the Scots women, and the Presbyterian Kirkmen: AND The pittifull Defeat the VVomen gave the Synod-men. VVith the particulars thereof. And their triumph with Clubs and Bagge-Pipes. And the Votes made in Counsell un∣der protection of the Lord Friedland. printer's or publisher's device June .22. Edenburgh, Anno. Dom. MDCLII.
A Fight at Dunin in Scotland, between the Scotch women, and the Presbyterian Kirk-men. SIR, I Must acquaint you with a sad story, of a fearfull conflict betwixt the Scotch women and the Presbyters, in the Town of Dunin, in the County of Pearth, up∣on the ninth of this instant, thus: Vpon the eighth our Scotch women Dragooners of the Province (being big with child of a strong fancy, that their
inheritance was invaded by some of their Bre∣thren, formerly deposed for their dislike of that Sinodicall Government (resolved to bee brought to bed at this little Hamlet, where af∣ter a long congratulatory prosopopia of the good successe of their deformed reformation, ordered those Preachers who had re-invested themselves, both with the Church and Li∣vings (by vertue of a Call from their Parishio∣ners) to be cited to appeare on the morrow at ten houres in the fore-noon, under paine of that fearefull Bull of Excommunication, in o∣bedience whereof the Inditement is presented by the Officer to the Wives, in their Husbands absence, who promised to be with them on the morrow, and to be as assisting as possible they could, for curing their mallady; that night the Women were most carefull, in draw∣ing together their Forces, and having met a∣bout four in the morning, they went to a wood hard by, and each of them provided a strong Club (they being about one hundred and twenty in number) with a loud Bag-pipe, af∣ter foure miles march, furprised the Towne, and possessed themselves of the Church-yard,
one of those flea-bitten Synod is sent to those Amazons, to see if the Brethren might meet in the Church, as had formerly been appoin∣ted; which being denied, he threatens them with Bell, Booke, and Candle, and they baste him for his paines, detaine him Prisoner, di∣spatches sixty of their number to surprise the remainder in the Market-place, the order was instantly executed with so much life, that all their Body was broken, and routed in their severall Parties, that they lost all their Baggage, and twelve of their best Horses in the Conflict, one Rollock getting out of the throng with losse of Horse, Hat, and Cloak, saved himselfe in the end of a Land, a second sorely affright∣ed, and bruised with stroakes, after a miles run∣ning, taking all the Creatures of the field for his enemies, with a superstitiously bended knee, did beg quarter of a Souldier, who un∣derstanding nothing of the matter desired to know his meaning; the honest Preacher (sur∣prised with the feare of his former danger) without reply fell to the ground; in the meane time, those victorious Gallants having laid hold on the Synods Clerke for a Preacher, did
beat him to some tune, he forswearing his Office, upon assurance never to ap∣peare in their Conclave was released, Master Haliburtonne not intending to be a Martyr, desired a Parly, for which he is reputed to have been of the Party, the rest of them being well routed, some twelve or thirteen of them rallied again, and about foure miles from the place, at a Village called Torgane, where being under the protection of the Lord Fred∣land, they voted: 1 That never any Provinciall Assem∣bly, should sit at the fore-named Dunine, but that the same should be accursed, and that every ninth of June should be a feasti∣vall day for their great deliverance. 2 That contrary to the definition of the Presbyterian Kirke of this Land, in the yeare, one thousand six hundred thir∣ty
eight, and one thousand six hundred thirty nine, when godly women were called up, for stoning the Bishops. 3 That ever hereafter the whole Sex shall be esteemed wicked, and for a Pen∣nance be condemned to weare (if not the Breeches) at least Calsones as a signe of their miscarriage. Thus have you the briefe story of this sad day, from Dalkeith, June 12. 1652. Sir, your Honours most humble and ever obliged Servant, A. B. FINIS.
depiction of the Scotch women and Presbyterian kirkmen at Dunin
