G1060 E316_6 99861245 113376
Good News from IRELAND Being an exact Relation of the late good successe at Sliggo Against the Irish Rebels. Communicated to both Houses of Par∣liament on Munday last 12. Ianuary 1645. Performed by Sir Charles Coot, Sir William Cole, and Sir Francis Hamilton, with the particulars thereof. As also divers Letters of great Importance concerning the Estate of that Kingdome and of the Kingdome of England, which were found in the Pockets of their Commander in chiefe. Together with a List of the Prisoners taken, the number slaine on both sides, and the names of all the Commanders. Published by Authority. London printed for Iohn Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 15. Jan. 1645.
A true Relation of the late successe at Sliggo against the Irish Rebels. Performed by Sir Charles Coot, Sir William Cole, and Sir Francis Hambleton, with the particulars hereafter expressed. ON Sunday the 17. of October 1645. the Irish Rebels having surrounded the Towne with 1000. Foot and 300. Horse, the Garrison seeing little hope of the advance of the Ʋlster For∣ces (who were then neere them at Bandron) though unknowne to them, conceived it absolutely necessary to hazard the fighting with the Rebels with their own strength and Sir William Coles Troops, rather then to starve themselves and lose their out-Garrisons which were blocked up, the Enemy lying betweene them; Captaine Richard Coot and Captaine Richard Cole
commanded our Horse being two hundred, who charged the Rebels Horse very resolutely, and fell in to the Sword pell mell, and beat them among the Divisions of their own Foot, and routed them, which Lieutenant Colonell Saunderson recovered with the Foot, and Sir Francis Hamilton came also with his Troope in the nick of time, and had the execution of the Rebels for five miles, their Foot taking flight upon giving ground of their Horse. In the pursuit their Commander and President of that Province was flaine (the titular Archbishop of Tu∣ain.) Our men took one hundred and fifty of their Horses with Pistols, all their Baggage, Tents, and Ammunition, there were two Wagons with rich Spoile and Money in them, they tooke severall of their Standarts and Colours, foure and twenty Drummes and Officers of note, in number 48. who are now prisoners in Sliggo, about two hundred of their men lay killed in he place, and many more had beene, if Plunder had not beene preferred before Execution by our Foot; we had but one killed of Sir William Coles Troop, and six horsmen , and some Horse. Upon this defeat one thousand Foot and two hun∣dred of the Enemies Horse more that were on their march to Sliggo, friendly turned backe with their fellows, whom they met in great haste flying, and our Laggan Forces comming also to relieve as, are now with us beleagering two strong holds of the Rebels neere our quarters. The Archbishop was a principall Agent in these wars, and one of their su∣preme
Councell; divers Papers and Letters of im∣portance were found about him; hee had for his particular an Order from the Councell at Kilkenny for leavying the Arrears of his Bishoprick, which Order and the Popes Bull and Letter from Rome, Paris, and other forraigne parts, and from severall of this Kingdome (in order to the Irish Affaires) re∣late, That the Pope would not at first ingage him∣selfe for the sending of a Nuncio for Ireland, untill the Irish Agents had fully possessed him that the restablishment of their Catholique Religion was a thing feizable in this Kingdome: whereupon hee undertooke the solicitation of their Cause with Florence, Venice, and other Estates, and to deligate his Nuncio to attend the Affairs of this Kingdome. The said Nuncio after some delaies in France was expedited hence by the Popes expresse order, and arrived at the River of Killimarre with twenty sixe Italians of his retinue in a Friggot of one and twen∣ty peeces, 22. October, and in his company Secre∣tary Beling, and divers regular and secular Priests; the Irish are much incouraged with the supplies, he hath brought the List, whereof were found about the Arch-Bishop, Inprimus two thousand Muskets, foure thousand Bandaleers, two thousand Swords, five hundred pare of Pistols, and ten thousand weight of Powder, which arrived in another Friggot before him at Crooke-haven the tenth of October, together with sixe Desks and Trunkes of Spanish gold, the summe uncertaine. These Letters likewise informe us that all the Kings hope is from Ireland, and if they desert him, he is likely to be undone very speedily;
severall other things they containe concerning Prince Rupert, Col. Legg, the Kings losses at Bristoll and Chefter, which are as particularly related as if them∣selves had been in the place; something also there is concerning the Treaty of Peace. Ormond (saies one Letter) is found a Machavillan; Dillon, Muskery, and Talbot are for peace, Conditionibus quibuscunque, which is, On any conditions whatsoever; (saies another) that their publike affairs are in via non ter∣mino: which is, in a fair way, but not brought home un∣to their end; (saies a third) the Propositions have their Answer slight and slow. There are some miste∣ries of State in the businesse which cannot be com∣mitted there to paper, yet more really certaine it is there will be peace; also the Letters expresse some differences amongst themselves between Muskery and Browne, in so much that Browne departed from Dub∣lin discontented to Killkenny, between Castle-Haven and Preston, in so much that Father Beauchamp was sent from the supreame Counsell to reconcile them. There is also a private Letter, some suspicions in∣formations against Dominico Spinila an Agent in Ire∣land, wherein he is traduced to hold correspondency with the Queene of England in France, and so to be a lover of their enemies.
Prisoners at Sliggo. GReat Morogh ve Divo O Flaherty, Lievtenant Col. to Ric. Bourk, cousen German to the Earl of Clanrickard and his next Heire. Iohn Garye, Lievt. Col. to Sir Tibbot Bourk, eldest Sonne to the Lord of Mayo. Richard Bourk Major to Ric. Bourk the Earle of Clan∣richard, Heire and Sonne to Sir William Bourk, brother to the late Earle of Clanrickard. Captaine William O Shaghuise brother to Sir Roger O Shaghuise. Captaine Garret Dillon, Son to Sir Lucas Dillon, who saith that his father was shot in the thigh. Cap. Ro. Castollogh. Killed. Edw. Brown Cap. of 100. Muskiteers out of Galloway, brother to Jeffery Brown the Lawyer. Three Lievt. of foot. Two Coronets. Three Ensignes. Killed. The Titular Arch-Bishop of Tuain the Rebels President of Connaught, a great Incendiary. With severall Prisoners of inferiour quality both of Horse and Foot. Two or three and twenty drowned. FINIS.
