G1775 E449_20 99864457 161863
A GREAT VICTORY OBTAINED BY HIS EXCELLENCIE THE Lord Generall Fairfax NEER The Island of Mersey, against the Forces of the Lord Goring, both by Land and Sea, With a List of the number that were slain and taken prisoners, the Sea-men totally routed, 22 Pieces of Ordnance taken, with all their Arms, Powder, Match, and Bullet. Also another Fight at Wivener, within two miles of Coulchester, 16. slain, 40 taken prisoners, and the surprizing of Lieut. Col. Gardner, and a Party of Walloons, by capt. Fisher, with his Suffolk Horse. Examination before the Generall, and their Co∣ ouching their marching up to the Walls of  and joyning with a Party to plunder the City. June 23 L, Printed for R. W. Anno Dom. 1648.
C R Another FIGHT NEER Coulchester, betwixt the ships which came in to his Excellency the Lord Generall, and the ships be∣longing to the Lord Goring. SIR, ON Monday last being the 19. of this instant, Captain Peacock and two more of the Har∣wich ships, which came in to the assistance of his Excellency the Lord Generall, engaged with the two ships that the Forces in Colchester had to lay o∣pen the River, and secure their passage in and out, and had a very desperate fight, discharging severall broad sides, and were often upon boarding, but still repulsed
by each other, with exceeding gallantry and resolution, the Docks being very well man'd with halfe pikes and other necessaries for War. This conflict continued for the space of half an hour, the victory being very doubtfull on which side it would be given, till at the last a party of our Dragoons were sent from Mersey Fort, who joyned with the Sea men, and fought resolutely; but at the last the victory were given to our party, for by the assistance of the Land∣forces, the Sea-men boarded the Enemies two ships with the losse of 7. men, three slam and two wounded, killed a Boston, and 7 or 8 Marriners, took about 60. prisoners, 22. pieces of ordnance, 70. Sea musquets, 100 half pikes, two Tun of Match, 9. Barrels of powders, great store of Bullets, and plenty of provisions, both for cheese, Biskets, Butter, salt Beefe, &c. The Enemy hearing that their ships were engaged, they hastned to send supplies for their relief, which they did. but before they could get to them, both the ships were seized on, the men secured, and the prize brought ashore; but because this party should not lose their la∣bour, a party of the Lord Generals engaged them at Wivenall, a Village they hitherto possessed, fought with them, killed 16. and took 40. prisoners, with the losse of 7 men. One of the Frigots which were taken carryed 12. piece of ordnance, the other ten; the one is sent away, the other stayes here. We have had severall skirmishes with the Enemy, within these two or three dayes, they are a very resolute and obstinate party, but we have divers of them priso∣ners, and amongst the rest, a party of Walloons, who
were going to the Enemy, extraordinary well mounted and as well armed with Blunderbasse Pistols, each of which would carry seven Bullets: this party was inter∣cepted by the Suffolk horse commanded by cap. Fisher, who after a short dispute, took most of them prisoners, and seized on their Horse and Arms. Lieut. col. Gardner, once Vice-governour of Faring∣ton house, with about 30. more, were also set upon by a party of our Horse, and secured, and were brought prisoners to the Generall. And upon their examination before his Excellency, they confessed, that their intent was to go through Col∣chester into Suffolk, so into Norfolk, and back through Cambridgeshire, by which time they should have a gallant Army, and then they would up to the very wals of London, where their own party would joyne with them in plundering that Rebellious city; and then how shall the Royalist, Independant, or Presbyterian be di∣stinguished? and must all be involved in ruine. The great Work upon the top of the Hill is finished, it holds 1000. men, the great Canons are planted, and upon Munday last they began to play, 8 Piece; were discharged six severall times together. The General hath received a Letter from Sir William Masham, and the rest of the Committee under restraint in Colchester, intimating, That they made it their re∣quest to his Excellency, to enter into a Treaty for peace, and in the same Paper a line or two signed, Norwich, Capel, Lucas, That they thought fit to give the Com∣mittee leave to sign that paper, and that they intended by it a generall peace. No answer as yet returned, and believed the Committee was forced to signe this pa∣per.
The party in the town are fortifying, and indeavour provisions from Tendring Hundred, which cannot bee considerable, nor yet prevented, unlesse the Suffolk for∣ces were come up, for whom col. Whaley is gone; they are imposing a fine upon the town, forcing all between 16. and 60. to bear arms, and are preparing horse-mils, and hand-mils to grind their corn. The Lord Generall begun a work yesterday at the North gate, and the Souldiers maintain it with much gallantry and resolution. The Trumyeter with a message for a treaty is not yet returned, nor must not, till the Morter-piece and Gra∣nadoes come up, and then accept of what the Generall offers, else Thunderbolts and Granadoes will be their doom. They have twice marched out with foot and long Boats to regain Mersey Island, but returned with losse, for our Forces fell upon them, and beat them back into the town. The souldiery begins to despair, but the Earl of Nor∣wich feeds their fancies with vaine delusions, telling them, That the General had sent a Trumpeter to them, offering to draw off, bid them chew their bullets all the Roundheads in London were plundered, onely their friends had left some for them, as deserving it. And hee further intimated, that Maj. Gen. Langdale with 10000. men were within 15. miles, and would fall on the Ge∣nerals Rear very suddenly. On Monday the Bells in the 16. Parishes rung till night, for joy of the blowing up the Parliament house, for so it were suggested to the souldiery. They keep no Matches ligted, unlesse upon duty.
The Generall hath set forth a Proclamation against the stragling Souldiers of his Army, which followeth in these words. WHereas I am informed that many Souldiers of the Army do ordinarily absent themselves from their quarters and cullers, and straggle about the coun∣try, whereby much opportunity and liberty is taken to plunder and abuse the country, and commit many out∣rages, the guards and other services are neglected, and some are taken prisoners by the Enemy; for prevention whereof for the future, since the pretence of seeking for victuals, under which this liberty hath been taken, is now provided against, by an orderly course of supplying the Army with provisions: I do hereby order and require, That henceforth no Souldier or Officee do presume to straggle a mile from the Leaguer, or stir away from their Colours and duty, under pain of being severely proceeded against recording to the Articles of War in that behalf; And all officers are hereby required twice at least in every 24. hours, to call over the List of the souldiers in their respective Troops and Companies, and to take speciall notice of such as shall at any time bee found absent without order or leave, that they may be duly proceeded against, and punished as aforesaid. Given under my hand and seale, June 16. 1648. T. FAIRFAX.
Since the proclaiming of this Order, the Souldiery keeps together, which doth prove far more disadvan∣tagious to the enemy, then formerly, by reason our Guards are more strong and secure, and able to oppose the enemy upon any attempt whatsoever, which they have since found, and smarted for; as appeares by their late attempt this morning upon two of our Guards, neer the North gate, who upon their sallying forth, our Centinels discovered them, and gave fire, which gave an allarm to the Guards, who immediatly were in a readinesse to receive them, and upon the Enemies ad∣vance they fired at each other, but did not dispute the businesse long, for upon the approach of a party of Horse, the Enemy retreated, our men pursued, and in the pursuit took 15. prisoners, killed 6. with the losse of one Corporall, and a private Souldier. From the Head-quarters neer Colchester June 21. 8. at night, 1648. Imprimatur G. M. FINIS.
