h2430 e198_6 99873333 157481
SIR IOHN HOLLAND HIS SPEECH in Parliament. Declaring the great and manifold Grievances of this Kingdome, both in Church and Common-wealth. Occasioned by the wicked practises and Arbitrary power of the disturbers and subverters of our Peace, our Liberties, and our Lawes. Published by a true Copie. LONDON, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.
SIR JOHN HOLLANDS SPEECH IN PARLIAMENT. Mr. Speaker, TImes of Action, are not for Rethorick and E∣locution, which emboldens me to rise, and al∣though I cannot but know and acknowledge my selfe, to be one of the youngest Schollers, & mea∣nest Proficients, in this great Schoole of wisdome; yet I cannot but thinke it part of my duty at this time, to deliver both my sense, and Conscience; which I shall doe (under the favour of this Honorable Assem∣bly) with all sincerity. We are called hither (Mr. Speaker) by the Kings Regall power, We sit here by his Majesties Grace and favour, And since his Majesty have beene so gra∣ciously pleased, to entrust the government of all in our hands, I doubt not, but we shall lay such a foun∣dation, in the beginning of this Parliament, that wee shall make it a happy and long lived one; Since the Eminent dangers of these times; the present distem∣pers
of this State, and herein, both his Majesties and our owne necessities, yea, and the Kingdomes safety too, requires it. Sir, it appeares by the Report you have so faithful∣ly made of his Majesties gracious Declaration, that we are now called hither for these foure principall Causes. 1. For the supply of his Majesties present wants. 2. For the reliefe of our Brethren in the Nor∣therne parts. 3. For the remove of the Scotch forces; And 4. For the redresse of our owne Grievances. That his Majesties wants are great and many Sir, I thinke there is no man doubts it, and it is as certain, our Grievances are so too; They are great and many; as well in the Church as the Common-wealth; I shall but touch them in either, in regard they have already been remonstrated in both. In the Church; By the Usurped power and practise, of some Prelates and their Adherents. By which meanes, many great, many dangerous In∣novations, of Doctrine, of Discipline, of Government have beene thrust upon us. In the Church; By the publique sufferance of Priests and Jesuites, not onely to come, but to a∣bide in the Land. By which meanes, the Number of Romish Catho∣liques are dangerously multiplyed. Idolatry increased and Gods heavie Judgements, highly provoked. In the Common-wealth; By the late and great inun∣dations
of the Prerogative Royall, which hath broke out and almost overturned all our liberties, even those that were, best and strongliest fortified. The Grand-Charter it selfe (Sir) That, which hath been so often, so solemnly confirmed, in the succession of so many Princes, ratified in the beginning of his Majesties Raigne, Founded by the wisdome of former ages, purposely to keepe the Beame even and right between Soveraignty and Subjection; Even this (Mr. Speaker) the choyce and dearest part of our Inheritance, have been infringed, broken, and set at nought. In the Common-wealth. By the over-potency of some few Great-ones, secreat Councellours of State, from whose advises ('tis thought) the greatest part of those distempers, vnder which the body of this Com∣mon-wealth at this time labours derives their origi∣nalls. In the Common-wealth. By the mischievous practises and policies of many and subtile Projectours, who under the title of the Kings profite, and the pub∣lique good, have rais'd to themselves large revenues, and that by the dammage of the whole Kingdome. They are (Sir) the very Mothes and Cankers that have fretted and eaten our all Trade, all Commerce, the very Beauty, strength, health and life of this fa∣mous Iland. In the Common-wealth, By the long and large entertainment of Forrainers and strangers, and that at his Majesties excessive charges; By which meanes. His Majesties Coffers are emptied, his Re∣venues shortned and the Kingdome many other wayes oppressed. But (Sir) J shall travaile my selfe no further in this
so large, so wide a field, but shall now onely crave fa∣vour to present you with mine owne weake apprehen∣sions for our progression in those particulars for which we have beene called, and in all humility sub∣mit them. And, First in the supply of his Majesties Wants. J doe humbly desire we may proceed therewith, in its due time, and then, with as much loyalty, duty, and liberality, as ever people exprest towards so good a Prince. And truly Sir, J thinke I may with confi∣dence say the present affaires of the Kingdome re∣quires it. In the Reliefe of our Brethren in the Northerne parts; With a sense of Charity and fellow-feeling of their miseries, afflictions and losses. Jn the remove of the Scotch Forces. With a soft and tender hand, of Mediation, Pacifi∣cation, and Reconciliation, if possibly it may bee wrought, with his Majesties Honour and this King∣domes safety; If not? And that they shall still re∣fuse to depart in Peace. Then (Mr. Speaker) to re∣pell and expulse them, with stout and resolute Spi∣rits, with valiant and united Hearts and Hands, such; as shall best suite with our duty to God, our King, our Country, such, as shall best become the Honour and ancient Renowne of the English Nation. In the Redresse of our Grievances. Jn those of the Church, which ought to have pri∣ority in our Consultations, as well in respect of nece∣ssity, as dignity; A love Principuum, In these I de∣sire Sir, and J doubt not but wee shall proceed, with all true Piety, well tempered and right guyded zeale, towards God, his House, his Truth.
In those of the Common-wealth; With a Religi∣ous care of our Countries freedome, in the faithfull performance of that trust reposed in us, by those that sent us, in the preservation of our Rights, our ancient Rights, the Rights of our Inheritances. Our Liberties, our Priviledges, our Proprieties. Yet in all Sir, J doe humbly desire we may proceed, as best suiting with the Nature, and condition of these troublesome times; as best becomming the Honour, Dignity, and Wisedome of this so great a Court, so great a Counsell, with all Tem∣per, Modesty, and due Mode∣ration. FINIS.
