H975 E637_6 99865727 117976
The Prerogative Priests Passing-Bell. OR Amen to the Rigid Clergy. Shewing the Usefulness, Equity, Lawfulness, and Necessity, of private Persons to take upon them Preaching or Expounding of the Scriptures, having a Call thereto by the Word of God, and agreeable to the practise of the best Reformed Churches of Christ, and Judgment of judicious Divines both Forraign and Domestick. Being a brief Reply to that Discourse intituled The Pulpit guarded with 17 Arguments, and owned by THO. HALL. Calculated on purpose for the Metropolis of Northamptonshire, and may serve indifferently for the Meridian of most places in other Horizons, especially for those parts that are in Con∣junction with the Northern Climate. By WILLIAM HARTLEY. But Diotrephes who loveth to have the preheminence amongst them, re∣ceiveth us not, wherefore if I come I will remember his deeds which he doth, prating against us with malicious words, and not content therewith; neither doth he himself receive the brethren, but forbiddeth them that would, and casteth them out of the Church. 3 Iohn 1.9.10. While the partition wall stood between Jews and Gentiles, there was also parti∣tions among the Jews themselves, but now the partition being broken down every man is alike Priest unto God, every man prayeth within the vail; what are we better for our priviledges if we do neglect our freedom? Doct. Jos. Hall Medit. upon the Angel and Zacharias. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H. Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shop in Popes head Alley, neer Lumbard street. 1651.
A Preface to the Reader. JEsus Christ (God manifested in the flesh) gave his Disciples to understand, that men did not light a candle, and then presently put it under a bushel, but set it upon a candlestick, that it might give light to the room: By which inference it was hint∣ed, that according to that dimension of light the Sun of Righteousness shall manifest in the elementary part of Mi∣crosmos (little world, mankind,) the Creature standeth accomptable to Justice, if he extend not the benefit thereof to its proper Horizon. To be wrapped up in silence (at some times) is an argument of pru∣dence, but at another season silent persons are rendered Accessaries. A tacite Spectator of a person in act of murder is an Abettor and Consenter to the slaughter: Nay, there is a time when our own secrets may not be kept silent; but what hath been spoken private∣ly in the ear of Understanding, must be publiquely declared on the top of that house or family wherein we are resident: And when Israel is at a loss in the way to Canaan, a voyce is crying in this Wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight. Although the Spirit of Elias be prisoned by Herodians, and the manifestation of God in the Creature (as to fleshly understanding) be killed, and continue in the grave (that earthly part of mankind) for a time; yet he that hath power to lay down his life, will also assume strength to take it up again, and striking dead those Roman Souldiers of Unrighteousness, will march in the Van of his Disciples into Galilee. Now to track the way of him whose footsteps are in the Sea, is impossible; and to limit the Holy One of Israel, is forbidden; For the times and seasons knoweth no man: But, if Wars and rumors of Wars, as well in Churches as Nations, Brethren (both in natural and Gospel relation) betray one another to death, Stars of Heaven (spiritual men in high and heavenly places) be fallen, and the Powers of the Earth (worldly Kings and Potentates) be
shaken, from a figtree Calculation, there is ground for belief, that the coming of the Lord is nigh at hand, and another Messenger is coming down from Heaven (the presence of God,) having great Power, and the Earth is lightened by his presence, crying,Persecuting Spirit. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of Devils, the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hate∣ful bird, Rev. 18.2. The coming of the Lord (as I give my Judgment) is the Appari∣tion of Righteousness in the Creation (as to mankind,) and for his personal Raign (which many godly persons expect,) I rather rejoyce to see, then have faith to beleeve, and say to those (termed Millena∣ries) as to all others, who seek after Christ, though in never so vari∣ous administration to my apprehended light, So walk as ye have received, only let your Conversation be as becometh the Gospel. The way to bring men to the knowledg of God is Christ Jesus, who in the mystery of the Gospel is Love, Meekness, Humility, &c. in the Creature, and all true Messengers put on Jesus Christ in this method: But now seeing many (who appropriate to themselves the stile of Ministers of the Gospel) barren in this nature, and fruits of rankor from a root of bitterness is so grown to maturity, that the Tree is easily distinguished, and notwithstanding the sheep-skin, the rapine of the Wolf is discovered, which cruelty is that contrary nature, or pure Antichrist, who must be destroyed not by outward violence, but by the Word of God: And this small Treatise, pre∣sented unto publique view, begs no further resentment then is con∣sonant to Scripture and Reason, whereunto he is wholly passive, who is A Well-wisher unto Truth, William Hartley.
To Mr THOMAS HALL. SIR, WHen the Cry of Sodom ascended to the ears of Al∣mighty God, you cannot be ignorant of the deter∣mination, Let us go down and see whether the Cry be so great as reported: It cannot be inter∣preted from this expression, that either the re∣moteness of the place, or the descension of God, did obscure or add to the knowledg of him, before whom all things are naked and open, but written for our learning, that great observa∣tion be had before we proceed to sentence. Sir, By the series of your discourse it will appear, that you have not only judged before the time, but also prevaricated righteous Judgment: To condemn the innocent, or justifie the wicked, is equally abominated by the Judg of all men; and although you have strained industry by Argument to maintain a Charge, seeing you have Argumentum hoc solum quod sit secundum pondus ad ae∣quatum, dolus versatur gene∣ralibus, commu∣ne non distin∣guit. levelled at a wrong ob∣ject, your Argument and Charge in the eye of Reason stand annihi∣lated. It must be granted you have abilities, yet let me mind you of this School Maxim, Corruptio op∣timi est pessima. The prevarication of the best is the worst corruption. You are pleased to say, that although we have not the Latin tongue, yet we have the lying tongue: 'Tis pity they are so inseparable in your self; your animosity is against Lay∣mens Preachings; sure you are from Rome, for your speech be∣wrays you: in the Common-wealth of Saints there is no such distin∣ction of Laity and Clergy, but all are one (or alike) in Jesus Christ. Let your term be granted, yet some of your own Poets differ from you, viz. Laicis licet enim curam de Religione et Ec∣clesia suscipere, cessantibus vel non officium fa∣cientibus Epis∣copis & Eccle∣siasticis. It is lawful for the Laity, in case of vacancy, or deficiency of Bishops, and Ecclesiastical persons, to take upon them the care of the Church and Religion. If there was equity for this in the time of Polanus, certainly there is Aetas paren∣tum pejor. a necessity for it in this present age, and the words of Calvin may now fitly admit of a Resurrection, viz. This is certain, that for these hundred years there hath scarcely been
every hundreth man chosen, that understood any thing of holy doctrine, Cap. 5. Sect. 1. So many as are consecrated Priests, are of Horses made Asses, of Fools made mad men, Calv. Just. lib. 4. C. 19. S. 29. But you will say, there is now an alteration: Then let us take a review; at the beginning of these present differences it may be five or six, or such a number in a County were Antagonists to that persecuting Power which did enslave tender Consciences, and acted gloriously at that season, but how few of that number that now endeavor not to erect the same coercive interest, though under visor of Presbytery? I know there is a remnant of that Tribe who are both godly and moderate Ministers, and deserve all due encou∣ragement; but I give my Judgment with Mr Calvin, scarce one of a hundred who do not as eagerly thirst after the dregs of Pre∣lacy and Tyranny, as Israel did after the Egyptian flesh pots. In one of your Epistles you mention your Imprisonment and suf∣ferings, great reason that you have, or should have, reparation; and 'tis a great grief to him whose sufferings are At the first sitting of this present Parli∣ament, about the business of Mr Hamden, I was cast into several pri∣sons, had my goods sei∣zed on, and arraigned for my life before Judg Heath. superlatively equivalent unto yours, to observe so much remisness in the Parlia∣ment of this nature. Sir, you say, this Discourse of yours was the work of leasure times, mine extracted by the dispensation of my dayly work. No wonder if you (being fed fat with the ruines of the people) appear an Anakin; and my self, who eat my bread by sweat of my brow (or industry) am rendred a Yet I suppose as frequent in Exercises of Religion as most of that Tribe. Pigmey; and though I cannot dispence with my occasions as to wait upon you in every particular Argument of your Book, yet so often as you appear I take boldness to ask you how you do, and remain Your vigilant Servant, William Hartley. Stonystrat. July 2. 1651.
THE Prerogative Priests Passing-Bell. OR Amen to the Rigid Clergy, SECT. I. ONe main Argument wherewith you deceive the people, is drawn (as you say) from Gods eternal Decree, who (as you argue) hath appointed every man a Calling, viz. some Carpenters, Fisher-men, Tent-makers, &c. others to beset apart for the Ministry. Now it is the express Com∣mandment of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.6. Let every man abide in the same state wherein he was called: And for some persons to multi∣ply Callings, is equally destructive to the Republique, as for the ge∣nerality of men to practice one particular Science; For if all tunn Mariners, and put to Sea, who shall stay a shoar to till the Land? Reply. We answer, That persons are qualified by God (the wise Disposer of all things) with abilities in the management of Arts, My∣steries, and Sciences, for the benefit of the Creation; but that per∣sons (so qualified) are prohibited the ministerial Function, viz. preaching of the Gospel, that I utterly deny; and for this Reason, that in the Constitution of the Common-wealth of Israel no man was without a Civil Calling: Nay Aaron, with the Levites, had an outward Employment or Calling, which in the Scripture sence is termed work, service at the Tabernacle, Numb. 4. But preaching and declaring the Word of God was indifferently and equally re∣ferred and required of all; Would God all the people were Prophets, or could prophecy: This work was alike laudible in Joshua and David, as in Aaron or Eliezar.
For your Inference, That Lay or Mechanick men (so called) may not preach, or Preachers may not trade or labour; the Scripture quoted, Let every man abide, &c. This Text is by you (as also many more) misprisioned, it having reference to a beleeving hus∣band, we, or servant; yoked with a wife, husband, or master that is an Infidel, advising not to depart from each other, but continue in the same state or condition they were linked in when they first were called; and upon this ground, What knowest thou O man, that, &c. To the Absurdity, If all turn Mariners, &c. I answer, That if such (or so many) as go down in Ships are to declare the wonders of God in the deep, and all people that dwell upon Earth are to de∣clare his goodness; certainly then no man is disfranchized of this priviledg, but rather entailed thereunto by the Light of God and Reason: And now seeing I enter list with exquisite wits, who I hope will be as ingenuous to vindicate their own Judgments, as convince my apprehensions, I frame an Argument in their own me∣thod. 1 Argum. Whatsoever was indefinitely commanded by Almighty God, and practised by righteous men in all ages, ought to be obeyed and prosecuted of every man in his proper generation: But it was (and is) the Cōmand of Almighty God, that all Creatures preach his glory, and righteous men were (and are) active to that end: There∣fore every Creature (as considered mankind) hath a right to the preaching of the Gospel. Peradventure critical spirits may cavil at some disharmony or in∣congruency in the Sillogism; but solid Judgments are not apt to quarrel about niceties or formalities: Raise your Batteries against the Reason of the Argument, and fire so fast as you please. It is somewhat improper to fall upon probation of first or second Proposition, unless I knew how far they are denyed; but it is not impertinent to remove an Objection, lest an absurdity be harbored from some hasty Inference. Object. Suppose a Congregation be met together, and all (or major part) fall a preaching, would not it breed confusion? where all are speakers, pray what shall we do for hearers? Ans. I answer: Notwithstanding all persons (at a congregated meeting) have alike priviledg to preach the Gospel, yet this makes not a necessity that all or many speak together: The Apostle Paul
hath provided against such a disorder, Ye may all prophecy one by one, not all at once. Though all Souldiers that mount a guard are concerned to pass upon duty, yet it doth not follow that the whole Guard stand Centinel at one time, but every one in order may ob∣serve his turn. SECT. II. Another fallacy wherewith you blind the people, runneth thus: That there must be an outward Call, as well as in∣ward, to those that preach the Gospel; and though persons may be gifted, yet they are not to exercise their gifts without Ordination; and that Christ gave Commission to the Apostles, the Apostles com∣missioned others, by vertue of which successive Power you are made Ministers, and so you (of the Clergy) and you only, are to preach the Gospel: How can they preach except they be sent? Reply. We answer; That gifts, graces, or spiritual experiments of the ways of God, give, and only give, principles of preaching: I saw (saith David) therefore I spake: The anointing it shall teach you: As every man hath received, so let him administer the same, as good Stewards of the mysteries of God. That which you term Ordination (as I give my Judgment) in the primitive times had not reference to a creative nature, but to confirmation or witness bearing to Truth in persons when they heard it preached or delivered; and this power of Ordination, or rather confirma∣tion, is equally centred in all illuminated persons in fellowship of the Gospel. Under the administration of the Law, If there arose a Prophet unto the Law and Testimony, for approbation; under the Gospel, Try all things, take heed how you hear; if any man bring any other doctrine, let him be Anathema, (accursed,) by whom? of all certainly that had knowledg in the Gospel. That there is an impossibility of preaching before they be sent, is granted; but whether this mission hath any relation to man, there is a question, it being evident that God, who is the Author and Fi∣nisher of every good work, is also the General to give Orders to all subordinate Instruments. I was (saith Amos) a Herds-man, and the Word of the Lord came unto me. The Gospel which Paul preach∣ed was not received of man, neither taught of man, but by revela∣tion of Jesus Christ. And after three years he went up to Jerusa∣lem to see the Disciples. Gal. 1. By this that is offered it appeareth, that Ordination (as you call it) viz. Pattent, Bond, or License from the creature, is not of necessity to the preaching of the Gospel, yea though the Authority be derived from all or the generality of Be∣leevers;
much less is that Authority authentick, which is abstract∣ed (or takes its being) from a few Monopolizes, to wit, Popes, or their Substitutes, the Bishops: And thus I draw a second Argu∣ment. 2 Argum. Where there is not a legislative Authority in the Con∣tinent, the derivative Power in the abstract stands invalid: But there is not legitimate Authority either in Pope or Quatenus a papali constitu∣tion. Bishop: There∣fore all Power derived from that essens is annihilated. Object. What, would you have all Ministers of this Nation lay down their Callings? The people must needs grow to Atheism and perish. Ans. No such matter: It's desired that all stiled Ministers of this Nation lay down that Prerogative Honour fetcht from Rome, and lay aside that Popish distinction of Clergy and Laity, becoming all one in Jesus Christ, and rather preach by vertue of Gospel abili∣ties, then humane Letters Pattents. I forbear to multiply Arguments, take these for a taste at present; and now I proceed to make replication to those Absurdities Mr Hall hath laid upon the separation in his Looking glass for Anabap∣tists, as he is pleased so to stile them. 1 Absurdity. That the Separatists hold, that the Saints in this life are pure, without spot, and need not use that Potion, Lord for∣give us, &c. Reply. We answer, The more holy and Saint-like every Profes∣sor is, the more sensible of his own vileness, and the more frequent in Lord forgive, and be merciful to me a sinner; yea with O wretched man that I am, &c. 2 Absurd. No man can with a good Conscience exercise the Of∣fice of a Magistrate under the New Testament: No Christian ought with a safe Conscience take an Oath, nor by Oath promise fi∣delity to a Magistrate. Reply. It is answered, The dispensation under, or in, the New Testament sheweth a perfect Rule for the conscientious walking of a Magistrate, with cheerful obedience from the Subject; and Christians may with a safe Conscience take an Oath, and by Oath promise fidelity to the Magistrate: But, Mr Hall, you of the black Regiment (for the generality) make null the Gospel Rule of Obe∣dience; was not your grand-father Woolsey diseased with the Popes Holiness? Is not his son Presbyter dangerously infected with the Kings evil? How say you Sir? may not gold in a Act for Tythes. string some∣what abate the tumor?
3 Absurd. They (meaning those of separation) are tumultuous, they raised tumults in Germany, filled it with fire and sedition, to the loss of six hundred thousand men, saith Alsteed; their doctrine being seditious, their lives are answerable; God punisheth ungodly and unmortified lives with base and loose Opinions. Reply. We answer, That it is most usual with guilty spirits to accuse innocent persons of that evil themselves are principled in; if Ahab be Judg, Eliah is the Troubler of Israel: Let Scribes and Pharisees give sentence, Christ must be the Deceiver; whether the Clergy, or those termed Anabaptists, brought confusion on that Na∣tion, is deeply questionable, that you (for the most part) resembling the generation of Vipers by that poyson of Asps dropping from the tongue, have fired these Nations: Bellum Episcopale, with (your Creators) the Bishops Petition to the King against the Parliament, is fresh in memory; if the Sun break forth, 'tis more then probable a Synodian Rabbi may be kenned in this Scotish mist. Sir, we under∣stand not this word seditious, unless by worshipping of God in that form (according to godliness) we do apprehend him in, which ac∣cording to the Law of Nations, Nature, Reason and Religion, is un∣questionably to be tolerated, and is adjudged requisite by moderate and unbyassed Governors. That God punished ungodly and un∣mortified lives with base and loose Opinions, I reply, Base and loose Judgments are punished with ungodly lives, for out of the heart in the first place proceedeth murders, adultery, &c. Sir, I beg leave to correct your Rhetorick by Reason. 4 Absurd. That a man may have more wives then one, that wives of contrary Religion may be put away, and then 'tis lawful to take others. Reply. That a man may have more wives then one, that's by us abominated, and declare, that to put away our wives for any cause whatsoever unless for adultery, is altogether unlawful; if any have apostatized to a Ranting principle, is to us a grief, let the blame rest upon the Authors: Paul and Timothy must not be measured by Demas, nor the Apostles censured for Judas. Why, Sir, provoke you the spirits of innocent men to your own shame? Harken to your Argument; Because in (almost) every corner of this Common∣wealth there are Priests that will Clericus in sella, &c. swear, whore, drink drunk, &c. Ergo the society of the Clergy are a generation of swearers, whore∣mongers, drunkards, &c. 5 Absurd. Ʋniversities, humane Arts and Learning they cry
down as needless, they burn all Books save the Bible. Reply. We answer, That we desire the Universities be well regu∣lated, that they may not (as formerly) be a cage of unclean Birds: For humane Arts, who maintaineth them more then those termed Separatists? Doth not the whole Tractate of your own Discourse betray you, compiled on purpose against Mechanick or Tradesmens preaching; if professed Tradesmen, then we are not Antagonists, but Abettors to Arts and Sciences: Let me help your memory, and bring upon the Stage of speculation what you were pleased to insert in the Title Page of your Book, viz. Lawrence Williams a Nailer, Publique Preacher. A true Nailer indeed; while thy hands make Nails for mans use, thy mind forgeth Truths, as fit Nails to fasten Christs building. Tho: Palmer a Baker, Preacher. Well done Baker, Bread for the Body, and Bread for the Soul, thou servest both God and men. Tho: Hinde a Plow∣wright, Preacher. A most useful Artificer, not onely (Macrosmos) pondrous Earth, but (Mi∣crosmos) Mankind are endeavored to be fertile by thy industry. Henry Cakes a Weaver, Preacher. A very ingenuous Craftsman, the Web thou warpest is all home-spun, pure Linnen, thou weavest no Woolsey nor Scotch-cloth. Humphrey Rogers lately a Bakers Boy, publique Preacher. A hopeful Lad: How many aged per∣sons can scarce say their prayers? and thou art able to make a Sermon; cer∣tainly it is the work of God, who out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings doth ordain strength. Peter was a Catcher of fish by nets, and men by preaching, and both allowable by Jesus Christ: Therefore trading and preaching is legitimate in the self-same person. As for that you call humane learning, we judg it good in its sphere; but that learning which truly qualifies a person to the preaching of the Gospel is Love, meekness, temperance, patience, &c. and where Christ dwells in this nature, these things will be preach∣ed and exhorted to: Be it granted, that humane learning (rightly sanctified) may help the sight, yet in it self it gives no more light then spectacles to a blind man.
That we burn all Books save the Bible, that's your say-so, we are not of so fiery temper; but those writings wherein we find no re∣sentment, may be reserved for officious uses. 6 Absurd. That preaching, praying, Sacraments, singing of Psalms, and all Ordinances, are legal, the Spirit is all. Reply. We answer, That for preaching (or declaring what we apprehend of the mind of God,) praying (or speaking forth our de∣sires to God,) Sacraments or Ordinances of Jesus Christ in their proper sphere are Evangelical or Gospel duties; happily we may not be harmonious with you in the formality: and for Davids Psalms we delight to read and repeat, as they are consonant to oc∣casion; but for singing of Davids Prayers in Meeter, seeing most part of the Book (though entituled Psalms) consists of Petitions, we see neither Precept or President in Scripture or Reason to back such an elaborate Organ-like practice. That the Spirit is all, it is answered, That God observeth the Spirit in an action, more then an action in it self. 7 Absurd. That Christ hath removed the Law, and now the Gospel is our only Rule. Reply. We answer, That Christ hath removed the formalities of the Ceremonial Law, himself being the Substance (or Antitype) of those Representations, and now pure Gospel, or the manifestation of Gods Love in Jesus Christ (apprehended by faith) is the only Rule or Line which directs our hope to eternal life. 8 Absurd. That the Saints are freed by Christ from all Laws, Covenants, Vows, paying of Tythes or Debts. Reply. We answer, That the Saints are not freed, but taught by Christ obedience to Laws, Covenants, and Vows, either in relation of God or man (so they stand not in direct opposition to his glo∣ry:) As for paying of See Mr Hill in Husband∣mans Plea a∣gainst Tythes. Tythes, it is with an ill will, it being not the tenth, but the A pure Law∣yer, to one seeming Truth add a number of falsities, let Spencers case a∣gainst Mirshal be a Testimo∣ny. third part of our livelihoods, and heartily wish that the Governors of this Commonwealth would resent those moderate Petitions which encline to ease the Nation of this heavy pressure, providing reasonable satisfaction for Impropriators: For paying of debts, we say with the Apostle, Owe nothing to any man; saving love. There are many more Absurdities inserted in Mr Halls Book, to which be quoteth Authors; but because I am unacquainted with their writings, I omit; for if due circumspection be not had to the precedent and subsequent part of a Discourse, an absurd Construc∣tion
may be collected from a clause or sentence. As for instance; In the Book of Psalms is written, There is no God; now the words (or sence) was not Davids, but a fool said so. I had thoughts to have made some Paraphrase upon Mr Halls coyned Tryal or Ar∣raignment of the Lay Prophet of the City of Amsterdam in the County of Babel &c. but that in such an Inscripture-like method there appeared more vanity then Reason, it being, in my understand∣ing, an apt Representation of a Puppet-play, where Appolonius, Zanchy, King James, Kirk of Scotland, &c. as several Apparitions in various dresses make a squeaking, and Mr Halls mouth the Oracle for Interpretation. Where Judg, Jury, and Evidence center in a single person, the sentence or such a Court is illegal and tyrannical. Now to the Ordinances of Parliament Mr Hall is pleased to present, April 26. 1645. Decemb. 31. 1646. April 26. 1645. It is this day Ordained and Declared by the Lords and Conmons assembled in Parliament, That no person be admitted to preach, who is not ordained Minister either in this or some other reformed Churches, &c. Decemb. 31. 1646. The Commons assembled in Parliament do Declare, That they do dislike, and will proceed against all such persons, as shall take up∣on them to preach, or expound the Scriptures, in any Church or Chappel, or other publique place, except they be ordained either here, or in any other reformed Church, &c. We reply, That if these Ordinances had, or shall (standing yet unrepealed) be produced as an Evidence against us, I am confident all ingenuous spirits, in the way of the Separation, will yeeld peace∣able Obedience thereunto, either doing or suffering: But I have it from rational and intelligible persons, That divers Votes in this na∣ture were meer Ingredients to set up a rigid Presbytery, the onely stalking-horse to uphold Monarchy, being the last refuge in order to the Kings re-investigation: But now it's evident, though the devices of mans heart are many, yet the counsel of the Lord will stand; and neither that Mr Lilly had over-rated it if worth a halfpenny. farthing Directory or Monarchial Interest are like to receive resurrection, the vanity of those Idols being (ex superabundanti) manifested to every unbiassed person; and the heart of the Magistrate seemeth to cast a more favorable aspect then formerly, witness that Act entituled, An Act for the relief of
peaceable People, to which I add that candid expression mention∣ed in the Parliaments Declaration in answer to the Scots Papers, Febr. 17. 1648. pag. 16. For the Toleration of all Religions and Forms of Worships that their Letter objects, we known not whom they intend in that Charge: as for the truth and power of Religi∣on, it being a thing intrinsecal between God and the Soul, and the matters of Faith being such as no natural light doth reach unto, We conceive there is no humane power of coertion thereunto, nor to restrain men from beleeving what God suffers their judgments to be perswaded of: But if they mean onely the outward and publique Forms of Profession or Worship, we know no such Ʋniversal Tole∣ration endeavored or intended amongst us, neither yet do we finde any warrant to persecute all that do not worship God, or profess to beleeve in the same Form that we do. It is the grief of every humane-like spirit to see Mordecai favor∣ed, although he justly may have merited the same; and what cae and industry the Presbyterated party do take to render both per∣sons and meetings of the Separation odious in the eyes of the Ma∣gistrate and people, for taste hereof, I thought good to insert the car∣riage of Mr Farmer, and Gore, &c. of Towciter, whose malicious and envious spirit could not be satisfied in setting Major Duckets Troopers to fall upon us with their naked swords while Capt. Elliot was speaking, but also caused many notorious falshoods to be in∣serted in the weekly News Books; Viz. A Tumultuous Meeting. Tompsons Party, Levellers. Ranters, Erroneous Fellows. For as much as this is not the first time that we have been abused in this nature (as is well known to some godly and eminent Gover∣nors of this Common-wealth,) it would favour of unanswerable improvidence if we should not faithfully endeavor to wash off that dirt which is so unworthily cast in the faces of us. Upon the first day (commonly called Whitsunday) divers of the Separation met at Cornet Reads house in Towciter, and after one friend had exercised his gifts, the Auditory did exceed the room; and by reason of the throng it was moved for better conveniency to go into the yard, which being of less continent then the room, by the advise of the Souldiery there present, and some friends, under the penthouse without door (taking the benefit of shade) was ad∣judged a convenient place; there Capt. Elliot (much about the
time of the ending of the evening Exercise at the publique place) spake a word of Exhortation, and the people gave him peaceable au∣dience. Now that this Meeting might degenerate to tumultuous disturbance of the Peace, that must wholly lie at the door of Far∣mer, Gore, and their adherents, who incensed the Souldiery; but by the wise carriage of the Officers the business was easily appeased. Seriously this is hard measure, when Christians shall be denyed that liberty which is commonly afforded to those unreasonable creatures who lick the crumbs of our tables. 2. We are branded for Tompsons Party; I cannot tell what to say to this allegation, seeing Tompson (his fury working his own destruction) is now under ground; but upon enquiry this is gatherd, that there was one at the Meeting that adhered to him, and by the Councel of State acquitted long since: Now if a Convention of people must be measured by a single person, by these mens Reason Sodomites were all righteous, because one Lot inhabited the City. For the word Leveller is a term of odium cast upon many a per∣son for holding forth of righteous Principles: for those who deny propriety under pretence of community, as we have no commu∣nion with them in such a principle, so see we no reason to debar them from hearing of the Word preached. 3. Ranters, erroneous fellows, &c. For calling those that met Ranters, if their passion had not quite eat up their Reason, this sen∣tence would not have passed, there being neither beer, wine, wo∣men, or any other object which might provoke licentiousness, made use of; besides, those who are involved in so sad condition, of ne∣cessity must turn Apostates unto prayer and preaching: Now had not the envy of the elder brother been too prevalent with them, if there came any of that judgment to the Exercise out of good inten∣tion, ought it not to be a matter of rejoycing? I am sure Jesus Christ saith, there is joy in Heaven upon the like occasion. And that the mouth of envy may be fully stopped, take a view of a Letter directed to Mr Benson, Commissioner of the Peace, viz. Sir, It is related, you are dissatisfied with the meeting of some dissenting from the publike Worship, and that my self should assume the publique place, which thing never entered into my intention; however we may be mispresented through malice or misprision, yet know that our actions will manifest all peaceable obedience to the present Power, to whom, with your self, I am A ready Servant, Will: Hartley. FINIS.
