L1526 E406_16 R201922 99862404 160493
A LETTER FROM THE KINGS MAJESTIES COURT AT HAMPTON; CONCERNING The Commissioners of the Lords and Com∣mons of the Parliament of England, and the Com∣missioners of the Estates of Scotlands delivering of the Propositions to the KING, upon Tuesday last at Hampton-Court. And the proceedings of the Kings Majesty thereupon. ALSO, A Message to the Estates of Scotland, and the coming into England of the Lord Lanerick, with the Trea∣tie and Covenant, to present to His Gracious MAJESTY. LONDON: Printed for Iohn Wilson, Anno Dom. 1647.
A LETTER FROM THE KINGS MAJESTIES Court at Hampton, concerning the Comissio∣ners presenting the propositions to the King, upon Tuesday last, being the 7. of this instant Moneth of September, 1647. SIR, YEsterday being the 7. of this instant, the Commissioners of the Lords and Com∣mons assembled in Parliament together with
the Commissioners of the Kingdom of Scot∣land, arrived at his Majesties Court, with the Propositions, from both Houses of Parlia∣ment, to be presented to the Kings Majesty, a briefe Summary or collection of which, I have sent you here inclosed, being the chiefe Heads (as near as I could gather) of the said propositions, viz, 1. To recall Proclamations against the Par∣liaments of both Kingdomes. 2. His Maiesty to signe the Covenant, 3. To passe a Bill for abolishing Bishops. 4. To passe a Bill for sale of Bishops Lands. 5. Religion to be reformed as the Houses agree, 6. Such uniformi∣ty of Religion to be passed in an Act. 7 An act passed against Popish Recusants. 8. For education of the Children of Papists. 10. For laying penal∣ties upon Papists. 11, An act for prevention of popish practises: and the like for the Kingdome of Scotland. 12. For the Royall assent to acts for the Lords day, for preaching against innovations, re∣gulating Colledges, and for publike debts and dammages, the like for Scotland. 12. To passe the setling of the Militia and Navie. 14. To null the old great seale.
14. For setling of Conservators for the peace of the Kingdomes. 15. The joynt Declarations and the qualifications against Malignants. 16. An act to be passed to declare and make void the Ces∣sation of Ireland, and all treaties and conclusions of peace with the Irish Rebels. 17. The setling of the Militia of the City of London. 18. The great Seale of the Commissieners of Parliament, and all acts by it to be made good. After the Commissioners arrivall here, immediatly His Majesty was acquainted with the same, who see∣med very pleasant and delightfull thereat, and with much respect and honour entertained them, as befited so gracious a Prince; and after the Commissioners had presented themselves before His Majesty, they de∣livered the Propositions to Him, desiring an Answer within the space of sixe dayes; and no doubt but they will receive full satisfaction therein, by reason that His Majesty doth (in part) approve of some, and it is hoped in few dayes (by Gods assistance) will give a satisfactor y Answer to the rest, which God of his infinite goodnesse grant, That so His Ma∣jesty, and His Two Houses of Parliament may bee firmly united together, and this poore languishing Kingdome, receive the blessings of Peace for the fu∣ture. Few dayes (we hope) will produce great sa∣tisfaction to the Kingdome, and his Majesties resolu∣tion further known concerning this great and weighty businesse.
For other Newes, we have but little, only this, that we have lately received informati∣on, that the Commissioners of the Estates of Scotland are not wel pleased, touching some particulars which lately happened concern∣ing a Peere of that Realme, and another Gen∣tleman, &c. Concerning which, the Governor of Newcastle hath endeavored to satisfie the Estates of Scotland about the same, and for that end hath sent a message to them, a copy of which, I shall here present to you, for the be ter clearing of many doubts and jealou∣sies, that may arise, &c. Right Honourable, REceiving your Letter concerning Mr. Cheesely, though his free passage (before it came) was granted, and therein your expectation answered, yet that a clear and right inter∣pretation may bee had of the cause of stopping Mr. Cheesely, and all misinterpretations removed, I desire to demonstrate the grounds and reasons of what I did, and give your Honors ample and what further satisfaction I can in the thing, that no offence may be taken thereat, First, my intelligence from the South told me of dangerous risings and tumults in the ci∣ty of London against the Parliament, occasioned by the insti∣gation of some particular male-contented persons, who en∣deavoured to embroyle this Kingdom in a second warre, and was labouring to kindle a flint in your Nation, and had sent
some Agens thither to set the work on foot: (which  too probable by that which fell from the mouthes of man of your Clergy in their Pulp ts about the same time)  the Speakers of the Parliament were (with most of the  bers driven from the Houses and glad to flye to the Army for safety. And they with the Army marching towards the City with a resolution to suppresse those tumlts: and Mr. Cheesely co∣ming in the mean time (before I had received any expresse from the Army how the state of affaires stood, and before I knew that Mr Speakers, and the rest of the Members were safely returned to the Houses) and shewing mee a paper without a seale, which he pretended to be the Speakers passe (which I knew not nor him neither) and not having the Ge∣nerals passe, nor letting me see your Commissioners passe, (but only at last told me that he had it) but did not shew it me at all, I was doubtful that hee might have beene a party ingaged in that dangerous combination against the Parl and Army, and going to do some ill offices in your Kingdome, & therefore upon these grounds and some others, I thought it my duty (in discharging of the trust reposed in me) to esire Mr. Cheesely to stay here till I sent an expresse (which I did with all speed) to Major Generall Lambert in Yorkshire up∣on the return whereof Mr. Cheesely had free passage, and was no longer stayed. And therefore I hope no such construction will be put as that there was the least intention in me (or any thing condu∣cing to it) to violate the happy friendship and union betwixt the two Nations, which I with all cordialnesse, and reality have endeavoured, and shall with all my power study to pre∣serve, Newcastle, Aug. 21. 1647. Your Honours assured friend and servant. R. Lilburn.
Postscript. UPon the close of this Letter, we recei∣ved further newes from the North, viz. That the Committee of Estates in Scotland, have chose two Commissioners, the one to give a visit to his Majesty, the other to come to the Parliament; they bring with them the Treaty and the Covenant, and have re∣ceived instructions from the Committee of Estates how to treat thereon: the Lord La∣nerick is expected here very speedily, with the Covenant. Here is an excellent Court, both for civill behaviour; and great respect to all that resorts hither. His Majesty is very pleasant since the coming down of the com∣missioners, so that it is hoped, there will be a happy uniting betwixt them, and a long∣wished for composure of all differences whatsoever. Dated at Hampton-Court, the 8. of Sep∣tember, 1647. FINIS.
