L1482 E443_26 R202809 99862980 161715
A LETTER from KENT: Of the Rising at ROCHESTER THE Magazine surprised, with 1000 Armes, 100 piece of Ordnance, two Guns planted at the Bridge, 50 ships in the River; And of the Treaty with them. ALSO The Declaration of a young man that calls himself Prince CHARLES, And the comming in of divers to kisse his hand. WITH A Declaration of other passages from the County of KENT. May. 22. 1648. Imprimatur Gilb. Mabbott. Printed at London by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, neer the Queenes-head Tavern, 1648.
A LETTER FROM ROCHESTER in KENT, Concerning The Surprize of the Magazine, and raising of Forces for the defence of the Towne. SIR, YEsterday we had a rumor spread abroad about this Towne, that six troopes of Horse were comming hither from the Ar∣my to plunder the Town, and quarter here,
and carry away divers Inhabitants for joyn∣ing in a petition on Foot, for the King, which caused a discontent in many who seemed to beleeve the truth of it, as if it had been really so intended. Last night some Gunnes were shot off, in the night, in the streets, which gave an A∣larme to the town, the watch not daring to oppose them. This morning early there were Drummes beaten, and horse and Foot gathered toge∣ther, declaring that it was for the defence of the town against the Army, and they did in short time grow to a considerable number. They marched to the Magazine, which they surprized, and took out Armes for their use, with powder, shot, match, and other ne∣cessaries. Also they drew out two pieces of Ord∣nance upon Carriages, and placed them at the Bridge; and they stood upon their guard, protesting to oppose all such as should op∣pose them. There were in the Magazine nigh 1000
Armes, 100 piece of Ordnance, and good store of Ammunition of all sorts. There were about 40 or 50 ships in the ri∣ver, out of which many Officers came ashore, both Captains, Masters, Bosons, Gunners, and o∣thers, and offered to joyn with them in the said ingagement. There were thus gathered together to the number of 3 or 400 in few houres, who after increased to more. But being since satisfied further in the clea∣ring of the businesse, and upon a promise made to them, that all means possible shall be used for stopping all forces from being sent against them, or quartering upon them, they are much prevailed with, and the mu∣tiny this night is pretty well appeased, and we hope as good as over, and that all things will be at peace here. Captain Lea and others who are gone from hence towards you, will advertise you more fully of the particulars. Rochester 21 of May 1648. late at night.
A Letter from Sandwich, concerning one who is there taken, that sayes he is Prince CHARLES. Right Honourable, HEre came two Butchers to the Mayor, who said that there was one that passed along with them, who saith that he is Prince Charles, the Prince of Wales, & that he stole away in his slippers, and passed by the way of Deale, telling how many miles he said he walked in his slippers, with o∣ther discourse which passed between him and them, & that upon his report to be the Prince, they caused Poultry to be dressed, and got ready for him, with other passages between them. This young man (who was the re∣ported Prince) being asked of the Ma∣jor,
& other Magistrates of the Town, whether he was Prince Charles or not, he said he was not, denying that he said so, but the Butchers affirmed it. Then it was told him, that they would send him to the Parliament, and acquaint them how he had called himself so. The young man then replyed that (as he said) he was the Prince of Wales Prince Charles: they asked him whe∣ther he was the King of Englands son, & he said yea, he was King Charles his son, and that he had heard that that County with others adjoyning to it, had declared their affections to settle him and his Father in their Rights, & that therfore he was come over to joyn with them, and that his intent is to as∣sist them for the bringing of the King his Father to London, to this purpose
(as I hear) he did declare to the Mayor, and the rest. Divers that came to see him desired to kisse his hand, which he houlds forth to them, and some kisse it. He came hither in very poore habit, and a course shirt upon him, but had afterwards better cloathes put upon him: But it is be∣leeved by most of judgement, that it is not the Prince; but that he was one that was ap∣pointed to have been reputed so, to have ani∣mated the Cavaliers to joyne in a speedy bo∣dy, out of this & some other adjacent Coun∣ties, others think it was for other ends: But without question it cannot be Prince Charles. This young man is of a middle stature; his under lip is bigger then his upper lip: he hath somewhat a flaxen haire; and his coun∣tenance is pale, only that he hath been tanned with the Sunne. Sandwich 18 May 1648. FINIS
