L1830 E910_11 99866562 168451
THE Literal Mans Learning: OR, The Light of Saints PERFECTION in the Life of GRACE. Printed for the Author. The Epistle to the enquiring Reader. Beloved Countrymen, COnsidering the many different Judgements of men in these dayes, concern∣ing the way of everlasting Life, some saying this is the way, others that; and few men judge right. I have in love unto all mankind, and there∣fore in love to my self, sought out the Law of Life, by the Word of the Lord, ac∣cording to the will of the Father, and promise of our Lord Jesus, whom we should hear in all things; for although it is so, that we are yet in the state of mortality, yet God the Father hath prepared immortal, or eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son, and Believers in the Lord, as the Scriptures have said, have everlasting Life, and shall not come into condemnation, John 5. but are passed from death unto life everlasting by promise, John 3. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life, John 5.24. Again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, the hour is comming, and now is, when the dead shal hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. Now is the hour, in which the dead in sins and trespasses may hear his voice; if they hear and believe in him, they shall live by him, therefore harden not your hearts: For he that believeth not in the hour of grace and peace the Lords word, shall be in the hour of trouble destroyed by the wrath of God. Marvel not at this; For the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shal hear his voice, v. 28. And shall come forth, they that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation, v. 29. They that have believed his Testimony, or Word, shall rise to eternal life; they that
have not, shall rise to death eternal; the hour is coming, not yet come. All that are in the graves are not yet come forth, for David is not yet ascended, Acts 2.34. In this Book following is the Law of Life manifested, and the Perfection of Believers in the Lord, in the Life of Grace, demonstrated by his Word of Truth; whereby is shewed the way for to obtain freedom from condemnation, and eternal or everlasting death: Herein is shewed, that perfect upright men before the Lord, in the earth have sin; and that they that are perfect, upright, and in the Lord compleat, have sin in the perfect life of Grace; and that who∣soever believeth in the Lord, as the Scriptures have said, doth righteousnesse, and are born of him, although they offend in many things: Herein is shewed, how he that is born of God deth not sin, or whosoever; and also, that they that are born of God do sin: And also shewed, that Believers are in this world, as Christ Iesus is, the sons of Gods love. And a Discovery of the second coming of the Lord, where the Saints shall reign, and what shall be restored then. These Mysteries are great, and sought out by them that have pleasure therein. If a∣ny scorn to learn of men, yet beware, ye scorners, that ye scorn not the Testimony of the Lord. I know no mortal men so wise, but they may be made by the Lords Word wiser, if they believe it; none so good, but they may be better, if they obey it; none so bad, but may be saved, if they repent and believe the truth. If ye will not suck honey from the lowest rose, yet goe to the lofty Lilly, the unquestionable Testimony, and believe it, giving glory unto the Word of God: Did the Lord give forth his Testimony, his Word, for men to believe it, or wrest it? to add to it, or take away from it? or for men to put private Interpretati∣ons upon it? Read, Judge, and Answer when ye will. They that will, or do say, whosoever is born of God do not commit any sin, put a private Interpretation upon that Scripture, which saith, Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; because they that say they have no sinne, in them the truth is not: It is opened in the Book. Written by Daniel Lewes, a Believer of the Testimony of Jesus, born in the Parish of Membury, in the County of Devon.
PAul the Apostle of our Lord Christ Jesus, both to the Jews and Cen∣tiles, in his Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 8. and Vers. 2. declareth his freedome from the Law of sin and death; which Declaration of his it agreeable unto the promise that our Lord made unto his Disciples, if they continued in his Word. See John 8. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, if ye continue in my Word, then are ye my disciples indeed, ver. 31. And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, ver. 32. I believe it is worthy of our best meditation, and to spend in seeking out the Mysterie of this Grace, heart and hand, time and pen: The freedom of the Lords Disciples from the Law of sin and death, to seek how it is done, by the Word of the Lord, in the which we are to continue; For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of sin and death, Rom. 8.2. The truth of the Doctrine is not to be called in question by any, but to be by all men believed: The Mystery may be by us enquired after and made known; therefore I will first declare what the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus is: Secondly, I will shew by the Word of God, how it doth free from the law of sin and death. God the Father is the Spirit of Life, Acts 17.24, 25. Iohn 4.24. Seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things. Observe, God the Father is the spirit of life, because he giveth life to all. The Spirit that giveth life to all. And his law of life in Christ Jesus is to be¦lieve in that man. That I prove thus: The Son of man is lifted up, that who∣soever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life, John 5. That Christ Jesus is a man in whom all should believe, see Acts 17.30, 31. with Acts 3.22. Him shall ye hear in all things. Thus you see the Spirit of life, the Father, the Law of life eternal, is in his Son Christ Jesus: whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life; And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one that seeth the Son and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day, John 6.40. There you have the law of life declared by the Son according to the will of the Father, whom ye are to hear in all things, This is my Fathers will, that every one which seeth me, and believeth on me, may have eternal life: Unto which will of the Father, the Son hath made a gracious promise, in these words, And I will raise him up at the last day. Thus then the law of life eternal, and the promise of being raised thereunto at the last day, is unto every one that seeth the Son by faith, and believeth in him, made a sure Law of Life, by the will of the Father, and pro∣mise of our Lord his Son. Therefore it is said, The just shall live by faith, Rom. 1.17. See Gal. 2.16. A man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Christ Jesus: even we have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law: For by the works of the Law shall no flesh be
justified, because by the Law is the knowledge of sin, Rom. 3.20. By the Law of Moses: Yet that Law is holy, and good, Rom. 7.12. Yea spiritual, ver. 14. Yet sin worketh death by it, ver. 13. That Law was a Teacher, or Schoolmaster, Gal. 3.24. till Christ, but then a Schoolmaster no longer to us, ver. 25. be∣cause by the body of Jesus Christ that Law is dead to us; and we also are, or should be dead unto it, Rom. 7. But now we are delivered from the Law, that being dead wherein we were held; understand it Moses Law, v. 6. the old Letter, or old Law of the Lord: The reason is, that we should serve in newness of spirit; that is, in the Law of the spirit, or the Law of the Father, by Christ Jesus, and be justified by that Law, or the Law of Faith, and Life in Christ Jesus. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God, Rom. 5.1. through our Lord Jesus Christ: And as sin worketh death by the good spi∣ritual old law of God; even so faith doth work life and peace by the good spiritual new law of God; because faith is imputed for righteousness unto every one that believeth in Christ Jesus, Rom. 4.5. & 22, 23, 24, 25. Abrahams faith was imputed to him for righteousness; it was not written for his sake alone, but for us also, to whom it shal be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. That is thus to be understood; if we on him believe unto the end of our life, that Faith shal be imputed to us for righteousness at the last day; Well done good and faithful servant, enter in∣to the joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25. And he that endureth to the end shall be saved, Mat. 10.12. The end of the Law of Faith is salvation of souls. See 1 Pet. 1.2. so on. Therefore we conclude, that a man is justified by Faith, Rom. 3.28. with∣out the deeds of the first Law of God; but by the second Law of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus, the law of Life. Do we then make void the law through Faith? God forbid: we establish the law of Faith, in which law are works also to be obeyed by disciples: Therefore the law of Life in Christ Jesus, is a law of works also: And if any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. If any draw back from Faith in Christ Jesus, and from the works of that law of Life, they perish in sin, excepv they repent; but if they sin, and repent of it before the Lord, abiding in the law of life, he will for∣give them, Mat. 6.6. And they believing in him, are also by him justified from all things; from which they could not by the law of Moses, Acts 13.39. be∣ing justified by Faith, the just live thereby, Rom 1.11. Now the just, that is, they that are justified, shal live by Faith, Heb. 10.38. But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves also are found sinners (as Iames saith) in many things we offend all, Jam. 3 2. And Paul declared of his being brought into captivity to the law of sin, even then when he was the Apostle of Christ Jesus. Consider the words when spoken by him in the present tense; For I delight in the Law of God, after the inward man, Rom. 7.22. That was not the Law of God by Moses, because he was from that delivered, v. 6. and dead to it, v. 4. Yet when he delighted in the law of the spirit of Life, he said, that he saw another law in his members warring against the law of his mind, and sometime prevailing, so that it had victory, or overcame him, bringing him into captivity to the law of sin, v. 23. Yea, he said that he hated something he
did, and did not allow of it. See v. 15. yea moreover he said, when he would do good evil was present with him. v. 21. ye that sin was in him. v. 20. And Iohn said, if we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. John the 1.1, 8. Observe the most perfect Saints, Christ Jesus being excepted, have sin in them; therefore the Saints perfection is not in being without sin in action: but in Gods grace that forgiveth sin committed; if we confesse our sins to him, he is Faithful and just to forgive our sins, and to cleanse us from all sins by the blood of Jesus, he will make good the Law of life to us. Whosoever believeth in him shall not perish: but have life everlasting. John 3. it is the will of the Father, and also the promise of the Son: that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. John 6. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we that have believed in Christ, we our selves also are found sinners: we grant we are so, if we say we have no sin, we are lyars; and so is any man, Christ excepted; is there∣fore Christ the Minister of sin? God forbid, said the Apostle. See Gal. 2.17. but the Law of our members is the Minister of sin. Rom. 7. our own lust. Jam. 1. that's the Minister of sin: but Christ Jesus is not the Minister of sin, although they were, and we are found sinners, that seek to be justified by him Yet our Lord Christ Jesus is not the minister of sin; because he sinned not: Although we sin, but he is the Minister of graces, and truth; for it came by him, John 1.17. And of the righteousness of faith he is the Minister: For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh. Rom. 8.3. in making his soul an offering for sin. Isa. 53. or his body an offering for sin, once for all. See Heb. 10.10. this man, after he had offered one sacrifies for sins for ever, sate down on the right hand of God. v. 12. exspecting his Enemies to be made his footstool. v. 13. for by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. v. 14. that is, the Faithful: therefore if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the Truth. v. 26. that is thus to be understood as fol∣loweth, if after we have received the knowledge, that God hath made the body of Jesus Christ a sacrifice that satisfieth God for sins, a sacrifice that sanctifieth, and perfecteth believers: if we wilfully reject the sacrifice and grace of God therein, then there remaineth no more sacrifice for sin; because all other sacrifice for sin are done away. v. 9. he doth not say there remaineth no pardon for sin: but there remaineth no more sacrifice for sin; because all other sacrifices are insufficient: but this sacrifice is alsufficient; therefore there remaineth no sacrifice for sin, but judgment to them that reject it. Of like import is that in Heb. 6. for it is not said, it is impossible for them to be renewed by repentance: but unto it, if they shall do; so meaning, it is a hard thing, for any to turn them again, or to renew them again unto repen∣tance: not impossible for them to be renewed by repentance; because after Peter knew Christ Jesus by Divine revelation. Mat. 16. he denyed, and for∣swore his Master. Mat. 27. And was renewed by repentance, yet the Lord said. Mat. 10. Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I deny before my Fa∣ther which is in Heaven. v. 33. And the Apostle said, if we deny him, he also
will deny us. 2 Tim. 2.12. Repentance is implyed, or else Peter had not been renewed. Thus you see the Law of life is Faith in Christ Jesus: And that Faith in Christ Jesus doth free Disciples from the Law of sin and death: According to the promise of the Lord, if ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed, and ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free. The Law of life is Faith; because the just do now live by it. Heb. 10.38. See Rom. 1.17. Faith doth free Disciples from the Law of sin, or condem∣nation; because it justifieth See Rom. 3.28. the 5.1. Faith doth free Disci∣ples, because it purifieth the heart: And they which believe have by it ac∣cesse. See Rom. 5.2. Act. 15.9. Faith is righteousnesse accounted so, impu∣ted so. Rom. 4. the clean raiment of the Lambs Wife. Rev. 19.7, 8. Much more I might speak of Faith: but I will first consider what Law of sin, or condemnation it doth free Disciples of the Lord from, and also from what death? Faith doth free the Lords Disciples from eternal death: but not from temporal death. And from eternal death Faith freed the Apostle, See 1 Cor. 15. Else Faith is vain: not from temperal death; because he knew the Disciples must first die, or be changed at the last trump, before that glory. But as concerning Disciples being made free from the Law of sin, I will not be positive, to determine the point: but deliver my judgement in the thing. Faith in Christ Jesus is the Law of life: As hath been shewed. I come to consider the words, for the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the Law of sin. Consider the Apostle did not say it had made him free from sinning: for he complained of sin in him. See Chap. 7.20. And Iohn said, if we say we have no sin, the Truth is not in us; therefore it cannot be understood, that it freed the Apostle or Disciples from sinning: yet doubtles the Law of life made him free from the Law of sin, if we understand by the Law of sin, the operation of his members to sin, then he was not made free from it, Chap. 7. but if the good spiritual old Law of God, that made nothing perfect, where∣of the Lord is the end, by the ded which no flesh shall be justified, from which believers are delivered after that Faith came, by which we were con∣demned, by the which Law is the knowledge of sin. Rom. 3.20. & v. 19. & Rom. 7.6. Gal. 3. See Heb. 7.19. and v. 18. from this Law of the knowledge of sin, or of condemnation for sin, Believers are made free by the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus. For the foundation of my judgement see the Scriptures before cited, and them that follow. John 1.2. my little Children these things write I unto you, that ye sin not, and if any man sin, we have an Advocate, that is one to make peace, with the Father, Iesus Christ the Righteous, so on; he is our peace. And v. 12. I write unto you little Children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name sake: I write unto you that ye sin not little Children: but if any sin, ye may see ye are made free from the Law of sin, or condemnation and death (sin worketh death by the Law) by Faith in Christ Jesus: the Law of life, ye are made free, but now ye are delivered from the Law. Rom. 7. Again Col. 2. ye are compleat in him. v. 10. having forgiven you all tres∣passes. v. 13. blotting out the hand-writing of ordinances that was against
us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Crosse. 14. the Ordinances of the old Law, which was contrary to us; be∣cause all were condemned by it: And no flesh justified by that Law; because it was not of Faith, Gal. 3.12. And that no man is justified by that Law, in the sight of God. See v. 11. therefore seeing Believers are justified, we are delivered from that Law of God: or made free from it by Faith in Jesus Christ, the just live by Faith. Observe, now the just live by Faith under the Ministry of Jesus Christ, being delivered from the Law of condemnation and death. Secondly ob∣serve, Believers are now in Jesus Christ compleat. Thirdly observe, Be∣lievers are not now free from sinning, but if they sin they have with God the Father, a Peace maker Jesus Christ. Again, fourthly observe, Believers are not delivered to sin, but from sin, that sin should not have the dominion, but be by the grace of God destroyed. Fifthly observe, Believers great grace, glory, and verity, is by Faith; Children of God, and joynt heirs with Christ. Sixthly observe, now there is no condemnation to them that walk in the Law of life. Seventhly observe, they that fall from Faith do fall from all this grace, and glory. See 1 Tim. 5.12. And Mar. 16.16. last part. If ye continue in the word of Christ ye shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you free: And if the Son make ye free, ye shall be free indeed. Iohn 8. Christ freeth his Disciples from darknesse and ignorance by his word of wis∣dom and Light. Again, Christ freeth his Disciples from suffering for sin; because he suffered for them: and satisfying the Law, because he satisfied God, there remaineth therefore a rest to the people of God. Heb. 4.9. And Believers do enter into rest by Faith. v. 3. Rom. 5.1. into peace with God through Faith in Christ Jesus. Seeing we have a great High Priest, that is pas∣sed into the Heavens, Iesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession. Heb. 4.14. And walk in the Law of life, by Faith in our Lord. Observe, Disci∣ples are made free by promise, if they continue in the word of the Lord. Secondly observe, Disciples do not immediately or presently attain to the knowledge of Gospel freedom; ye shall know the Truth and be made free, thereby if ye continue in the word of the Lord: but if ye continue not in the word of the Lord, ye shall go down unto the Chambers of death in dark∣nesse, and bondage not made free. Well then, seeing Disciples by promise, are to know the truth, and be made free thereby, from the Law of condemnation and death, if they con∣tinue in the word of the Lord: let us look unto the glorious Lord of Light, Jesus Christ the Righteous, who by his Ministery of Truth is the Author and Finisher of Faith: Faith cometh by hearing the word of God. Rom. 10. the grace and Truth that came by Jesus Christ. Iohn 1.17. is the word of Faith which his Ministers Preached: to beget Faith, the Law of life in the hearts of them that heard the words; but they that put the word of the Lord from themselves, eternal life also, See Act. 13.46. Therefore I conclude, that our Lord Jesus Christ, by the word of his grace is the Author, and Fi∣nisher of Faith in the hearts of all them that receive his word into their hearts, and keep it unto the end. By which word of grace and Truth in continuance of time, the keepers thereof grow up into a glorious life, that is
great peace and freedom: having Christ among, in, or with them, the hope of glory. See Col. 1.27. See the Margent Note, for among, or with you. And there is great reason to be shewed for this Truth, that the word of grace and Truth, that came by Jesus Christ, doth beget Faith, the Law of life, in the hearts of all them that keep it; because by that word the object of Faith is lifted up unto all: perswading, inviting, and exhorting, and so it draweth to come. See Iohn 7. if any man thirst, let him come unto me, and drink. v. 37. how gracious is any or every man by the Lords own word in∣vited, or drawn by invitation, for to come to him, and drink the water of Life. See v. the .38. if any sinner thirst for a Savour, let him come unto the Lord Jesus: he is not willing any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. 2 Pet. 9. if your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as the Snow. Isa. 1. therefore repentance granted, is unto sinners water of Life: but if ye wil not drink thereof ye shall perish in your sin. If any Believer thirst for spiritual refreshments, let him come to the Lord Christ, to the flowing forth of his grace & Truth, the word of the Lord that is written in the holy Scriptures to perfect the man of God, & comfort the Saints: & ye shal then in time know the Truth, and that shall refresh you, for the Lord cannot ly (make you free, that his word shall do if ye continue in it) For the word is not in Heaven above thee, nor in the Earth below thee, the righteousnesse of Faith saith, it is nigh thee. Rom. 10. Even in thy mouth, and thy heart: Mark, even in that is in the holy Scripture, or in the mouth of the Lords Minister, but not in thy mouth nor heart, except thou receive it and believe it. Observe the Lord Jesus he is in Heaven above thee, not in the Earth below thee. See Heb. 7.14. but the word which men should believe and receive, is written in the holy Scripture. See 2 Tim. 3. Iohn 20.31. these are written, that ye might believe, and be made wise to salvation; the word is nigh us that we should believe in the holy Scripture. Those that will not be satisfied with the word of grace and Truth, that came by Christ are not refreshed: but are complaining as if they were in a Wildernesse where there is no water, al∣though they are zealous. But it is not to be wondred at; because reject the refreshing word of grace and Truth: seeking something above them out of their reach, or seeking things below them, the imaginations of men they are not refreshed by the water of life, they cannot be except they repent. Our Lord praying the Father to sanctifie Believers, prayed that he would do it by the word, Iohn 17. sanctifie them through thy Truth: thy word is Truth, whereby is shewed unto us, that the word of Grace and Truth that came by Christ, do fill the heart with Faith, and so sanctifie or purifie it, as the Father and Son have the body. Great is the refreshments of thy word O Lord, unto them that trust therein. Yea blessed is (the) man that maketh the Lord his trust. Psal. 41.4. See Psal. 119. v. 42. So shall I have where∣with to answer them that reproach me, for I trust in thy word. I shall be re∣freshed by wisdom; but thou must cry after knowledge, and lift up thy voice for understerding. Pro. 2.3. thou must seek her as silver, and search for her, as for hid treasures v. the .4. then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and finde the knowledge of God. v. 5. so on unto v. the 10. but take notice, understanding, or wisdom, here is put in the noun Feminine (her) proceed∣ing;
that is, the words Counsels, or Commandements of God; see chap. 1 and v. 1. of the 2. unto which thou shouldst apply thine heart and ear to be wise, v. 2. Ye to be made wise to salvation, 2 Tim. 3. to be refreshed or comforted, Rom. 15.4. for the word of life is nigh thee; that is, the word of faith, which Christ and his Apostles have preached; which is written for our learning; truths of such glory, that the Prophtts enquired after, and the Angels desired to look into, 1 Pet. 1.1. Be not deceived, not in thy heart, except with thy heart thou shall believe it; for with the heart man believeth unto rightoousnesse, Rom. 10. If thou come to God, thou must believe he is, and a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. Even so they that seek spiritual refreshments, Lust belleve the word of the new Testa∣ment, the Lord's word of faith is true, the truth of God; or else ye cannot be refreshed: For the wrath of God abideth on him that believeth not John 3.36. Or the wrath of God abideth on him that believeth not the Son; they that, believe not the record that God gave of his Son, are of great sin guilty John 5.10. Again, If any man thirst for a King, one of high birth, a great Conqueror in high glory, then come unto the word of God, the river of divine Light, and it will guide thee or shew thee; Jesus Christ King of all the world, mande higher then the Kings of the Earth, where is he that is born King of the Jews, God with us, Mat. 1. and second Conquerer of Death and Hell? He is not here, for he is risen as he said, Mat. 28. One that that hath the keys of Hell and Death, Rev. 1.18. One that will give victory to every one that believeth on him; I will raise him up at the last day, John 6. Observe, the Lord Jesus will give his Disciples, if they continue in his word, victory over Death and Hell; he will do it, he can do it, unshut the power of Death and Hell, this King the Lord Jesus, hath the keys to do it; here is water of Life for every one that liveth, and in him believeth; if he die, yet shall he live: This King is the Son of God, I have begotten thee, Psal. 2. He is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, high by birth; he is the Star of Jacob, the light of God's Israel. O Earth, behold thy King, the Heathen is given him for his Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for his possession: O that thou wouldest rent the Heavens, and so come down, that the mountains might rremble before thee, and know themselves to be but men. O thirst for this King, for he shall judge the cause of the oppressed; and also break every yoke, yea, the bars and gates of Death in sunder; shall not the Judge of all do right? If any man thirst for Laws that are spiritual, come to this King, and his word of grace and truth will teach thee, and promise thee Love and Light eternal in the observation of them, that is water of Life to every believing soul, cause of great joy. If any any rellious man thirst for proclamations of grace, let him come to this Kings Embassadors word of peace; 2 Cor. 5. Though they have been unto him traitors, or of him or his Saints murderers, see Act. 3. And in Saul, God hath raised up his Son, to turn you and pardon you, or that ye should turn from your sins and be pardoned; this is water of life to the rebellious; but if ye receive not this ye perish: Kings of the Earth are
mercilesse in this, look for the King of mercy. If any man thirst for spiritual food, come unto this Lord and King, and by his word he will feed thee with his own body and blood unto eternal life; this you see, if any man cometh to the Lord Jesus, there is full refresh∣ment for him in his word of grace and truth; John 6. My flesh I will give for the life of the World, v. 51. Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the water of life: The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that is a thirst come: And whosoever will let him take the water of life freely, Rev. 22.17. The Bride-groom's voice saith, Come, and drink; which is Spirit and Life; John 6.63. with John 7.37. Jesus stood and cried, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink: Pro∣mising that he that believed on him, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water, v. 38. The Scriptures of truth, old and new, do say, Him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you; then shall the water flow; then will the glorious Lord be unto you a place of broad rivers and streams; Isa. 33. Then shall thine eyes see the King in his beauty; they shall behold the Land that is very far off: Thy water shall be sure, if thou believe on him, as the Scriptures hath said; if thou cleave to his word, and continue therein, bowing down to his wise∣dom, and apply, or incline thy self unto his Commandements, wisedom shall enter thy heart, and then knowledge shall be pleasant to thy soul; then shalt thou drink of the water of Life, and be abundantly satisfied thereby; If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink; this saith the Lord. How gracious doth the Lord draw any man, or all men, by his free offer of the water of life to drink, with a gracious free invitation, Come unto me: Our Lord said, He that gave a Disciple a cup of water, should not lose his reward; shall the Lord take notice of such small things in men to reward it? And will any man be so wilful, not taking notice of so great a thing as the water of life freely offered to any man, and of the Lord's own free invita∣tion? Come unto me. If so, it is but a right and also a just reward that you should perish, not injoying living water, nor yet the Lord's gracious presence; because ye regarded not his grace. Thus you see how graciously the Lord draweth every man unto the (word) of his grace, that they might live by faith in him; he that believeth in him, shall live by him; He thae cometh to him, shall never hunger; and he that believeth on him, shall never thirst, John 6.35. For he is the bread of life. But some may say, we have no righteousnesse, and therefore we fear to come unto the Lord; then I answer by the word of life, he came to call thee, see Mat. 9.13. And if thou repent and believe in the Lord, that shall be counted unto thee for righteousness; see Rom. 4. But some may say, I have no zeal; heark, then come and be zealous of his word, of his works; and I tell thee, and all men, if thou have never had zeal nor righteousnesse before the time of your convertion, yet you may come boldly to the Lord, to the Throne of grace; and find help in time of need, if ye continue in his word. That I prove this, Repent and be baptized every one of you, Acts 2. He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, Mark 16. If ye continue in my word,
ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, John 8. Again, If ye had never so much zeal and righteousnesse, except it were the righte∣ousnesse of Faith, and zeal for the word and works of the Lord Jesus Christ, ye must count them rags, if ye were according to the Law blamelesse: See Phil. 3. Here I will advise some, take heed how ye call zeal for the word and works of Christ filthy, or the righteousnesse of Faith filthy rags; for it is the spotlesse raiment of the Lamb's wife; see Rev. 19.7, 8. But all zeal and righteousnesse, that is compared with the righteousnesse of Faith, is but as filthy rags comparative, but dung I count it: So although it be blame∣lesse according to the holy Law of God, in respect of the righteousnesse of God by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Isaiah that Eagle-eyed Prophet, that saw the Lord's glory fill the whole Earth, fore-seeing the gracious call of our Lord Jesus, how he opened a fountain of grace to all sinners; called all to the waters, without money and without price: Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, Isa. 55.1. Behold, I have given him for a witnesse to the people, a leader and commander to the people, v. 4. That is, not to Israel alone, but unto all the people of the Earth; not a leader only to righteousnesse, but also to lead sinners to re∣pentance; Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thought; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. v. 7. (that is, Jesus Christ) Behold, Thou shalt call a Nation that thou knowest not (understand it in the present tense) and Nations that knew not thee, shall run unto thee) understand one in the present tense, the other in the future, when the Prophet spake; Because of the Lord thy God, and for the holy One of Israel; that is, God the Father, the holy One of Israel; for he (hath) glorified thee v. 5. God the Father hath glorified the Lord Jesus Christ before the world was (taught by him) Christ in the ministry of grace, was by the Father glorified from the fall of man; and had glory with the Father in the ministry of grace, before the world was taught by him; therefore seek ye the Lord, the glorified Lord, Christ Jesus, seek ye the Lord while he may be found; call ye upon him, while he is neer, v. 6. If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink, saith the Lord, the glorified Lord. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your souls shall live: And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. That is, the Lord will never fail thee nor forsake thee, v. 3. if that ye incline your ear, and come unto him; and keep his Commandements, ye shall abide in the Lord's love; see Joh. 10.15. But some will say, What if we sin? I answer, If ye sin, ye break his Commandement; but if that ye repent, ye satisfie the Lord's Law; and keep his glorious royal Law of life, the Law of Faith. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is (not) bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, unto the Lord, whom ye should hear in all things, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight it self in fatnesse; in the royal Law of life, or faith in Christ Jesus; whereby we are made free from the Law of condemnation and death; and are presented glorious, and made compleat and perfect in him. Thus you see the evelasting Covenant of grace in Christ, is made with
men upon works of Faith; not upon the works of the old Law, for that is not of faith; but upon the works of the new Law, for they are works of faith; If ye keep my Commandements, ye shall abide in my love; incline your ear, and come unto me; hear, and your soul shall live. And I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Therefore blessed they are that do his Commandements, that they may have right to the tree of Life, Rev. 22.14. Faith without works is slain, Jam. 2.17. Therefore they are worthy of great reproof, that preach up everlasting grace, upon obedience to the old covenant of works: And they are worthy of as great reproof, that deny any covenant of works; for they give not the Lords servants meat in due season, the one or other. Thus you see there is great reason to be shewed, that the word of the Lord doth beget faith, the Law of life in the hearts of them that hear and keep it. O how strong is it to draw, to break and heal, to assure and seal, yea, to teach all the humble that receive it and keep it; making them wise through faith unto salvation; the sure word of prophesie. O! then look unto the Lord Christ Jesus, all ye Nations of the World; for his love, grace, mercy and truth, is made known for all; Preach the Gospel to every creature: Look unto his word, and be made wise; believe in him and be saved, all ye ends of the Earth: Believe and obey the Lord, and ye shall be perfect and compleat in him; continue in his word, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. Thus you see perfect peace and freedom from the Law of condemnation and death, is by the Law of life in Christ Jesus; and the Law of life is begotten by the word of the Lord: Faith cometh by hearing the word of God; and by faith believers are made compleat and perfect in Christ Jesus. Observe, Faith begotten by the word, is a precious grain; for it purifieth the heart, Act. 15.9. The righteousness then of faith, is much more excellent then that of the Law of Moses; they that obtain victory by faith, shall stand on Mount Sion with the Lamb, the Lord Christ Jesus, having his Father's name written in their foreheads. You see the word of the Lord doth beget the Law of life in them that hear and keep it; begat with the word of truth, and quickened by the Spirit of truth, unto the righteousnesse of faith; them that continue in the Lords word; and so made free from condemnation and death eternal. O, come unto the water of life, the Lords word; for by it is the object of saith lifted up unto all them that are wounded, to heal them; therefore if any man that is wounded unto death eternal by sin, thirst to be healed, let him come unto the word of the Lord, and by it believe in him, as the Scripture hath said, and he shall be healed, or everlastingly saved; Whoso∣ever believeth in him should not perish, but have eternal life, John 3.15. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world; but that the world through him might be saved, v. 17. He that believeth on him, is not condemned, saith the Lord, v. 18. That the Lord Jesus is lifted up by his word unto all that are wounded by sin, is shewed, in that he was sent, that the world through him might be savêd, and not condemned; Therefore As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wildenesse, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, v. 14.
First, I will consider Moses's lifting up the Serpent in the wilderness, how he lifted him up, why he did lift him up, and unto whom he lift him up. Moses lifted up the serpent high for a publick view, or object, see Num. 21. condly, to save them that were or might be wounded unto death, Num. 21. And thirdly, Moses lift up the serpent unto them over whom the Lord made him a Lawgiver: Even so. First then, Jesus Christ by God the Father is made unto all the world a Lawgiver, Psa. 2. The Isles shall wait for his Law, Isa. 42.4. The Elect, or cho∣sen King of God, v. 1. with Psa. 2. I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, v. 6. Therefore the Lord Christ Jesus in the Ministry of Grace and Truth is to be lifted up to all the world: Go preach the Gospel, Grace, and Truth, glad tydings to every creature, that the Son of man, the Lord Jesus, the Seed of Abraham, the Son of the Almighty God, and God with us, is lited up to save all them that are wounded to death: Look unto him all ye Nations, he is your King; beleeve in him ye wounded to death, and be everlastingly saved, ye that are appointed to die; he shall deliver them that are appointed to die, if they repent, and believe in him. Even so must the Son of man, the Lord Christ Jesus, be lifted up, to heal them that are wounded unto death by sin, that they may repent, and live by faith in him, all those over whom the Lord made him Lawgiver. Look unto him all ye ends of the earth, and be saved; for the Lord hath made him your Lawgiver and King. Him shall ye hear in all things, Acts 3. Repent, that your sins may be blot∣ted out: It is the will of the Father, and also the promise of the Son, that Whosoever beleeveth in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting Life, John 6. Therefore come to the water of Life, the Word of God, and live by faith in the Son of God, that ye may be made free from the Law of condemnati∣on and death, by the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus. He that belie∣veth in the Son of God is not condemned, see Iohn 3.18. He that believeth in the Son of God, hath the witness in himself, hath the word of grace and truth in himself; because his Word, that is Spirit and Life, is in them. Therefore come to the word of God, and live by Faith in the Son of God; for thereby shall ye be made free from condemnation and death eternal: If ye continue in the word of the Lord, being justified by Faith in him, ye are not condemned, but are made free from the law of condemnation and everlasting death, by the will of the Father, and promise of the Son; and it is sealed unto us by the Spirit of Truth. Whosoever beleeveth in him, shall not perish, but have life everlasting. Thus the word of the Lord doth witness unto us that believe in him. See Iohn 3. Therefore let them that thirst to be healed, and made free from condem∣nation and death eternal, come to the word of the Lord, and continue therein. For thereby the Lord Jesus is lifted up for every one to believe in, and be saved. He is thereby lifted up above all other means, to heal, to save, and to draw every one unto the law of Life: And he is the sure Foundation, to be by all men in or upon the Earth believed in, above Kings. Priests, or any
Princes, yea his word is above them all, and therefore we should believe his word above them all; and then ye shal be made free indeed. For by the word of grace and truth the Lord Jesus is lifted up a sacrifice for sin, satisfying God, Isa. 53. by the which offering Believers are sanctified and perfected for ever, having remission of sins, Heb. 10. And so they have full assurance of Faith, yea Victory: Ye are compleat in him, see Col. 2. ha∣ving forgiven you all trespasses. And shal be so presented, if ye continue in the Faith, Chap. 1. Thus you see the Lord Jesus is lifted up by the word of God, to satisfie God the Father, and perfect Believers; and so he maketh peace by the body of his flesh, saving all them that come to God by him, to the uttermost; from the law of condemnation, from death eternal, from sins dominion. O come to the water of Life, to the righteousness of Faith; that ye may be healed. Christ Jesus is lifted up to satisfie God for sin, and to cleanse Believers from all unrighteousness: Therefore Believers are compleat and perfect in the Lord Christ Jesus, in their Life of Faith. That Believers in the Lord Jesus, in their Life of Faith, are perfect, see Phil. 3. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded, v. 15. And that they are also compleat in the Lord, see Col. 2. Ye are compleat in him, v. 10. Thus you see Believers are perfect, and also compleat in their Life of Faith: If any man offend not in word, the same is a perfect man, Jam. 3.2. That there is a great Mystery in this soul-satisfying truth, which hath been hid from Ages, and from Generations, but is now made manifest to the Saints, I well know, and shall labour to make it known to others also: But I will first ask one question of them that say there are none of the Saints perfect and compleat in the life of grace before death, but Christ Jesus who sinned not. I ask you where the Apostle did erre in his Doctrine to the Saints? or doe you erre in imagining so? I will give you the priviledge to answer your selves: I believe the Apostle. And so I will proceed to make known this great and gracious Mystery of Grace. First, We are to understand there are degrees of Perfection: As thus, per∣fection in Works, in Wisedom, in Strength, in Power, in Glory, in Grace: And God is in all these things perfect; yea his perfection is such, that men cannot add to him in assisting; God is perfect without any man. Every good and perfect gift is of God, Jam. 1. Secondly, There are perfect men: Christ the Lord so perfect that he sin∣ned not; no man else perfect so, because that all men else have sinned, Rom. 3. And if we say that we have not sinned, we make him a lyar, and his word is not in us, John 1.10. Yet there are and were perfect men also; but not so per∣fect as the Lord Christ; because all men else have sinned. That there have been perfect men that have sinned, see Gen. 6. Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generations: And Noah walked with God. If all men sinned except the Lord Jesus, then Noah sinned, yet Noah was a per∣fect man in his generations, before the flood, and after. These were the gene∣rations of Noah, the just and perfect man, v. 9. Again, 2 Cor. 13. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one minde, v. 11.
And as many as be perfect, be thus minded, see Phil. 3.15. For God will not cast away a perfect man, see Iob 8.20. God will not cast away Believers in the Lord Christ Jesus, see Iohn 3. Observe, Believers in the Word of the Lord are perfect, yet are they vile, offend in many things: as Iames saith, In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. And Iob said, I am vile, Chap. 40. V. 4. yet Iob was a perfect upight man in the earth, Chap. 1. V. 8. said the Lord. This perfect man Iob esteemed the words of the Lord more then his food, Chap. 23. V. 12. Therefore seeing men may be perfect before the Lord, yet offend, it is a great Mystery. They that believe in the Lord as the holy Scriptures hath said, are perfect in the work of Faith, and upright before the Lord in that work in the earth; their Faith is counted to them for righteousness, their iniquities forgiven, and sins covered, Rom. 4. Even so David was upright before the Lord, in believ∣ing the Testimony of God; a man after his own heart in that work; for he esteemed the Lords Testimony more then gold. And so David com∣manded Solomon to serve the Lord with a perfect heart, and a willing minde, 1 Chron. 28. Therefore let us (the disciples of Jesus Christ) go on to, or un∣to perfection. See Heb. 6.1. Go on unto the perfect work, to believe in our Lord, as the holy Scripture hath said. And then we shall be perfect in the work of Faith, and upright in the earth before the Lord in that work, although we offend in many things: And if we confess our sins, his blood shall make us clean from all unrighte∣ousness, 1 Iohn 1. But if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us, v. 8. And if we say that we have not sinned, we make him a ly∣ar, and his truth is not in us, v. 10. Thus you see, they that believe in the Lord, as the holy Scriptures have said, are upright and perfect in the work of Faith before the Lord upon the earth, and by the grace of God in the blood of Christ Jesus made clean from all sin, and so are compleat in him; yet in many things we offend. This is the great Mystery, that offenders should be upright in the earth, and perfect, yea compleat, unreproveable, and unblameable before the all-seeing God. Ye are compleat in him, that believe in Christ Jesus, as the Scriptures have said, upright and perfect in that work before the Lord, although we offend in many, or in some things, being justified by Faith in Christ Jesus, and made clean from sin by the grace of God in the blood of the Lamb, the Lord Jesus Christ. For what the Law could not do, God sent his own Son to do (to make them compleat and perfect that believe his word, that we might be justified from all things by Faith in him) and delivered or made free from the Law of condemnation and death, by the law of Life: I do not frustrate the great Mystery of Gods grace, but magnifie it: If righteousness come by the Law, then Chhrist died in vain, Gal. 2.21. So then they which be of Faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham, Gal. 3. v. 9. the same are the children of Abraham, v. 7. delivered from the power of darkness, and translated into the kingdom of his dear Son, or Sonne of his love, Col. 1.13. and are compleat in him. See Chap. 2. Having forgiven you all trespasses. This then is the first degree of Believers Perfection in the Life of Grace:
if ye continue in the word, ye shall know the Truth, unto which the san∣ctified have by the grace of God attained in Christ Jesus, who saveth us from our sins, yet few have the knowledge thereof: I cannot speak as to spiri∣tual men. There is perfection also at the resurrection of the dead, in the life of glory: unto which the Apostle had not attained, neither was then he perfect in the life of glory; therefore he said in his perfect life of grace, If by any means I attain unto the resurrection of the dead. Phil. 3. not as if I had already atained,  were already perfect: but our conversation is in Heaven, from whence we look for a Saviour, who shal change our vile body into the likeness of his glorious body; and then make us perfect in the life of glory: and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time, without sin unto sal∣vation. Heb. 9.28. The reason is, because he hath once appeared already to take, or put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. v. 26. Thus we may see the Church of Jesus Christ is perfect in the life of grace: but not in the life of glory, but it shall be: he shall change us, that we may be like his glorious body; but we which believe in Jesus Christ, as the Scripture have said, are come to mount Zion, the City of the living God, and are perfect in the work of Faith, and compleat in the Son before the Lord. But if we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. 1 John 1.8. Observe, they that in the life of grace are perfect and upright before the Lord, and compleat in the Son, have sin; if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in such; therefore they that say they have no sin, are all of them deceived: And the Truth is not in them, if they or we say, we have no sin. And therefore such are of their Father the Devil, that say they have no sin; he is lyer, and abode not in the Truth: And such are they that say they have no sin, the Truth is not in them. Let none be angry with me, for saying they are the Children of the Devil, that say they have no sin, for John said, the Truth is not in such: And the Lord Jesus said, the Devil is the Fa∣ther of such. See John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, for the Truth is not in you that say ye have no sin. Observe, the Compleat and perfect Church of Christ Jesus, the City of the living God have sin: that I prove thus; if we say we have no sin, the Truth is not in us. 1 Iohn 1. v. 8. Sin dwelleth in me, said a Member of the Church Rom. 7.20. And in many things we offend all. Iam. 3.2. Yet they are perfect in the work of Faith, or work of God, if they believe in him, as the Scripture have said; therefore if ye sin, confess your sins unto your Father in Heaven, and he will forgive you. See Mat. 6. with Iohn 1. Come to thy Father of mercy, he will forgive thee: Come to the King of mercy, & he will make thee clean in his, or with his Blood. Secondly observe, they that say they have no sin, they have not the Truth in them, and therefore they walk in the darknesse, in a lye, not in the true Light of the Lords word, but in a lye of their own hearts; and therefore they are not perfect in the work of God, of Faith: but sin unto death, and are in their uncleanness, that is in a lye against the Truth, or true Light of
Gods word: a sin unto death; because the Blood of Christ Jesus our Lord doth not make them clean from all sin, that have not the Truth in them. Of this sin all men are guilty before they believe the Truth, See Rom. 3. And from this sin we are delivered when we believe in the Son of God. Ioh. 1.12. to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, that believe on his Name: therefore if the Children of God say, they have not so sinned, they make him a lyer, and his word is not in them; if we say we have not sinned, we make him a lyer, and his word is not in us, 1 Iohn 1.10. Iohn doth here declare what sin they had committed, before they had believed the Truth; if we say we have not sinned, if we say we have not been unbelievers, his word is not in us; for the Lord looked from Heaven upon the Children of Men, and they were all gone out of the way, none did good; and we were Children of Men before we believed in the Son of God, and then guilty of unbelief: if we deny it, his word is not in us. And when that we were Infidels, unbelievers, we did no righteousness, and he that so sinneth, or so committeth sin, is of the Devil, that sinneth and doth no righteousness; he is of the Devil. John 3. because the unbelieving do no righteousness. Rom. 3. And for this purpose (that we should believe in Christ Jesus) the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil; that we should believe in him; for whosoever doth believe in him, as the Scripture hath said, doth righteousness, and is born of God, and is righteous, for their Faith is counted, or Imputed unto them for righteousness, Rom. 4. And they stand righteous by Faith. Rom. 11. therefore while the seed of God, the word of Christ Jesus, the Truth that came by him, remaineth in them, they cannot so sin, as to be children of the Devil, while Faith is in them: yet they may sin; yea the Saints do sin while the seed of God is in them. That I prove thus, If we say we have no sin, mind the words 1 Iohn 1.8. in the present tense was not he a Saint is not his Epistle written unto the Saints that walked in the true Light? did not they keep the word? was not the love of God perfected in them, and their sins forgiven them for his Name sake? yea they had overcome the wicked one. Chap. 2. v. 14. the word of God abideth in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one: And unto them he said, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us. Therefore the Saints do sin while the seed of God remaineth in them; and yet if they believe in the Lord they are righteous. Little children let no man de∣ceive you: he that doth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous. 1 Joh. 3.7. He that believeth the Truth is righteous and made clean from all sins, and purified by Faith; therefore righteous, but whoso keepeth his word in him verily is the love of God perfected: Hereby know we that we are in him. Chap. 2. v. 5. hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy Crown: Thou that hast the key of David, the word of God. See Rev. 3. from v. 7. to 13. Objection, from 1 Iohn. 2. v. 6. He that saith he abideth in him, ought himself also to walk even as he walked; but they that sin do not walk as he walked; & there∣fore they that sin do not abide Disciples in him: this is the objection of some. I will first shew what I grant of this objection: And secondly what I deny, and then answer. He that saith he abideth in him, ought himself also so to walk even as he walked; I grant it; because the word so teacheth: but they that sin do not walk as he walked, I grant they do not walk obedient in every thing alwayes; therefore not as he walked; they that sin do not abide Disciples in him, that conclusion I deny; because if we say we have no sin, the Truth is not in us: And in many things we offend, yet I know there is a sin unto death. 1 John
5.16. And that all unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not unto death. v. 17. Therfore they that sin do abide Disciples in the Lord, & may so abide; If any man see his Brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask & he shall give him life v. 16. Now I wil give answer, they that believe the Lords word or testimony, walk in the true Light that he walked in; therefore they walk as he walked: Al∣though not so obedient always in everything. And if they offend in many things and many times yet believing his word, they walk as he walked: Let no man de∣ceive you that believe the word, they that are born of God do sin: but not unto death. And therefore it is said, whosoever is born of God sinneth not. For they that sin unto death, are such as are not born of God: or else such as are from the new berth fallen, there is a sin unto death. Therefore rejoyce in the Lord ye righteous Believers of his word, that walk in the Law of his life: Rejoyce in the Lord, rejoyce in the Truth, rejoyce in your sanctification, in your perfection, in your work of Faith or righteousness, in your new bearth, in your pardon of all sins: Rejoyce in that we all have the promise of Eternal life in glory, though we offend in many things and many times. And again, I say rejoyce in that we have the word of Truth, to seal all this grace and glory unto us: hold that fast which thou hast, that no man take thy Crown; they that believe in Jesus Christ, as the Scripture have said, are doers of the Law of life, & are justified: therfore rejoyce. Their Faith is imputed unto them for righteousness, and they are born of God, and sin not unto death; yet they sin. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selvs, & the Truth is not in us, but we know that every one which doth righteousness, is born of him, John 2.29. Every one that believeth in Christ Jesus doth righteousness; therefore every one of them is born God: they do not transgress the Law of life, the seed of God is in them: Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning; if that which ye have heard from the beginning shall re∣main in you; ye also shal continue in the Son & in the Father. v. 24. Continue in the word of the Lord, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free: the Law of the Spirit of life shal make you free from the Law of condemnation and death. Thus you see perfect upright men in the work of God or Faith, sanctified once in the Blood of the Lamb, in the life of grace have sin: And although that the Apostle truely said, I know nothing by my self; let it be understood sin, yet this wil not prove that sanctified men have no sin; because that he then spake but of him self: And John speaking of sanctified men as truly said, if we say we have no sin, the truth is not in us. Therefore they that say they have no sin, they have not the truth in them; how then can the Father, the Son, and the true Light be in such lyers? for they lye and do not believe the Truth; the Truth is not in them, but a lye of their own hearts, and they speak great swelling words; they are wretched, mise∣rable, poor, blind and naked, and know it not, that have not the truth in them; yet they say they are rich, increased with goods, have no sin, but all they do is righ∣teousness; will ye believe their lye? have need of nothing, have the Father, the Son, and also the Spirit, they say in them; but that cannot be, because the truth is not in them. Behold, they are in darknesse, not in the light of Sion; yea, they grope for the wall, like the blind, as if they had no eyes; at noon day they stumble, as in the night, and are in desolate places as dead men; for they have rejected the word of the Lord; and what wisedom is there in them? they trust imaginations of their own hearts; they speak the inventions of their own brains; they teach every man his neighbour, & his brother the counsel of their brests; & say, the Lord saith, when they say. Shall not the Lord be avenged on such a peo∣ple,
which think to cause people to forget his word, by their lyes, and by their light? if the light in you be but darknesse, how great is the darkness? you sin a∣gainst the Lord that deny the truth; you deny the truth, that deny his written word If one man sin against another, the Judge shal judge him; said Eli, 1 Sam. 2 25. But if a man sin against the Lord, who shal intreat for him? was his quary. I answer, Christ Jesus will, if that ye repent; because he ever liveth to make in∣tercession for them that come unto God by him. Heb. 7. and he calleth all to come, John 7. promising that he will in no wise cast out them that come, John 6. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come into him; and I will sup with him, and he with me. Rev. 3. Very remarkable is the grace and long forbearances of God to sinners, that I prove thus, Jeremiah prophesied to the rebellious house of Israel long, and the Lord delayed his judgements; which made Jeremiah cry out, If I am deceived thou hast deceived me; from the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amen, K. of Judah, even unto this day, that was three and twenty years; the word of the Lord came unto him, and he spake unto them; but they hearkened not: See Jer. 25.1.2, 3. so on; Then the Lord said to him, Take thee a roll of a book, and write therein all the words that I have spoken against them, from the day I spake unto thee, unto this day, Chap. 36.1, 2. The reason why God delayed judgement and commanded Jeremiah to write; see v. 3. It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do unto them, that they may return every man from his euil way, that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin. Certain it is, God hath given them ability to will, and do; to repent and turn from their evill way, or else there had been no ground for perfect wisedom to have expected such fruit of them; but they refused saying, The word of the Lord in thy mouth we wil not hear; yet he prophesied grace, yea free grace to them, forgivenesse of their sins upon repentance: but they having so sinned rejected the word and Law of God, which was for all Israel to believe and obey, and refused to repent and turn; the Lord would by no means clear such guilty sinners, although he be gracious, merciful, and doth long forbear; see the the Lamentations of Jeremiah. Even so, although the Lord be long-suffering, not willing any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. yet them that will not believe and obey the Gospel of Christ Jesus, which was preached in all the world, Col. 1.23. to every creature under Heaven, them that will not believe and obey it, the Lord will punish with everlasting destruction, 2 Thes. 1. See also Rev. 18. Although he have long delayed the punishment, he will fulfil his word in time: He shall send Jesus Christ, which be∣fore was preached unto you; who the Heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things, Acts 13.20, 21. At that time he will restore all things that he hath said he will restore, or promised to restore by the mouth of his holy Prophets, since the world began; at that time there will be great fulfilling of promises, thy people shall be well in the day of thy power, Psal. 110. the Lord shal descend from Heaven with a shout, the dead in Christ raised, and they that live by faith in him changed, Phil. 3. Thes. 1.4. And then the Lord shal give rewards unto his servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and them that fear his name, smal and great, and destroy them which destroy the earth, Rev. 11. (Beware false prophets,
and Idolaters smal and great, you shall be destroyed, not restored at that time) then shal the Saints reign on the Earth, with the Lamb that was slain, Rev. 5.10. so on. That is, the Saints shal reign on the Earth with Jesus Christ that was slain; therefore believers of the Lords testimony, of his words or word. Believers in Jesus Christ, comfort one another with these words; for then ye shall have life eternal in glory, your vile body made like the glorious body of Christ Jesus, and reign on Earth with him. Who shall execute the Lord's judgement on the rebellious at that day of his great power, I leave till that time shall, or the Lord in that time shew; but the Lord Jesus shal be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, with mighty Angels; with his mighty Angels, to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel. See 2 Thes. 1. Therefore repent that your sins may be blotted out when that time shall come, from the presence of the Lord; for he shall send Jesus Christ from the Heaven, to rule the Nations of the world. He shall judge among the Heathen, he shall fill the places, the places of the rebellious with dead bodies; and he shall wound the heads over many Countreys; Slay them before me; He shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall he lift up his head, Ps. 110. He hath shewed his people the power of his works; that he may give them the heritage of the Heathen, Psal. 111.6. If we be slain for the word of God, and testimony of Jesus in the City of Sodom and Egypt, in the dwelling place of the unbelieving; yet we shall reign on the Earth with Christ Jesus; See Rev. 20.4. with the 5. Chap. v. 10. compared. O then come to the water of life, the word of God, unto the grace and truth that came by Christ Jesus, and live by faith in him; that gave his flesh for the life of the world, that we and they (should) live by faith in him; and then the Law of the Spirit of life shall make you free from the Law of condemnation and death; continue in the Lord's word, and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free; If ye continue in the faith, ye shall be presented unreprovable in his sight; yet in many things, we all offend; therefore so speak, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of liberty, Jam. 2.12. By the Law of life, by faith in Christ Jesus; for he shall have judgement without mercy, that hath shewed no mercy; therefore look to it, ye that will not forgive upon repentances; but mercy rejoyceth against judgement, v. 13. And Believers in the Lord, as the Scriptures have said, have known and believed the love that God hath to them; herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldnesse in the day of judgement; because as he is, so are we in this world, John 4. Christ Jesus, he is the Son of God, the Fathers love; and so are we sons of his love in this world; therefore as he is, so are we in this world; sons of Gods love; and it doth not yet appear what we shall be; See Joh 3.1, 2. Therefore rejoyce ye righteous in the Lord; but rejoyce not in iniquity I should now make some use of the truth that people in remembrance of the grace and mercy of God, should in life obey, and praise the Lord; but I desire to conclude, I leave that work to the Reader. And I doubt not, but believe I shall meet with some Ironical sensures of the envious; but wisedom is justified of her Children. What greater gift my Countreymen, then Letters which un∣fold the Law of life? A treasure more then Gold; it is more precious then Rubies. FINIS.
