O213 E274_22 R209887 99868738 159498
The old Parliament, WJTH Some Passages thereof: As it was long since ordered, in the Reigne of ALEXANDER SEVERUS, then Emperour of Rome: AND Of the Proceedings therein, against VETRO∣NIUS TURINUS, a great Favourite of the said Emperour. Taken out of the Greeke Records, and sub∣scribed by the chiefe Secretary, Eucolpius Cler. Alex. Imp. Published according to Order. LONDON, Printed for Robert Austin. 1645.
The Old Parliament. ALexander Severus Emperour of Rome, in his time elected out of all parts of his Empire, a convenient company of wise, and persons well reputed, to be his Councellours, consisting of Lawyers, Souldiers, and other expert and eloquent men. Here followeth the names of some of them, according to the Greeke Records. Gordian the Consull. Ulptan the Chancellour. Frontinus Keeper of the monu∣ments. Fabius Sabinus, Catilius Severus, Censors for the Citie. Quintilius Marcellus, Ca us Manlius, Censors for the Provinces. Fabius Gab nus. Claudius Venatus. Seremanus. Caius Marcellus. Cato. Septimius Arabi. Vetronius Turinus. Aurelius Philippus. Marcus Gemiuus. Moderatus. Oninius. Paulus. Triphonius. Duillus. Cotta. Eucolpius Secretarie. Of the sentences of the Lawyers amongst these, and the rest of the Senatours, is made the Text of the Law Civill, gathered in the books named The Digests. The manner of the sitting of these Senatours, and their office was thus: 1. All matters and causes of great importance were brought in order before these Senatours, and by them examined; and the re∣port
thereof by them made unto the Emperour. 2. No decree or ordinance was made, but first debated on by 10 Lawyers, substantially learned, and 50 other expert and eloquent men, which was done after this manner: Everie mans opinion and sentence was thorowly and quietly heard without interruption, which was taken by the Clerks, eight being assigned for that pur∣pose; and a competent time was given to everie Councellour to stu∣dy and consider, so as that he might speak with judgment. 3. When Law and matters politike were treated on, those that were learned men and eloquent, spake and debated theron. 4. When matters of war were treated on, that was debated on by Captains, and old experienced Souldiers; as also them that were expert in the situation of places, and pitching of fields, and prepa∣ring of camps. 5. When matters pertaining to the Emperour was treated on, it was debated by such as were well read in histories, and that had ex∣perience in the affaires of Emperours and Princes; and what they had done (as well Romans as other Nations) in semblable causes. 6. All debates being taken by the eight clerks; perfect coppies thereof were forthwith written out, and delivered to the Emperour, which he read privately, comparing their judgements together; and afterwards in convenient time delivered his owne judgement, before all his councellours; and any man amongst them had free libertie to declare themselves in their judgement, though against the Empe∣rours opinion: and what was carried on by the major part, that hee made a Law. 7. By the consent of the Senate, and not else (of whom the com∣moners were apartie) he chose the former Censors, two for the citie, and the other two for the Provinces. And thus also were new Se∣natours chosen, when places were vacant; as also the Judges, and other chiefe Officers, which had jurisdiction and authoritie to give any sentence. 8. If a Knight, a Judge, or a Senatour, was found to staine the
estimation of the degree, it was in their authoritie to degrade such of their office, or dignitie. 9. All such were discharged out of the Senate, which were gi∣ven to lying and flatterie. 10. They purged the order of Knight-hood, degrading all Knights which were shamelesse, Iecherous, maintainers of theeves, or they themselves Robbers. And the like was used in reforming Judges, and other Head-Officers, both in the citie, and about in the provinces. 11. All estates were liable to their correction: The Emperours palace not exempted from their jurisdiction. 12. The Emperour loved all that was vertue, and hated all that was vice, in what person soever he saw it. 13. In his owne respect, whatsoever profit might redound to him by tollerating of any notable vice, he would rather lack profit, than give way to vice. 14. In them that were Concellours, hee utterly abhorred ambi∣tion, and slattering Judges; hee hated (with extreame detestation) covetousnesse and wrath. In both the one and the other hee loved sinceritie. 15. Hee gave free leave to any of his Councellours that offen∣ded, to come to a legall triall, though never so great a favourite; as particularly Vetronius Turinus, a great favourite of the Emperours, one who got into the Emperours favour by a familiar and secret dis∣course; by which meanes Turinus tooke many bribes from divers people, to do them some friendship to the Emperour: and by this meanes he gathered much treasure to himselfe, but did nothing for those he undertook for. But at the last, many to whom hee had promised such things as they sued for, notwithstanding they received nothing in conclusion, but nods with the head: by which meanes they found themselves deceived, and their great sums of money vainly employed, wherat they murmured; and partly moved with disdaine, and partly with
povertie, they brake forth at last into publike exclamations: in so much that it came to the Emperours care: whereat the Emperour was moved with great displeasure, that Turinus whom hee had in so great estimation, should sell his determinations and sentences to de∣fame the Emperour, as if hee did nothing, but at his beck and com∣mandement, and thereby abused his Subjects. Wherefore the Emperour permitted Turinus to be forthwith ar∣rested, and openly in his presence to be accused, many witnesses coming against him. Turins being called to the bar before the Senatours, there came many sufficient and credible witnesses against him, who attested that in their presence hee had received such briberie: the witnesses were many, and the proofes full against him. The Emperour gave convenient time to the Senate to deliberate by themselves, before they gave sentence what punishment should be equall to the offence of Turinus, and necessarie for an example to others in the like nature: and everie man delivered his opinion. Some delivered their opinion, that open rebuke with sufficient satisfaction unto the parties wronged, should be a convenient pu∣nishment. Others added thereto imprisonment for a certaine time. Divers would that he should be banisht far from the Court. Many affirmed with vehement arguments, that he deserved to be beheaded, considering that in abusing the Emperours Majestie, in selling great offices to persons unworthy, and the like, (as was proved against him) he had put the publike weale into no little hazard. The Emperour advisedly hearing all their opinions, in the last place (as it was his custome) delivered his judgement in this manner. My trustie and well-beloved Councellours: Wee have hitherto attentively heard, and thorowly considered your wise and honourable sentences, declared with free and uncor∣rupted minds; although by the diversitie of your naturall incli∣nations, your sundry reasons seeme to have no little diversitie, as it happeneth in all consultations, where divers men doe declare
their opinions freely, as I doubt not but you doe. Notwithstanding for as much as hearing all your opinions, and reasons, I am the better instructed to find out and declare (except I be deceived) what should be the most expedient and necessary pun∣ishment of Turinus, for the offences which he hath committed, wher∣in ought to be no lesse severity (as may be proved by good reason) then if he had attempted to have slaine me, or burne this most noble City. And so the Emperour inlarged himselfe in many particulars. Wherefore he was then judged to be led away unto the open market-place, where the most resort of people use to be: and there to be bound to a stake, with smoake made of green stickes, and wet stubble, and to be smothered to death. And during the time of his execution, a beadle shall cry, with fume shall he dy that fume hath sold. 15. When any had executed any good office for the publike good of the Land, then would the Emperour himselfe, not in his owne name, but in the name of the whole Empire say, the publike weale give to you right hearty thanks. 16. Chiefe Judges, Proconsulls, Lievtenants, and the like, were never placed but by deliberate judgement of the Senate. 17. There was no man in dignity or office, either by the assigne∣ment of the Senate, or in under offices, put in by his own Commis∣sion, but the Emperour knew his person, and forme of being. And when he was solicited to promote any person, he would search out his name in his book of remembrance. 18. By the consent of the Senate the Commons sitting with his Coun∣sellours the Emperour agreed to these Lawes following. 1. Ordered that threescore Conservators be chosen for the good of the publike weale, to see that the children of this Nation be well brought up, and instructed, according to the capacity of their wits, from the age of seven yeares unto sixteen, and that in their playes and recreations there be no dishonest thing: And that such as are the sons of Gentlemen, be exercised in reading. And they and the
rest in swimming, running, wrastling, to occupy all weapons of war. And also that maids during the same age be brought up in shame∣fastnesse, humblenesse, and occupation, necessary for a house-wife. And that they be not seene out of their fathers house, but in the companie of their mothers, or such other that are in their places. 2. Ordered that the said Conservators, have power to controll every housholder of what estate or degree soever, if any excesse be found in their fare, or where riotous persons be: or that moe servants then roomes are in his or their house, and that for necessary businesse may be imployed. 3 Ordered that they see that no victualling, or brothell house have their doores open to receive any person, either before the sun rising or after sun set, that every man may be knowne, that repaires to such places. Ecelpius Cleric. Alex. Imp.
