P1771 E457_29 R203332 99863309 115501
THE PETITION OF 8000 Reduced Officers and Souldiers, Amongst whom Are many Knights, Collonels, and o∣ther Officers of note, that have faithfully served the Parliament. Read in both Houses of Parliament, on Tuesday the 8th of August 1648. For a speedy settlement of Religion, the King, Parliament and Kingdome, in a Par∣liamentary way, according to the late Just and modest defires of the City of London. And for payment and security for their Arreares. AND The Answer of both Houses of Parliament Delivered to the said Petition. Signed Jo. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum, H. Elsynge Cler. Par. Dom. Com. LONDON Printed by Robert Ibbitson, in Smithfield, neer the Queenes-head Tavern, 1648.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE COMMONS Assembled in PARLIAMENT. The humble Petition of the Reduced Officers and Souldiers that have faith∣fully served you. And have hereunto subscribed. Sheweth, THat your Petitioners have with un∣wearied patience and fruitlesse successe often Petitioned, and too long expected the happy establishment of those ends for which they were at first engaged, which at their re∣ducement
they did hope and expect to enjoy as the fruits of their hazzards and services, being the hap∣py settlement of Religion, King, Parliament, and Kingdome, according to the Covenant, for want of which this Kingdome is again involved in a new warre. The consideration wherof moves your Petition∣ers to expresse their resolutions, and humbly to pray, 1 That there may bee a speedy settlement of Reli∣gion, the King, Parliament and Kingdome, in a Par∣liamentary way, which your Petitioners humbly conceive cannot be but by a free and Personall Treaty according to the late just and modest desire of this Ci∣ty. And in Order thereunto, your Petitioners doe offer themselves if necessity requires, and shall hazard their lives and fortunes, to secure his Majesty and the Parliament during the Treaty, against all such as shall indeavour any way to disturbe the same. 2 That all Officers and Souldiers without excep∣tions whose accounts are not stated, may have them audited by the Auditors mentioned in the late Or∣dinance brought in by Mr. Scot, and that they may be commanded to act without delay. 3 That the said Auditors may have power to al∣low your Petitioners interest for the forbearance of their Arreares from the time it was due, your Petiti∣oners having spent the greatest part in attending for the rest. 4. That those imprisoned for debt may be set at li∣berty,
And the rest protected, till paid their Arreares, their debts not amounting to more. 5 That your Petitioners may bee paide forthwith the remainder of the 3 Monthes pay according to the Ordinance of the 15, 16, and 21th of June 1647. And that it be made up according to the old establish∣ment, and that they may receive proportionably with others, notwithstanding all former Qualifica∣tions, 6 That your Petitioners may receive security for the remainder of their Arreares, and that it be spee∣dily settled and charged upon some place where there may be visible security. 7 That your Petitioners patience being worne out, and not longer able to expect the fruites of your ma∣ny Votes, and Orders, either to settle Religion, the King, Parliament and Kingdome, according to the Nationall League and Covenant, or to relieve their pressing necessities, doe unanimously agree (presum∣ing on your approbation, and countenance to so pious and necessary a worke whereunto they are in honour and conscience oblieged) to imploy their utmost endeavours, for removall of all obstructions, that have or may impead the happy consummation of the premises, and to disperse such jealousies, as hath bin unjustly throwne upon them. They assure your Ho∣nours not any more to ingage, but for those ends. Signed by 8000 Officers and Souldiers amongst whom are many Knights, Collonells and Of∣ficers of quallity, that have faithfully served the Parliament.
The said Petition was delivered to the House of Peeres virbatim▪ Die Martis 8 Aug. 1648. The Answer of the House of Peers to the Pe∣tition of the Reduced Officers and Souldiers, delivered by the Lord Rochford.. THe Lords have commanded me to give you thankes for your good affections to them, They doe likewise give you thankes for the continuance of your good service from the beginning. They do assure you that they have put part of your desires into a way, and will take the rest into speedy consideration, John Browne Cler. Parliamentorum. Die Martis 8 August 1648. The Answer of the House of Commons to the said Petition of the Reduced Officers and Souldiers. Delivered by Mr. Speaker. Gentlemen, THe House hath considered of your Petition, and as your Judgements have
have followed theirs heretofore, so you would make that your Rule still; They have done what possibly they could to satisfie the Petitioners Ar∣reares, and for a great part therof hath given them the same security that the Lord Fairfax his Army had their Ar∣rears secured by. And they have further Ordered, that all such Delinquents Estates, Fines, and Compositions, as the Peti∣tioners shall discover, that are not dis∣covered, shall goe to such of the Peti∣tioners, as shall make such discoveries; towards payment of their whole Ar∣rears. And have further Ordered that the Fifth and twentieth part of such De∣linquents as the Petitioners shall dis∣cover, not formerly discovered, shall
also goe towards payment of the Ar∣rears of the Petitioners. And the House hath also appointed a Com∣mittee to conferre with some of you of a way to give you further satisfacti∣on. H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. FINIS.
