P2181 E950_1 99866632 118909
ἙΑΥΤΟΝΤΙΜΩΡΟΎΜΕΝΟΣ, OR, THE SELF-REVENGER Exemplified in Mr. William Barlee. By way of Rejoynder to the first Part of his Reply, viz. the unparallel'd variety of Discourse in the two first Chapters of his pretended Vindication. (The second Part of the Rejoynder to the second Part of his Reply being purposely designed to follow after by it self, for Reasons shortly to be alledged.) Wherein are briefly exhibited, amongst many other things, The Rigidly-Presbyterian both Principles and Practice. A Vindication of Grotius from Mr. Baxter. of Mr. Baxter from Mr. Barlee. of Episcopal Divines from Both together. To which is added an Appendage Touching the judgement of the right Honourable and right Reverend Father in God, Iames Lord Primate of Armagh, and Metropolitan of Ireland, irrefragably attested by the Certificates of Dr. Walton, Mr. Thorndike, and Mr. Gunning, sent in a Letter to Doctor Bernard. By THOMAS PIERCE Rector of Brington. . Isocrat. Out of thine own Mouth will I condemn thee. Luk. 19. 22. LONDON, Printed by R. DANIEL, for Richard Royston, at the Angel in Ivie-lane, M DC LVIII.
A Praemonition to the Reader. HAd we such eyes and other instruments, as (by the help of a Macroscope) might suffice for the Dissection of an emmet, or a Flye, we are told by a . Et pueri na∣sum Rhinoce∣rotis habent. Habet & musca sple∣nem. Greek and a Latin Proverb, that we should find a Gall in the one, and a Spleen in the other. Even a gnat, or a puneze, may break the sleep and Repose of the strongest man living. And Brasidas, though a stout and a valiant Captain, did yet acknowledge this Truth, when he was bitten by a Mouse. I am not making any Comparisons, as being too odious to serve for my use. I desire only to signify, that 'tis so far from being manlike, to contrive mischief unto a neigh∣bour, that 'tis a sordid Privilege to be hurtfull, and common to men with the meanest Creatures. How manifold a mischief hath been designed upon my Person, by one who utterly despaired of dis∣advantaging my cause, I foresee an occasion to shew anon. In the mean time I will desire this common favour, from all indifferent, unbyass't Readers, that they will take some acquaintance, in case they have none, or that in case they have any, they will send
back their memoryes upon the All that hath passed betwixt my Neighbour and my self. I had, by way of prevention, set out a Copy of some Notes, which I had written for a Friend, upon God's Decrees. How well I kept to the Subject, hath been as clear as that light, by the help of which it hath been cleared. How much beside the whole Subject my Neighbour pretended to frame an An∣swer, I have discovered in my account of that his Correptorie Correction. And now how much his second Book is more exorbitant then his first, I am again obliged to make apparent. I say, obliged in Conscience, as well as in ordinary Discretion, and that for diverse good reasons hereafter mention'd. Had he disputed against my Notes, though not as a Christian, yet at least like a Man, I had receiv'd and treated him as a generous enemy; and by how much the stronger I had found him, I should have lov'd & honor'd him so much the more. But if the venerable Grotius might say of Mr. Rivet, much more may I of Mr. Barlee, that in stead of a Confutation, he only presented me with a Qui à me nunquam no∣minatus de il∣lis se de∣fendit, & in me velut de Plaustro con∣vitia exspuit, &c. Grot. Vot. pro pace p. 63. Dung-Cart, fully laden and running over with all sorts of muck, wherein his Doctrins (belike) were to lye and batten. For be∣sides the worst names, and the uncleanest Epithets, which could have dropped from the Pen of a Con∣sistorian, (of which Tribe we have a They rail against all they dislike with more then hea∣thenish scurrili∣ty. Survey of Ho. Discip. p. 123. Character from the Wise and Provident Bishop Bancroft) what∣soever ill things he was able to fancy, or to hear, or but to say that he had heard, concerning my Per∣son, and my Opinions, all that was my Portion, heaped
up, and fasten'd on me, with the profusest liberality I ever heard of. I knew that vengeance was none of mine; for, by a peculiar right, God had challeng'd it to Rom. 12. 19. Heb. 10. 30. Himself; nor durst I venture to break in upon Gods . Inclosure. I was contented to make my self some little part of amends, by giving my Reader no other tast of his stile and temper, then what I had met with in his first nine sheets, and by exhibiting the weaknesse of all his pertinent Argumentations, wheresoever I could find them throughout his Book. I did not give him ill language, unlesse it were an ill language to say what language he had given; nor did I do him the least wrong, unlesse it could possi∣bly be a wrong to shew the wrongs which I had suffer'd: but even Luk. 21. 19. possessed my soul in patience, and 1 Pet. 2. 23. committed my cause to Him who judgeth righ∣teously. , Hom. Iliad. . . I confesse it had been more for my secular in∣terest, to have pai'd my Neighbour in his In prover∣bium abiit, Malis viris ne Draconem qui∣dem audere den∣tes admoliri, Bonos vel à mre morderi solitos. own coin, or rather to have made him pay soundly for it. For had I impleaded Him at Law upon an Action of Slan∣der, (as some, who were learned in the Law, thought most convenient,) I had probably sate down in Peace and safety. But see how well I am requited, for having but shew'd, and so pardon'd, his misde∣meanours. My Neighbour observing my Resolu∣tions neither to raile, nor to raise Reports, nor to take Advantages of Law, but only to shew that I am Psal. 19. 13. Innocent from the great offenses imputed to
me, (in the doing of which I was constrained, by unavoidable necessity, to demonstrate the injustice of my Accuser) he took the boldnesse thereupon to persevere in the course which he had begun; as being well assured by my Principles, that when he had done his very worst, (both as a bitter speaker, and as a Bearer of False witnesse,) he could not fail of my forgivenesse, and that upon no dearer Termes, then his own willingnesse to accept it. It seems he did esteem it so great a Punishment to be shew'd, (though in no other colours then he had put upon himself, and such wherein he had chosen to make his appearance upon the stage) that nothing now would content him, unlesse he might shew himself worse. After many Epist. Ded. p. 1. Travails, and much pains∣taking, Ibid. labouring in the work, and p. 5. thrashing hard, a second Volume was squeezed out; which, for the better sound's sake, he adorned with this Title, A Necessary Vindication. For, whatever the Contents of the thing required, he thought it could not be seemly to call it A Necessary Revenge. To that he added in the Title-page, A full Abster∣sion of all . Calumnyes: because it was grievous to Flesh and Blood, to Declare A Confession of former Faults. When men have drank too deeply of the Waters of Deut. 33. 8. strife, hardly any thing but ven∣geance will quench their thirst. They will never leave dabling in Printer's Ink, till they have made themselves blacker then any Negroes. [.] But yet their lives are bitter to them, when they come to the . Dreggs of the guilty potion; and
they do commonly rake up those putrid things out of the Grave, to which they wish they had given the deepest Buriall. There were many grand fictions in my neighbours first Book, which having proved to be such, I meant should dye, and be buried in per∣fect silence. But being raised again to life by him who gave them their Being, and that by a new kind of Clyster, to which is given the Name of a Full Abstersion, I shall be forced (do what I can) to make their life very miserable, and (for ought I know) to give them a wofull Immortality. Yet very far shall I be from doing this upon de∣sign, but only by such a meer Accident, as will in∣separably follow my Vindication. For had he con∣fessed his perpetrations, and thereby taken off the Scandals, which have been given to as many as have read his writings, I had readily embraced him with both mine Armes. Nor shall I fail to forgive him (by the help of God's Grace) though he shall still offend against me more then Mat. 18. 22. seventy times seven. Or had he only bitten me with a neat piece of Drollerie, I had been pleased with his wit, and taken all in good part: For that which I have com∣plained of, hath not at all been the sharpnesse, but only the noysomnesse of his Teeth. So far have they been from being sharp, that (to speak the very Truth) I have thought them the obtusest I ever felt. And in biting at any thing of mine, they have but broken themselves in pieces; perhaps much more then if they had chewed upon a flint. Or had he charged me in his second Book (as he had done in
his first) with now and then a volley of Railing, by calling me Dragon, or Devil, or Atheistical Lucia∣nizer, or a Belcher forth of damnable Blasphemies, and the like; and having given that Vent to the exu∣berances of his Passions, (as Epist. Ded. p. 2. himself is pleased to make it out) had not proceeded any farther to things in∣comparably worse, I had either not answer'd, or on∣ly answer'd with the Angel, Iude 9. the Lord rebuke thee. Nay farther yet: Had he raised such idle Rumors, as had reached no farther then the outward man, as that I had 17 or 18 fingers, and about some 13 or 14 toes, I had confuted him no otherwise, then meerly by shewing my Hands and Feet. Nothing then but his Doctrins should have falne under my Pen. But when I am publickly charged with things of that Nature, that if I really am guilty, I must not live; and of which if I am silent, I may by some un∣kind people be reported to consent; I do conceive it to be a duty, to the performance of which I am in reason and conscience indispensably obliged, to shew the groundlesnesse and falsehood of such suggestions, lest I appear (by my omission) to bear false witnesse against my self. 'Tis true, that some of my Neigh∣bours storyes are so incredible in themselves, and so bewrayed to be Inventions by his very indeavours to prove them none, that many may think it had been better to tread them only under foot by passive si∣lence, then by a solemn confutation to cast them back in their Author's Face. But when I see, and consider, that the Things are twice printed, and with much more boldnesse in the second indictment
then in the first, nay with confident affirmations that they shall be justifyed to my Face, if need require; I do conceive that my silence might help to lend them some credibility, though without my silence they can have none. And this may serve for the first reason of my following enlargements; especially of those in my two first Chapters. Which being pre∣mised and suppos'd, there are others so cogent, as I know not how they can be resisted. For First, how shall I hope to serve God in my calling, with any considerable Successe, by any Doctrin I shall deliver from Presse or Pulpit, if I am judged before-hand to be a piece of an Atheist, Hin-Quarter of an Anabaptist, the bigger half of a Pa∣pist, 3 quarters of a Ranter, a whole Socinian, an Angel of Darknesse every Inch, as highly a Pela∣gian as Pelagius himself when at his worst, and not only guilty of much Hereticall pravity, but an Helvi∣dian anti-Scripturist, and whose Design in highly Ie∣suiticall? Nay if besides all this, I am a frontlesse, absurd, and gracelesse Person, dementate by God for perdition, a kind of a Sorcerer, the Quakers Darling, ☜ and worthy to be reckon'd among the witches, and a hundred things more, (of which See ch. 4. §. 1. Note that this is but a speci∣men of a world the like stuff, which Mr. B. calls the boyling up of his Piety, (c. 1. p. 6. in marg.) the doing like Christ and his Apostles, (Ibid.) doing the part of an orthodox cordiall zelot, (p. 8.) his godly jealousy, (p. 12.) the playfulnesse of his stile to tole-on Gal∣lants to read his Book, who if they be not toled on with somewhat of mirth and cheerfulnesse, are ready to swear they be weary of over much reading, (ch. 2. p. 45.) hereafter,) what sort of men will take part with me? Sure not the Papists, because I am a Protestant, and (upon all occasions offer'd) dispute against them: nor yet
the Protestants, because I am (forsooth) a Cassan∣drian Papist. Not the Quakers, because I am a Black-coat: nor yet the Anabaptists, because a Socinian: nor the Socinians, because a Sorcerer. nor the Sorcerers, because a Pelagian. Much lesse the Pelagians, because an Atheist: no nor the Atheists, because an Arminian: nor the Ar∣minians by any means, because a witch: nor the rest of mankind, because I am not a Presbyterian. Neither the Town in Barbary which was all turn'd into stone both man and beast, nor yet the Monster brought forth at Weerted on the Elder-Sconce near Ardemburg, were any way comparable to the Monster which Mr. B. hath described (I may say) in his News-book. I will propose no more (in an Epistle) then two particulars to consideration. First, if I am not only thought, but said in print to be the Monster, who did not only think, but boast aloud, [See the first Chapt. of this Book, §. 9. p. 15, 16, &c. ☞ That there was no sin in me, that I was above sin, and that by my own power I could abstain from all sin,] how can I rationally hope to fare better then Servetus, who never spake any thing like it that I can learn, unlesse I prove it to be a groundlesse and witlesse Slander? for what were this but to make my self God, who alone by his own power is above all sin? Our blessed Saviour did but say, Son, thy sins be forgiven thee, when straight the Scribes accused him of Mar. 2. 5, 7. Blasphemyes; alledging this reason, that to forgive sins was for God only. With how much a greater force of Reason should he have stones cast at him, who should affirm himself sinlesse, nay above
sin, nay above all sin, nay suopte Marte, by his own power above it all? To clear my self from so foul a charge, and to shew the impertinence, the unskil∣fulnesse, nay the demonstrable falsenesse of that Aspersion, I See Divine Philanth. de∣fended, ch. 3. p. 81, 82, 83. answer'd in a Section of 10. Particu∣lars. All which Mr. Barlee doth tacitly confesse to be irresistible, by his wilfull omission of a reply; and yet he asks no pardon, makes no confession, but (on the contrary) denyes it flatly to be a fault, and (without the least colour or shew of proof) profes∣seth to stand to his Accusation, and (twice in a Breath) calls me impudent for denying what he is pleased to affirm, and talks of proving it by a Mi∣nister without a Name, and seeks to cover it with new Slanders, so unluckily chosen, that they become their own Traitors, as I shall shortly demonstrate in the following papers. Secondly, if I am not only a Papist, but Iesuitical; nor only such, but also a Se∣minary Priest; nor only one of them who creep pri∣vately into houses, but one in possession of a Par∣sonage; if I am one of the Mr. Baxter's Christian con∣cord, p. 45, 46, &c. cited and applyed by Mr. Barlee in his Necess. Vindic. c. 2. p. 73, 74, 75. Conspirators against the Protestant Religion, who having more wit then Dr. Vane, Dr. Goff, and Dr. Baily, do only stay here in England under the Names of Episcopal Divines, because we think we may do our party more service then by declaring our selves Pa∣pists; and if our Design for the Introduction of Popery is so strongly laid, that it gives a strong probability of prevailing, if God do not won∣derfully blast it; I say, if I am one of these Po∣pish complotters (as Mr. Barlee now publisheth)
against whom Mr. Baxter In the page above cited. professed to take himself bound to proclaim a publick warning to the inhabitants of the Nation; then by the Law of this Land must my Quarters be hung up on the high places of the great City, for the striking a Terror into those who are partakers of the plot. And the great plot (saith Mr. Baxter) is design'd to be carried on with no lesse then p. 46, 47. 5 subservient plots, of which the least is a swinger; and of which I am publickly Mat. 15. 19. charged by Mr. Barlee, as well with the greatest, as with the least. By these two instances it is evident, that I am now to deal with an other thing, then the most who are ingaged in any controverted Doctrins: Not only with a weak and unskilfull Disputant, but also with an outragious and false Accuser; who layes things to my charge, which (if he is able also to prove) will make my Native Country too hot to hold me. So that now Mr. Barlee hath brought af∣fairs to this passe, that I must either be suspected for the worst Creature in the world, or else I must mani∣fest to the world that I am slander'd. Had he kept to the Questions of God's Decrees, the Death of Christ, the Grace of Conversion, and the like, and in prosecuting them had shew'd but a shortnesse of Discourse, bewraying nothing but his Cause and his understanding, I had had no more to do then to 2 Tim. 2. 25. instruct him in meeknesse opposing himself, if God per adventure would give him Repentance to the ac∣knowledgement of the Truth. For as he should not have been offended that I saw not with his eyes,
but with mine own; so could I never have been displeas'd so far forth as to be angry, that he saw no farther then he was able. But when a man is accu∣sed of committing a murder, or of stealing a horse, or any other matter of Fact of very dangerous impor∣tance, he must prove the negative by such mediums, by which negatives are to be proved. As by catching the Accuser in diverse contradicting Tales; by proving him [virum non fide dignum] a Customary Raiser of false Reports; by shewing the vast improba∣bility of the thing; by evincing the inconsistence of circumstantials; by making it evident and clear, that the life and Temper of the Defendant is known by thousands of worth and credit to have ever been Wisd. 2. 15. quite of another Fashion; last of all by the exerting of a Hand from Heaven to compurge him. How much of this is my case, the intelligent Reader will see anon. And if my Neighbour did pretend he was to publish his Reply, to secure [the Introduct. p. 4. credit of his ministerial office, his Name, and Fame,] it may well be one reason of my Rejoynder, that be∣sides those things I must also provide for Truth, and safety. Secondly, as I must not hate my Brother in my Heart, Levit. 19. 17. so in any wise I must rebuke him, and must not suffer sin upon him. If I should not resist a grow∣ing evill, I know not to what it may aspire, or whi∣ther at last it may arrive. It is so dangerous a thing to go along with impunity in any lewd Course, that Faelix & prosperum scelus virtu vocatur, the greatest mercy to malefactors is to arrest them in their Carriere. Why did Diagoras turn Atheist,
but because he saw a Plagiarie not struck with Thunder? When Bancr. Dang. Pos. practised under pretense of Reformation, and for the Presbyterial Diseipline. ch. 15. p. 176. Mr. Hacket and his Adherents were apprehended and examin'd, they did then confesse before witnesse, [that their extraordi∣nary purposes were nothing else, but illusions of Satan, cruell, bloody, and Traiterous Design∣ments, which yet before they were detected, they protested even with tears, fastings, groans, and imprecations, to have proceeded from the Di∣ctates of God's good Spirit. So much wholsomer it is for evill Doers to be caught, then to be cruelly permitted to grow successfull. Thirdly, there is some such thing in Plato's Gor∣gias, as that offenders are to be punished for three gooduses.  or , for the revenging of Pateat quod noxium est, ut possit conteri cum patuerit. Hieron. advers. Iovin. l. 2. the offense, and paying satisfaction to injur'd Iu∣stice; , for the admonishment of the offender, that he never again commit the like; and , for the giving a timely warning to Lookers-on, that they amend their lives by that example. It was one of the menaces of God to Israel, Ezek. 5. 7. 8. That he would execute his judgements in the midst of them in the sight of the Nations round about them. Which was no doubt for this reason (as I collect from the Con∣text) that as their exemplary sins had been apt to hurt many, so by their exemplary punishments ma∣ny also might be healed. And this is openly ex∣pressed to be one end of punishment, that Deut. 17. 13. which com∣pare with Ezek. 39. 7, 21, 23, 25, 26, 27. all the people may hear and fear, and doe no more presum∣ptuously. These are the things at which I ayme, and (I hope) very sincerely. First, the clearing of
mine innocence, as to that whereof I am accused; next, the good of my Quae per in∣suavitatem medentur, emolumento curationis offensam sui excusant. Ter∣tull. de poenit. cap. 10. Accuser, whom I would fain be instrumentall to promote unto Repentance and change of life; lastly, the benefit and instruction of both our Readers, whom another man's harms may render circumspect and wary: but the Glory of God more especially, both first, and last, is the end and scope of my undertaking. I have not been ignorant, or unmindfull, that I am put by my Neighbour in slippery places, and that in the doing of my duty I am not freed from all danger: it being possible for the injur'd to seek Revenge against the injurious, under the righteous pretense of a vindication. And truely the fear of the former hath sometimes put me to the Question, whether it were not my safest course to omit the later. It being absolutely impossible to clear my self, but by extenuating the credit of my Accuser. To this I answer'd within my self, that should I be so very impotent, as to requite his Railing with Railing, and his false Accusations with false Accusations, I might conclude my self guilty of a defensive ven∣geance. And yet what might I not say, (would I make use of my invention) with greater credibility then He hath done? Nay should I but faithfully re∣peat what I have heard from persons whom I can name, Iam more then confident I could make his Ears Tingle. But whilst I keep to this Rule, of di∣vulging no more of his misdemeanours, then I find divulged by Himself, (which yet will so vehemently tend to his disadvantage, that his Abettors will be
apt to think me cruell, unlesse they consider all a∣long that I am no more then a Defendant, and that the follyes of my Neighbour were wilfully printed in both his Books, before it was in my power to reprint them in mine own) I say, whilst I keep to this special Rule, I am hitherto perswaded I do not de∣viate from my duty. To prove that I am slander'd, is but to do my self right; and to do my self right, is no man's wrong. To punish an evil Doer, is no injustice. It is rather a great Mercy, to punish him lesse then he deserves; because in the doing of corrective or vindicative justice, an Arithmetical proportion is still allow'd. Yet should I think my self cruell, for having shew'd how out of measure I have been wrong'd and injur'd by my provoker, but that I find within my self a perfect. willingnesse to for∣give him; and upon competent satisfaction (though but half so much as I may require) I shall readily offer him a solid Friendship. But now in order to this end, I must convince him of his guilt; and let him see his necessity of coming in, by shewing the dangers of holding out. I must make it undeniable, that he hath charged me with things, which (because I am not able to ex∣presse their nature any otherwise) I must discover and expresse by the name of Slanders. Diverse of them being such, that the Cabbidge whose Diame∣ter was half a mile, and the Furnace erected to boyl it in, were but puny Fictions in Comparison. I am very well aware, that whilst I am using the means for the attainment of the end, (that undeniable conviction of
which I spake) he may say in a third Book, as now he doth in a second, that I am much more pungent in my De∣fense, then he hath been in his Accusations. Concedo To∣rum, I am exactly of that opinion: It being not the pun∣gency, but the Rancidity of a writer, which men of clean nostrills are wont to nauseat. Very far were the Pharisees from being pungent, unlesse by moving our Saviour's pi∣ty, when they called him Glutton, Wine-bibber, a Friend to sinners, & one who wrought by the power of Beelzebub: But sure our Saviour was very pungent, when he proved them malicious and senselesse slanders. To shew that an∣other is abusive, is much more smarting, then to abuse. And therefore (with pardon to the comparison) I think it more my Neighbour's Torment, that he is evinced to be injurious, then it can possibly be mine, that I am injur'd. It is not a little for my comfort, that my greatest severity doth consist in a manifestation that he is cruell; and that no other miseryes do fall upon him as from me, but what he hath pulled upon himself with all his might. It is not so little as seventeen Times that he hath called me an impu∣dent and a brazen-fac't Person, which I never could indure to call him once. Without a circumlocution, he hath often given me the Lye, for having spoken the greatest Truths; much more then I had given Him, for having printed the greatest falsehoods. Times without number he calls me proud and insolent. much good doo't him with all his meeknesse. To sum up all in a word; The more inju∣stices and wrongs he hath industriously done me, I shall be still the more resolute to do him none. I confesse that slander is a very hard word; but unavoidable to those, who are obliged to distinguish it from other species of untrue
speaking. Whatsoever is not true comes under the notion of a lye, but one sort only is call'd a slander. And to call a thing slander whilst it is proved to be such, (and in part confessed, as well as denyed, by its Author,) cannot possibly be a slander, unlesse (which implyes a contradiction) it be also proved to be none. In so much as for the usage of this one word, it will be needless to ask my neighbour's pardon. There are now remaining but 3 things more, of which my Reader may be pleased to be premonish't. 1. Mr. Barlee seeming to me to be Note, that after he had pro∣posed a Method, p. 5. he profes∣feth to quit it, and to speak imme∣thodi∣cally, p. 11. professedly imme∣thodicall, and to have made a kind of Thicket wherein to hide his Argumentations, which he hath also so fenced with Thornes and Briars and hollow Teeth, as to forbid the Reader an Accesse unto the nakednesse of his Doctrins; I determin'd so to order my account of the whole, as that his Doctrins and his manners may no longer afford an um∣brage to one another. This is therefore no more then the first part of my Rejoynder. It is indeed but the prolusion to those approaching Calamityes, wherein Mr. Barlee and Mr. Whitfeild will be made appear to have involved their dearest Doctrins. For I reserve the second Part for a pecu∣liar work, to follow this at some Distance, with a strict in∣junction upon my Stationer, that he shall never permit the one to be bound up with the other. And I contrive it thus to this End, that what concerns Gods Decrees, and the sub∣jects depending thereupon, may be put farr asunder from those exorbitant subjects, which (however very usefull in severall kinds) are wholly forreign and impertinent to the professed subjects of our Debate. My Aime being now to set out personals by themselves, that I may shortly with greater comfort fetch all his Doctrinals out of their Dens,
and expose them stark naked, (divested of those Cappari∣sons wherein they are labour'd to be disguis'd) that the abused people of the land may behold them clearly as they are, and start back at their Appearance, & keep aloof from the Danger of being ever again led captive by them. 2. As I have now dscharged but half my Debt to Mr. Barlee, so he may probably stay the longer for what re∣maines, because of grave Mr. Whitfeild, his Fellow-Labourer in the work who, it seems, conceiving (& very wisely) that one at once was insufficient for the maintaining of many errors against one single man, (who hath never a Second but the Truth to take part with him in this Conten∣tion) took advantage of the time to joyn his forces to Mr. Barlee's; as being very well assur'd, that my Actions are successive, not instantaneous; that I must first do one thing, and then another, before it is possible to do a third. Now because his whole Book is at least Intitled against mine, (though the greatest part of it is against no-body-know's∣who) and because he is superiour to Mr. Barlee (in point of manners at least, though not at all in point of learning,) & in regard of some other things of which I shall shortly give account, I do intend in the next place to make him ac∣quainted with himself, to whom I find he hath been he∣therto a very great stranger; & all for want of such friends, as I shall shew my self to him, if God permit. I shall not re∣flect on those indignityes most uningenuously put upon me in his Poetick and btter Prose before the Correptorie Cor∣rection, (wherein he instructed Mr. Barlee how to raile, & calumniate, by the tacit exhortative of his Example;) but immediately falling upon the matter of his last printed Book, and that in conjunction with his Collegue's, I shall
charitably indeavour to make him see that his greatest Isa. 30. 7. strength had been to sit still. 3. Whatsoever is found spoken, in the ensuing sheets of this Book, concerning the Principles and Practise of Pres∣byterians, I have only spoken as an Historian upon matters of Fact. Nor have I done it from my self, but from the cre∣dit of the most questionlesse and authenticall Records. Nor have I sought out occasions of such discourse, but patiently received occasions offer'd. All is to satisfy Mr. Barlee, who (if we may judge by his writings) would not otherwise be content. Nor are my words to be extended unto all Pres∣byterians indiscriminately, but to such, and such only, of whom the Authors by me cited are found to speak. For I know there are many, who at least are esteemed to be of that judgement (how truly or falsely I cannot tell) whom for their peaceable Dispositions, their Christian Temper and moderation, I do very unfeignedly both love and honour. In Rem, non in Personam, scripta est mea Actio. I intend those zelots, to whom my character doth agree, let their Names or Qualityes be what they will. What I say from the Histo∣ry of Mr. Knox, I mean of those men whom Mr. Knox himself meant, who was a chieftain of the party. When I name Paraeus, Buchanan, Hacket, and the like, it is plain I mean Them. If, when no body is nam'd, any one or more persons shall name themselves, & apply my words to their particulars, which I had left only in common, (to be seized on by none but the proper owners) they will be, in that case, their own Accusers. There is nothing else in my thoughts, which seemeth need∣full to be premised. And this at least is enough for the no-great∣length of the following Treatise; whose great variety of matter (whereof the third Chapter will afford the best choice) is repre∣sented to the Reader in the Generall Contents which now ensue.
The Generall Contents of the severall Chapters. CHAP. I. AN Introduction containing the great dishonesty of the Tongue: Its severall Species, and Degrees. Mr. B. arrived at the utmost Round of the climax. How a man may be brought to believe his own lye: made apparent by 4 examples. Mr. B's concernment in the premisses. His wise & caetera. His confession sealed with an Oath, that he gave no cre∣dit to the far greatest part of his inventions. yet will not make a Recantation. but seekes to secure an old Falsity with a new one. Proved by an Induction. His 2 Oaths opposite to each other. His impossibility of escaping at any crevice, either from per∣jury, or contradiction. The best that can be said for him is vehemently bad. What he gets by his denial of vain credulity. His Oath at best inconsiderate as from a common swearer. His pretended necessity for swearing. His Argumentative Oath like Mr. Hackets. His necessityes and streights betwixt his first and second Book. He gives the slip to a passage which would convince him of a double perjury. The first of his 3 excepted slanders: proved no more now then when it was crudely affirmed: pretended to be a Hear-say contrary to his Oath. He is provoked to name his Informer, if he hath any. Motives used to that purpose, from parallel slanders which might be raised upon him, and that with more probability, and greater hopes of escape. Reasons for the motives to the producing of his Informer. Of Adams sin, and ours, Original and Actual, in him, and us. How Mr. B's notion tends to Pelagianism, and to other ab∣surdityes. T. 's account of Original sin in himself. What it is to be born in sin: What it is not. Of that Text Rom. 5. 12. The Absurdityes which follow from Mr. B's exposi∣tion. The ridiculous force of his Argument. Its Absurdity shewn in a parallel case. He betrayeth his crime with his excuse: and blasteth his Informer. His second In∣former evinced by himself to have been a Forger. How his Tempter betray'd him to the choice of his invention. How the Trick of his Confidence is an Argument of his Distrust. Again he runs on the Symplgades either of perjury or causelesse Railing. The shamefull modesty of the Informer. He is challenged to appear. Mr. B. makes more way to the Discovery of his slanders. His signal Tergiversation. His new Calumny in defense of an old one. His Revenge upon a Gentleman of 3 years old. His wofull Drol∣lery. His malice against Castalio. Of Christian perfection in Scripture. A Catalogue of his gettings by maligning Castalio. He slanders Arminius, or chargeth Mr. Baxters Doctrin with Arminianism. His personating a Bp. His being by confession 400 wide of the Truth. His conscionable Divine confessedly a cheat. Of Artificial Handsomness.
His perjury thereupon. In sum, His confessions without Repentance: His Repentance without Amendment: His liberall promises to amend, with Resolutions of growing worse. CHAP. II. Mr. B. cites private Letters to his own disadvantage. His competent judges none but those of his party. His tacit confession of scurrility. His go bullitions. His 15 Falsityes in 8 lines. His passing judgement before Doomsday. His ad∣judging men to Hell imply's the falsenesse of all his Doctrins. His fear of Danger, without being of opinion that there is any. He wonds himself with a Salo. Sneaks from his charge of Socinianism, yet layes it on Mr. P. and inferres Calvin a Scman. His cruell kindnesse. Servetus his Books burnt before his Body. Mr. 's monstrous Dilemma his own snare. His ordination into the Priesthood; when, and by whom and on what Termes. His Promises of Conformity. subscription to the 39 Articls. se∣verall Oaths. Deny's his own Hand, wherein he professed to proceed by the common Counsell of the Presbytery. His Accusation of Dispatch. His Recriminations the saddest part of his Adventure. His love of falsehood quatenus ipsum. The first Ground of his Malignity ript up by Himself. What he gets by his complaint that his Parishoners were filched from him. Their Vindication. His charge recoils upon Himself. His cursing, and swearing, and Pulpit-scuffles. The Continuation of his Inventions. His Dream of the Printers Boy. His sin against Conscience and common sense. His sad Defense of his Scholarship. He buets Mr. Calvin and Himself, in hope to make his Latin whole. An important Digression to a new way of convincing Mr. B. of False witnesse. Of Praying for the Dead, and unto Saints. A bashfull Ca∣lumny betraying its own Guilt. A short Catalogue of 34 other Falsehoods, to save the labour of 34 whole Sections. CHAP. III. Mr. B's charge of Ingratitude the greatest jest in the world. He defileth his own Nest: Is disobliging to Sequestrators, and unthankfull to Mr. Hobbs. King Iames concerning the Presbyterians. The Imprisonment of Mr. Cartwright, Travers, &c. King Iames his Antipathy to Presbyterianism and Pigg. The Bishops lenity compared with the Presbyterian Rigor. The Presbyterian Doctrins of excommunicating and killing the supreme Civill Magistrate. Knox, and Buchanan. The Presbyterian Prin∣ciples
agreeable to their Practice. That of the Kirk in particular. Quares touching the Covenant. Touching a Book subscribed by the Ministers within the Province of Lon∣don against Toleration, and for the Covenant. Paraeus his Book most seditious: dis∣sembled, and defended by Mr. B. ondemned to be burn'd by the whole Vniversity of Oxford: and by orthodox King Iames with the hands of the common Hangman. Gro∣tius his judgement of the Book. Paraeus an Oracle to the party. Of Lambeth Articles: King Iames and Bishop Mountague: Vniversall Grace and Redemption. The late Re∣verend Primate against Mr. B. Mr. B's Quaestion never enough to be admir'd. His re∣markable Calumny, and Impertinence. The irresistible Truth of Vniversall Redem∣ption. Of Testard, Camero, Amyrald, Spanheim, Daille. Blondel for universal Re∣demption in his approbation of Daille's Book. Of Mr. Baxter's warning to the Na∣tion against Cassandrian Papists under the names of Episcopal Divines. How applyed by Mr. Barlee. A vindication of Grotius: His Temper and Design. The Peace of Chri∣stendom attempted by Melanchthon, Maximilian, Ferdinand, and others, before Gro∣tius. Accusations must not be too generall. Episcopal Divines no Papists. Melan∣chthon, Bucer, nay Calvin and Beza for Episcopacy, set Formes of Prayer, Rites and Ceremonies. Popery shut out by Episcopal Divines: but advanced by Presbyterians. How Iesuites and Presbyt.  have been assisting to one another. Mr. B's Contradi∣ctions about Bishop Davenant: His third edition before his second: and his being alive at least a year after he was dead. His pretended correspondence with that Bishop. His exceptions and sawcinesse to the same. That Bishop reckons universal Redemption among Fundamentals, and declares against all who shall deny it. How severely that Bishops judgement reflects on Mr. B. His foul inventions of the late Primate of Armagh. CHAP. IV. HIs Breeding, and way of Complement, to the admiration of all the world. XI. pages full of Railing, of which a Tast only is exhibited. A Copy of Mr. B's Re∣formation. His notable justification of himself. His Asperity against all others: obliquely against Dr. Bernard and Dr. Reynolds; expressely against Grotius, Ca∣stalio, Episcopius, Dr. Taylor, Mr. Thomson, &c. against Mr. Calvin. Mr. Thom∣son vindicated in particular. Of Mr. Baxters Godly Man: And why Mr. Barlee so much extoll'd him. The sad effect of that opinion, that the Regenerate man cannot cease to be so. Mr. B's self-contradictions. His excessive commendations and con∣demnations of himself. His Digression to the sum of 150l. at which he values his study of Books. His Dexterityes in speaking beside the purpose. How great an Arti∣ficer of escapes. The two Instances of his Wit.
The Contents of the Appendage. A Manifestation by severall Instances, that Dr. Bernard never pretended to prove the Negative to that which was Affirm'd by T. P. concerning the judgement of the late Primate as to the controverted points. That matter is ventilated in severall Letters to Dr. Bernard. In the first it is evinced, that T. P. spake safely of the said Primate, on which side soever the Truth might lye; and that the case of Mr. Barlee is very sad on all hands. The same things with more advantage are evinced in the second. The third Letter sheweth, that the Primates Honour was advanced in the publi∣cation of his change. The Aspersions cast upon the Primate by Mr. B. as well as on Bishop Overall, with whom the Primate at last concurr'd. The great Harmony and Agreement between the judgement of the Primate as it is lately set forth by Dr. Ber∣nard, and the Doctrin deliver'd in the Books of T. P. The fourth Letter doth make a parallel of the Primates judgement with the writings of T. P. in 13 particulars. Then sheweth the inconsistence of the Primates judgement with M. B's in 15 particulars. wherein is also included Bp. Andrews his vindication. The fifth Letter exhibiteth the three Certificates, by which T. P. was induced to believe and publish the Pri∣mates change: the first from Dr. Walton; the second from Mr. Gunning; the third from Mr. Thorndike. Vpon which, satisfaction is required of such Calvinists, as have adorn'd their Doctrins by unjustly usurping the Primates Name. His Grace of Ar∣magh is farther proved to have changed his former judgement, by the Irish Articles concluded A. D. 1615. and by the late account which Dr. Bernard gave of it. To which is added the Primates care, that Dr. Iackson's writings might be preserved. And Mr. Baxters Censure of St. Austin, as unsound, and against Scripture, in that par∣ticular, wherein 'tis collected from Dr. Bernard, that the Primates judgement agreed with Austin's.
An Introduction to the First Chapter, concerning Slanders and other Falsehoods. §. 1. IN the whole Catalogue of Impostures by The great Dishonesty of the Tongue. which the God of all Glory hath been dis∣honour'd, Religion perverted, and the World abus'd, there is certainly none grea∣ter then the Dishonesty of the Tongue. For in a direct contrariety to the principal Ends of its Creation, to wit, the Honour of God, and the mutual benefit of man, it is frequently imployed (by some sorts of Factors more especially) in the blaspheming of the one, and in the ruining of the other. Since the Iesuites, and their Apes, (who at the first did but imitate, yet at last were able to instruct them) have made use of their Tongues to conceal their meanings (although intended by God to lay them open) there have been whole volumes written concern∣ing the Mystery, or Science, or Art of Lying; and a sadder confusion hath been made of the distinct est Languages and Tongues, then that which was given for a Defeat at the Twer of Babel. God himself in much mercy was the Author of the Gen. 11. 7. one; but the Devil in great malice was the first Father of the Joh. 8. 44. other. §. 2. Now the Dishonesty of the Tongue, though of divers Its several species and degrees. species and degrees, by a generical word is called Falsehood; which being singly taken is breach of Truth, and joyn'd to
witnesse, is breach of Iustce, and joyn'd to Neighbour, is breach of Charity: all expresly forbidden in that short Praecept, Exod. 2. 16. Thou shalt not bear false witnesse against thy neighbour. In the former respects, it is no more than a Lye; whereas in the later, it is that, and somewhat more, Imprope∣rium, a Slander. But there are three sorts of speaking which are not literally True, betwixt which notwithstanding there is a very vast Difference: to wit, a Rhetorical, a Lo∣gical, and an Ethical Falsehood. Of which the first, and the second, may in many cases be very innocent; but there is hardly any case, in which the third will not be guilty. And yet of this last sort there are degrees too. For a Lie that is perfectly officious, is not so filthy as a malicious one. That is nakedly a Lie, but this a Slander. And this is capable of Degrees, whether the slander be contumelious, or only by way of obtrectation. § 3. For that I may not suffer a possibility of doing mine Mr. B. arrived at the utmost Round of the climax; as will be shewed Ch. 1. §. 9. and 10. & 11. & 12. enemy any wrong, by laying more to his charge then I can certainly demonstrate, whilst I say he hath arriv'd to the very top of this ladder on which so many have climb'd to ruine, I will informe my self and my Reader with so much more of this subject, as may help to preserve us from all mistakes, and inable us to passe a righteous Judgement on Mr Barlee, as to that which is the subject of this first chapter. § 4. There are three or four wayes, by which a man may be How a man may be brought to believe his own lye. brought to believe his own Lie, as well as to credit the Lyes of others. For first, a man may be sick of a Phrensie, through some distemper in the brain; or be transported by the strength of a windy spleen, which may feed the fancy with strong and 1. strange dreames. Or secondly, in revenge of his former 2. wickednesse, and continued enmity to the Truth, he may by God's just judgement be wholly left unto himself, and to the suggestions of the Tempter; according to that of the Apostle 2 Thess. 2. 10, 11. Because they received not the love of 2 Thess. 2. 1o, 11. the Truth that they might be saved, even for this very cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should believe a lie. Or thirdly, he may stumble into the stedfast belief of an arrant falsehood, through the scandal of [felix & prosperum scelus] his temporal prosperity in any lewd practise: and this is likely to be meant by that of
Solomon, Because sentence against an evil is not executed Eccles. 8. 11. speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to doe evill. Or fourthly, his case may be just the same, which I have read in the works of that excellent Patriot, 4. the most wise Bishop Bancroft; A Pretended Holy Discipline Chap. 4. p. 61. man (saith he) may tell a lie so oft, that forgetting himself to be the Author of it, he may think he heard it from some person of credit, and so believe it to be true. And of this he thee gives us two remarkable examples, in the two Origins of Popery and Presbyteriansme. § 5. How this is pertinent to the Indictment of the grievous Made apparent by four Exam∣ples. Malefactor, who stands before us in this Arragnment, I shall demonstrate so much the better, if I give some Examples of this Assertion, That a man many wayes may believe his own lie. The first occurring to my memory is that which I 1. find in learned Buxtorf, and by him it is Maimonides apud Buxtorf. in Thesaur. ing. sanct. p. 683. usque ad 689. recorded out of Rabbi Mosche Ben Majemon, who in an Epistle to the Rabbins of the City Marseilles, makes this relation of one Eldavid. That about 520. years agoe, he gave himself out to be the Prodromus of the Messias, and that he came to pre∣pare the way before him. Upon this his pretension many Jews flock'd to him, as their Ancestors had done to Iohn the Baptist. But after the space of twelve months, this confident Impostor was apprehended: and being asked by a King of Arabia (before whom he was brought to be examin'd) what it was that mov'd him to do such things, his answer was (like that of the Scotish Spotswood Hist. Scot. l. 6. p. 330. 331. Presbyterians) that he was moved to what he did by the Commandement of God. And when the King again ask'd him, what signe wilt thou give us whereby to in∣duce us to a belief? Eldavid presently replyed, Cut my head from off my shoulders, and a little after I will revive. The King, as he desir'd, cut off his head; but farre was Eldavid from making good what he had promis'd, by either recover∣ing his old head, or by getting a new one. And so he proved himself to have been a false Prophet. But 'tis likely the man was serious, & deceived not others, untill his heart or his fancy deceived him, because he was willing to be tryed by a decollation, and dyed a Martyr to his Delusion. I find Bp. Bancroft of Dangerous positions practised in pretence of Re∣formation, and for the presbyte∣rial Discipline. l 4. c. 10. p. 161. 162. ano∣ther Example in the seditious Presbyterians of Queen Eliza∣beths dayes, I mean Copinger, and Wiggnton, and the rest of 2.
that Gang; who having fasted and prayed, both much and often, to try what method God would put into their Hearts, for the releasing of the Mr. Cart∣wright, Vdall, Traver, and the like, who were then im∣prison'd. Brotherhood, as well as for the Reforming of Church and State, at last they. found in them∣selves an impetuous motion (called by them and their bre∣thren, A Call from God) to murder the Lords of the privy Councell, and so to make an Insurrection against the Queen. And to prepare the peoples minds for the readyer acceptation of their purposes, they printed a pamphlet of pradestination, as though by the Abuse of that Doctrin they meant to have laid their Intended wickednesse upon God (they are the Authors own words) as if he should have moved them to such ewd Attempts. These things stand upon Record, transcribed from the mouths of severall witnesses up∣on Oath, such as were sharers in the conspiracy, when openly examin'd in the Starr-chamber. We have a third example in 3. the Cicero de Natura Deo∣rum l. 3. Tyrant Dionysius: who having spoiled the three Tem∣ples of Proserpina, Iupiter, and Aesculapius, conceived his Sacrilege not only lawfull, but godly too; because the first did not drown him as he sail'd to Syracuse, nor the second strike him with a Thunderbolt, nor the third infest him with some great sicknesse. And if with these great Instances of Self∣deceit we call to mind, and compare, what we cannot but 4. have heard of the Iames Nay∣ler. man at Bristoll, who thought himself to be the Christ, and was worshipped as such (by not a few both men and women) and was so stifly wedded to this unreasona∣ble Fancy, that for all the whipping in London, he would not admit of a Divorce, but carried it with him into the prison, and (for ought I hear) continues to embrace it untill this In∣stant, and defends this whoredome of his Invention, by plead∣ing Testimony of Conscience, and the inward witnesse of the Spirit; if, I say, we compare this fourth example with the former, I think I need not here add a fifth. §. 6. From what hath been said in the last two paragraphs, Mr. B.'s Con∣cernment in the praemisses. it appears to be a thing possible, that Mr. Barlee really might believe (at least some part of) his Inventions; by which of the four wayes (§. 4) it doth not concern me to passe a Iudgement. But that in some of his Falsehoods, he hath been a most deliberate and wilfull sinner, beyond the worst that I have met with, in all my Reading, or Converse, I shall shortly
manifest and evince, not by perswasive Probabilities, but by cogent Demonstrations; such as shall wring out an Assent from the most incredulous of all his Friends, I mean his Com∣plices and Abettors. Concerning some of his Falsehoods I will be bold to say, that had he endeavoured for a wager, or been brib'd by me with a Reward, to frame his Calumnies so unproportionable to all the Rules and Arts of lying, as not to leave a possibility of his being believed by any Creature, he could not have given us a lustier experiment of his Faculty, by all the Pangs and Tortures of his Invention. § 7. Now then, good Reader, give me the steadyest of thy Attention, and prepare thy self for an Astonishment. He be∣gins He betrayeth himself by his indeavoured vindication. to quit himself of the Forgeries which I had laid to his charge, in these following words. W. B. Ch. 2. page 17. line 18. and so down∣wards. About what he hath of my (1) Fictions against him, of taking up things upon (2) bare report, or simple hear-say, about what I charge him with Corrept, Cor. 39. concerning his being above sin, and concerning the deniall of the lawfulnesse of second Marriages, p. 73. of Ministers, &c. Answ. That I may at once quit my self from the Aspersion of having indulged to any vain Credulity against him, I must once for all protest before God and men, that I know but three things in all my book, which I did so much as seem to give Note, that what he did not give credit to, he did no: believe, for if he had, he must needs have given some credit to it. For not to believe is to give no credit; to which the giving of some credit is a di∣rect Contradi∣ction. credit to against him, and which yet I did not take up upon bare hear-say, &c. T. P. 1. Had not the man been so distinct in the later part of these 1. His wise & caetera. lines, which he marks for an Answer unto the manifold charge, I should have thought his two & caeteras (but espe∣cially the first) had been the wisest performance in all his
Book. For I had charg'd him in one See the beginnings of the 40. sections of the third chipt. of the Div. Phi∣lanth. Df. b chapter with 40. pal∣pable Inventions, which were the Subjects of so many Se∣ctions, all conspicuous in the Front of the severall Sections, and thereby thrusting themselves into the Eye of the Reader, and expressed all in his own words, and all referred to the pages from whence I took them. Mr. B. observing but two of the 40. in my epistle (set down only as a specimen of what the Reader was to expect,) sets them down with an & caetera, (but imperfectly too) and pretends to acquit himself from all at once. This is the bottom of his deep project, and my first observation. But secondly, He spoyles himself for a projector 2. His confession sealed with an Oath. in the very next words. For he rapps out an Oath, that in all his book (without exception of a page) there are but three things that he knows, which he did so much as seem to give credit to against me. Reader, observe the man's Confession. Of those 40. great Falshoods which he delivered in his book with the greatest confidence in the world, he doth acknow∣ledge 37. to have been wilfully committed, there being but 3. of all the number to which he gave any Credit. How great a wickednesse was that, to accuse a Neighbour, even in print, of so many foule things, when he makes Oath (even in print too) that he believed so very few? But this is the , the meer beginning of all his sorrows. For thirdly, there was a multitude of Slanders (besides those 40. thrust up together) 3. That he gave no credit to the far greatest part of his Aspersions. which I observed out of his Pasquil both in the first, second, and fourth chapters of my book. Of all which, when I ex∣pected that he would offer at a proof, or publish at least a Recantation, he puts me off with a Solemn Oath, that (ex∣cepting three things) he gave no credit to a syllable of what∣soever he spake against me throughout his book. How then shall I, or the world give credit to him, if he can hardly be∣lieve a word of what himself speakes? Fourthly, since he con∣fesseth with an Oath, that all his slanders, except three, were 4. Yet will not make a Repa∣ration. so transcendently incredible, that he himself could not believe them; why do we not find him upon his Knees, at an open penance, as he Dedic. E∣pst. p. 3. line 1. 2. promis'd no longer since then whilst he was dedicating his Labours? Here is his * fateor with a wit∣nesse, but where is his * peccavi, which he is wont to be at in a poenitent mood? Does he think that his making a lusty confes∣sion ** Epist. Ded. lib. pr. p. 9. of his sins, can intitle him to a privilege of doing as
wickedly as before? If so, we understand what is his Doctrin of Repentance, which doth consist of a Confession with∣out satisfaction or amendment; (a goodly ornament of the Party, of which he would be reckon'd a Leading man.) Or does he think that slanders are peccadillos in the elect, of whose small Number (small I mean in comparison) he often gloryes that he is one? If so, what need such large Confessions, and so many offers to cry peccavi, when the omission of that also can be no more then a peccadillo? But I will follow him no farther in this his miserie, as being diverted by a greater. For fifthly, he doth not only sweare that he gave no credit to all the things which he spake against me (excepting three) but 5. But seeks to secure an old falsity with a new one. that he did not so much as seem to give credit to them. Was ever Man so unhappy in the laying down so few words? that whilst he is saying a very great Truth [his giving no credit to what he spake against me] he should spoyle it in the same Instant with as great a Falsehood [his not so much as seeming to do it neither?] Doth he never so much as seem to give any credit to the Articles of his Creed, when he pronounceth them in the most positive and dogmaticall manner to be ima∣gin'd? And was he not every whit as positive, every whit as dogmaticall, in pronouncing things against me, to which he here sweares that he did not so much as seem to give any cre∣dence or belief? I will put it home by an Proved such by an Indu∣ction. Induction of some particulars. When he said, that I gave out Faith to be the Correp. Corr. p. 15. cause of election, in my publick papers; and that I did not so much as deny that when two men are equally called, whereof the one converts himself, the other miscarrieth, it is not p. 15. God, but Man that puts the difference; and that at Daintry in my Sermon I affirm'd God to have prepared Hell, for the Devil and his Angels, but p. 20. not for any wickedmen; that I affected to be an p. 36. elector and Deter∣miner of Grace; that I call'd in Poets, if not p. 69. Devils, to help me to blaspheme; that I was a Satanicall blasphemer, and p. 102. exceeded the Devil himself in blasphemy; (with a multitude the like) did he not so much as seem to believe what he said? or will he say that these things were rather for me, then against me? Or when he Correp. Corr. p. 174. professed in the presence of God, that he did much fear, that no man could write thus, but one wel-nigh in the same condition with Simon Ma∣gus,
adding, that I did openly blaspheme against Scripture, did he not seem to give credit to it? Either he did, or he did not. If he did not, why then did he professe it in the presence of God? and if he did seem to give credit to it, why then doth he protest before God and men, that he did not? Poor man! what hath he done? or what will he do? Can he escape doing penance upon his knees (as before he E▪ ist. Ded. the first p. 9. promis'd, and hath now Epist. Ded. the second p. 3. reproms'd) when he hath not a mousehole through which to run from it? The many falsehoods which he af∣firmed in the word of a Priest only (for he is a Priest, or a Lay-preacher) he did lustily seem at least to credit: and did he not so much as seem to believe what he said upon his Oath? Behold His two Oaths opposite to each other. two Oaths as perfectly opposite to each other, as the Scotish Covenant was opposite to any Oath which can be nam'd. And will be do no penance for being perjur'd? At what Crevice will he creep out? He cannot say, either in reason, or in charity to himself, His impossibi∣lity of esca∣ping at any Crevic, either from perjury, or contradictions. that by his phrase of giving credit, he only meant taking up upon Report from other men. For 1. if that had been his meaning, he would certainly have expressed it in a significant Phrase; whereas habere fidem, to give credit, and credere, to believe, are [] two expressions of one thing. A man may give credit to the false suggestions of his own heart; and again his own Fancy may create such Fictions, to which himself can give no credit. 2. In that very objection which he proposeth unto himself, as that to which he must shape his An∣swer, there are two sorts of falsities with which he stands charged; viz. the Fictions of his Brain, and Things taken upon report: to the first of which he is to give his first an∣swer, or at least his second, or to give a reason for the omis∣sion. 3. As a man is said to be vainly credulous, who believes his own Iealousyes without just ground, so had Mr. B. meant otherwise by that expression in that place, it had been more to his miserie, then now it is. For 4. no sooner had he sworn that he knew but three things to which he gave credit, but he immediately lets fall a fourth, concerning second marriages, which he confesseth to have taken upon the report of a Reve∣rend Divine: which plainly proves him to be perjur'd, if he meant there were but 3 things which he took upon Trust. Nay 5. there were many amazing portentous falsehoods, with
which he was charged in my book, and clearly proved to be guilty of; which he must either now say he had but taken upon Trust from other men, (and then he is perjur'd, as before,) or that at least they were the Issues of his Invention. Such was that of rifling the Batavian Cabinet, and of being * behold∣ing ** See Div. Pilnt: Def. ch. 3. p. 143, 144, &c. to such Roguish Pamphlets as Fur Praedestinatus, and to Ibid. p. 147, 148, &c. my Domestick Doctor Iackson, and to p. 149. Castalio for flowers of Rhetorick, &c. neither of which is in the number of those 3. fictions, to which alone he sweares his having seemed to give credit. And be it known to all his Readers, that he neither indeavours to prove the truth of those things, nor declareth his sorrow for their falsehood, but passeth them over in a very deep silence, hoping that I would forget them, as well as our lesse-concerned Readers. In a word: if he will say his meaning is, That of the Numerous Calumnies and Forgeries which I demonstrated to be such, (and himself also confesseth, partly implicitly, and partly explicitly) there were three, and three on∣ly, which he received upon Trust from some other man; he is not only perjur'd, as hath been shew'd, but also ownes the greatest wickednesse that any man (in this kind) can be guil∣ty of. It being much a greater fault, to be the Coyner of adul∣terate mony, than only to take it with the one hand, and put it off with the other. That is such a betraying subterfuge, that I conceive he dares not use it. I have taken his words, not on∣ly in the most rationall, but the most favourable construction: and therefore knowingly he will not cast Anchor upon Quick-sands. But whither then will he flye for Refuge? He cannot say that the place is false-printed, for the sense is intire, the words exact, they are not alter'd in the Errata, nor yet with his pen, and he jogg'd up to London immediately be∣fore his book came forth, ('tis said) on purpose to set all right as he would have it. He cannot say that he excepted but three things only of some one sort, or in some one part of his Cor∣reptorie Correction; for the words of his Oath are these ex∣pressely, [I must protest once for all before God and men, that I know but three things in all my Book, which I did so much as seem to give credit to against him, and which yet I did not take upon bare hear-say, &c.] Observe good Rea∣der. All his book, is the widest expression he could have us'd, whereby to justify me, and defame himself. Nor will his last
words afford him any the smallest chink. For what he took Note, that in his p. 19. lin, 35. 36. he confesseth those to be bare hear-says, which here he swear's were not. not up upon bare hear-say, he either saw, or felt, or smelt at least afarr off: and then why gave he no credit to them? or if he did, why did he not so much as seem to do it? or if he did, and did seem too, why doth he swear that he did neither, when in the very same Oath, he sweareth that he had reason and ground for both? Here he sweares that which implyes a con∣tradiction, and that within the compasse of not many words, of which his Oath is composed. For if he alledge (as a Salvo for Name, and Conscience) that the last words do not relate to any thing else, then the three particulars excepted, his Cala∣mityes will increase by all the things that he hath spoken in their defense, as I shall clearly demonstrate, when I come to consider them apart. & yet (the sadder is his condition) they cannot regularly belong to any other then those three; nor tru∣ly should I have guess't it to be his meaning, but that I know it his lesser Evill, and find him often at false construction, and so in charity would hope, that some degree of his guilt may be imputed unto his Ignorance, rather then all should be laid on the back of Conscience. Yet that he may not be ingratefull for so much favour as I afford him, (as he formerly hath been) I will shew him very shortly how ill he chooseth for him∣self, in case he chooseth to be thought a good Grammarian. But I may not yet passe from the present passage lying be∣fore us. For sixthly, I must not omit any means whereby to lessen the unhappinesse of this unfortunate Creature, if any 6. The best that can be said for him is vehe∣mently bad. means may be found for so good a purpose. The best excuse that I am able to prompt him to, is to put a speciall Emphasis upon the words [I know.] for so run's his Oath, [I must first once for all protest before God and men, that I know but three things in all my book, which I did so much as seem to give credit to against him, &c.] But alas! this best of ex∣cuses is so vehemently bad, that I know not how he will be able to take it kindly. For if he did not see the greatest part of my book, nor of his own, whilst he was Epist. Ded. p. 1. l. 3. labouring in the work of vindicating the later from the many high charges of the former, where were his Eyes? If he did see, but not per∣ceive, whether went his understanding? If he did see, and per∣ceive, but would not be known to do either, whereabouts lay his Honesty? If I rightly remember, Busbequius, in one of
his Embassyes, tellsus a story of some Turks (the great As∣sertors of Mr. Barlee's Doctrin of Decrees) who having a ve∣ry great mind to be drunk with wine (which Mahomet's Law had forbid them) did first break forth into such a showt, as they thought was sufficient to fright their Consciences into their feet, that so they might revell it without all scruple. Some such expedient our Correptory Corrector had need devise, if after his having published so many things against me, he will have an ability not to know them; or to know but three of them, and to unknow the rest; or not to know them to have been cre∣dited by himself, no not so much as in appearance. If by say∣ing, he doth not know, he means, he doth not consider or re∣spect them, it hath some Resemblance to his Doctrin of God's Decrees, viz. That God did decree the Reprobation of his Creatures, not without a foreknowledge of their Actuall sins, but yet without the least respect or consideration of them. ☜ Seventhly, it is to be noted, that Mr. Barlee doth imply it to 7. What he gets by his deniall of vain credu∣lity. be a very ill thing, for a man to have indulged to any vain credulity against a Neighbour; because he calls it an Asper∣sion from which at once he would fain be quit. And to effect his purpose, he must protest before God, that he gave no cre∣dit to any one thing which he spake against me in all hi book; excepting those three, which shall be by and by men∣tion'd. As if he thought it a lesser crime to slander a man a∣gainst his knowledge, then to speak vvhat he thinks through vain credulity of disposition. For that they really vvere slan∣ders (every one, except three) he doth more then confesse vvhilst he protests before God, that he himself did not give any credit to them; vvhereby he proves them, by an Oath, to have been maliciously intended, and not embraced through meer credulity. Nay he is yet more unlucky: For in that he protests against his having been vainly credulous, and against his having taken those things upon hear-say, doth he not in∣timate unto us, that they vvere only the children of his inven∣tion? As if he thought it a finer thing, to spin a Forgerie out of himself, and not to give it any credit, then to be so credu∣lous as to believe it from another. Eighthly, neither he, nor his Friends, can comfortably say in his excuse, that the 8 vvords of his Oath vvere not carefully put together, and tha through some inadvertency he hardly knew vvhat he said, be
yet his meaning was good enough. for this will render his gilt as great as any thing else, that he should swear he cares not, or considers not what. I can expect it from none but a common swearer, to protest before God even before he is a∣ware. But neither is it credible, that that sin should serve for his excuse. because it was written, and read, (in probability very often) before 'twas printed. Were it available to say, that his intention and meaning was good enough, though infinite∣ly different from the signification of his words, there would not be any difference betwixt the truest and the most slan∣derous speaker, as to an human Tribunal. But if Mr. Barlee should speak Treason against the Commander of 30. Le∣gions, and then appeal to good meaning, I doubt such Logick would not preserve him. Nay ninthly, His invoking of God was clearly used as a Design, to wipe off the aspersion of 9. being credulous. for so run his words, That I may at once quit my self from the aspersion of having indulged to any vain credulity against him, I must once for all protest before God, &c. where the particle [That] in the beginning, is , that is, it notes the final Cause of his protesting before God; [That I may] is all one with [To the end that I may.] Nay tenthly, he ushers in his Transgression of the third Commandement, with a positive [I must,] which needs 10. His pretended Necessity for swearing. must signify either his Duety, or his Necessity. Not his Duety, because it was lawfull to have omitted the attestation of God in such a case. but his Necessity (as he thought) for one of these two reasons: either because he was reduced to that extre∣mity and exigence, that he had no other shift whereby to a∣muse one sort of Readers, (and then the necessity was but mo∣rall, created to himself by himself;) or else because he was pre∣determin'd to that abuse of God's Name, by such a Fatal Decree as he is wont to dream of, such as gives a necessity to all mens Actions, (and then 'twas a physicall necessity, not at 11. all to be avoided, if we believe Mr. B. upon his word, or his Oath.) Mr. B.'s Ar∣gumentative Oath. Not un∣l ke to Mr. Haket, who in¦sted of mira∣cles, or reasons, whereby to prove that his Doctrin nd T aiterous Design did im∣mediately proceed from the spirit of God, fell into swearing, and groaning, and calling curses upon himself, if it were not so. Bp. Bancr. Dang. Posit. ch. 15. p. 170. But then, in the eleventh place, what a subtil Dispu∣tant is Mr. Barlee, who urgeth an Oath for an Argument? and no other Argument, except an Oath? I had accus'd him
of many falsehoods which he reported upon hear-say in seve∣rall kinds, and other falsehoods which he invented, (which sure are worse;) and he, to vindicate himself, hath not any thing to say, but that he protests before God and men, &c. and to give us Assurance that this is all he hath to say, he tells us, He must once for all protest, &c. for though he inserts the word [first] yet there follows no [secondly] to which that first can have a regular relation. What falsehood is there, or can there be, which may not be proved to Mr. Barlee (by an argument ad Hominem) if wicked Protestations may passe for proofs? But what is the thing which he protests? not the nega∣tive to that which was laid to his charge, but a thing imper∣tinent and senselesse. For I accus'd him of his slanders and other falsehoods, (as things wicked in themselves, and inju∣rious to his Neighbour) partly invented by himself, and part∣ly taken up upon bare report; (and in that very method he sets them down in the objection:) I did never accuse him of giving credit to those falsehoods, but rather of raising such falsehoods as were incredible, and pretending nothing for his ground, but a simple hear-say. Now Reader, attend to his astonishing Answer. I must once (saith he) for all, protest before God and men, that I know but three things in all my book, which I did so much as seem to give credit to against him, &c. Would he have justified himself, or answer'd the Objections, he should have protested, or proved, one of these two things: that either he never said the things whereof he was accus'd; or if he did, he said true, and that for such or such reasons. Whereas he only protesteth, that of all the particulars in his book he believed but three, nay that he did but seem to believe those three too. And therefore twelfthly, Mr. Barlee subscri∣beth 12. His necessityes and streights betwixt his first and second book. implicitly to my whole volume of Accusations, and stigmatizeth his second book, for pretending to vindicate his first. The reason is evident, because in this most signall and re∣markable place, (wherein he protests before God and men) he doth not offer so much as to say, that they were not Fi∣ctions with which I charg'd him, but he sweares that they were Fictions, by swearing that he gave no credit to them. For, what other reason can be imagin'd, why he gave no credit to them, but because he believ'd them or knew them to be but Fi∣ctions? Behold now the streights into which this writer hath
cast himself (for I am only an Index to shew him how.) He must confesse himself guilty, for fear he confesse himself guil∣ty. It must be his refuge to say, that he was slanderous before, that he may not seem perjur'd in having sworn that he was slanderous. I have his publick Protestation to clear my self, nay to clear the very charge which I brought against him. At least the utmost that he can say, is, that he excepted three things; which what they are, his next words tell us, by way of reference. W. B. ch. 2. p. 17. line 29. & deinceps. The first is that which here he hath, and which again he makes a great stirr about, Philanthrop. chap. 3. p. 81, 82, 83. The second is that about the 600. Copyes mentioned by him chap. 3. p. 54, 55. The third is about the Dialogue of two Ladyes about Artificial Beauty, mentioned from p. 150. to 552. of chap. 3. T. P. §. 8. Now he names the three things, to which alone (he He gives the slip to a passage which would convince him of a double perjurie. protested) he seemed at least to have given credit. But he slily passeth over that, of which in particular he swore, that he did not so much as seem to give credit to it, and yet that he did not take it up upon bare hear-say, &c. which must there∣fore be examin'd, before I goe forward to the three particulars expressed. Whilst he was speaking of Gods Decree in rela∣tion to sin, he brake out most impertinently into these very words, Corr. Corr. p. 73. Look you to that formidable Ergo, who are said to be against all second Marriages of Ministers. This pas∣sage he was willing to give the slip, because he knew it would convince him of a twofold perjury. For first, if he did not believe, or give credit to it, at least he seem'd so to doe, and yet he swore he did not, as hath been shew'd. and if he did but seem to believe the fiction (by having printed it in his pamphlet of Predestination) but did not believe it in good earnest, what a wicked Impertinence must it needs have been, to publish a fiction quatenus ipsum, without connexion to any
syllable before or after? as if in the midst of his thoughts concerning eternal Predestination, it had occurr'd to his me∣mory, that (the day before) he swallow'd the Ace of Trumps, and so forgot where he lef: and then he remem∣bred, what he thought a fine thing, (a shed of Latin) Ba∣culus stat in angulo, &c. which suggested a slander from a pretended hear-say. And this inferres his second perjury. For his protestation before God referres to all that period (as hath been shew'd) and so to his pretention of not having taken upon bare hear-say. Yet he had printed, [that I was said to be against the lawfulnesse of all second Marriages of Miniers:] which how could he tell, if he never heard it? If he heard it, he did but hear it, and then we know he is for∣sworn; if he did not, 'twas his invention. Thus having shewed his miscarriage, which he so cunningly huddled up; I will hasten to that which is more amazing, his three ex∣cepted particulars which are of most weight with him, and for which he thinks he hath most to say, [as being the onely three things in all his book against me, to which he protested his having giving some credit.] Stand forth, Malefactor, and name the first of your offences. W. B. Ch. 2. p. 17. lin. 35. and thence to the bottom of the page. First, if my Reader will be pleased once more to turn to my Correptory Correction, p. 39. he will find that I used my utmost care and diligence to inform my self of the Truth of it, and I far∣ther back it there, with a probable Argument from what he hath in his uncorrect Copy. T. P. §. 9. Now he enters upon that, which will paradigma∣tize The first of his three ex∣cepted slan∣ders. him to all posterity: the greatest slander, and the most groundlesse; that I believe hath been brewed in the brain of man. And because by that which I shall say, his utter un∣doing in point of Credit (if at least he hath any) must needs ensue; I desire his well-willers to carry this in their minds,
That should I abstain from doing that which may seem a sive∣rity to Mr. Barlee, I cannot fail of being guilty of perfect cruelty to my self, besides a double injustice both to the Truth, and to the world. I have turn'd to the page where the great slander is recorded, where I find a bare narrative of a pretended report from a reverend Minister, who is said at first to have told him alone, and afterwards many more The slander, as it lies in its original. ☞ Ministers in his hearing, and as heard by him from my own mouth, viz. that I believe no sin to be in me, that I was above sin, that by my own power I could abstain from all sin; and that he wrote this Testimony as the Testator of it did dictate it to him.] First observe, that here is nothing of care and diligence ex∣pressed in finding out the truth of it, but only a hearing 1 Proved no more now then it was at first, when it was crudely affir∣med. the words at one time, and transcribing them at another. Here is not a syllable concerning the care which he took, to try the truth, or the falsehood of that report: for the finding out of which, he professeth that in that place (p. 39.) he used his utmost of care and diligence. To find out the truth or the falsehood of such a strange Tale, he should have examined the Relator, about the time when, and the place wherein, and the occasion upon which such words were spo∣ken: he should have asked who heard them besides himself, and have told him (out of St. Paul) that against a man of my calling (which is their own also) an accusation is not to be admitted but before two or three witnesses: he should 1 Tim. 5. 19. have consulted with me about it, to try if I did remember, or would acknowledge any such words, or any other words like them, or if I never said something which might occasion such a mistake in him who heard me; or if that would not prevail, he should have tryed to catch me in several stories: he should have moved every stone to have found out the truth, had he used his utmost of care and diligence. But what did he in stead of all this? he bids us look. but whither? to his p. 39. for what? even his utmost care and diligence. where∣in employed? in finding out the truth of what was told him by a Reverend Divine. wherein did his utmost both care and diligence consist? in giving ear to the words, and in writing them down. Here then is one falsification in the beginning of his Defence.
Secondly, He pretends to no more than a naked hear-say forth t Invention (for so I shall prove it in the end;) where∣as 2. No more then a hear-say, con∣trary to his oath. he swore a little before, that he did not take it up upon a bare hear-say. Nor doth he pretend, that any more than one man did ever say that he had heard me to speak such words, and he a Sympresbyter of the Gang too, who cannot therefore pretend to so much as one witnesse; but the Apostle saith ex∣presly, An accusation must not be received against a Priest, without two or three witnesses: and , to admit, or receive, a Complaint or Accusation, was but the first part of the three, which were to goe before the sentence in the judicial proceedings among the Iews, by which that Text must be explain'd: See Doctor Hammond's Annot. on the place. next the complaint must be confirmed by the oaths of those witnesses: and because the witnesses may be perjur'd, (whether brib'd with money, or suborn'd by their own malice) the cause is thirdly to be searched, and considered by the Iudge. for if the witnesses are two, but made appear to be sons of Belal, if they are proved to be greedy of filthy lucre, or if the Plaintiff is known to be a Iezebel, and apt to be a suborner with either money or moneys worth, if Naboth is known to be both honest and religious, and yet accused at once of blaspheming God and the King, if Ahab is known to have been in love with Naboth's vineyard, and that he could not obtain it by fairer meanes, a considering Judge will be suspicious of such mens oaths. But Mr. Bar∣lee's Informer is the original accuser, and cannot be his own witnesse; for where two single men say yea, and no, to one sentence, the result is nothing but , an endlesse a Heb. 6. 16. strife of contradiction. Nay thirdly, that one Informer is but pretended; neither 3. Mr. Barlee provoked to name his In∣former, if he hath any. named in the first book, nor now in the second; and I really believe he is not yet christen'd. If there is any such creature, let him not hide his head and his name together; nor any longer expose his brother Zelot to shame and censure. If his Name be Simeon, let him not suffer little Levi to bear the whole odium of such a slander. At least let Mr. Barlee have so much mercy upon himself, as to lighten his load of guilt and hatred, by laying part of it upon a new pair of shoulders. When I reported that I had heard of the Primates change, I thought my self obliged to name my Authors, first in private,
and now in print. And if there is any other case wherein this Iustice shall be requir'd, I will not fail to perform it, or make satisfaction for the wrong. I require no more of my Accuser, then what I offer at his Demand. If he had an Informer on this side his bosome, or his Brain, let him be brought into the light, that the deed of darknesse may be made manifest, and Mr. Barlee be freed at least à Tanto. But un∣till he doe this, he must remain on that Gibbet on which he hath truss'd himself up. His upper lip must be thought the reverend▪ Divine unto his lower; or his tongue did dictate, whilst his ear and his hand did both receive the information; and so at once he is Simeon and Levi too. But fourthly, that I may force him by cogent Reason to take this course, which is more for his interest, then he can 4. Moives used to that purpose. think it to be for mine, (for whilest he names not his Infor∣mer, he is concluded to have none) I shall intreat him to re∣member, that he may make it a leading case to as many sons of Belial, as either for malice, or for money, shall ruine them∣selves, or their dearest friends, in point of fame, or fortune, or life it self, by raising a false Report, upon pretence of an Au∣thor without a name, if it were fit that such a report should passe so easily for its own proof. As for example, If I my self had any malice to Mr. Barlee's person, or any love to his parsonage, or any envy of his parts, or had been publickly non-plust in some dispute, and thereupon had a design to con∣trive his mischief, I could easily publish a Declaration, That September the eight 1649. he was found under a hedge in the act of Adultery, and that this I was told by rom parallel slanders which might be rai∣sed upon him. three godly Ministers, who riding that way, were all three witnesses of the thing. And many yeares before, when Mr. Barlee was in Holland, he was commonly drunk every week, as three Dutch Merchants told me, first when I was alone with them, and afterwards upon the Exchange, when many more heard it as well as I, and this they protested to have been eye-witnesses of; and they were most These are Mr. Barlees words ch. 2. p. 19. li. 9, 10, 11. con∣scronable men, who I think made as much conscience of not telling or believing lies, as any men in Holland. Such slanders, I say, I could invent, or cause others to invent, if I had his Conscience (which God of his mercy, and by his grace, defend me rom) or if I could indure to repay him in
kind. Nay let Mr. Barlee lay to heart, that these two fictions are more commendable, or (to speak more exactly) lsse in∣tolerable then his. First, because in the former I name the year, and the day, and the place of commission; secondly, be∣cause I pretend to three witnesses, all as reverend as his one; thirdly, because the subject matter is much more probable (as I conceive) then that which is the subject of his invention. Or I could say, that Mr. Barlee had kill'd a man in his wrath, when he was at Leyden, for worsting him in dispute And that with more probabi∣lity, about the point of Praedestination, and thereupon fled into England, &c. and for this I could give a more probable Reason, then he can give for my saying, I am without sin, &c. for is it not true, that he was at Leyden? and that he came into England? and that he is strangely cholerick, (as him∣self confesseth) and that he is vehement in dispute? impati∣ent of opposition? much more impatient of being worsted? And since wilful murders are sometimes committed, man∣slaughter often, in fits of passion; is it not infinitely more probable, that fire should burn down a house, or a cholerick man kill in a fit of rage, then that a man should say, he be∣lieves he is without sin, and above sin, and by his own power can keep himself from sin, who hath breathed nothing so much as confessions of sin, ever since his very boyage? The former case hath so much colour of probability in it, and Mr. Barlee hath discovered so much virulence of spirit, that many men have consider'd how great a happinesse it is, that neither he, nor his kinsmen, have got the power of the sword. Nay fifthly, should I invent such a slander as one of those above mentioned, I could have such an advantage as he is not 5. And greater hopes of escape able to pretend to: for I could say, that my three Dutchmen, or my three Reverend Divines (from whom I had my Intel∣ligence) are all six dead, and so escape the necessity of bring∣ing them forth to the Tribunal; whereas Mr. Barlee's one man is implyed by him to be still alive (as we shall happily observe anon.) And truly (Reader) the chiefest Reason The Reasons of these mo∣tives or the finding of the Informer. why I use these Impellents, to force my confident Accuser unto the naming of his Informer without delay, is my rational jealousie and fear, that if he stay a long time before he doth it, he will impute it to any Minister within the compasse of his Acquaintance, who betwixt this and that shall chance to
die; or else, for want of a better way, he may take an occa∣sion to die himself; at least he may hope to be my Surviver, and then may use me as well as Mr. Rivet and others have used Grotius. And because I find at the later * end of his book, he hath provided a pretense for his saying nothing to ** ch. 4. p. 149. li. 3, 4, 5. this charge, by professing to be * resolved to cut off all the advantages, which in this kind I may take against him, and to cut them off by an obstinate kind of silence for the fu∣ture; I am afraid he will pretend he must not answer to my charge, because he dares not break his promise; and that the clearing of himself (by aspersing the Minister who did in∣form him) will not any way consist with his obstinate kind of silence, nor with his stedfast Resolutions of cutting off all my advantages from this day forward. But this is just as if a Felon should take an oath before his trial, that he will cut off all advantages by an obstinate silence, and refuse an answer to his Inditement, under pretense of his duty to keep his oath. Indeed I have heard of a cunning School-boy, who when the Master was brandshing (over his back) the terrible. In∣strument of his anger, besought him only this favour, that he might not be whipt until he first had said his prayers. The Master pleas'd with the petition, thought good to grant it. Why then (said the Boy) I wll never say my prayers until I am grown too big for such correction. But Mr. Bar∣lee must consider, that if he shall refuse to name his Reverend Informer, because he resolved to write no more, and confirm'd it with his promise in the conclusion of his book, the Slander will be ascribed to his invention. Or if he will not write, he may read at least before the Magistrate, and take the advan∣tage of being Plaintiff: for if he hath not slander'd me, nor his Informer neither, then they may worthily implead me for all this wrong. And therefore let me perswade him, either to crave my forgivenesse, and to make me a little satisfaction, (for I will not rigidly require my due) or else let him spee∣dily produce his man, who was the Author of his Report. I know that most Souldiers doe love to make a golden bridge to a flying enemy, because even cowards, and conquer'd men, will doe strange things when they are desperate. But so sure am I of being innocent, as to that wherewith I have been slandered, and so very desirous to know the bottom of the
report, that I will not willingly accept of Mr. Barlee's Ter∣giversation, nor so much as afford him a wooden bridge. For suppose the worst that can arrive, to wit, that he and his Con∣gerro should both conspire to be perjur'd at a dead lift, or suborne false witnesses (as Iezebel did;) yet so much doe I rely upon the Integrity of my cause, (and upon the good pro∣vidence of God upon it) that if I could not evince them to be suborn'd and perjur'd, by either the multitude, or strength of reasons, I should not despaire of a miracle, for the making a Dscovery of Truth and Falsehood. But I find I am so farre from having spoken the Totall of what I have to say, for the proving this slander to be demonstratively a slander (however demonstratively prov'd already) that I doe think it fit for a∣nother Section. §. 10. Because a namelesse Informer (he knew) was worth nothing, he tells us that he back't it with a probable Argu∣ment from what he found in my uncorrect Copy; that is, from How Mr. Barlee spoiles himself by his pretensions to a probable Argument. a manuscript, which he transcribed, I know not when, nor from whence, nor with how many Interpolations; such as I never yet saw, nor would he suffer me to see it when I desir'd that favour by way of Epistle. Yet he confessed in his Epistle, that there was non sense in two places, and that if he should send it, I could not possibly read it; and other Transcripts which I saw, were strangely alter'd from my Originall: and yet he calls this my uncorrect Copie (uncorrected indeed of all his Interpolations) and to the world of Readers who ne∣ver were in his desk, nor had ever a sight of his Manuscripts, he citeth no body knows what, to prove his Slander. How much better might I accuse him, of having written whatsoever I please to fancy, who have so much of his own hand whereon to father it? But secondly, admit in his Manuscript there 2. are such words from whence he can draw a probable Argu∣ment (as by and by I shall shew the contrary) yet is that suf∣ficient to back a story, which if not true, is an incomparable slander? Probable is that, which as it may possibly be true, so it may possibly be false too. Behold the manifold unluckinesse of this Dsputer. The very Topick from which he argues he confesseth to be Apocryphall, a jen-scay-quoy, an uncorrect Copy in the dark, a Manuscript lying in his Desk, or at least in his closet; and yet from this unknown thing he pretends to no
more then a probable Argument, which he hopes will per∣swade, but cannot hope it will prove, unlesse he understands not what [probable] signifyes, and so hath printed he knew not what. But thirdly, his greatest unluckinesse is yet to come. For that which he calls a probable Argument of my having said, [I am without sin, and above it, and by my own power can abstain from all sin,] is rather a probable Argu∣ment that I never said it. Because the words which he citeth from the manuscript Copy (which he calls mine) are expres∣ly these; Correp. Corr. p. 39. lin. 22, 23. [You say that Adam's Concerning Adams sin, and ours and origi∣nall sin, and actual, both in him, and in us. ☞ sin was none of our own, contrary to the Apostle Rom. 5. 12.] In which few words, how many wayes hath he miscarried, and even ruin'd his own interest, for which he spake them? For 1. suppose I had said, that Adam's sin is none of our own, had I thereby inferred that we are without sin and above sin? had I not rather infer'd the contrary, that though another mans sins are not ours, yet ours are our own? Is there no difference betwixt another man, and our selves? the things of another, and the things of our selves? and was not Adam an other man? was not A∣dam's whole person, (body, soul, and spirit, and the qualityes of each) a different thing from our persons, bodyes, souls, and spirits, and all personall qualityes whatsoever? Every child could have taught Mr. B. that though Adam and we do agree in specie, yet we are (with a witnesse) numerically different. 2. It seems Mr. B. is so unsufficient for the Ministery, that he knows not what is meant by our original sin amongst the men of his own way. He thought that Adam's actuall sin of eating the Apple had been that which we call original sin in our selves: which none of his party (if they have more wit then he) will ever say: and How Mr. B's notion of it tendeth to Pelgiansme and to other absurdityes. if they should, they would imply unavoidably, that our original sin is not inherent in our souls, but only in Adam; who being forgiven, dead, and happy, hath that sin done away from his imparadised soul, and so there is no such thing remaining as original sin, by that do∣ctrin. And by the same it would follow, that original sin is actual sin, that actual sin is no sin, that Mr. Barlee's Daughter is guilty of his books, (as having been in ipsius Lumbis) though she never had a hand in them, and I verily believe was never willing they should be written. 3. But if I had said, that Adam's sin was none of our own, and had implyed
thereby what he supposeth, yet having spoken in the plurall number, including all the posterity of Adam, of which Mr. Barlee is a part, I had by consequence implyed that every man in the world (Mr. Barlee too) is without sin, and above sin, and by his own power can abstain from all sin. And thus we see that Mr. B. was an unpolitick projector: for he should have fancyed my words were these, Adams sin was none of mine own; but he would needs have it thus, Adams sin was none of our own. 4. My own Ac∣compt of ori∣ginal sin in my self. ☜ That which I call original sin in my self, is the pravity of my nature, my corruptnesse of Dispo∣sition, by which I love darknesse better then light, unlesse God by his Grace doth make me able to choose better, to have better loves, desires, and inclinations, then I can pos∣sibly have without it. And through this pravity of Nature there is not any meer man who can possibly be without sin. And the spirit of this Doctrin doth run through all that I have published from presse or pulpit. But I Why I say that Adams Actuall sin is not numerically mine own. must not lye, and speak non-sense, and abuse the Scriptures, and imply a thousand contradictions, for fear of displeasing an angry Neighbour. I say, I must not commit these Crimes, by saying that Adams sin was very really mine own. Indeed if Adam had never sinn'd, I hope I should ever have been Innocent. But Death having entred into the world by sin, and sin by Adam, I have too many sins which are peculiarly mine own, (both Original and Actuall) to need another man's sin for the completing of my Number Perhaps a few country people, who have been taught by such Pastors as were put besides the right use, when they were dedicated to learning, may think it sense to say, that Adam's sin was our own before we were, or that his sin which began above 5600. years since, did also not begin till yesterday when we were borne, or did begin a thousand times, and was ten thousand times begun before its beginning. Such men as these must be taught to say, that all our own sins did enter by Adam; not that our sins were A∣dam's, much lesse that Adam's sins were ours. And before I shew this from Mr. B's own Text, (which he thought had been pertinent, but is nothing lesse) I will thus reason him in∣to his wits. If Adam's sin was none of Mr. Barlee's own, it was none of mine or thine, Reader: but it was none of Mr. Barlees own. For did he eat of the fruit in the midst of Eden, many
thousands of years before he had a mouth? no more did I, or t'other man. What the Jewes said to Christ (and very rational∣ly in respect of his Manhood) Ioh. 8 57. Thou art not yet 50. years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? that may I say more rationally of my self, I am not yet 40. years old, and have I ever seen A∣dam, whom Abraham was too young to see? and could his sin be mine without my commission? and could I commit it with∣out existence? Nothing is mine in any sense, (right, or wrong,) unlesse I find, or conquer, or purchase, or inherit, or claime by prescription, or receive it by deed of gift. Now it cannot be pretended that Adam's sin is mine own, unlesse by right of inheritance, and that is but weakly pretended too. For when I say in my Concerning a mans being born in sin. What is not meant. confessions and prayers, that I was born in sin, and in sin my mother conceived me, and the like, I do not mean that I was born in the act of eating forbidden fruit growing in the midst of the Garden of Eden; nor that I did eat it with Adam's mouth before I was born; nor that my mother Eve conceived me in sin as she once conceived Cain or Abel; nor that I was born, in the guilt of those actuall sins, which my mother committed, who brought me forth into the world: but I What is meant by it. mean that I was born in original sin, that is, a pravity of nature, a corruptnesse of disposition, which makes me naturally prone to obey the law that is in my Rom. 7. 23. members, & to rebell against the Law which God hath imprinted in my mind. So that that which I inherit, is a depraved nature, com∣mon to me with all mankind, considered in specie; but nu∣merically consider'd, it is peculiarly mine own, and no mans else. Whereas if I inherited (in a proper sense) as well the sin, as the substance of my progenitors, then the sins of my particular immediate parents would be mine own, rather then Adams. And therefore (fifthly.) let us consider, how per∣fectly 5. contrary to common sense Mr. B. opposeth that Text, Concerning that Text, By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin. Rom. 5. 12. where the Apostle saith, that by one man [A∣dam] sin entred into the world, and death by sin. He doth not say, that one mans sin is the peculiar sin of all men, or all mens own, (as the word was:) nor can he mean it in such a sense, as if the numericall sin of Adam's eating the Apple, were suc∣cessively propagated (as mankind was) throughout the uni∣verse of men. The Absur∣dityes which follow from Mr. B's exposi∣tion. for then, as all the sons who descended from Adam, were the same kind of Creatures that Adam was, to
wit men; so all the sinners, as sinners, descending from Adam, should be the same kind of sinners that Adam was, to wit Apple-Eaters, and eaters of that Apple which was forbid∣den. A second absurdity. And if every thing of man which entered into the world by Adam were Adam's own, and our own too, then as Adam's sin should be our sin, so his personall qualityes and members should be our own too. And Mr. Barlee must say, that Adam's Nose was Mr. Barlee's own Nose, or deny himself to be Adam's Son; or say that he was born without a Nose, and that this which he now weares, is not an originall, but an actuall Nose. he must say that Adam's Death was our own, if his sin was our own, by force of that Text Rom. 5. 12. which saith, that Death, as well as sin, did by one man enter into the world. Now then let us observe the utmost force of his probable Argument. The utmost force of Mr. B's Argu∣ment. ☜ [Mr. Pierce said in his uncorrect copy, that Adam's sin was not our own: & St. Paul saith, that by one Man sin entered into the world: therefore it is probable Mr. Pierce said, That he was without sin, and above sin, and by his own power could abstain from all sin.] By the very same Logick, (but with a greater force in some respects) I will prove that Mr. Barlee doth probably think he shall never dye; (but either be translated, or live immortall upon Earth.) For he doth probably believe Its absurdity shewn in a parallel case. that Adam's Death was none of Mr. Barlee's own: and St. Paul saith, that by one man Death enter'd into the world, Rom. 5. 12. therefore it is probable, Mr. B. believeth, that he is without death, and above death, and by his own power can abstain from dying. Besides; the same Apostle that saith, By one man sin entered into the world (v. 12.) doth also say at the same time, that by the righteousnesse of one, the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life, v. 18. from whence how many inconve∣niences will arise to Mr. Barlee, and to his Doctrins, as well as his wayes of arguing, I leave to be observed by the consi∣dering Reader. Having shewed how little he understood that saying, that by one man sin enter'd into the world, &c. I will but add that the meaning is only this: It was by Adam's eat∣ing the forbidden fruit, that we are all of us obnoxious both to sin and mortality, as being born after the image and likenesse of Adam. , by one, as by an instrument, which Satan used; or , by one, as by a door, at
which sin enter'd, and Death by sin. not that Adam's sin and Death were both our own. But notwithstanding the lesse then nothing which Mr. B. hath alledged for his report, that I said such things as must needs imply me to be a Ranter (a Sect which follows his prin∣ciples, for want of mine) yet he adventures to proceed (not foreseeing what I have shew'd him) in that desperate manner which now ensues. W. B. Chap. 2. p. 18. lin. 1, 2, &c. The Minister from whose mouth I took up † both the Reports, about his maintaining himself to be above † sin, and about his Deniall of the † † Observe Reader, that both those Tales had one Author: and that in the first he conceales the worst part; which was, that I said there was no sin in me, and that by mine owa power I could abstain from all sin. lawfulnesse of second marriages of Ministers, is not a man of mean Note in the Ministery, nor far off, with whom, since this last book of his came forth, I have divers times conferred about these reports; and he professeth, that upon any just oc∣casion he will justify them to his Face; and stands amazed at his impudent Denyall of what he then said to him. Methinks therefore his marginal Finger p. 81. is but like that of the naughty one who be speakes his own impudence with his fingers, Prov. 6. 13. T. P. §. 11. First it ought to be observed, that what he barely re∣ported in his first book, he barely repeateth in his second, He betrayeth his crime with his excuse, and blasteth his first Informer. without replying to those See Div. Philan. Def. ch. 3. p. 81, 82, 83. ten things, which I had returned in my Answer to that incomparable report. and yet he said in his Title-page, that he had made a full Abstersion of all ca∣lumnyes, &c. thereby implying this confession, that those were far from being Calumnyes, from which he hath not endea∣vour'd to clear himself. This is a speciall point of his necessary Vindication, to acknowledge the enormityes which were laid to his charge, even whilst he labours to deny them. To sing
the same song, in the very same notes, with this ridiculous dif∣ference, that he who before was a Reverend Minister with∣out a Name, is now a namelesse Minister of no small Note, what is this but to be stomack full in the midst of a confession? 2. and to betray his Crime with his excuse? Secondly, he con∣fesseth a little after, that that Minister who told him, I was the Author of Artificial Handsomnesse, although a p. 19. lin. 9. consciona∣ble Divine, was yet a Deceiver in that point. And if he was cheated by his conscionable Informer, why did he not suspect his man of note too? since I was much more likely to have pen'd that book, then to have given occasion for such a slander. Nay thirdly, he confesseth, (in the passage lying above) that his man of no mean note in the Ministery had foulely wrong'd 3. His second In∣former is evin∣ced by himself to have been a Forgr. me in one thing which he related, [viz. my denying the law∣fulnesse of second marriages of ministers,] and why might he not have thought, that he as foulely wrong'd me in the o∣ther, [viz. my saying, that I was without sin, &c?] That he wrong'd me in the former, by Mr. B.'s confession and Oath too, I prove from those words which were the subject of my seventh section, where he protested before God and men, that there was nothing in all his book to which he gave credit so much as seemingly, except those three things, of which this, concerning second marriages, he knows, was none. And by this we may see, that Mr. B. wants a good memory the most of any man living, unlesse I may except his Reverend Minister. For as if Satan had betrayed him, since he slunk from the mention of second marriages, when it concern'd him nearly to crave my mercy, or at least to prove he did not need it, (which yet he could not prove without a confession of being perjur'd, as hath been shewn §. 7.) he here confesseth the same man (that is, probably, himself) to have been the Author of both reports; as well of that which is acknowledg'd to be false, as of the other which is still pretended to be true. Thus he useth his Brother presbyter, (as the men of his Leven do use the Catholick Church) whilst he relyes upon him in one thing, as an infallible informer, and yet esteems him in an∣other 4. How his Tempter be∣tray'd him in the choice of his invention. an arrant cheat. But fourthly, the greatest jest is, that he should leave his informer in his more tolerable invention, and stick fast to him in that which is more impossible to be true. For I did really disswade a neighbour Minister from a
plurality of wives, though the Arguments which I used were taken only ab incommodo; which might give a slander some kind of colour, or pretense. But so infinitely distant hath my tongue ever been from that impious boast of being without, and above all sin, that I never spake any thing like it, never any thing that look'c that way, or that might give an Eve-dropper and an enemy the least occasion of mistake, but as much the contrary as any man hath ever spoken. He might have said with more skill, that Christ and St. Paul were against all marrying, because they both preferred the single life. Or being resolved to say an ugly thing of me, he might rather have gi∣ven it out, that I pretended to be a Prophet, sent in the Spirit of Elias as a forerunner of Christ at his second coming; or that I us'd to say Masse in a Cope and Surplice; or that I was Canon of Saint Croix; or any other strange thing, rather then that I said, I was without sin, &c. And yet to gain some credit to this wonder, he saith [he hath diverse times con∣ferred ☞ ** Observe him speaking in the plurall. with his man of note about these * reports, who stands amaz'd at my impudent denyall, and upon any just occasion will justify * them to my Face.] §. 12. The more desperate the pranck is, the greater confi∣dence is needfull to make it prosperous. When the besieged How the Trick of his confi∣dence is an Argument of Distrust. Romans were almost famish't in the Capitol, and had no pro∣visions now left besides a few loaves of Bread, they cunningly threw out those loaves at their besiegers, that so the enemy might swallow a strong belief of their plenty. And still the guiltiest malefactor is the readyest to wish the earth would swallow him alive, if he was ever suborned to bear false∣witnesse. Some mens sins are so great, that to protect them from a discovery, they think it needfull to make them greater. If Laban's Teraphims are stoln, and searched after very nar∣rowly, they must either be restored, or else Gen. 31. 19, 35. concealed with a lye. Dioxippus was innocent, and yet did Saepe minus est constantiae in rubore, quam in culpa. Qu. Curt. l. 9. p. 294. blush at his inditement: But the Prov. 30. 20. whore in the Proverbs did wipe her mouth, and say that she had done no wickednesse. Mr. Bar∣lee finds it concernes him to be as confident as the best; and I wonder how he miss't of rapping out the other Oath. But it happens to Him, as to most malefactors, that he reveales his guilt in his indeavours to conceal it; and may say of the tongue, what Diana did of the countenance,
Heu quam difficile est crimen non prodere!—For not remembring that he protested before God and men, that, except three things, he knew nothing in all his book How he runs on the Sym∣plegades of being guilty either of per∣jury, or cause∣lesse railing. which he had spoken against me to which he gave the least credit; and again not remembring, that the report about second marriages was none of those three; and again not re∣membring, that he was now only to speak about the first of those three, (viz. my saying, that I was without sin, &c.) he links that of marriages together with this (quite out of its place) and saith that the same man of Note will justify both. Insomuch that Mr. Barlee should have excepted four things, from the multitude of those, to which he swore he gave no cre∣dit. For that now he gives credit to that which he swore he gave no credit to, appeares by his charging me with impu∣dence, both in the person of his Informer, and from himself, and both within the space of 3. or 4. lines. or else he chargeth me with impudence against his own conscience, and in vio∣lation of his Oath, because he swore he did not credit, what now I must be impudent for not crediting my self. Which of his sentences will he adhere to? if to the later, he is perjur'd; ☜ 2. The shamefull modesty of the informer. and if to the former, a causelesse Rayler. Secondly, I do not wonder that his informer admires my impudence, since him∣self is so bashfull, as not to shew us his head, and even to hide his very name. Good modest creature! He runs behind Mr. Barlee, before he railes. He goes on the other side his stalking Horse, that I may not discover by whom it is that I am shot. This is now the second time that we have heard of him in print, sine nomine, sine Tribu. And turning his own back to me, (as being asham'd of my impudence) he tells me (by his Vicar) what he will do before my Face. Once more there∣fore I send a challenge to this Anonymous man of Note, He is chal∣lenged to ap∣pear. (unlesse his name is Mr. Outis) to shew himself above-board, and either publickly to confesse that he hath abused Mr. Bar∣lee, or to declare that Mr. Barlee hath slander'd him, or to prove that I have injur'd both, or to acknowledge that both have injur'd me. Mr. B. implyeth his being yet extant; and therefore let him not say with the man in the Comedy, Non 3. Mr. B. makes more way to the discovery of his slandor. possum audire, quia dormio. Nay thirdly, he is not only a∣live, and mettlesome, and wonders I am so impudent as not to own being a Ranter, when it pleaseth his black Majesty
to have me thought such, but he is of Note in the ministery, and not far off. This is better then all the rest, at least as good for my purpose. For now I shall prove by an induction (I thank Mr. Barlee for this assistance) that the slander is an unlucky one in severall respects. For I can easily number all the Ministers of note in this part of the County. With one part of them I have never had any discourse; with another part of them I have discoursed only in publick, when many persons upon their Oaths, will and must be my witnesses, that I never utter'd any such thing, as that I was without sin, above sin, and by my own power could abstain from all sin. nor doth Mr. B. so much as pretend, that I was heard speaking thus by more then one. And the ministers of note are very few, in this County, with whom I have ever discoursed singly. And those few have been such, who have not only still treated me in friendly manner, and censur'd Mr. Barlee in a high degree, but they have given me such characters behind my back, as have much exceeded my small deservings. I am tempted to name them, but that I think I ought not without their leaves, least they should be in some pain, and look with suspicion on one another, as the They looked one on another, doubting of whom he spake. Ioh. 13. 22. Disciples did when Christ said, that one of them should betray him. To one of those Ministers I once affirmed in a letter, that I was, and would continue, (by the grace of God assisting me) free from the great abomination of the Presbyterian Directory; but that was far enough from saying, I was without sin, because there are many other sins besides complying with the Directory. I said to another by word of mouth, that we did many times resist the grace of God. He said, he could not, being one of the Regenerate. And whe∣ther did he or I imply, that we were above sin? This is the utmost I can remember I ever spake, whereby to give him any occasion of so impertinent a slander. Fourthly, if Mr. B. hath 4. diverse times discoursed with his Informer, and his Informer hath answer'd as he reports, he is perhaps of their number (spoken of by Bp. Bancroft) who come to Pretended Holy Discip. ch. 4. p. 61. believe their own lyes meerly by telling them too often. Fifthly, he saith his Minister will justify his two Reports upon any just occa∣sion. A likely matter, when upon two such occasions al∣ready 5. His signal Ter∣give sation. offer'd, he hath so valiantly hid his head, and taken the courage to be namelesse. When that time comes, that he
can think it a just occasion, I shall prove him Brother to those two, who took their Oaths against Naboth. But betwixt this and that, bear witnesse Reader, that Mr. B. hath accused me a second time in print, of saying that which is said by none but Ranters, and yet he thinks he hath not hitherto a just occasion to name his Author. But he hath not yet done with it; nor I with Him, I do assure him. And therefore let us observe him confuting himself in his own defense, as it were casting himself backward by trying to stand upon his guard. W. B. Ch. 2. p. 18. lin. 13, &c. Secondly, I cannot but believe, had he not pub∣lickly brought in a large plea for the innocency of Infants, chap. 4. p. 25, 26, 27. but that the same front of his would bear him out in the deniall of what a person of true honour and integrity told me, as having heard it too from his own mouth; that he called a waggish lad of about four years old an innocent, free from sin, who yet, I trow, hath by this time committed some kind of actuall sins. T. P. §. 13. In these few lines, there are many things most gros∣ly false, which, in case they were true, would be impertinent and absurd. Before I shew the grosse falsehoods, I will re∣late the whole story which gave occasion to this calumny, The occasion of this new ca∣lumny, in de∣fense of the old. though nothing but Rancor could be the cause. There was a child in his Parish of 3. years old, who being sickly and con∣sumptive (as his Physicians were of opinion) and yet at that time the only Son of his parents, (whose plentifull Fortune might make them the gladder of a Son) gave some occasion to his parents of very mournfull apprehensions. I thought it my part, (as in many respects I was obliged) to administer com∣fort in such a case. In the tract of my Discourse I was led to
say, that if God should be pleased to take their child unto him∣self, in the harmlesse Nonage that he was in, they might raise themselves comfort even from this consideration, that God had taken him from the evill to come, and set him in Wisd. 4. 17. safety, as the book of Wisdom expresseth it. God might vers. 11. speedily take him away (for ought they knew) to this end, that ibid. wickednesse should not alter his understanding, nor deceipt begule his soul, in case he outlived his harmlesse years. That this was the utmost, I have more witnesses then one, and I defie his Informer to prove it more if he is able. Now observe Mr. B's prevarications of the truth. 1. The child was then but 3 years old; Mr. B. hath mounted it to 4. 2. The child was then very weak; Mr. B. feigns him to have been waggish. 3. I said he was harmlesse; Mr. B. addes innocent, and free from sin. Vi probus, & pius, non tantum ino∣cens. Cl. Salm. in Def. Rg. c. 11. The Earle of Bristoll's Apologie was (in his con∣stant phrase) to clear his Innocency, not freedom from . Innocent I might say, though I do not remem∣ber that I did: but [free from sin] I am sure I did not: and they that heard me will bear me witnesse. But innocent and harmlesse are both of one signification. When David said he would Ps. 26. 6. 2. wash his hands in innocency, and that in innocency Ps. 73. 13. 3. he had washed them, when Daniel said that God had sa∣ved him from the Lyons, for as much as before him Dan. 6. 22. inno∣cency was found in him, when Abimelech said, In the Gen. 20. 5. innocency of my hands have I done this, when God himself said of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that they had filled that place with the blood Ier. 19. 4. His revenge upon an Infant of 3 years old. of Innocents, will Mr. Barlee complain against those expressions, and say they were denyers of origi∣nal sin? If his person of honour will say I said any more then the pen-men of Scripture have said before me, I will prove him a person of no integrity. But secondly, how should a person of honour have any thing to do with Mr. Barlee? He that can, let him believe it. Or thirdly, how unfit is Mr. B. to give his verdict of that child, to whom he was concluded to have owed a shrewd turn, ever since that child was known to have cut him with a Sarcasme? but my words were spoken long before M. B. had found him waggish. Nor doth he pretend, that the child was then guilty of actuall sins when I pronounced him to be harmlesse, but [he Trow's that by this time he hath committed some such;] and why he Trow's it, he is too bashfull to give the reason. Fourthly, be it so that the 4. little Gentleman of four years old (he should have said of
4. years young) was somewhat playfull with Mr. B. (as Mr. B. Ch. 2. p. 45. professeth to be with me) did he think the Babe was of his match, and fit to be writ against from the presse, and in the presence of all the world to receive his Correptory Corre∣ction? I have read the saying of Will Withers, (in Q. Eliza∣beth's time) that if any man pinch't him, he would strike him that stood next, whosoever he were. I should have quite for∣got my reading, but that I am thus put in mind. If Mr. Barlee is once confuted, or pinch't with a discovery of his inven∣tions, woe be to all the little children that stand in 's way. But now fifthly, let us grant him as much as may be, concerning 5. the Age, or the ladderie, or the waggishnesse of the child, or my pronouncing that he was innocent; yet what was this to the purpose, for which alone with a [secondly] it was pre∣tended to be brought? Thus runs his Argument. Mr. T. P. did say a child was innocent of four years old; therefore The admirable force of Mr. B's arguing. ☜ probably he said, that Himself was without sin, and above sin, and by his own power could abstain from all sin, who is somewhat more then four years old. How much better might he argue against Daniel and David, who spake of Innocency in themselves, then here he doth against me, who only spake of another, who was also more innocent then either Daniel or David? Doth he not strike, through me, at the Church of England? I am sure in the collect upon Inno∣cents day (which must now be called the waggish lads day) we are appointed to use these very words, [Almighty God, whose praise this day the young Innocents, thy witnesses, have confessed, and shewed forth, not in speaking, but in dying, mortify and kill all vices in us, &c.] If Mr. B. did not know what Innocent signifyes, because it is a Latin word, why must my Front be therefore brought upon the stage? I told him sufficiently what was meant by Innocence apply'd to Infants, even in that very Div. Phi∣lanth. c. 4. p. 26. li. 2. page which he just now cited, viz. a simplicity and inoffensivenesse of mind. He doth not re∣ply either to that, or to any other part of my plea for Infants: but only shews that he is angry, both with me, and with a Gentleman of 4. years old, and leaves posterity to determine, whether the Infant or his Accuser was the waggish lad.
W. B. Ch. 2. p. 18. lin. 21. &c. Thirdly, if his publick and domestick Con∣fessions, of which he speaks, do all sound a contra∣diction to, or a cordiall retractation of what he formerly said to my Reverend Brother, I am hear∣tily glad of it, for the good of his Soul, and long I wish he may, with St. Iohn, continue in that sound and humble acknowledgement of his sins: but I fear me he may quickly revert to his former pre∣sumptuous sayings, if he embrace too fast the tenents of his new friend S. Castalio, who hath written a whole book about the perfection of Christians, and their immunity from sin here upon the face of the earth. S. Castalio de obedientia Deo praestan∣da. p. 295. edit. in 12. A. D. 1578. His wofull Drollerie can not help him. Totus orbis exercet Histrioniam. T. P. §. 14. Here he adventures to allude to one particular of the ten, which I return'd to his slander in my former Defensative. My words were these, [He Div. Philan. ch. 3. p. 81. cannot but confesse, that when he hath heard me out of a Pulpit, (which hath been 5 or 6 times) he hath heard from my mouth a full confes∣sion of my sins.] Or perhaps he alludes to my other words, Ibid. [I have as many witnesses, as weekly Auditors in my church, and as daily Auditors in my family, that I affirme the quite contrary to that invention.] Notwithstanding which, and all other things by me alledged in that place, (which he durst not here take notice of) he perseveres in his impiety, and supposeth all I there said to signify no more then a Retractation. But that his Drollerie may not excuse him, I can prove by many witnesses (whereof each is equall to a thousand of his Informers) that since I came into this Coun∣ty, within which time the matchlesse slander did take its Date, there hath not been any one day, wherein I have not been liberall in the confession of my sins. Which when my Reader hath consider'd, and compared with all which I have
publisht, especially with my preface to The sinner impleaded, and the two grounds of my belief, (Correct Copy p. 6.) when he hath weighed the wretchednesse of Mr. B's Reply, with what I have spoken in this Rejoinder, he will infallibly con∣clude, that the ancient Tit. 1. 12. Cretians did not come near him, but were as much behind him in faculty, as before him in time. Secondly, what he saith of Castalio, gives us a measure 2. Mr. B's malice aganst Casta∣lio most impr∣tinently vented. of his Logick, and his integrity. That holy and learned man, (it seemes,) hath published a book concerning obedience to be performed from man to God, wherein he shews to what pitch of that perfection, to which our Saviour doth exhort us Mat. 5. 48. a man by Grace may attain to upon the earth: and of that immunity from sin of which St. Iohn speakes 1 Ioh. 3. 6, 9. where he saith of the Regenerate man, not only that he doth not, but that he cannot sin: which is a higher ex∣pression then Castalio ever used. I am not concerned in this unseasonable-impertinent-incoherent effusion of Mr. B's ma∣lice against Castalio, save that I honour the memory, and ad∣mire the goodnesse of that great Christian. In which respect I will say, it was Castalio's design in all he writ, to advance Christian Per∣fection exhi∣bited in Scripture. the purity and strictnesse of Christian practice, that the name of Christ might be no longer blasphemed Rom. 2 24. 1 Tim. 6. . Tit. 2. 5. among the Hea∣then through the wickednesse of such as are called Christians. It was said to Abraham, walk before me & be thou Gen. 17. 1. perfect; and of Noah, he was a just and Gn. 6. 9. perfect man; and of Job, he was a Iob. 1. 1, 8. perfect and upright man; fearing God and eschewing evill. (God will not cast away ch. 8. 20. a perfect man.) David said, God maketh my way Ps. 18. 32. perfect. And our Sa∣viour, Be ye Mat. 5. 48. perfect as your Father in Heaven is perfect. If thou wilt be Mt. 19. 21. perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor. Thou shall be Deut. 18. 13. perfect with the Lord thy God. We speak wisdome among them that are 1 Cor. 2. 6. perfect. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers, for the Eph. 4. 11, 12. perfecting of the Saints. Vers. 13.—till we come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the ature of the fulnesse of Christ. Now the God of peace make you Heb. 13. 20, 21. perfect in every good work to do his will. Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be lm. 1. 4. perfect, and intire, wanting nothing. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthy∣nesse of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. perfecting holynesse in the
fear of God. St. Paul could do Phil. 4. 13. all things through Christ who strengthened him. Zacharie and Elizabeth walked in Luk. 1. 6. all the commandements, , blamelesse, without reproof, none (but a Correptorie Corrector) could say black to their eye. And had not Castalio good reason to write a book of Obedience, when he saw he lived in a rebellious world? Had he not reason (in that book) to speak of Christian Perfection, when he found men pleading for a fat all necessi∣ty of their sins, and an impossibility to be obedient? He spake of that perfection which signifyes integrity, and is required of us in Scripture, as hath been shew'd. (if he went any far∣ther, I defend him not.) He spake of immunity from sin by the help of Gods Grace, not by the meer strength of nature▪ nor did he speak of an immunity from original sin, or sins of igno∣rance and frailty, but from wilfull, deliberate, and damning sins. But this is Doctrin which Solifidians cannot indure; because if they grant it to be true, they must rail no longer, and slander no more; they must no more be perjur'd, or schisma∣tical, or sacrilegious, or covetous, or cruel in persecuting their Neighbours; they must repent in another notion then they are willing to hear of; for restitution, and satisfaction, mortification, and self-denial, and a newnesse of the whole life, must be ingredients in their repentance. Thirdly then, let us observe what our Pamphleter hath gotten by being im∣pertinent 3. A Catalogue of Mr. Barles ggs y his mliging Castalio. against Castalio. He hath shew'd himself an ene∣my to the Grace of God, of whose effectual working in his children Castalio writeth. (as if God were not able to work wonders on Earth as well as in Heaven.) He hath shew'd himself an enemy to all those Scriptures above men∣tion'd, which do affirm a perfection of men on earth, to wit, in the sense before given. He hath shew'd himself an enemy to the Darling of all honest and pious Christians, meerly for following the Scriptures, and pressing hard for a conformity to the example and precepts of Iesus Christ. He hath shew'd himself an enemy to his best beloved and dearest self, who (when it is for his turn) is not only for effectual, but irresisti∣ble Grace: as if he thought he could sin, without resisting the Grace of God, or could resist that Grace which is irresistible. He hath shew'd himself an enemy to all his own Gang; but above them all, to his Ch. 2. p. 73. admired Mr. Baxter, who differs as
much from him and his, as Note that Mr. Barlee doth eithe slander Armi∣nius, or charge Mr. Bax∣ters Doctrin with Arminia∣nism. Cor. Cor. p. 109. Arminius, or Castalio, or who∣soever he is, whom the Presbyterians exclaim against: whether he differs from himself too, let him determine. But what saith Mr. Baxter? He saith very truly, that the Aphor. of Iustif. Thes. 24. p. 129. personall Gospell-righteousnesse is in its kind a perfect righteousnesse, and so far we may admit the Doctrin of personall perfe∣ction.—Ib. p. 133. our righteousnesse is perfect, as in its being, so likewise in order to its end.—Object. Is our personal righteousnesse Ib. Thes. 22. p. 122, 123. perfect, as it is measur'd by the new Rule? Ans. Yes, saith Mr. Baxter.—Ib. Thes. 27. p. 141. As it was possible for Adam to have fulfilled the law of works by that power which he received by nature, so is it possible for us to per∣forme the conditions of the new Covenant by the power which we receive from the grace of Christ. Nay farther yet, the same Mr. Baxter who saith, That the Tenor of the new Covenant is not, believe in the highest degree, but believe Ib. Thes. 24. p. 133. sincerely, and you shall be justified, (so that our right∣eousnesse formally considered, in relation to the condition of the new Covenant, is perfect or none) doth also say, that a mans sincerity doth especially lye in his own Saints E∣verl. Rest. part 4. p. 296. will. And that it is, under God, in a man's own choice, whether he will live a blessed life, or not. Thus Mr. Barlee hath shew'd his enmity against all he hates, and against all he loves too: And (which is his opus naturalissimum) he hath revealed to all the world, whereabouts his shoe wrings him. Yet fourthly, I commend him for his confession, [Totum or∣bem exercere Histrioniam;] though he knew it was not for 4. Mr. P. per∣sonating a Bishop. his credit to translate it. But I will doe that for him. All the world is employed in the art of stageplayers or Hypo∣crites. Totus orbis (saith Mr. Barlee) All the world is phari∣saicall, given to counterfeiting, and cheating, and holy co∣senages, (the Ad quartum Actum & ultra in Dramate hoc desultando frigultites Presbyteriani spectati sunt. Salmasius in Defen. Reg. cap. 10. Godly party not excepted.) Totus Orbis is a capacious phrase; (as a Circle is the most comprehensive of figures, and the world of Circles) it includes Mr. Barlee, when he plaid his part in that notorious omoe-Tragoedie (equally sad and ridiculous) which he and others lately acted in Daintry Church, intil'd by the Actors, An Ordi∣nation of Ministers, but by many of the Spectators, An Or∣dination of Lay-Preachers to be Lay-Preachers still, and (without repentance) for ever Ne quispiam bis ordinetur▪ & ne qui piam bis baptizur. Nam ordina∣tio est perpe∣tuae functionis consecratio, ut Baptimus perpetui oe de∣is testifica∣tio Bannosis d Poi. ivit. Dei, &c. 7 . incapable of the Priesthood,
by being ordained by such Priests as were incapable of or∣daining. Ier. 5. 30, 31. Such horrible things are committed in the land, and some of the people (a) love to have it so, and what will they doe in the end thereof? Ordinationes eorum m∣rariae, leves, inconstantes, &c. Tertull. de praescript adversus Haereticos. §. 15. It The Reason of Brevity in all that follows. now becomes me to be sensible, how many sections I have bestow'd upon those manifold absurdityes, thrust up together by Mr. B. in his pretended vindication of himself from the first slander of the three, to which alone he protested to have given some credit. A running pen, in conjunction with a most obnoxious and faulty adversary, have betray'd me to this length, even whilst I still hoped I should be brief. Should I proceed as I have begun, two inconveniencyes would follow. I should first reprint his voluminous Libel; and I should write such Volumes of Animadversions thereupon, as would speak me too prodigal of time and paper: nor would my Stationers whole estate suffice for half the impression. I will therefore take up, before I go any farther; and setting down his pages, if not his very lines too, (as hitherto I have done) I will mark out his follyes in the narrowest compasse that I am able. §. 16. In his ch. 2. p. 18. lin. 32, &c. he confesseth that he Of the 600 Copies of my Correct Copy which Mr. B. said were sold in this County within 2. months. of which see Div. Philan. Def. ch. 3. p. 54. lyed about the second thing excepted, although he excepted it from his lyes. His 600. copies are now dwindled into 200. Good news for the Brethren. Things are better then they ex∣pected. For in the reckoning of 200 Mr. B. did overlash no more then 400 beyond the Truth. Besides that he excuseth it, by saying that his memory was intolerable false to him, or W. C. was swayed by frowns, or favours, to a deniall of his words. But W. C. is amaz'd at the incongruity of the false∣hood, because it is most for his secular interest to please that party. And yet he professeth not to have spoken of 200 nei∣ther: so that now Mr. B. must prepare a new Salvo, and lay the fault on his invention, which was terrible false to him, no longer on his memory, unlesse he forgets that 'twas the babe of his invention. Nor was it I, but Mr. B. who told the world my book old well: I rather labour'd to refute him, and to fleece his 600. And therefore this was his waggery to lay his ordures in my Dish.
§. 17. In his ch. 2. p. 19. lin. 8. &c. he confesseth also that Of my being the Author of Artificial Handsomnesse. of which see Div. Philan. Def. ch. 3. p. 150. he lyed, or (if you please) that he slander'd, when he reported me the Author of the book intitl'd Artificial Handsom∣nesse. But he excuseth it by saying, that he was told this lye by a most conscionable Divine, (is not he more conscionable who tells no lyes at all?) He farther commendeth the con∣scionable Father of that lye, for a man that makes as much conscience of not telling, or believing lyes, as any man in England. He should sure have said Crete; because he gives no instance of his Conscience, besides his having (by his confession) foulely slander'd his Neighbour. But he gave three Arguments to back his lye: Which first were weak ones, be∣cause they did He saith he did but almost believe, what he thought fit to publish, as if he believed it altogether: and which he lately excepted from the num∣ber of those things, to which he swore he gave no cre∣dit. almost perswade Mr. B. to a belief; and be∣cause he is ashamed to name one of them; (which he could not have failed of, if it had been for his advantage:) And se∣condly, likely to be none at all; because his conscience, or his fear, or something like conscience, flew fiercely into his face, and made him draw over it an invisible deleatur; so as the Printer might admit it into his book, and then be chid for that admission, if the worst came to the worst. The phrase, men∣tioned before, doth shew that the man had been at it long a∣go, but (it seems) had consider'd, that he needed not in the same book tell the same untruth twice. Though that was also another untruth, to say that a thing was before mention'd, which now he saith was never mentioned before. And this, besides, is a contradiction. What he tells us of his letter sent up to the Stationer, does but aggravate his crime: for it proves that he knew it to be a slander and when it was printed for the use of the world, he blotted it out of a few copyes to be sold in this County (which were indeed very few;) & this he thought an expiation of such a generall slander. But his book slew abroad as far as the Mercury could carry it. And I was ta∣ken to be the Author of that book, by men who lived in other Countyes, by whom I was also severely censur'd. And there∣fore to make me amends, he should have stood in a white sheet upon the stool of Repentance, with a Noverint Vniversi (upon his Forehead) that what he said was a Slander, for the forgivenesse of which he intreated the prayers of all his Readers. But now he shews us what a Repen∣tance he recommends to his Parishoners by his exam∣ple.
The foul Na∣ture of his Repentance. He confesseth that he had wrong'd me, but doth not shew that he is sorry: he rather labours to prove it a very good injury, which it was fit he should do me, for three strong reasons which he resolves shall be namelesse; and in lieu of reparation, he proceeds to wrong me (if it is possible) ten times more then before. §. 18. Having thus discover'd the three remarkable Fi∣ctions in excuse of which Mr. B. had most to say, and there∣fore excepted from all the rest, as the only three things to which he gave the least credit, I will now begin a new Cha∣pter. And looking back a few pages, I will observe the man's manners as far as p. 77. and try if his custome of speaking falsely is become his artificial and second nature. I will not pretend to pen them all down, (that would be a vast enterprise, neither suitable to mine, nor my Readers pa∣tience) but only as many as may suffice for a little specimen of the Man.
CHAP. II. Mr. B's new falsehoods superadded to his old ones as a Token of his Repentance and proficiency; with his Absurdityes of severall kinds in the management thereof. §. 1. IN his ch. 1. p. 7. lin. 12. he complains of my private, Of cruell and causelesse pro∣vocations in private let∣ters. cruell, causelesse, epistolary provocations.] 'Tis well for him that they are private: for should I make them as publick as diverse persons would have had me, the world would wonder at this complaint. When Travellers have a mind to tell incredible stories, they commonly calculate their tales to fit Meridians, and place the strangest the farthest off. and Mr. B. thinks that he hath nick't it, when he cites my Manuscripts and private letters, as knowing that his Reader hath not a Key to his Cabinet. But he doth not consider, that I have Copyes of my letters as well as he; and can give his Readers this short account: That when I heard he had been writing against I know-not-what Manuscript, which he reported to be mine, I told him friendly (in a letter) what I had heard, and that I would not rashly believe a ru∣mor, but desir'd to know the bottome of it from himself, that if indeed it were so, he might be sure to have a true Copy, which I alone could infallibly supply him with. This I hope was no cruell or causelesse provocation. But yet he return'd in part of Answer, [that I knew him to be robbed (he called not me the Thief) of a considerable part of his very few Au∣ditors when they be altogether. As for my Question, he did say and write in a way that he would dare to own, and as just occasion should be given, he would not be afraid, nor asham'd, to give me and the Church of God an account of what he had been doing against a trifling Pamphlet sa∣vouring
of my Genius, and said and believed to be mine.] And at last concluded with the words of Austin to Pelagius, having told me a little before, of my Pelagian and Semipela∣gian Doctrins or Tenents. §. 2. Ibid. lin. 9, 10, 11. He saith, that to mine and his Of his compe∣tent Iudges of his scurrility and calumny. competent judges, he offered to do open penance for his pas∣sions, if they prove against him either scurrility or calumny. The Note, that he excuseth only the later, confessing the former in an implicit way. later of which Mr. T. P. vehemently asserts and supposeth, but never proveth.] (1.) Let the Reader determine whether his Lecturing-sympresbyters, to whom he dedicates that work, and to whom alone he submitted in Before his Correp. Corr. P. 9. that Epistle, are competent judges betwixt him and me. What Malefactor in the world can be ever found guilty, if he may choose his own Iury, and Iudges too? Nay what condemn'd prisoner can be discouraged from his sin, or any whit troubled at his Sentence, if he may have the priviledge to choose his own Gallows? Twice besides in this new Pasquil, he offers to be tryed for his Doctrin and manners, by any C. 2. p. 55. and p. 52. ten of his senior Sympresbyters of any worth or Note. But withall he provides for a double escape, if I should be so intoxicate as to stand to their judgement. For they must not only say, but prove him guilty, so as he may be fain to confesse the proof, which he resolves never to do. Next they must be of worth and Note; which he will not grant them, unlesse they say that he is Innocent. Here is a tacit confession, that his Doctrin and manners are both obnoxious, because he will not be tryed but by his Peeres, that is his Patrons, or Congerrones, or fellow-Labourers in the work. Is there a Quaker in the world, who will not offer to be tryed by any ten sym-Qua∣kers of any worth or note? Or if his sym-Presbyterians are his competent Iudges, can he think that they are mine too? Well fare the Gallantry of the man, who hath found out the only way of being concluded William the Conqueror. But (2) I appeal to the unconcern'd Reader, and to late posterity, and withall to our legall Ecclesiasticall superiors, whither I have not evinced his twofold Guilt. Nay I appeal to his own C. 2. p. 19. confession, whether it was not a calumny which his (a) conscionable Divine did help him forge against me, touching Artificial Handsomnesse, and his Reverend Mi∣nister, touching second marriages: which if it were not
a calumny, Mr. B. is Ib. p. 17. perjur'd, by not putting it down for one of his 3. things excepted from all his book. But (3) if we quit him of calumny, (which we must not do) yet for the sin of scurrility he must do open penance, as himself hath tacitly acknowledg'd. For having named both the Crimes, he saith I never prove the later, implying the former beyond all que∣stion: else he certainly must have said, that I never prove ei∣ther. In such language as this, Avaunt, Avaunt, thou Sa∣tanical Mr. B's godly bulitions. blasphemer, thou exceedest the Devil himself in blasphemy, ragest against Heaven, belchest out blasphe∣myes and Diabolicall stuff, playest the Lucian, and Carpo∣cratian, makest a new Diabolicall Pater-noster, open∣ly blasphemest against Scripture, Dragon, Sorcerer, noon-day Devil, worse then Diabolicall, and the like, Mr. B. will not deny but that he is guilty of scurrility. Yet (4) so insearchable is the man, that notwithstanding his He had it first in one of his letters to me; then in the Epistle before his Corr. Corr. now again in his Reply. repetition of [peccavi fateor, and, peto veniam, si un∣quam post hac] yet here he writes a whole chapter to justify all he had committed: , he was but some∣what p. 6. over-heated; it was the Ibid. in marg. si quid intumuit pie∣tas, ignoscat. godly intumescency and ebullition of his zeal; he had great Ibid. cause for it, even epistolary provocations which were cruell and causelesse; he is but one of the orthodox p. 8. cordiall Zelots; these are only his (g) Ludicralls and the (g) play fulnesse of his stile; was not our Saviour p. 6. sufficiently zealous? His frailtyes (he confesseth) are p. 55. great and many; he hath exuberancyes Ep: Ded. p. 2. and 3. of passion, and will promise to make (if need be) an o∣pen confession upon his knees for all the wrongs it shall appear he hath done me: Ch. 1. p. 8. but his cordiall friends have no great Reason to blame him, because he is for a use∣full and necessary moderation; whereas some men's hair∣brain'd g g p. 9. fury, falsely called zeale, is destitute of all prudence, and other mens soft, milky, faint-hearted coldnesse is disguised under the Termes of prudence, fairenesse, peace, moderation; but he hath shew'd himself against both ex∣tremes. Thus his conscience and his tongue are accusing, and excusing, confessing, and denying, washing, and wallowing in the mire, sinning, and repenting, and speaking well of his sins: and so by turnes he does them both over and over, and thinks he may do it very safely; for he is one of the few whom
God hath Postscript. p. 6. called to be faithfull, is acted by Grace irre∣sistible, from which he cannot so much as totally for a time, much lesse finally fall away, let his scurrilityes and calum∣nyes be what they can be. And whilst he is such a white Boy of Fate (like Homer's Paris) what need he care to put an end to any thing that is evill? Such are his opinions, and such his practice: and both have been published in Print, first by himself, and then by me. §. 3. In his c. 2. p. 10. lin. 13, 14, &c. he complains, that I made assaults upon his 3 aged Prefacers, the neighbour∣ing Of Assaults made upon all the Protestant Name and Glory, upon Mr. B's bare word. Lecturers of Northampton and Daintry, upon Calvin, Rivet, Vedelius, Walaeus, Amyraldus, Bp. Usher, Hall, Davenant, King James, upon the whole Synods of them at Dort, or Westminster; in a word, upon almost all the Protestant Name and Glory.] Now he begins to be pretty hopefull, because in these few lines we have not much more then 15 Falsehoods. For to the first of his Prefacers I gave a greater Div. Phi∣lan. Advertis. to the Reader. commendation then perhaps in modesty he will own. The second I Ibid. passed over in silence, though he had publickly gaped upon me with his Teeth. The third I Ibid. dismissed with lesse castigation then he deserv'd. Nay. I Ch. 3 p. 61. rebuked Mr. B. for passing so terrible a sentence upon the publick Practices of those his three Patrons, their growing rich upon 3 sequestrations, which M. Barlee had said was an unchristian, ungentlemanly, unscholarly, unneigh∣bourly, unecclesiasticall thing. And it was he who assaulted his Neighbour-Lecturers, not only by speaking to them in publick (which they could not but take for a disgrace) but by Ch. 1 p. 17, 18. registring their receding from a part of those Articles which they had formerly subscribed. from which Aspersions I did endeavour to clear as many as I was able. I spake not of the person, but words and Doctrins of Mr. Calvin. I repeated what others had spoken of him, (which I did not do neither till Mr. B. had urg'd me to it) and what he spake of himself. I toucht Rivet but once, and that by accident, Mr. B. having used him to stave off a Blow; nor was it his person, but his Ch. 4. p. 23, 24. Argument whereby he sought to prove that vitious, which he said must needs have been from God. Of Vedelius, however peccant, I spake but little more then nothing. of Walaeus, nothing at all that I can now think on. Amyrald, and
the three Ch. 4. p. 14. Bishops, I spake reverently of, as I had reason. The Synod of Dort was composed of differing partyes, and not a little misliked by our English Divines who were Assessors; whom Mr. B. having Ibid. p. 15, 16. abus'd with their Hierarchick Flaunt, I did vindicate and rescue from that unclean Mem∣ber. Of the Westminster Divines I said no worse, then that I had not Ch. 3. p. 37. seen their Confessions of Faith, and that they could not make a better Creed then the Apostles, or teach their mother a better Catechisme then she had taught them. But Mr. B. by applying that to them, which was not spoken or meant of them by me, calls them by craft Manichees, Helvi∣dians, Carpocratians, Turks and Stoicks, c. 1. p. 7. King Iames I vindicated exceedingly, when Mr. B. had Ch. 4. p. 7. said in ef∣fect, that his Majesty and S. Austin were as great Railers as himself. As I Ib. p. 11. did also Bp. Davenant, when Mr. B. jeer'd him with his Orthodox put-offs. Last of all for the Protestant Name and Glory, so far was I from assaulting them, that when his sawcinesse had call'd them the lazie-Hierarchick-non-preaching-lubbers, I did assert them as the Ch. 3. p. 73. Ornaments, the Glories, and the venerable supports of our English-church, the very latchets of whose shoes we weekly Preachers are not worthy to untie. And was this to make an assault against them? Believe me, for Correptorie Correction, and saying much in a little (I speak of False∣hood) Mr. Barlee is He who shall wear the Garland. §. 4. In his c. 2. p. 11. lin. ult. p. 12. lin. 1, 2, &c. he takes Mr. B. passeth sentence before Dooms-day. it ill that I said, he represented me to the world as in a state of Damnation, because he did not expresse it in those very words. yet he confesseth, whilst he denyeth, that my charge was true. For he confesseth that he told me (Corr. Corr. p. 43.) that I was like to be looked on as some of the Planets spoken of Iude 13. (for whom is reserved the blacknesse of darknesse for ever) if I repent not the sooner, (that is, if I turn not Presbyterian.) Where he takes it for granted, that I have not yet repented, and therefore hitherto am in a state of Damnation. Besides, 'tis one of his tenets, that the Saints can never be in such a state, no not in the (g) Act of Adultery or Corrept. Corr. p. 221, 222. Murder, and that they cannot dye untill they have repented. So that unlesse his meaning was, that I am one of those Re∣probates Iude 13. he either knew not his own opinions, or saw
not whether they would lead him, or else spake non-sense when he added, [if you do not repent the sooner:] it being certainly his opinion, that if I am not already of the elect, I never can be; and if I am of the elect, I must Note, that he prayeth in these words, The Lord he grant Mr. T. P. Repentance, that he may a∣void all divine censures. c. 2. p. 42. and saith, I want his prayers. p. 23. as being averse from the true Faith by way of mascu∣line opposition. p. 4. inevitably re∣pent, or must not dye. Here then Mr. B. is put to his choice, whether he will renounce his whole conceipt of election, and irresistible Grace of Repentance, or confesse (what he de∣nyes) that he thought me at that present in a state of Damna∣tion, or that he wilfully spake against his conscience. By the way observe at once his charity, and his discretion. If Mr. B. commits the sin of Murder, he thinks he cannot be in a state of Damnation, and that he cannot dye till he repents; but if I am found in the Act of being Antipresbyterian, I am certainly damn'd if I repent not the sooner. Both are taken from a presumption, (without any the least ground, save in his fancy) that he is called to be Postscr. p. 5. faithfull, and I was ab∣solutely ordained to be a Reprobate. Secondly, he alledgeth for himself, that in his second passage which I cited, (Corr. Corr. p. 174) He did not expresse his opinion, but his feares, that none could write as I did, unlesse well-nigh in the same Mr. B. feares Danger, with∣out being of opinion that there is any. condition with Simon Magus. As if he could fear my being a Reprobate, without being of that opinion. It is so im∣possible for the one to subsist without the other, that Philoso∣phers do reckon fear as the Formido est de intrinseca ratione opi∣nionis. formall reason of opinion. In saying, he did fear my sad condition, he implyed indeed, he was not sure of it. (and what a great vertue was this, that he did not speak himself God, who alone can be sure what shall become of us hereafter?) But the more he fear'd it, by so much the stronger was his opinion, which set his fear at that pitch. So that if he speakes sense, his meaning certainly must be this, (which will be worse then if it were non-sense) that he did think me well-nigh in the same condition with Simon Ma∣gus, but yet he was not of that opinion: or else he was of that opinion, but he did not say it in those words. Let him choose which he pleaseth, his falsehood in saying, he did fear what he did not, or his falsehood in saying, he did not think what he did. And let him study some little Logick, (though it be but a System) that he may trouble the world with not-so-many contradictions. Above all, let him not call it his godly jealou∣sy (as here he doth p. 12.) to pluck the Mt. 13. 30. let boh grow togeher untill the Harvest. Tares from the
wheat before the Harvest, untill he is able to distinguish be∣twixt the one and the other. But let him leave it to him, who shall come in the cloud at the last Day to Mat. 3. 12. gather the wheat into his Garner, and to burne up the chaff with unquencha∣ble Fire. When Mr. B. was pleas'd to charge me with Correp. Corr. p. 178. A∣theisticall Lucianizing, and with the pouring out Ibid. p. 114. of damnable blasphemyes, for vindicating God from the aspersion of being the Author or cause of sin, I would ask him if he thought me a pretious vessell of election. When he will an∣swer that Question, I shall shew him what follows. §. 5. In his c. 2. p. 12. lin. 24, 25. &c. He saith he only Of Socinia∣nisme falsely charged. charged me with Note, that [consequen∣tial] is here added as a Fig-leaf. And in this his se∣cond Book, c. 2. p. 38. he layes Socinia∣nisme to my charge without the least Reser∣vation. consequential Socinianisme, to his best remembrance, in all his book.] Is not this a rare Chri∣stian, vvho for so great an injury to his Neighbour, vvill make no other satisfaction then to deny or to extenuate the crimson Fact? and to justify this too with want of memory? It can as little be expected by any Reader, that I should re∣member so many pages, wherein the Socinian is put upon me. Yet by but dipping into his book, I find him speaking of my Correp. Corr. p. 69. Socinio-Grotian-Persian glosses; my desires not to be ac∣counted a Ib. p. 157. Socinian, in such a fleering way as doth imply, that I shall be so accounted do what I can; my (d) Atheisti∣cal Lucianizing and (d) Castalionizing, which (with him who brands Castalio vvith no lesse then viperous Socinian books p. 13.) vvas to call me Socinian, and very much worse, unlesse he thought that the Atheist Lucian vvas a Socinian only (many hundreds of years before Socinus vvas borne) or that Socinians are all Atheists. Again, he told me, I vvas nearly allied to the Ib. p. 15. Iesuites and Socinians: though novv dd Ib. p. 178. he virtually confesseth, I vvas no more like a Iesuite, then himself like a Dominican. and so by his logick he is nearly allied unto the Papists, and (vvhich is vvorse) unto the Li∣bertines, vvho only built upon the Calvinists Foundations. In hovv many more places he did asperse me as a Socinian, I must needs be forgetfull, as vvell as he. He hints my erring about the very See with how much more Reason he might have called Calvin a Socinian, who called the three persons, the three pro∣prietyes of God, and disapproved of Christs being God of God. Grot. in voto pro Pace, p. 15. Hunnius apud Grot. Discuss. Rivet. Apol 185, 186. Trinity, but holds forth nothing; only dreames of a Manuscript, and talkes as impertinently out of it, nay a great deal more, then Mr. Haddock did in his sleep. At last
he concludes, hovv he may shew me, another time, justly suspected of Socinianisme, because I read the books of Episco∣pius & Castalio, who are no more Socinians then Mr. Barlee, (for ought I know,) and I read them as little (I believe,) as He. Or if I read Socinian books never so much, (as I know few men have read them lesse) doth it follow I am a Socinian, more then I am a Presbyterian, because I read Dr. Twisse, and Mr. Barlee? By this way of reasoning, Mr. Barlee may justly be thought a Heathen, because it appeares by his Latin shreds, that he hath taken some few of the Heathen Poets into his Bosome. His signal ignorance of Antiquity, as to the Canon of Scripture, and the three subsistences in one substance, I leave as I find it, meerly for fear of being te∣dious. §. 6. In his c. 2. p. 13. lin. 19, 20, &c. he talks of his Of his tender∣nesse to me, and to Serve∣tus. Compare this with §. 19. witnesses in the Country, how tender he hath been of my life, and of my livelyhood; giving this instance of his ten∣dernesse, that he thought me fit to be punished, but not to be burnt, as was Servetus at Geneva.] Yet 1. he defends the burning of Servetus, who was not so bad as Mr. B. hath la∣bour'd to fancy me. For let them say what they please to lessen the guilt of that cruelty, yet they are partyes, and must not so easily be heeded, as other men who are none. If Serve∣tus his book was so blasphemous, why was Calvin so Serveti li∣bri, non Ge∣nevae tantum, sed & aliis in locis, per Cal∣vini diligen∣tiam exusti sunt; fator ta∣men unum me exemplum vi∣disse libri Servetiani, in quo certe a¦non reperi quae i objicit Calvinus, &c. Vot. pro Pace, p. 16. di∣ligent in burning up the Impression, which he should rather have preserved, that posterity might see some competent cause for such a terrible execution? Yet by the Providence of God, one or two of the Copies escap't the fire: and we are assured by peerlesse Grotius, that in the Copie which he saw, he could not find those things which were objected by Mr. Cal∣vin. What Melanchthon spake of it was meerly on suppo∣sition that Calvin's narrative was true. And Oecolampadius was offended at the Barbarity of the Sentence. Nor find I any thing pretended against Servetus, which was so highly blasphemous, as the making God to be the Author or cause of sin. How well Mr. Calvin could tell his own Tale, and how diligent he was in being the first Informer of his Af∣fairs, we may guesse by his Calvini E∣pist. 164, 165, &c. Epistles which he writ to the 4 Helvetian Cityes, for the gaining of authority to his new Devise. Secondly, Mr. B. c. p. 15. complains of the severity
which was used to Penry, which shews how much kinder he is to Treason, then to that which either is, or is called Here∣sie. And with how many sorts of heresy he hath been pleased to load me in both his books, I need not here reckon either to his, or my Readers. Thirdly, though he professed in his Ep. Ded. p. 2. Epistle to be so sollicitous of my Fame, & outward safe∣ty, as no man more; yet he will have me to be a Sorcerer, and to be ranked with the witches spoken of by the Apostle 2 Tim. 3. 13. (ch. 2. p. 42.) again, he chargeth me at once with Socimanisme and dimidiate Pontificianism, p. 38. with my good friends the Anabaptists, and Quakers, p. 42. (two sorts of persons to whom I am equally a stranger, and more a stranger then Mr. Barlee) with Words, which he plainly ap∣plyes to me, if he is not guil∣ty of some∣what worse. c. 2. p. 45. lin. 6. 7. &c. vehement pleading for the lawfulnesse of praying for the dead, and unto Saints, p. 44. Nay in the very next page to the place I am upon, he seeks my sequestration by this Dilemma. §. 7. P. 16. lin. 1. 2. &c. Either he practiseth in his publick Ministry those many liturgical knacks which he doth so zealously plead for, or he doth not: if the first, he knows at what perill he doth it; if the later, he proclaims himself a timorous unconscionable Coward to all the world. The Lord shew Mr. T. P. a way how to leap out of this snare; and this the Lord knows is all the harme I wish him.] Observe the cha∣rity of this Saint, who prayes by the Directory. He wisheth me no worse then perfect beggerie on one side, or to be published on the other for an unconscionable Knave. If one of these must be my Lot (as Mr. B. seemes to be resolv'd) give me the former, let him take the later. Should I not speak to his Dilemma, he would exclaim against my Cowardise, and want of conscience, for doing as ill as a Presbyterian. Yet if I speak distinctly to it, he will admire my folly, and want of prudence, for not doing so ill as a Presbyterian. I am not amorous of suffering; I have had too much of it already from that implacable and bloody Sect. But so much do I prefer the greatest secular inconvenience before the sin of complyance with such a Gang, that I will readily cast my self on the shorter Horne of his Dilemma, as being most sure that it will do me least hurt. I would not be bribed with both the In∣dies, to do any thing so ill, as might make me be mistaken for a Presbyterian, or a Complyer with that Faction by any
shew or appearance either of flatterie, or of fear. Be it there∣fore known to this Contriver of mischief, (and to as many of his Abettors as hope to have me in their Lurch,) that I do duely perform my Oaths and promises; I live in humble obedience both to the Lawes of the Land, and to the Canons of the Church; I have no commerce with the Directorie, or with any thing else that is Presbyterian; nor yet do I practice any more of my liturgical knacks (as this Zelot of the Kirk profanely calls them) then I think I am, in conscience, in∣dispensably obliged and bound unto. I use that prudence and moderation, to which I am advised by the severest of my Superiours. And they who had power to do me hurt in consi∣deration of my Practice, have been so throughly satisfied with the grounds and reasons of what I do, as to think me the worthyer of preservation. Had the I mean, the Correptorie Correctors on∣ly, that is, the men of Mr. B's spirit. Fierie sort of the Pres∣byterians (which I have reason to distinguish from the more charitable and candid) swallow'd down that power of doing mischief which they gaped after so long, with so much appe∣tite and hunger, (and when they had swallowed for a time, were happily made to cast it up,) I had not expected so great a Miracle, as that a man could have been honest, and have injoyed his own too. Who can take the vast distances, or number the manifold degrees, by which the Body of Indepen∣dents must be preferr'd? But now 'tis fit that Mr. Barlee should know his part in the Dlemma, who to avoid the peril on the right hand, hath made choice, on the left, to be recorded as a most timorous and unconscionable Coward. When he entred into the Priesthood, he took the Oath of su∣premacy, and the other Oath of Allegance, subscribed the nine and thirty Articles (without which, Bp. By Him M. B. was or∣dained, c. 2. p. 40, 61. & however Mr. B. may wrong that Bp. I can prove his pra∣ctice in ordi∣nations to have been strict and wary against the least ap∣pearance of Presbyteria∣nism, or non∣con-formity. Davenant ad∣mitted none into the Priesthood, as I can shew;) nay if he were ordained in the year 1640. (when that Bp. celebrated a ge∣nerall ordination in the Cathedrall Church) he was made to take that other De praeca∣vendis Novi∣tatibus in Do∣ctrina & Regimine secundum Canonem nupertime editum, &c. Note that the Bp. re∣jected those who refused the taking of that Oath, and would not give them Holy Orders. this I can prove. Oath against admitting or complying with any manner of Innovations in point of Doctrin or Discipline, according to the Canon in that case provided by the then-Convocation, which was legitimately called,
and authoriz'd. Nay this is not all; for before Mr. Barlee was admitted into the office of the Priesthood (which was the very expression then used by the Bp.) he did solemnly promise in See the Book of Ordination of Bishops, Prists, and Deacons, p. 18. the presence of God, and the Congregation, (amongst many other things) that the Lord being his Helper, he would re∣verently obey his Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, unto whom the Government and charge was committed over him, following with a glad mind and will their godly Admonitions, and submitting himself to their godly judge∣ments. There he solemnly and demurely did make profession, [that he thought in his heart, he was truly called to the Mi∣nistery of the Priesthood, according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of this Church of England.] Ibid. p. 17. Clearly granting, (by that copulative,) that the order of our Church, as then it stood, by his confession, was according to the will of our Lord Iesus Christ. In Note that he confesseth he subscribed the 39. Articles, when or∣dained, c. 2. p. 61. subscribing the 39. Articles, he acknowledged the Artic 20. power of the Church to decree rites and ceremonyes, and auctority in controversyes of Faith. Artic. 2, 3. That none are lawfully called and sent to minister in the Congregation, but such as are chosen and called to it by men who have publick authority given unto them in the Congregation, to call and send Ministers into the Lords Vineyard. Artic. 34. That whosoever through his pri∣vate judgement willingly and purposely doth openly break the traditions and ceremonyes of the church, &c. ought to be rebuked openly, (that others may fear to do the like) as he that offendeth against the common order of the Church, and hurteth th' authority of the Magistrate, and woundeth the consciences of the weak brethren, &c. That the books of Artic. 35. Homilies, (concerning the Common Prayer, &c.) ought to be read in churches by the Ministers diligently, and distinctly, that they may be understood of the people. Artic. 36. That the book of Consecration of Arch-Bishops and Bishops, and ordering of Priests and Deacons, &c. doth contain all things necessary to such consecration and ordering, neither hath it any thing, that of it self is superstitious or ungodly, &c. Artic. 37. That the Kings M. hath the chief power in this Realm of England and other his Dominions, unto whom the chief Government of all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or civil, in all causes doth appertain.
All which, with the rest, being subscribed by Mr. B. and the Priesthood received, (as hath been shew'd) he When this is done, they shall go to the Com∣munion, which all they that re∣ceive Orders shall take to∣gether, and re∣main in the same place where the ands were said upon them, &c. see the Book for Consec. and ord. p. 19. sealed to all he had subscribed, promised, and professed, by the tremendous Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. All which notwithstanding, he hath covenanted with the Scots to mould us all after the Kirk; polluted his Church with the Directorie, and many o∣ther abominations I spare to name; hath taken upon him to ordain Priests, to which office he knows he never received a consecration, and had no other power imparted to him by Bp. D. venant, then to Ibid. p. 19. preach, to dispense Sacraments, to bind and loose; and that not any how, or as he listeth, but Ibid. p. 17. as this realm hath received the same. He jeer'd our Di∣vines at the Synod of Dort, (and Bp. Davenant as one of them) with their Hierarchick Flaunt, the Masse of Cere∣monyes, the ceremonious Litter, the many pretty Liturgi∣call Knacks, with other the like effects of his spirit and breeding. He denyes that any civill power can have a supre∣macy in causes Ecclesiastical (so long as he cleaves to his Kirkirsh Principles,) and now he publickly Ph. 2. p. 67, 68. avows that his Presbytery hath an Authority to excommunicate the Ma∣gistrate, the supreme civill Magistrate under which they live, and to which they have Note, he confesseth it was no rash Oath (c. 2. p. 22.) and therefore ought to have been kept. sworn to live in subjection and obe∣dience. the foul and horrid consequences of which most Po∣pish and Iesuiticall Tenent, I could easily tell him out of sto∣ry, were this a place for such inlargements. I shall omit ma∣ny things, untill I am farther provoked, and find it needfull, I will only observe this once for all, that when he labours to excuse his senior sym-Presbyters and Patrons whom he had tacitly accused See that manifested in Dv. Philan. c. 1. p. 17, 18. of temporizing, and inconstancy, and re∣ceding from their subscriptions, &c. he saith; they only re∣ceded from the Rituall c. 2. p. 40, 41. part, and in an age unceremonial. What a rare Animal is this? and with how healing a Tongue can he lick himself whole, although his ulcers are never so grievous? There is but one Article, of 39, commanding a du∣tifull observance of rites and ceremonyes; the rest are only of substantials: from which when the party Note, the Iudgement of the late Pri∣mate, set ou by Dr. Bernard, (p. 126) was this, That the ordination made by such Presbyters, as have severed themselves from those Bishops unto whom they had sworn Canonical obe∣dience, cannot possibly be excused from being Schismaticall. apostatizeth, then all was but rituall (you may be sure) and they grew out of
fashion; that is, the times did alter, and (like their ordinary Emblem, upon the pinnacle of the Temple) the men alter'd with them. There is nothing more easy, then to put soft names upon the ruggedst Actions in the world. Drunkennesse is good Fellowship, Euphoniae gratia; fornication a Trick of youth, . and so, , every thing may be any thing. I make no doubt but if Popery should reign a∣mongst us in these dayes, and should be as rigidly imposed as in the dayes of Queen Mary, Mr. Rabbi Buisy would be the first at his Crucifix and his Beades, and would say in his Defense, to any man that should accuse him of serving the Times, that he only That is, Tempora mu∣tantur, & nos mutamur ab illis. conformed to the rituall part, and in an Age ceremonial. They are very unlikely to take up the Crosse, who have laid it so heavily upon other men's shoulders. But now that I and Mr. B. have taken our Turns in his Di∣lemma, I must consider of a way how to shorten my work; lest if I punish the Malefactor after the measure that he is guilty, I loose as much time as my greatest adversaries can wish. §. 8. In his c. 2. p. 16. lin. 18, 19, 31, &c. he denyes Of his denying his own hand. that he intended a publication of his papers against a Manu∣script called mine; and explains what he meant by com∣muni Presbyterorum consilio in one of his letters directed to me long since.] If I had not experience of his hardinesse, I should admire how he durst to contradict his own eyes, when he could not but know that mine are open, & that it is in my power to send his letters into the light. I have them now under mine eye, and do find my self threatned in the second, as I find him boasting in the first, vvhat publick use he would make of an Answer to my Pamphlet, and what account he would give to the Church of God of what he had been doing against that Trifle. I am also looking upon his third Letter (as he directs me) wherein his words are precisely these [being a Presbyterian I affect much to proceed com∣muni Presbyterorum consilio:] that is, in plain English, by the common Counsell of the Presbyters, not by the common consent only, as here he falsely translates his own Latin. Did he think that consilium had been the Latin word for consent? or did he wilfully mistake it? or had he forgot his own words when he challeng'd me to look under his Hand and Seale?
Other men may judge as they think convenient: but I be∣lieve his forgetfullnesse is the best expression of his Remem∣brance. §. 9. In his c. 2. p. 17. lin. 16. he saith, I make more hast Mr. B's Accu∣sation of my Dispatch. of which he might have accused St Au∣stin, and Ori∣gen, and the greatest Lu∣minaries of the Church, with much more reason. with my good works, then good speed, (giving this reason in the margin,) because my Correct Copie, Sinner impleaded, and Philanthropie, were all put forth in lesse then a twelve∣month.] He cannot indure to speak Truth, though nothing is gotten by his falsehood. Nineteen Months were expired betwixt the first and the last of those three books. And what had he to do with that? why must he publish to the world, that I am industrious in my calling, and that himself (if he is able,) is not willing to tell twenty, without loosing 7 before he comes to 19? But be it so that my books had come forth all in a day, can that either better them, or make them worse? then indeed is Mr. B. an excellent Author, who after some years Ep. Ded. p. 1. travail (to use his Phrase) was able to squeeze out a couple of Monsters. And however he tells me that I am not quick-sighted, yet in the very same line I can see his Latin, [acutum cernere & mordere] and, few lines before, I can see his Greek, [:] and whilst I see, I pity both; advising him henceforward to content himself with Dutch and Hebrew. §. 10. Whilst I am thus going forwards in shewing his His Recrimi∣nations the saddest part of his Adven∣ture. Falsehoods, I am arriv'd at that c. 2. p. 19. lin. 36, 37, &c. page, where he is pleas'd to accuse me of the very same crime, palpable untruths which I published against him, and of them not a few, but many threes, saith our Accuser. But here he stumbles at his own threshold, and no sooner tryes to get up, then he falls quite down. First he confesseth, that his three Exceptions were bare hearsares, which he had sworn were no bare hearsayes p. 17. Next he feares, that I had scarce so much as hearsayes to bear me out in what I said: though part of what I spake was from his own hand-writing; part from his mouth, delivered to me from his own messenger on purpose sent unto my House, who did not whisper it neither, but spake it audibly to others; and part from such persons, who for number are more, and for credit more weighty then this unhappy Recriminator can pretend to be. Thirdly, he tells us he will but touch upon a p. 20. lin. 2, 3. few of my supposed calumnyes, without so much as
mentioning a world more; when yet he had told us in his Title-page, that he had made a full Abstersion of all calumnyes; hoping the Reader would forget what he had said in his Title, or not read on till p. 20. or not observe the contradiction betwixt the one and the other, or at least conceive a world more beyond the collective All. How impossible it is, that M. B. should knowingly have omitted to accuse me of any failing, which he conceived to be such, I will briefly demonstrate by 2 examples of his willingnesse to make me guilty. 1. In the conclusion of my Philanth. I had written these words,—when some wagers have been laid concerning the Correptorie Correction—The Printers offi∣cer (by setting his letters so loosely as to fall out of the frame) expressed it thus—when some wagers have con been laid cerning the Correptorie Correction.—which misplacing of the syllable [con] which should have been added to [cerning] was demonstrably no other then the misfortune of the Presse; and yet Mr. B. in his c. 2. p. 9. Prints thought fit to trouble his Readers with it. 2. Whereas my Printer, in the Div. Phi∣lath. c. 3. p. 99. lin. 19. same book, had made it [in] in stead of [ni] which I had therefore very carefully took care to have mended in the Catalogue of Errata, and that in this printed form [p. 99. l. 19. r. ni] Mr. B. taking no notice that it was alter'd in the Errata, layes it roundly to my charge in his c. 2. p. 28. which however, in it self, most unworthy to be mention'd; yet considering the use which may be easily made of it, I think it more worthy then greater matters. For from hence I thus argue: If Mr. B. was so diligent in observing those oversights, which he could not but know were none of mine, but meerly Typographicall, and as venial faults in the Printer as any Printer can let fall, in any the most weighty or sacred volume; how would the man have triumphed, had he found any errors of greater moment? and how innocent doth he declare my papers to have been, wherein he is fain to quarrell such motes? and how incredible must he be thought, whilst he pretends an omission of other faults? Nay, fourthly, he protested before God, that he knew but three things which I accused of being fictions, to which he gave the least credit, p. 17. yet here he talkes of many threes; at the very expense of being perjur'd in his former affirmation, or of speaking in the later against his knowledge.
Fifthly, how incredible must it needs be, that he who invented so many Tales, and took up so many upon Report (either in deed, or in pretense) should omit to publish any ill thing of me, if he had really met with it in any part of my writings? But let us come to the particulars of which his unhappinesse is composed. §. 11. His first complaint is, (p. 20. lin. 7, 8, 9, &c.) that Of the ground of his ma∣lignity. his chief Parishoners being of my Congregation, I said, was the ground of all his Correptorie Correction.] My own words were, that this Philanth. c. 2. p. 46. in marg. and c. 3. p. 122. appeares to be the reason. And so it doth very sufficiently. For 1. he was civill and courteous to me, as civill, and as courteous, as most men in the Country, untill the time that his Parishoners betook themselves to my church, (as much without my knowledge, as against his pleasure:) and from that time forward my Neighbours enmity to me did take its Date. He got a Copie of a Manuscript which was conceived to be mine, (and whisper'd such among the Bre∣thren) against which he boasted what confutations he was preparing. I advis'd him by letter, that if it was true what I had heard, he would consider whether his Copie were mine or not, and whether (if mine) it were a true Copy or a false one. To this, (before he would give me one pertinent word) he re∣turn'd me an Answer usher'd in with this Preface—You know me to be Robbed (I call not you the Thief) of a consi∣derable part of my very fevv Auditors vvhen they be all to∣gether. In his second letter he told me, that those chief Parishoners vvere the His words were in Latin, susceptor gregis alieni, non certe abacti, sed sponte fugientis. fugitives of his Flock, and that I was the Receiver of another mans sheep; that they were not so good as he vvould have them, else I needed not to turn His word was . medler in another man's dioecese out of any over-fond love of abolished Episcopacy. Nay he flew so high as to wish, that matters might be judicially decided in an Eccle∣siasticall Court. (vvhich vvhat it imports in a Presbyterian sense, so many have felt, that all have heard it.) 2. This aking Tooth did so torment him, that he abruptly cryed out in his first printed Pamphlet (as he vvas trying to speak of Gods decrees) that I had fulfilled my insolency against his See Philanth. c. 3. p. 56. ministry, and his Flock. and in another place, (upon a suddain twitch of the vexed part) he Of which there is a se∣ction Philan. c. 3. p. 72. blurted out a bold vvorld, that he took more pains vvith those fevv under him, then I
with my more numerous flock. Upon another sharp pang of the aking Tooth, he brake out into a confidence, that his Correp. Corr. p. 22. Sermons were more wholsome, though not so handsome as mine. Nay so far is he from leaving this anodynous outcrie, untill his pain hath left him, that he re∣proacheth me (even here too) with my Note, Rea∣der, that this is as contrary to Truth, as any thing that is false. See what I said Philan. c. 2. p. 46. lin. 4, 5. Filching of his Parishoners (lin. 17.) and with schismaticall practices a∣gainst his Parish (lin. 24.) and this ground of his Distem∣pers he calls the ground of his godly jealousy (lin. 20.) Nay (as the acid humour doth increase,) he layes about him like two or three It is his Thrase of him∣self, p. 5. lin. 7. thrashers; strikes at the high commenda∣tions which he saith I gave to his Parishoners qualityes and conversations, when I said that they were persons of a most imitable converse, fearing God and hating covetousnesse, &c. Then he talks of his advantage to do me a mischief; and forgeth me to have said, My words were these▪ Per∣haps my neighbour doth consider, that it lyes in his power, &c. and thinks that I am of his opinion, &c. Philan. p. 3. that it is in his power to do me many a shrewd turne; talks of Patriarch sibbs in anothers dioecese, and of no body-knows-who, who cheerfully com∣plyed with his Ministery; calls me fawning Tertullus; speakes of his preaching by the hour-glasse (in 2 words of true Latin) and of others coaching it to church (in one word of false French;) observes that [far fetcht is good for Ladyes;] tells them how well they might have fared by hearing him speak; and so concludes with another old Say, [their mind to them their Kingdom is.] Thus he puts things together to the very end of his 21 page: & this must go for a proof (if we are as wil∣ling as himself) that his Parishoners going from him was not at all the ground of his Correptory Correction. But because he denyes that he did preach them out of their patience, and spake against them, as well as to them, out of the very same Pulpit, I will oppose to his deniall (which is but single, and his own too) their unanimous affirmation, that what I said they will justify on all occasions. It was from them who were af∣fronted that I had knowledge of the affronts: and they are persons of so much honour, as well as of conscience and inte∣grity, that one of their words will weigh more, then all the Oaths and Protestations which can be put by Mr. B. into the contrary scale. Nor is it a little to his prejudice, that he hath spent two pages in an impertinent invective against those per∣sons, who are so generally belov'd, because so generally ob∣liging,
that they stood in some need of his evill Tongue, to de∣liver them from the woe of being spoken well of by Luk. 6. 26. all men. For now it happily falls out, (to their unspeakable comfort and advantage) that they are only spoken well of by all except one; and He a Correptorie Corrector. §. 12. It is his second complaint, (p. 21. lin. ult. p. 22. lin. 1. Of hiring his book to be printed. &c.) that I did publish his confession, that it must cost him around sum of mony to get his book printed.] Was not 20. such a sum? would not that have done well in a Daugh∣ters portion? And did he not send it me in a message by a neighbour Minister, that He could get his book printed for no greater sum then 20. which if himself could not spare, he had friends who were able to do it for him? I had been told it before by many grave Persons; but I should hardly have made it publick, had he not told me of it himself. And did I do ill to believe his own message, when delivered by a person much more credible then himself? If the bargain was alter'd from after that time, he should have sent me word of that too, as he had done of the former. But how doth he blast his own credit, in setting this down as a palpable untruth, of which himself was the Author, and I but his Echo? nay he confesseth even here, whilst he doth offer at a Deniall, 1. that he suspected some such matter, and spake of it to his friends; 2. that one acquainted with the wayes of printers did a little scare him about a sum of mony; 3. that after the mony matter was talk't of, he did, out of pure respect to his Budget, forbear committing his Book to the Presse; (Truth will out one way or other.) 4. that at last it cost him a small matter to the Printer, and what he did gratify his choice friends with. But let him speak again in print; was he not obliged, at the Stationers price, to take off 200 of his Correp. Corre∣ctions? and doth he not drop a I find it since in his ch. 2. p. 28. confession that divers Dozens of his Book came down to him bound up? and did he not leave some dozens to be sold for him by the tio∣ners? Come away then, Reader, to his next Recrimina∣tion. §. 13. His third complaint is, (p. 22. lin. 24, 25. &c.) that I Of his swear∣ing and cursing, and railing, and Pulpit-scuffles. said, he rayled at me to all sorts of people, and cursed me to some, and preached me down in his 2 lecture Sermons.] He preach't and rayl'd, for he rayled in preaching, to all sorts
of people. Once at Northampton in mine own hearing, un∣der the title of : vvhich when I charged him with, he did not deny it. another time in Daventry Pulpit, which (being upon a market day) was talked of in the market, and brought to my eares by a cloud of eare-witnesses. And whether he railed at me or no behind the Curtains, his Readers may judge by what he hath done upon the Stage. A Correptorie Corrector begins to grow into a Proverb, and gives a speciall denomination to one that railes. p. 22. lin. ult. p. 23. lin. 1, 2, 3. But Mr. B. will lay down his life upon it, that, for above this 30 years, never did rash Oaths or cursing come out of the doors of his lips; nor in his greatest hast and heats did he ever protest so high, as by his Faith, by his Troth, or his Truly. Yet in the 17th page of this his last book, he protested before God, not only rashly, but very much worse, as hath been shew'd. Is not that more then by his Faith? Again he Correp. corr. p. 174. professed in the presence of God, that he thought me well-nigh in the same condition with Simon Magus. Is not that more then by his Troth? Nay farther yet, he pulls a curse upon himself, and the greatest curse too, even Ibid. p. 25. lin. 1, 2. Anathema Maranatha, if he prove not the Doctrins which he hath taught these 20 years most agreeable to the Faith of the Church of England. And when we consider how impossible it will be to prove that, how much worse hath he done, then if he had spoken it by his Truly? Nay in this his second Book he bestows this curse upon his Friends, C. 2. p. 38. lin. 19, 20. Beshrew them, who vvere at any time so credulous, &c. But in excuse of this last he may chance to say, that he vvas somevvhat older at his p. 38. vvhere he cursed, then at his p. 22. vvhere he laid his life upon it, that he had not cursed or sworne these 30. years. and therefore I presse it not much upon him: I love to allovv him all the scope that I am able. §. 14. His fourth complaint is (p. 3. lin. 20, 21. &c.) Of his Corre∣ctors, Apologie, and being in the Diurnall. concerning vvhat I said of the Correctors of his Presse, and that his Apologie was to be looked on as the deepest instance of his invention: and p. 24. that he was at the cost to have his Book in the Diurnall.] To the first I ansvver, that I vvas told it by divers persons vvhose eyes vvere still upon the place, and could tell more of those matters then Mr. B. himself. vvhich I cannot prove, I'le beg his pardon, although the
matter is not of moment. For a most satisfactory Answer to the second, I refer my Reader to the Philanth. conclusum. 7. p. 66. place, where my words may be seen in conjunction with the reasons which there I give for them. I say to the third, that what he did by a proxy, he truly did. . That I can shew my information under the hand and seale of a most worthy person. That if he did, he did well, (for who prints books to keep them secret?) and therefore if he did not, I did not ill to think he did. Yet because I did take it upon report, I shall as soon as he proves I did mistake it, make him amends in such a manner as he will have me. And thus having seen the very utmost of what he hath been able to charge me with, (from the very beginning to the conclusion of my book,) I will pursue my method of charging Him. §. 15. In his p. 24. lin. 8, 9. he is not afraid to divulge his Mr. B's Dream of the Printers Boy. Dream, that by my silver hook I hooked in very Printers boyes to be my Historians, and that I bribed them to let me have a hansell of his papers, &c.] A thing not only ex∣tremely false, but so very impossible to be true, that I was ne∣ver able to find out whereabout his Printer lived, whether at London, Oxford, or Cambridge. Upon my diligent inquiry, I heard that London was the place, but I heard it only, and read it in the Title-page of his Book. For ought I know, there is no such matter. But admit him to be in London, I cannot tell (to this hour) either where he lives, or what his name is. All I find in his Title-page, is, Mr. Sawbridge his Stationer, and W. H. which what it signifyes, I cannot tell. Indeed Mr. Sawbridge was ask't the question by a Friend, but he was as wary as the ancient Persians, and would not let fall a syllable towards the opening of the secret. The myste∣ryes of Bacchus and of Cybele were never lock't up with greater care. The like was observed in the printing of his last; which I was never able to get a sight of (notwithstanding my indeavours, which might administer an occasion to Mr. B's confident invention) untill after there were Copyes in the pub∣lick shops at Northampton. So very unhappy is Mr. B. in printing all that lyes uppermost. His sin against conscience and common sense. §. 16. In his p. 25. lin. 18, 19. he saith, I omitted to touch upon the 20th part of all that was substantiall in him, and
argumentative.] If he had said, [of all that was scurrilous and invective,] he had hit the Truth a little nearer. I was chid by wise persons for considering him at all, and again I was chid for taking him so much into consideration. But for this I have been thanked by the very same persons, that I shew'd him the shadows of all his substance. What subject is there in all his Satyr touching the questions in debate, and relating to my notes, upon which I have not fully spoken in my defense of Gods Philanthropie? My Alphabeticall Index is a thousand witnesses, to such as list to look no farther. But I have many more witnesses then Mr. B. can pretend to, be∣cause the whole Impression was dispersed long ago. How I spake to all things which were substantiall and pertinent, and why I spake to no more, I cannot demonstrate by an inducti∣on, unlesse I transcribe the many sections, both of his book, and mine. But I can do it a shorter way, even by sending my equall Reader to the conclusion of my Philanthropie, and by desiring him, with that to compare the Index. §. 17. In his 27, 28, 29. pages, he proclaimes his ignorance Of his false Greek and Latin. in Greek and Latin, by his pitifull endeavours to make them venial. I did occasionally name a few of his infirmityes, and in mercy to him I nam'd no more. I did seriously intend not to rub up that sore, and meant that Time should either heale it, or skin it over. But since the Delinquent is so ingratefull, as not to accept of my pity, and even flings dirt at me for con∣cealing so much of his uncleannesse, I will compell him to be sorry, though I cannot be sure he will repent. First, for his ge∣nerall excuses, that the Printer did him much wrong, and that I would not admit of a corrected Copy which he sent me, I have this to Answer for his discomfort. 1. That the grossest of his commissions (such as multa rara, ad phalerandum po∣pulum, derelictoscujus, and the like) are not pretended by himself to have been errors typographicall. For of the three I now nam'd he seeks to justify two, and very wisely con∣ceales the third: ad phalerandum populum he dares not men∣tion. 2. Though I would not accept of a book from his hands, (having bought one before out of the shop, and suspecting many dishonestyes to lye in ambush by such a pro∣ject;) yet I detein'd it so long, as to examine his monstrosityes of Greek and Latin, (which by the Index I had made was
very easy to be done.) And except Daemon meridianum (which he had mended with his pen) I found the book to be as faulty (in point of Latin and Greek) as that which I had from the common stall. Nay I have now in my custody one of those very Copyes, which Mr. B. corrected after it came to Northampton; and even there I have discover'd above twenty grosse errors (as a neighbour Minister can bear witnesse) nei∣ther amended with the pen, nor yet in the Catalogue of Er∣rata. But let us come to the particulars in which I See Philan∣thr. c. 3. p. 99. instanc't. The first, and chiefest, was his deplorable use of phaleran∣dum, which in stead of confessing, or excusing, he very care∣fully passeth over, and breaks out into railing, as the natu∣rall His ad phale∣randum popu∣lum. language of his misfortunes. And having shew'd by convina, (as heretofore by Monsieurs) that he would fain be mistaken to have at least a little skill in Italian and French, even whilst he demonstrates his perfect ignorance in both, he tryes to hide his reall frailty, by starting a frailty where there is none. For the fault that I found was multa rara, which His multa rara. was as bad as to have said, multa pauca: And to that I pointed with an asterisk both in the margin, and in the Text. But our Gamester provides a back-door for his escape, and makes as if I had blam'd him for the particle [ni] whereas he knows I never did, and was so far from laying it in his dish, that I laid it wholly in the Printers, as Mr. B. might have read in the Ca∣talogue of Errata. In so much as that refuge hath quite un∣done him. Nor fares he the better for his many rare Gemms, because his words were multa lectu dignissima & admodum rara; which if he thinks not worse then many grammaticall incongruities, I know what the Reader will be apt to say of his learning. Is not this bad enough? not, it seems, for Mr. Barlee: for that which follows is much worse. Calvin. In∣stit. l. 3. c. 23. §. 4. His cujus de∣relictos. De∣fectio arguit fuisse derelictos, cujus (supple Derelictionis, saith Mr. Barlee) non potest alia adduci causa, quam Reprobatio. Calvin's word was derelictos, not derelictio: or if it had been so, as Mr. B's ignorance would have had it, yet could it not have been Mr. Calvin's meaning. For 1. it appears by the context, that he was speaking of the Defection of the Re∣probate Angels, and inquiring after its cause: and 2. it could not otherwise be sense, then by making cujus to refer unto the word defectio. Could Mr. Calvin be so silly, as to say
that Gods Reprobation was the only cause of his dereliction? Not his positive Reprobation, for then it would be before the negative, (in contradiction to his Tenent;) not the negative Reprobation, for that is nothing but dereliction, which cannot possibly be the cause of it self. No, 'twas only Mr. B. who could arrive to that pitch of Dementation. What satisfaction will he now make me for giving me the lye with a notorious epithet, and for his wonderfull impertinence of St. Paul's ignorance in Grammar? He tells us it is venial to break Priscian's Head. But these are such faults as would break his Heart too. The time would fail me if I should mention the great variety of the like, which are very conspicuous in his Correp. Correction. But I will shew my Catalogue to any man that shall desire it for satisfaction; and from the Presse, if required by M. B. Nor is he happyer in his second book then he was in his first. For not to speak of such trifles as Coriphaeus, and acutum cernere, (not mended in the Errata) I will only mention two or three Rarityes. What I had written Philanth. in Avertis. to the Reader. , he thought he must repeat This was worse then his manifold mistake of , which it seems he thought could not agree with Helena, be∣cause its termi∣nation did happen to be in [] there∣fore he mur∣der'd it into , and the like; and after all, marr'd all in the mending.  p. 17. no doubt because he found  in his Lexicon, and could not find . wherein how many absurdityes might be observed (to the filling up of both pages) I leave to the guesse of a sufficient Reader. Again (in his ch. 2. p. 54, 55.) he snibs me for an oversight in translating this Latin, Desinebat esse vir, sed non malus Grammaticus: either not knowing, or not considering, that the words are Amphibolo∣gical (like Ibis redibis nunquam Romane peribis;) and when the sentence vvas capable of both constructions, I had reason to take that vvhich vvas most for my purpose, and for the credit of Origen, to vvhom the Amphibolie vvas ap∣plyed. Novv vvhether the Logick, or the Grammar of Mr. B. is to be shent, I leave himself to be the judge. But above all, I admire him for his vvaving of my In his c. 3. p. 52. lin. 27, 28. where he referrs to my Philanth. c. 3. p. 106. Dilemma, vvhereby he vvas forced to confesse, that he vvas either a wil∣full Impostor, or else understood not the Latin tongue, vvhen he translated Felix Turpio, not only besides, but against the meaning of the vvords. Whosoever shall read chap. 3. p. 105, and 106. of Divine Philan. Def. and compare it vvith Mr. B's affected Dumbnesse (c. 2. p. 52.) and vvith vvhat he saith of opinion astree (c. 2. p. 36.) and hovv he mends it
in his Errata, by making it worse, he will sure be tempted to laugh as loudly, as Val. Max. l. 9. Philemon once did upon another occa∣sion. §. 18. Whilst I am in this place of my vindication, I am a little interrupted by a kind neighbour of the Ministry, who An occasional Digression for the clearing of what is past, and for the abridging of what is future. was very much suspected to be the Man, whom Mr. Barlee pretended to be the sole Author of his Reports: I mean those two, of which I have spoken so lately, and so much at large, chap. 1. §. 9, 10, 11, 12. Nay he himself was very confident, that Mr. B. would lay those ugly children at his innocent Door, if he were not prevented by timely caution. He hath therefore very worthily, like an affectionate neighbour (lesse then which I never found him) not only cleared himself from Mr. Barlee, but cleared me from himself too; that I may be justified by them both, upon whomsoever the blame and the guilt may lye. So far was I from having said to this reverend Minister, that I was without sin, above sin, and by mine own power could abstain from all sin, and again so far from denying the lawfulnesse of the second marriage of Mi∣nisters; that he hath three times attested I said the contrary: first, to a clergy-man of this County; the next day after, to a Gentleman of greater quality; and two dayes after that, to me in person. nor this by an orall or fugitive profession, but he voluntarily offer'd to at test it under his Hand, and accor∣dingly hath done it at the very same time Decemb. 14. 1657. Nor hath he done it in one, but in three distinct written Forms, to which he hath added a threefold subscription of his Name; that Mr. Barlee may be known not only the Raiser of those two slanders, but withall to have invented his way of manage∣ment, and defense. Which to describe unto the life, in its complication of falsityes, with which Mr. B. doth lye intangled, will be the subject of a Treatise to be published by it self, if Mr. B. shall make it needful, by any obstinate perseverance in so manifold a sin. But I suppose he will think it his easiest way, to make a confession of his faults, and to accept of my pardon, which I am Mat. 18. 22. bound to afford him upon the ac∣count of Christianity, though he shall yet sin against me no lesse then seventy times seven. In the mean time it concerns me, as the injur'd party, to make good use of my Advantage. And since I find my self unabled, by no lesse then an induction
of all particulars, to make a most cogent Demonstration of my having been calumniated in severall kinds, and that without the least shadow or shew of Reason; I shall take a shorter course then I have hitherto done, for the clearing my self of all other calumnyes, as soon as ever I shall have spoken to this following insinuation. §. 19. He saith by head and shoulders (c. 2. p. 44. lin. 25, Of praying for the dead and unto Saints, pleaded for by no-body∣knows-whom. 26, &c.) That it will much concern me to inquire who that Minister was, who vehemently pleaded, four or five years ago, for the lawfulnesse of praying for the Dead, and unto Saints, at a Gentlemans table, who contended against it, and complained heavily to Mr. Barlee of it.] (1.) If an∣other Minister did this, how can Ibe much concern'd to in∣quire who he was? or why did he not say, he meant another, and not my self? For as the words are here placed, he plainly seems to mean me by them? which why should his Readers be left to think, in case he did really intend some other? (2.) A∣gain, if I am the Man he means, (which is the opinion of all I meet with) why durst he not say it in downright terms, as he was wont to say things of worse importance? His very mode of delivery bewrayes his guilt. And well it might. For (3.) how could I eat at any Gentlemans table, who could possi∣bly complain to Mr. Barlee? Or (4.) how can he be a Gentle∣man, who did not only complain of what was spoken at his Table, but of what he feigned to have been spoken? Off goes his Gentility, if that is part of his Evocatos tanquam ad epulas nuptia∣les Protestan∣tium primores, Carolus no∣nus opprimi jussit. Thuanus l. 55. 56, 57. Cluver. ad A. D. 1572. p. 734. entertainments. None but . Herodot l. . c. 119. p. 51. Astyages, and Atreus, have ever made a more cruell and inhospitable Feast. None but Harpagus and Thyestes have found a sorryer Treatment at another mans Table. For (5.) so far have I been from pleading vehemently in behalf of those errors of the Roman Church, that I have vehemently pleaded against them both, when it hath not been for my interest, but much to the hazarding of my safety. Nor am I able to be∣lieve, that this is any other story, then what was newly coined in the old mint, and only antedated from 4 or 5 years ago, that the Gentleman (when accused) may fitly say he hath forgot it. But I omit to say more, (how much soever I am provoked) untill I am refused some satisfaction. It was no longer ago then in his p. 38. lin. 21, 22, 23. when Mr. B. wished [with an O] that I would purge my self from dimidiate Pontificia∣nisme.
And p. 73, 74, 75. he reckons me to be one of those Cassandrian-Papists, against whom Mr. Baxter doth warne the Nation. And because he is assured that he hath no ground for it, he is fain to glance at me in a most oblique and squinting story, which is as far from Truth, as Malice is from Charity, and Truth from Falsehood. It is as if a man should say, that it nearly concerns Mr. B. to inquite, who that Mini∣ster was, who upon the perusall of the Divine Philanthropie defended, did so exceedingly swell with Anxiety and Anger, that the Cooper presently was sent for, to Hoop his Belly and his Ribs, for fear of bursting: But I declare against this, as a most unchristian and unmanlike course: and only propose it as a glasse wherein Mr. B. may behold the ugly face of his inventions. And because by these courses, and many more of this nature, he strikes directly at my Living, and at many o∣thers through my sides, I think he cannot but owe me some very publick satisfaction: And by these presents I do require it. §. 20. Now I come to my shorter course, which I promis'd A short Cata∣lgue of 37. more False∣hods. at the end of the 18th section: and which if Mr. Barlee shall not take in good part, I will speak at large to those things, in another Tract, which now I shall only think fit to mention. 1. What he saith of an imaginary Ch. 2. p. 31. parallel betwixt my opinions and the Pelagians (which he pretendeth to have made in his Correp. Corr.) 2. what he saith of Ibid. D. Reynolds in his Epistle to himself, shewing my Arguments to have issued from the Pelagian School. 3. what he saith of my Ibid. and p. 32. abusing D. Reyn. and Mr. Whitfeld, &c. 4. of my Ib. p. 33. repeating the Barbers Bason a second time. 5. of its being no p. 34. fiction, into the partnership of which he took in his reverend Divine. 6. of what passed at p. 34. Daintry touching Socrates and Iob, (who were both spoken of, but not as Mr. B. doth make relation.) 7. of my p. 36. ending my Notes with a harsh . 8. of my p. 37. accusing him for being like Pausanias, (which indeed I mention'd of an indefinite , but he alone applyes to himself.) 9. of p. 38. frequent repetitions, (which is more his own fault then any mans whatsoever in all my reading.) 10. of my p. 42. ranking the best of men with the worst of Quakers, (whereas I only said, what things I was unlike, and how
far from being a Quaker.) 11. of my being not able not to know, that p. 42. Bishops were no other then primi Presbyterorum. 12. of my p. 42. justifying one of the worst of his expressions. 13. of his p. 43. not making promise to crave pardon for his faults. 14. p 45. of my spending above 22 sheets in pure invective. 15. of his not p. 47. saying that he had need to cast about for Topical Arguments. 16. Ibid. of his 5 Arguments to prove that matter of fact, pretended not to be spoken to. 17. Ibid. of my confessing a Copy to be mine (which I never saw, nor knew any thing of but from Him.) 18. p. 48. of confessing by faultring denyals. 19. Ibid. of lea∣ving out a passage against speciall discriminating Grace. 20. p. 50. of his never having heard that his three friends had their finger in the pye of sequestring others, though some of them lived upon sequestrations. 21. p. 52. of its being plain by the Text and context, that he spake not of me, but of himself. 22. Ibid. of my granting those Westmonasterial Authors to make for him (when yet he declares for the up∣per way, &c.) 23. p. 53. of his alluding to my words when he calumniates them. 24. Ibid. of his opposing my Idol Fan∣cy of Grace, when he gibed at Gods Grace by me alledged. 25. p. 56. of his not charging me with Atheisme, &c. 26. p. 56. of my not threatning him with a thing pass', but He me. 27. p. 57. of his not allotting me a portion in the bottomlesse Lake, &c. (which I have largely proved Ch. 2. §. 4.) 28. p. 59. of Aerius his not being condemned generally for heresy. 29. p. 60. of his party's maintaining communion with us in doctrin and worship. 30. p. 61. of Bp. Davenant's exacting nothing, but the Oath of supremacy, and subscription to the 39 Articles. 31. p. 64. of Episcopius his being an Anti∣trinitarian, &c. 32. Ibid. of my knowing that Episcopius was fully confuted by Vedelius, (when I know the con∣trary.) 33. p. 65. of the Bishops severity to Non-conformists, &c. 34. p. 66. of King James his promise, that he would labour to conform the Church-government of England to that of Scotland, rather then vice versa. 35. p. 71. of speciall Grace being inconsistent with universall. 36. p. 71, 72, 73, &c. of my charging Testard, Amyrald, Bp. of Armagh, &c. with Ar∣minianisme (who never own'd it in my self.) 37. p. 76. of Bp. Davenants Pacificatorie to Duraeus not being one of
the last things he writ (by which we must mean, his publick works, not private letters, &c.) What Mr. Barlee saith, or insinuateth, (by such inevitable consequences, as do make it equall to what he saith in dogmatical positions) is nei∣ther more nor lesse true, in the 34 places directed to in the margin of this last section, then if a man should say that Mr. Barlee was passionatly in love with the Queen of France, and pretends a just Title to the Crown of Spain. And thus (good Reader) I have preserved thee at once from so much labour, and losse of time, as 34 long sections must needs have cost thee. I wish I had thought of this me∣thod sooner; since his prevarications with the Truth are (most of them) so palpable, that to Sententias vestas prodi∣disse, superasse est. Hieron. ad Cesiph. adv. Pelag. c 4. name them only, is to discover them; and to discover them only, is to confute them.
CHAP. III. Mr. B's Abuses of other men, (as well as of me, and of himself,) especially of his own Party; and his incomparable mistakes in those of the Prelacy, the late Primate, Bp. Davenant, &c. §. 1. Mr. B. taking it for granted, upon the representa∣tion of his Fancy, that he had done me some spe∣ciall savour, concludes from no-premisses, that I discover my self to be a Monster of ingratitude for having Of my being a Monster of Ingratitude to Mr. B. because he abused his best friends without my consent, and was reproved by me for it. written a tedious letter to him, and made that use of his Answer which he expresseth ch. 2. p. 50. lin. 14, 15. &c.] Where the ingratitude doth lye, I shall leave it to be consider'd by this impartiall account of that whole matter. When I had published a true Copy of my Notes to prevent the publishing of a false one, I was told, (which since I find was true) that Mr. Barlee had a designe to print as much of that false one as he thought might be usefull to do his work. Against this I thought fit to preadmonish him in a letter. Advising him first, to live in silence, and not to trouble the Presse with breach of charity or peace. Or if that might not be, that he would then keep close to the proper subject of debate; and neither call me by ill names, nor affirm any thing to be mine, which I had already so very heartily and so knowingly disown'd. For ha∣ving voted me already to be a Papist, and a Pelagian, (and a Socinian into the bargain) should he proceed to aspersions from I knew not what Manuscripts copied out with his Ink, why might he not accuse me of having said Masse, or of any thing else which might be matter of sequestration? With how much reason I did this, both his books have made appear. For
what I suspected only as possible, he hath abundantly per∣form'd, notwithstanding all those premonitions, with which my self and others did very affectionately oblige him. But the word sequestration did so sting him (as he pretended) that he wonder'd (in his next letter) at my monstrous unchari∣tablenesse, for representing him to my misgiving fancy, as if he had nothing of an Ecclesiastick, of a Christian, of a Gentleman, of a Scholar, of a Neighbour left in him. So great a sin did he reckon a sequestration. He farther added, that even then when his principles did seem most to lead him to the liking of the sequestration of unworthy Ecclesiasticks, yet even then he was so much for Ecclesiastica Ecclesiastice, and justa juste, as that, he blessed God for it, he never had, nor ever would have, nor ever in that way hoped to have, any hand or finger in that pye. Now comes the jest. For having Noted sequestrations with such a black Coal, and startled at the mention of such a Bugg, as if he thought it a Scarlet sin; and being afterwards put in mind, who they were that grew lusty upon that very Dish which he thought Poyson, (and blessed God that his finger was never in it;) he tells the world even in Print, that some of his friends (his dearest Friends and Patrons too) have even lived upon sequestra∣tions, but he did not think of them when he wrote what he did. Who saith he did? or who can think it? Had he remem∣ber'd at that instant what now he tells us, he would not cer∣tainly have us'd them as accidentally he did. He would ra∣ther have lessen'd and excused that Fact, then have loaded it (as he did) with so many heavy aggravations. What he saith, he never heard of his three speciall Friends, and the distin∣ction which he makes betwixt having a finger in the pye of sequestring, and living upon Still he saith it is a way he is not satisfid with, however practis'd by the long Par∣lament, which he did most Idolize. p. 52. I hope that others may be unsatisfied as well as He, and as safely. sequestrations, &c. doth but amount to such a salvo, as stands in most need of being co∣ver'd; and kept close: for the more Aire gets in, the more the u'cer will be indanger'd, as I could shew more wayes then one. Mr. B. should have known, (I mean, he ought to have consider'd) that this is one of those things which, the more he stirrs, will smell the more unbeseemingly. But let it lye quietly for me, as before it did, untill Mr. B. shall rake it up, as now he hath done. So much for Monster of ingratitude, which Himself was much rather to be charged with, for calling
Him [Ch. 3. p. 7. monstrous Leviathan Hobbs,] who hath assisted his party (at least to the utmost of his Ability) in asserting their Doctrins of Gods Decrees. And though Mr. B. doth but write like one of the lowest of his Disciples, yet he tells us, he will as soon own the Ibid. Devil for his Master, as Mr. Hobbs. §. 2. In his c. 2. p. 65. lin. 28, 29, &c. He saith, it had been well for King James, and all his posterity, if he had Of King Iames and the Pres∣byterians. continued to follow the counsell of Robert Rollock; who did advise him, as he would not fal into inextricable streights first or last, to continue a fast friend unto the Godly.] So he calls the Presbyterians of the Kirk; vvith whom if King James had complyed, as he did not, they had not done as they did, but had preserved him from falling into inextricable streights. And then (saith Mr. B.) it had been better for his Posterity. So dangerous and fatall a thing it is, for any Ma∣gistrate whatsoever, in any Kingdom or Commonwealth, not to comply with the Presbytery, when they have power to do mischief. He hath spoken very much to the credit of his par∣ty; and given notice to all in power, that the way to be se∣cure from the attempts of that Sect, is either to set them up, or to keep them under. But which of the two is most eligible, I hope the world will make no more Trialls. Well, we have heard Mr. B. of King Iames and the Godly: Now it comes to my turne to produce King Iames concerning both. In the con∣ference at Hampton-Court, upon occasion of Dr. Reynolds obtruding twice the Kings supremacy, his Majesty took him up in these following words. King Iames his speech of the Presbyt. Confer. at Hampt. Court, p. 82, 83, 84, 85. Dr. Reynolds, I will tell you a Tale. After that the Religion restored by King Edw: the sixth was soon overthrown, &c. we in Scotland felt the effect of it. Whereupon Mr. Knox writes to the Queen Regent, that she was supreme head of the Church; and charged her, as she would answer it before Gods Tribunall, to take care of Christ his Evangill, and of suppressing the Popish Prelates, who withstood the same. But how long, trow you, did this continue? Even so long, till by her Autho∣rity, the Popish Bishops were repressed, Himself and his Adherents were brought in and well settled, and by
these means made strong enough to undertake the mat∣ters of Reformation themselves. Then loe, they began to make small account of her supremacy, nor would longer rest on her Authority; but took the cause into their own hand, and according to that more light wherewith they were illuminated, made a further Reformation of Religion. How they used that poor Lady my Mother, is not unknown, and with grief I may remember it. Who, because she had not been otherwise instructed, did desire only a private Chappel, wherein to serve God after her manner, with some few selected persons: but her suprema∣cy was not sufficient to obtain it at their hands. And how they dealt with me in my minority, you all know. It was not done secretly, and though I vvould, I cannot conceal it. I vvill apply it thus. And then putting his Hand to his Hat, his Majesty said; My Lords the Bishops, I may thank you that these men do thus plead for my supremacy. They think they cannot make their party good against you, but by appealing unto it: as if you, or some that adhere unto you, vvere not vvell-affected tovvards it. but if once you vvere out, and they in place, I knovv vvhat vvould become of my supremacy. No Bishop, no King, as before I said. Neither do I speak at random, vvithout ground: for I have observed since my coming into England, that some preachers before me, can be content to pray for James King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defen∣der of the Faith; but as for supreme Governor, in all cau∣ses, and over all persons (as vvell Ecclesiasticall as Civill) they passe that over vvith silence; and vvhat Cut they have been of, I have aftervvards learn'd. Thus far King James. With vvhose vvords if vve compare vvhat hath been vvritten by Claud. Salm. Dfen. Reg. c. 10, & 11. Salmasius, vvho vvas in every part of his life, except the last, the greatest enemy to Bishops, and the great∣est Patron to the Presbytery, and yet hath fasten'd the blackest Character upon the English Presbyterians that hath ever been given to any Sect, I suppose some Readers vvill take the vvords of Mr. Barlee, and use them thus. It had been vvell for King James, and all his posterity, if he had follovved the counsell (not of Robert Rollock, but) of one vvho vvas infinitely vviser, I mean, his orthodox
and learned self; who advised his son Basi. D. l 2. p. 42. Henry, whilst yet in Scotland, not to suffer such Ministers to be in his Kingdom, if he liked to sit at rest. §. 3. But Mr. Baddes further (ibid. lin. ult.) that Mr. Cart∣wright, Of the impri∣sonment of Mr. Cartwright, and Mr. Tra∣vers, &c. and Mr. Travers, and others, were imprison'd for ceremonial inconformity towards the later end of Q. Eliza∣beth her Reign. (And he tells us a little before, that) King Iames interceded for their releasement. He would have it thought, I suppose, that Q. Elizabeth was cruell to those good men, when they were guilty of nothing but Peccadillos. But was Mr. Hacket hanged for non-conformity to things indifferent? Or was it nothing but ceremonial, which Co∣pinger, Lancaster, and Artington, and others, designed a∣gainst the lives of the whole privy Councell, and against the person of the Queen? Or were not Cartwright, and Travers, and Wentworth, and Charke, and Egerton, and others of the Presbyterian Ministry, Dang. Posit. c. 13. and 14. p. 171. to 176. made privy to the plot, to which they were accessary by their concealement? Perhaps Mr. B. is not acquainted with those affairs. And therefore to requite him for his care to have me very well inform'd, about the Faction which played Rex in King Iames his Court, (p. 69. lin. 32, 33. &c.) for which he adviseth me to a book writ in elegant verse by Thomas Hepey, if I am able to procure it for love, or money; I will direct him for information to a most admirable volume, printed in the year 1593. and in∣titled thus—[Dangerous Positions and proceedings pub∣lished and practised within this Iland of Britain, under pre∣tense of Reformation, and for the Presbyterial discipline.] If King James did intercede for those mens release, perhaps being then but King of Scotland, he did not know the whole cause of their imprisonment here in England: or he was not out of his wardship to those fiery spirits (as he call'd them) and so might intercede in complaisance to his Guardians, (however unfit for that office to a King of his Age:) or he was not yet perfect in his mystery of King-Craft: or let the cause of his intercession be what it will, he did many things of which he afterwards repented that they were done. King Iames his Antipaty to Presbyteria∣nisme. §. 4. What Mr. B. is pleas'd to add, (p. 66. lin. 19, 20.) of K. James his writing into Scotland, that he would labour to
reduce the Church-government of England to that of Scot∣land, rather then conform that to England's, is for many reasons very incredible. First, because Mr. Barlee tells it; and citeth no other Author then the unwritten words of a Scotish Minister. (At every dead lift he tells us something that he was told, be it of me, or any man else.) Secondly, K. James was so far from such a preference, that his a version to Presbyterianisme was as great as to Pigg, or to Tobacco. Witnesse his words at Conference second day, p. 85. Hampton-Court, where speaking of Dr. Reynolds and other chieftaines of the party, If this, (quoth he) be all that they have to say, I will make them conform themselves, or I will harry them out of this Land, or else do worse. Witnesse his letter from Spotswood Hist. Scot. l. 7. p. 530. White-Hall A. D. 1617. to the Presbyterians of the Kirk, wherein he upbraided to them their ignorance and profanenesse, and re∣sembling them to the Heathenish Constable of Castile, told them, [they would indure both Lions, Dragons, and De∣vils to be figur'd in their Churches, but would not allow the like place to the Patriarchs and Apostles.] Id. ibid. p. 533. A. D. 1617. Witnesse his chiding speech in the Diet held at St. Andres, when he pressed upon them to keep a yearly commemoration of our Saviours greatest blessings bestow'd upon mankind, as his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension, and Descent of the Holy Ghost; the private use of both Sacraments in urgent cases; the Reverent administration of his holy Supper; the ca∣techizing and confirming of children by Bishops; much too long to be here inserted. Witnesse his very angry Id. ib. p. 535. letter di∣rected to the Arch-bishops of St. Andrews and Glascow, re∣presenting the wrongs he had received from that sort of men, and saying, [He was of that age, that he would not be con∣tent to be fed with Broath, as one of their Coat was wont to speak.] Witnesse his other angry letter directed singly to the Id. ib. p. 536. Arch-bishop of St. Andrews, wherein he complained of their ridiculous and scornfull dealings with their Soveraign, & their greater irreverence towards God himself, saying [The Ministers ease and commodious sitting on his Taile (they are the Kings own words) hath been more look't to then that kneeling, which for reverence he had required to be en∣joyned to the receivers of so divine a Sacrament. Neither can we conceive (as he there goes on) what should be meant
by that Table (which they required even in their private administrations to people upon their Death-beds) un∣lesse they meant to make a round Table (as did the Jewes) to sit and receive it. In conclusion, seeing we and this Church here must be held Idolatrous in this point of kneel∣ing, or they reputed rebellious knaves in refusing the same (they are the Kings own words) it is our pleasure, &c.] Witnesse his third severe Ibid. letter, sent with this unto the Councell, for inhibiting the payment of stipends to any of the rebellious Ministers, (they are the King own words) in Burg, or Landwart. Witnesse his first letter of indignation, to the generall Assembly indited at Perth, wherein he charged all the rebellious dispositions of the people (who of their * Id. ib. p. 537, 538. own dispositions were most Loyall) upon them, and their Doctrins: minding them of his patience under their mani∣fold provocations, their slandering the truth of God (they are the Kings own words) by walking disorderly under the cloak of seeming holynesse, shaking hands, as it were, in this their disobedience to Magistracy, with the upholders of Po∣pery (still the Kings own words.) Witnesse his fourth sharp Id. ib. p. 542. letter directed to the Bishops at the An. D. 1621. last Parliament which was held by that King in Scotland, telling them [they had to deal with two sorts of enemyes, Papists, and Puritans; that they should go forward in action against the one and the other. That Papistry was a disease of the mind, and Puri∣tanisme of the Brain, (they are the Kings own words) and that the Antidote of both must be a grave, settled, and well∣order'd Church in the obedience of God and their King. Whereof he will'd them to be carefull, and to use all means for the reducing those that either of simplicity or willfulnesse did erre. Witnesse his speeches at Hampton-Court, when he trounced Mr. Confer. at Hamp. Court second day. p. 67, 68. Knewstubs for taking exception to the Crosse in Baptisme: ib. p. 74. when he said of him and his Brethren, [I have lived among this sort of men ever since I was ten years old: but I may say of my self as Christ did of himself, that though I lived among them, I was never of them since I was able to Note, that when King Iames liked Presbyteria∣nisme, it was before he was able to judge, but not one minute after. And the very same do I pro∣fesse of my self. judge; neither did any thing make me more to condemn and detest their courses, then that they did so peremptorily disallow of all things, which at all had been used in Popery. Witnesse his words upon the third day
of that Conference, when he pleaded for subscription to the three famous Articles, which the Church-men of England were to approve by subscribing; namely, the Kings suprema∣cy, the Articles of Religion, and the Book of Common Prayer. The necessity of which he did presse so home, and evinced by three such excellent Reasons, as he thought it fit to conclude in these words, Ib. third day p. 93, 94. [That if any, after things were well ordered, would not be quiet, and shew his obedience, the Church were better without him, he were worthy to be hanged. Praestat ut pereat unus, quam unitas. The Lenity of the Bishops compared with the rigor of the Presbyt. Yet how favourably he used them, notwithstanding his Threats, and how much mercy the Bishops shew'd them, in spight of all their guilts and provoca∣tions, many thousands can witnesse, and have found too soon by sad experience. So little reason had Mr. B. to accuse them of cruelty (as just now he did p. 65. lin. 16, 17. &c.) whose on∣ly fault hath been thought (by the prudentest persons) to have been this, that they quenched not the fire whilst it was yet in the Bramble, whereby it was suffer'd to grow boistrous, even able to devour the lofty Cedars; and had not an Army of Buckets opportunely encountred the threatning flame, had burn't up every green Rev. 8. 7. & 9. 4. thing upon the face of the Earth. Of this I am sure, that the severest of the Bishops did exact no more of non-Conformists, then Mr. Calvin Expedit ut extet summa quaedam Do∣ctrinae ab omnibus re∣cepta, quam inter praedi∣candum se∣quantur omnes; ad quam etiam observandam omnes Episco∣pi & Parochi jurejurando a stringantur; ut nemo ad munus Ecclesiasticum admittatur, nisi spondeat illum Doctrinae consensm sibi inviolatum futuum. Calvin. in Epist. 87. ad Protect. An∣gliae, p. 165. & paulo infeius.—A certa precum formula, & ritibus Ecclesiasticis, ne∣quaquam Pastoribus in functione sua discedere liceat. advised the Duke of Somerset, (the then-Protector to King Edward the sixth) to exact very severely of all that were candidates for the Ministery, before their admission to Ecclesiasticall fun∣ctions. From which he would have them to be rejected, if they would not stipulate for their conformity; which the Bishops by Oath should be obliged to see perform'd. And 'tis known that Ab ea discedere non ma∣gis liceat, quam ab ipsis Religionis placitis. Beza in Epist. 83. Beza was so rigid an exactor of universall confor∣mity to the devise of the Presbytery, that he would have it as unallowable to swerve from that, as from the very Maximes of Religion it self. What matchlesse crueltyes have been com∣mitted, as well by the Scotish, as by the English Consisto∣rians,
I will not relate, untill I think it more needfull. I will but hint to Mr. B. what was once presaged in the Painted Chamber (Sept. 12. 1654.) hovv sad a Tyranny over mens consciences vvould have been exercised in Britain, as vvell by the English as the Scotish Presbytery, if it had made such steps, or been as sharp and rigid, as it threatned vvhen it vvas first set up. And so I passe to his other plea for that party. §. 5. Mr. B. confesseth (c. 2. p. 67. lin. 30, 31. &c.) that if Of excommu∣nicating Kings, and killing them, the Do∣ctrines of Presbyt. with the traitorous seditious Jesuites, they should hold, that in ordine ad spiritualia, it vvere lavvfull by Ecclesiasticall censures, to depose or kill vvicked Kings, (a thing vvhich all Presbyterians vvith the late Assembly at Westminster plead against,) dangerous matters vvith a vvitnesse I might be able to prove against them.] Here he happily confesseth the haynous nature of the Fact, for vvhich he brands the Iesuites (very vvorthily) vvith tvvo shrewd Epithets. And therefore as many Presbyterians as shall be found to have been guilty of the very same crime, Mr. B. also confesseth to have been both traitorous and seditious Presbyterians. And since he hath given me my Theme, I vvill speak upon it as I am able, at least as I am bound upon this occasion. First, I knovv it vvill be granted by men of all judgements, that Renovvned Mr. Knox vvas Presbyterian vvith a witnesse; as great a Ring-leader in Scotland, as Luther in Saxonie, or Cal∣vin at Geneva, or Zvvinglius in Helvetia. Nor vvas Buchanan inferiour in point of parts or reputation. But Bucha∣nan and Knox have taught the people these Doctrins: That if Princes are Tyrants, their subjects are Knox to England and Scotland, fol. 78. freed from their Oaths of obedience; (and vvhether or no they are Tyrants, vvho but they must be the judges?) Buch. de jur Regni, p. 40. It vvere good if Revvards vvere appointed by the people for such as should kill Tyrants, as commonly there is for those vvho have killed Wolves or Bears, or have caught their vvhelps. Nay nearer yet to Mr. Barlee's purpose, they say, that Ministers may Id. ibid. p. 70. excommunicate Kings: and that He vvho by excommunication is cast into Hell, Ibid. is not vvorthy to injoy any life upon Earth. Nay Knox sets it home, Knox Appel. fol. 35. [The people are bound, as much as lyes in their povver, to revenge the injury that is done by the civill Magistrate to God.]
Would you know the force of the obligation? He teacheth that in these words. Id. ib. p. 26. It is blasphemy to say, (what yet was said by St. Paul, and the primitive Fathers of the Church) that we must obey Kings, be they good or bad. If it is objected, that God placeth Tyrants sometimes for the pu∣nishment of the people; the answer is, so doth he Buchanan. de Iu. R g. p. 57. private men sometimes to kill them. Obj. shew an example in the Scriptures that subjects may use their Governours so. Answ. It doth not Id. ibid. follow that 'tis unlawfull, because it cannot be shew'd in Scriptures. Yet that they urge for the unlaw∣fulnesse of many ceremonyes in the Church. If it is farther objected, that St. Paul commandeth us to pray for the civill Ma∣gistrate; it is presently Id. ib. p. 50. answer'd, we may punish thieves, and yet we ought to pray for them. Obj. St. Paul com∣mandeth us to be subject and obedient to them. Id. ib. p. 55. Answ. St. Paul writ this in the infancy of the Church. There were but few Christians then, and not many of them rich, or of ability, so as they were not ripe for such a purpose. Before I shew the great Harmony betwixt their Principles and their Practice, I will first observe, that what is thus taught by these persons, was embraced also by the party. (I mean the violent, and rigid, prevailing sort.) Not only Mr. Knox, but multi∣tudes of Ministers adhering to him (in the times of Queen Mary, and Q. Elizabeth) were bold to innovate in Religion by a very violent & forcible course. They took an Oath of Knox in his Hist. of the Church of Scotland p. 217. confederacy of their own private heads; prescribed Id. ib. p. 218. orders for Reformation, to be observed throughout the Realme; Ibid. p. 234. A. D. 1558. commanded the Religieux to leave their houses by a Day, upon pain of ejection by open force; protested even to the Ibid. p. 256. Parlament, (shortly after assembled by the summons of the Q. Regent) that unlesse they had their desires, they would go on in their course: and if violence happen'd, they should thank themselves. What they promis'd (or rather threaten'd) they soon perform'd. Being summoned to appear at Striveling, they humbly Ibid. 258. refused to obey. In stead of that, Hollinshed p. 366. they fell to the razing of Religious houses; sent Knox ib. p. 265. menaces to the Queen, that unlesse they might have their own wills, and in their own way too, they would not be subject to any mortall upon Earth. They Ib. p. 272. summon'd the Nobility, upon pain of excommunication, to joyn with them;
preaching to them this lesson, Ib. p. 269. that it was their duty to bridle the fury and rage of wicked men, whether Princes, or Emperours. Ib. p. 276. They sent the like threats unto the Bishops, and other Clergy, who were not just of their Cut; Ib. p. 283. entred by Oath into a league, that if one of their number should suffer justice, all together should revenge it; Ib. p. 306. kept the field 2 months; Ib. p. 308. plunder'd the Coyning-Irons (however al∣ledged by the Queen to be a speciall potion of the patrimony of the Crown) Ib. p. 308. indeavoured also to make it good; enter'd again into a Ib. p. 317. league to be disobedient. Ib. p. 330. The Queen sought peace, and having wonderfully suffer'd, intreated too. But they would have Ib. p. 333. none, gave her insolent language, ma∣ny times the Ib. p. 362. flat lye. At last they called the Queens party a Ib. p. 364. Faction, and threaten'd to punish them as Ibid. p. 364. Traitors when God should put the sword into their hands. They con∣sulted with the Ib. p. 372. Ministers, (with Knox and Wilcock more especially) for the deposing of the Queen: And having pro∣nounced it to be lawfull, they Ib. p. 378. actually did it in a most for∣mall way. All which I have inserted so much the rather, both because Mr. Knox is his own Historian (who cannot be thought to have done himself, and his party, wrong,) and because his Historie is not every where at hand; much lesse the works of Arch-bishop Bancroft, who is able to furnish the best account of those men, from the very best Records that can be wished. As Geneva vvas the place vvhere Mr. Knox had been Whence Mr. Knox received his Doctrin. Bancr. Dan∣gr. Po. ch. 3. p. 10. trained up, and throughly instructed for such a work; so he professed in a letter, (vvritten by him from Diepe A. D. 1557.) that his opinion and motion of that matter vvas not barely grounded on his ovvn conceipt, but upon the grave counsels and judgements of the most godly, and the most learned, vvho lived in Europe. Novv that the Bishop of Geneva vvas vvithall the free Bodinus de Repub. p. 353. Etiam Boni∣vardus in De∣scrip. Gen. Prince, having the right of the sword, and the other parts of civill Iurisdiction, Mr. Calvin himself did very liberally acknowledge, vvhen he abode at Id. Ho. Disc. c. 8. p. 113. Stras∣burgh, vvhere his acquaintance vvith Melanchthon had in∣fus'd into him some moderation. Witnesse his plentifull Calv. Epist. ad Card. Sadol. p. 172. A. D. 1539. E∣pistle to Cardinal Sadolet, and his agreement in the Confe∣rences at Worms and Ratisbone, that in the Reforming of the Church, the ordination of Priests and Deacons should be left
unto the Bishops. Yet what was done to that Prince, and how the Syndicks after him (although the then chief Magistrates) were provoked by Mr. Calvin to banish him out of the City, and how again (after that) he made a very strange use of his Restauration, in so much that they complained of a new kind of Tyranni esse voluistis in liberam Eccle∣siam, voluistis novm Ponti∣ficatum revo∣care. Calv. ad Farell. Ep. 6. p. 11. Popedome in a Protestant Commonwealth, the intelligent Reader may easily call to his Remem∣brance. I will not speak of those pranks which they played here in England during the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, (that would make a whole volume.) But having mention'd the maximes of Mr. Knox, I will briefly give an instance how well he walked by their directions. For when he had given us a Nar∣rative of that studied murder, which was committed by his Brethren upon the Arch-bishop of St. Andrews, he Knox Hist. of the Ch. of Scott. p. 143, 144, 145. com∣mended it in his margin, not only as an innocent, but (to use his own word) a Godly Fact. In a word; 1. That the Scotish Presbyterian Discipline doth utterly overthrow the rights of Magistrates, to convocate synods, to confirm their Acts, to order Ecclesiasticall affairs, and to reform the Church in their Dominions; 2. That it robs the Magistrate of the last appeal of his subjects; 3. That it exempts the Ministers from due punishment; 4. That it sub∣jects the supreme Magistrate to their extremest censures, and the saddest effects of them; 5. That it robs the Magistrate of his dispensative power; 6. That it takes from the Magistrate his civill power about Religion; 7. That it challengeth this exorbitant power to it self by no lesse then the pretense of Divine Right; 8. That it makes a monster of any Common∣wealth wherein it is suffer'd to prevail; 9. That it is most pre∣judiciall to Parlaments, and indeed destructive to them; 10. That it is cruell and oppressive to particular persons, whose tender consciences will not suffer them to comply; 11. That it is hurtfull to all orders and ranks of men; the Reader may easily collect out of their own Relations of it in their Books of Discipline. Or if the Reader shall think those Books too big, and not very easily to be met with, he may help himself a nearer way, by consulting that little ex∣tract (cheaply bought and soon read) intitled, A fair warning to take heed of the Scotish Discipline, &c.
Novv, 1. vvhether the English Presbyterians did not jointly, and solemnly, swear and Covenant, Testim. to the Truth of I. Chr. sub∣scribed by the Minist. within the Province of London, p. 26. lin. 16, 17. with hands lifted upto the most high God, that with their utmost endea∣vours, they would Solemn League & Co∣venant, Aric. 1, & 2, &c. conform this Church to the Kirk of Scotland, in point of Doctrin, worship, Discipline, and Go∣vernment; 2. whether they did not Testim. to the Tr. of I. Chr. p. 28. in. 17, 18, &c. publickly declare (A. D. 1647.) that they did then still stand as firmly en∣gaged to the reall performance of that Oath and Covenant with their utmost endeavours, as at the first taking of it, and that it was not in the power of any person or persons on earth to dispense with it, or absolve from it; 3. whether they did not Ibid. p. 26. lin. 11, 12, &c. also p. 27. lin. 24. then, and there, affirm the Discipline of the Kirk to have been found experimentally successfull in preserving the Church of Scotland from errors, schismes, and Heresies, from their first Reformation hitherto; 4. whether they did not Ibid. p. 30. lin. peult. & ult. which is to be compared with confesse to all the world, that in stead of true piety and power of godlinesse, they had opened the very flood∣gates to all impiety and prophanenesse; and that from af∣ter the time of their having Page 29. lin. 14, 15. which again compare with removed the prelatical yoak from their shoulders by their Covenanted endeavours, there was a Page 30. lin. 12, 13. &c. ruefull, deplorable and deformed face of the affairs of Religion;—Ibid. lin. 26, 27, 28. & seq. swarming with noysome errors, here∣syes, and blasphemyes, in stead of Faith and Truth; torn in pieces with destructive schismes, separations, divisions, and subdivisions, in stead of unity and uniformity; Page 31. lin. 3, 4, &c. that in stead of a Reformation, they might say with sighs what their enemyes said in scorn, that they had a Deformation in Religion; and in stead of extirpation of heresy, schisme, profanenesse, &c. they had an impudent and generall inundation of all those evils; 5. whether they did not Page 34. lin. 16, 17. &c. declare, that they had sworn to God, to disavow that tole∣ration (which was then made, and since hath been Ian. 22. A. D. 1654. p. 17, 18. re-made, for giving Liberty of Conscience to such as could not comply with Them;) 6. whether they did not, according to the Stat. 13. Eliz. 12. Law of this Land, before they were admitted to any Bene∣fice, attest their hearty Note that Mr. B. now saith (c. 3. p. 49.) Those Ritualls of our Mother Church were justly thrown over-board, when a storm was up; notwithstanding his Oath of approbation. consent (in the open face of the con∣gregation in time of Divine service) to that very Doctrin,
Discipline, worship, and Government, which they swore, in their Covenant, they would reform, and alter, as unlawfull, and (in diverse points) abolish also; 7. whether the House of Commons (in that Parlament, by whose commission the Assembly of Divines did sit) did not Exact. col∣lect. p. 19. declare in their Re∣monstrance, (Dec. 15. A. D. 1641.) that they did not purpose or desire to abolish the Church-government; nay 8. whether both the Houses of that long Parlament did not declare the next year after, Declar. 9. A. D. 1642. Exact. Collect. p. 135. that they intended to take away nothing from either the Liturgy or Government of the Church but what should be evill, and justly offensive, &c. 9. whether the Ministers did not perswade the Houses to the utter abo∣lishment & razing out (as much as in men lay) of those very things, which at first they thus intended meerly to regulate & Reform; 10. whether there is not a contrariety in the Theoremata III. Imp. Eden. 1647. decrto Synodi Theor. 4. & 62. & 88, 82, 98, 96, 97. also Assem. Edinb. 1570. and 2 Book▪ Discip. c. 1, 7, 12. Pres∣byterian principle (both Scotish, and English, and Allobro∣gicall) to the remarkable Declaration of the foresaid Parla∣ment, wherein they Exact. Col∣lect. in Rem. Decem. 1641. p. 19. disclaimed all intentions of ab∣solving men from that obedience which they owed to God under his Majesty, whom they professed they knew to be intrusted with the Ecclesiasticall Law, as well as with the Temporall; whether all the premisses above mention'd have not been thus and thus, (as in the queres hath been ex∣pressed) I leave to be determin'd by all unpassionate and sober men. I will conclude this section with the Confer. at Hampt. Court second day, p. 47, 48. observation of King Iames: That in the margin of a Bible of the Geneva Translation, (presented to him by an English Lady) he met with some Notes very partial, untrue, seditious, and savour∣ing too much of dangerous and traitorous conceipts. As for example, Exod. 1. v. 19. the marginal Note alloweth dis∣obedience unto Kings; and 2 Chron. 15. 16. the Note taxeth Asa for deposing his mother only, and not killing her. And how the Book against the supreme civill Magistrate, was supposed by Dr. Reynolds to have been writby Ficlerus an ar∣rant Papist, which yet was proved to have been writby a great Disciplinarian (whether Iesuite, or Puritan, it was not specified) and confessed by Dr. Reynolds to have been applyed against the Queens Majesty that last was for the Pope, the Reader may see in the two Ibid. p. 49, 50. next pages. Of what con∣cernment
this is to Mr. Barlee in particular, may be partly judged by the subject of this section, and partly by that which now ensues. §. 6. Mr. B. confidently affirmeth (c. 2. p. 68. lin. penult. Of Paraeus his Book burnt by the whole Vni∣versity of Oxford. antepenult. ult.) that Paraeus his Book upon the 13th to the Romans doth not at all treat of meer Ecclesiastical censures, such as suspension, excommunication, &c. but only of the lawfulnesse in some cases of coordinate states putting down of elect and limited Princes, such as most of the German Princes are.] 1. If Mr. B. was ignorant of what was said by Paraeus, in that his Comment, he cannot easily be excused for being so bold, whilst he is blind, as to say, that what he saith All those can tell who have seen Paraeus, &c. 2. If he was ashamed to own his knowledge of the Truth in that af∣fair, he should not have outwardly excused what he inward∣ly condemn'd; nor have denyed explicitly, what he implicit∣ly granteth by so grosse a falsification. For first, it is as visi∣ble as the Sun at noon, that it was not only the Comment upon the 13th chapter, (which alone is mention'd by Mr. B.) but the whole book of Commentaryes upon the Epistle to the Romans, which was condemn'd and executed (as women murdering their husbands are wont to be) by the wise Decree of the most learned, Protestant, orthodox Vniversity, assembled together in Convocation A. D. 1622. And secondly, it was burnt, for containing such Propositio∣nes erroneae, periculosae, insidiosae, im∣piae, seditiosae, sanae politiae subversivae; non solum Canoni divino, Decre∣tis Concilio∣rum, scriptis Patrum, pri∣mitivae Eccle∣siae Fidei & professioni, sed Monarchico Culmini sub∣dole ruinam minitantes. Decret. Vniv. Oxon. quinto Iunii 1622. propositions, as were unanimously judged and pronounced by that vast body of learned men, 1. false, 2. impious, 3. seditious, 4. subversive of found poli∣ty, 5. insidious, and 6. craftily threatning utter ruin, 1. to all Monarchie, 2. to the Faith and Profession of the primi∣tive Church, 3. to the writings of the ancient and holy Fa∣thers, 4. to the decrees of Christian Councells, 5. to the Ca∣non of Holy Scripture. Nay thirdly, the most wise King Iames (as Grotius calls him) who was acknowledged by Mr. Barlee at once an Orthodox and learned Prince, was so far provoked by the above-said book of Paraeus, that he com∣manded it should be burnt by the hand of the common Hang∣man. Fourthly, to shew the wonderfull falsehood and unhap∣pinesse of Mr. B's suggestions, be it known that Paraeus did
deliver these Doctrins in the book above mentioned. 1. That 1. Episcopi & Pastores Magi∣stratus suos impos aut in∣justos, si con∣tumaces sint, possunt & debent, de consensu Ec∣clesiae, Satanae tradere, donec resipiscant. 2 Subditi in Magistratu in∣feriori consti∣tuti adversus superiorem Magistratum se, &c. etiam Armis defen∣dere jure possunt. 3. Subditis mere privatis—arma ca∣pescere licet, ab ordinaria potestate de∣fendi non pos∣sint. (this is regularly in∣ferred by the rule of con∣traryes.) 4. Subditis mere privatis—se & suos contra tyran∣num, sicut con∣tra privatum grassatorem, defendere lice. Has & imiles propositiones condemnat Vniversitas Oxoniensis, &c. the Bishops and Pastors, by the consent of the Church, may, and ought to deliver up to Satan their wicked and unjust Magistrates, if they are stubborn, untill they repent. 2. That the inferiour Magistrates being subjects have a right to de∣fend themselves, even by Armes, against the superiour Ma∣gistrate. 3. That private subjects (who are not so much as inferiour Magistrates) may take up Armes, if they cannot be defended by an ordinary power. 4. That subjects meerly private may defend themselves and their Relations against a Tyrant, as well as against a private Assassin, if they can∣not implore the ordinary power, nor by any other means escape the danger which they are in. This may serve for a Tast of that renowned Presbyterian. Now it is to be observed, that when the question is to be put, whether the chief Magi∣strate is a Tyrant, ungodly, unjust, or whatsoever else it is which makes him lyable to Satan, and to the sword, the chief Magistrate himself must not be suffer'd to be the judge, (for he will never condemn himself;) but they, forsooth, will be the judges, who have a mind to make him away, both by ex∣communication, and force of Armes. Fifthly, it is apparent, from the premisses, that Paraeus did treat of Ecclesiastick censures (which Mr. B. denyed) and not of coordinate States, much lesse of them only, (which Mr. B. affirmed:) and unlesse M. B. did believe, that subditi was the Latin word for Princes or States, and that inferior did signify coordinate, and that by tradere Satanae could not be meant an Ecclesiasticall censure, what excuse can he invent to lessen the guilt of his excuses? And if he anchors upon this, he doth declare him∣self a stranger to the Latin tongue. Sixthly, Mr. B. disco∣yers his affection to Paraeus his Book, by c. 2. p. 69. lin. 1, 2, 3, &c. censuring the censure of that Famous University, and by censuring me for approving of such a just censure. As if the Book were more pardonable for endeavouring the ruin of Church and State, then King Iames and All Oxford for sending that Book into the fire. Seventhly, that the burning of that book was ill re∣sented
by the Note here the saying of most judicious Arch-bishop Bancrost, that if Coppinger, Hacket and Arhing on, had murdered 2 or 3 of the Lords in Star∣chaber the last day in Tri∣nity Term, the Consistorian Doctrin would easily have defended it; especially if the further in∣tents of the Discipline had thereby succeeded. Dang. Posi. ch. 15. p. 176. party (as M. B. happily confesseth) doth help us vvell to demonstrate, that though Paraeus was but one of the Presbyterians, yet his partners and Abettors in the pernicious doctrins by him espoused, were too many by too many. Nor is that any wonder, for (eightly) Paraeus was an Oracle to that sort of men, much consulted, and observed; an aged Pro∣fessor of Divinity at Heidelberg, invited to sit in the Synod at Dort, whether (because he could not go by reason of his Antiquity) he sent his large Descants upon the 5 known Articles, which had not only the honour to be read in the Synod, but to be printed even at Act. Synod. Dord. sess. 99. p. 239. large in the History of the Thing. Ninthly, the University of Oxford did solemnly decree, Celebris ille coetus decre∣vit, quod sin∣guli ad gradus in qucunque facultate pro∣movendi, ante admissionem, primo subscribant, & deinde eodem tempore suscipiant juramentum crpo∣rale, se ex animo praedictas propositiones condemnaturos, & detestaturos in perpetuum. that all who were candidates of degrees in any faculty, should, before their admission, subscribe to those Censures of Paraeus his Book, and at the very same time should take a corporall Oath, that they would ever damn and detest, from their very souls, those Paraean propositions before rehearsed. Tenthly, Grotius the Great was of this judgement, that if Si istae Pareanae exceptiones, id est, regulae Paulinae eversiones, admittantur, dico, nullum Imperium diutius in uto fore, quam donec talia sentienbus vies defuerint. Grot. Vot. pro Pa. p. 53. Paraeus his eversions of St. Pauls Di∣vinity are once admitted for expositions, no Government can be safe one minute longer, then the Abettors of such Doctrin shall want Ability to Rebell. Eleventhly, Mr. B. pleads for Paraeus, that he speaks against elected and limited Princes; as if he tacitly granted, that he ought not to have spoken against any other. In which case I will advise him, to compare the Discipline of the Kirk, and the National Co∣venant, with the Oath of Supremacy, which he professeth also to have sworn, and all three with the statutes 24. H. 8. 12. 1 Eliz. 1. and 3. and then let him tell me who is meant by Speciatim addo, Calvinistas in hac re deteriores esse quam Lutheranos. Nam nullam fidem servant. Iura, perjura, &c. Becan. 5. Manual. Controv. 14. n. 4. Becanus, when he saith that the Hereticks do neither keep Faith with God, nor man. The words were not fit for a Ie∣suites mouth, because the Pope, as well as the Presbyterian, doth pretend a Gospell-right to The words of Padre Paul are very agreeable, to shew the absurdityes of both. excommunicate his supe∣riours.
But I appeal to all the world, whether we may not say the same of David Paraeus, which Ronsardus said of Mr. Beza, quod Armatum Evangelium praedicavit, That the Gospell which he preached was clad in Armour. §. 7 To all his Nothings which follow (p. 69, 70. &c.) be∣cause Of Lambeth Artic. King Iames and Bp. Mountag. uni∣versal Grace and Redem∣ption. it is not lawfull to say more then a little, I will say the least that I am able, till I meet with something of some im∣portance. First, it is sufficient, that the Articles of Lambeth were never admitted into the Church of England, as any part of her publick Creed, however asserted by private men in their Parlours, and perhaps by some in their Pulpits too. Their worthyest Patron made some Amends, by contriving the 3 Articles of which Mr. B. hath been so sick. They were Confer. Hamp. Court second day, p. 24, 29, 30, 41, 42, 43. of∣fer'd by Dr. Reynolds at Hampton-Court, but immediately cast out, and not so much as vouchsafed a consideration. But the King in those matters was of the mind of Dr. Overall, and the Bishop of London. Secondly, that King James incouraged the Doctrin which was taught and printed by Bishop Moun∣tague, Mr. B. doth not deny; but in stead of that, he gives the wise King some of his Correptorie Correction, because the Presbyterian Faction could not then play Rex at Court. Thirdly, when I used those words, The chief Head of Armi∣nianisme (as Mr. B. will call it do what I can) is universall Grace and Redemption, I did clearly put off the Nick-name of Arminianisme, which Mr. B. and his Mrs are wont to fasten upon the Doctrin of Holy writ. But of that which they expresse by such a silly Catachresis, I did professe to esteem universall Grace and Redemption the chiefest Head: And with that I am willing to stand See Div. Philan. Def. ch. 3. p. 19. or fall. Nay M. B. doth confesse, he can easily justify my saying, because that all the 5 points have a necessary dependance on one another. Fair fall for once a good confession, that when he is beaten out of one error, he may no longer admire the rest. He confesseth that Mr. Perkins, and the most eminent of the party, are for the universality of Grace and Redemption sensu aliquo. Very good: let it be sensu sano, and we are friends. Fourthly, in his p. 72. lin. 3. and 5. He addes [only] to universall, which no man (I think) did ever do before Him: and then he askes, Mr. B's Que∣stion never enough to be admir'd. with what forehead I can write against him, for charging me with the denyall of all speciall and peculiar Grace? I
will patiently tell him (without admiring his question, though sure the most senselesse that ever was) even because his charge was without all ground, nay without all colour of Truth or reason, nay against his own knowledge, nay in a flat contra∣diction to both his eyes. For he read what I writ of special Grace, Divin. Philan. Def. c. 3. p. 84, 85. &c. which I as∣serted as plainly as ever man did. But I said that all Grace was not only special, there was general Grace also. And did I de∣ny either, by affirming both? whose forehead now must be desir'd? Nay in the section going before (p. 43.) I did instance in the particulars of special Grace, till I came to that of per∣severance unto the end, which there I called a special Grace. Which being so, (as his eyes shall witnesse for me it is) with what discretion, or conscience, could he ask such a Question? But Mr. B. cannot conceive how Redemption can be univer∣sal, when Grace is special. Poor man! what he cannot con∣ceive he thinks not conceivable. I told him that Christ is a conditional Saviour, who will not give a second Talent to him that squanders a way the first, or wraps it up in a napkin. The learned Bishop Vsher of the true in∣tent and extent of Christs Death, p. 6. Primate hath lately told him, by Dr. Bernards publication, that by vertue of Christs Death, God is made placable unto our Nature, but not actually appeased with any, untill he hath received his Son. All men may be said truly to have an interest in Christ, as in a Common, though all do not injoy the benefit thereof. Doth M. Barlee ask why? the Bishop Answers, Because they have no will to take it. they Ibid. p. 8. refuse to accept the gracious offer that is made unto them. Now that every man in the world is made saveable by Christ, untill he wilfully forfeiteth his in∣terest, the Bishop proves invincibly from these two grounds which cannot fail: 1. Ibid. p. 7. ☜ That it is every mans duty to ac∣cept of Christ thankfully, and to apply him with comfort unto his own soul; 2. Ib. p. 24, 25. especially p. 27. that no man is bound by the com∣mand of God to believe an untruth. From vvhence he in∣ferreth his opinion (in opposition to two extremes, vvhich I have ever opposed as vvell as He) that Ibid. p. 7. Christ hath prepared for thee [O man whosoever thou art] and the Gospell hath offered unto thee, a sufficient Remedy for the taking avvay of all thy sins. This I have chosen to expresse in the Bishops vvords, in exact conformity to vvhich I had delivered my opi∣nion
upon the very Correct Co∣pie of Notes, p. 19. lin. 1. same grounds, before I had the possibi∣lity of reading that work, which came so lately into the light by the happy care of Dr. Bernard. §. 8. As if Mr. B. were of opinion, that Apostasy signifyes conversion, or reformation of judgement, he blunders on (c. 2. M. B's remar∣kable ealumny, and excellent impertinence. p. 71. lin. 13, 14. p. 72. &c.) that I framed a charge of Apo∣stacy (so he writes it, with a c) upon learned Testard, Amy∣rald, Daille, the Bishop of Armagh, Bishop Davenant, and Mr. Baxter.] First, it is a foul calumny, to say I charged Apostasy upon any man within the Church, much more to say it of those persons, of whom I spake not a syllable of disrespect. Nor do I think the word Apostasy is any where in my writings, unlesse where I speak of the wicked Angels. Secondly, the Reader will find in that Div. Philan. Def. c. 1. p. 15. page, that I speak of a conversion or change of judgement in Philip Melanchthon and my self, whom yet I meant not to call Apostates. Nay, thirdly, I did not expresse a change of judgement in any one of the six who are expresly named by Mr. B. Nay, fourthly, though I might seem to imply such an honorable change in 2 of the 6; yet in the 4 remaining I did not so much as imply it neither. Fifthly, or if I had said any such thing, I had said no worse of them, then of Melanchthon, King Iames, Bishop Andrews, Dr. Potter, Dr. Godwin, (the Author of the Jewish Antiquityes) Tilenus, Mr. Hoard, and diverse others, who are known to have improved their younger judgements into that which Mr. B. doth call Arminian. And sixthly, by the same way of erring which Mr. B. here useth, we may say that St. Austin was defamed by himself for an Apostate, by having writ his Retractations. Seventhly, my designe in that place was to shew that I ought not to be called an Arminian, for professing the Doctrin of universall Grace and Redemption, because the anti-Arminians (so many of them as were the most learned) did hold that Doctrin as well as I. Nay I shew'd it to be the Doctrin of St. Hilarie and Prosper (I might have added, of all the Fathers) many hundreds of years be∣fore Arminius was born. Of which two Fathers Mr. B. durst not take any notice. Eighthly, in stead of speaking to the pur∣pose, by proving that point to be Arminian, or by proving that those persons were not assertors of that point, he runs away with this impertinence, that those six men were no
Arminians, with which he fills up severall pages in confuta∣tion of his own Fancy. For I had told him in one word, (what he therefore needed not to have told me back in many pages) that those six persons were So I call them in that page which Mr. B. himself citeth. viz. Philan. c. 1. p. 15. anti-Arminians: which doth not signify for Arminius, though  signifyes pro, or for, (which perhaps was the reason of M. B's mistake) but against Arminius, vvhich is the force of  in composition, as Mr. B. will find when he is got as far as his Greek Grammar. I am not sure that his mistake lay in this; but if it did not, it needs must argue his greater guilt. For he would instill into the Reader, that I called them Arminians, whom he knows very well I called the contrary; that so he might compare me, with some pretense, to malicious persons guilty of the plague. But now let us come to his particulars. §. 9. 1. His account of Testard (p. 71.) is only this, that he hath nothing of him in his study, but that the learneder he Of Testard, & Camero for universall Re∣demption. was, he was the likelyer not to differ from the Gallican Church. of which he appeals to a Nationall Synod held by the Protestants at Charenton 1623.] But first he cites not the words, either in French or Latin. And secondly, his words are the lesse likely to be true, because in that very Synod, learn∣ed Camero was approved, both by Durant the Praesident, and all the rest of that Body, after his conference with Tilenus, wherein he declared his opinion of universal Redemption, and that in such a full sense, as gave occasion to Spanhem. exercit. p. 59. Spanhemins to call it Arminian, and Pelagian, and finally rejected by the Synod at Dort. Thirdly, if Testard did differ from other Protestants of France, doth it follow from thence that he did not differ? yet this was that which I implyed. And others did differ as well as He, and were accused before Synods of those very things which Mr. B. doth forge in me. Fourthly, it was demonstrated by Camero, and since by Daille, that the In precibus publicis. In Confess. Fidei Art. 1, 2. In majore Cache∣i, Dom. 1, 4, 47, 49. In Catech. minori, §. 4. In Praesat. ad S. S. de qui∣bus fuse Dal∣laeus in Apo∣logia pro 2 Synodis, à p. 949. ad usque 968. publick monuments of their Church do teach that Christ is the Saviour of every man in the world without exception, not only sufficienter, but also intentionaliter: That Christ hath purchased, for every man, a possibility of being saved; and that the reason why so many are damn'd is, because they do Bona pars hominum non servabitur, quia Salutem sum repudiat. Id. ibid. part. 4. p. 960. re∣pudiate
their own salvation. All which is proved against Spanhemius by such a multitude of Arguments, as will not be answer'd in any great hast. Now if Mr. B. will say, that that Church was divided against it self, or that her Pastors taught they knew not what, or that Spanhemius, a Dutch-man, was better acquainted with the French Church, then the learnedst Ministers in France, or that these were Arminians whom it concerns him to clear from all suspicion of Arminianism, in what a Labyrinth of Absurdityes is he involv'd? §. 10. What he talkes of Amyrald (p. 72.) is just as much at a venture: who, however no Arminian, (no more then I Of Amyrald, and Daille, for universal Re∣demption. So also was lo∣dell in his ap∣probation of Daillo's Book. ever was) was yet so opposite to the Puritans in the points of Grace and Redemption, that Spanhemius writ against him no lesse then three volumes, and gave him Correptorie Cor∣rection for being Arminian, Massilian, Pelagian, and what not? Now Mr. B. must confesse, that Spanhemius had either reasons for what he said, or else was guilty of more then heathenish scurrility. Which of the two will Mr. B. now side with? if with Spanhemius, he pleads against Amyrald, for whom he pleads; and if with Amyrald, he is bound to do penance for both his Books. What I said of Gods Philan. c. 1. p. 22. sin∣cerity in desiring the welfare of all mankind, (and by con∣sequence the things in which his welfare doth consist) is said by Amyrald and Daille throughout their Books. Nay even that very thing which Mr. B. chargeth upon me and the Ar∣minians, is said by Camero, Amyrald, In Apolog. pro duabus Synodis, part. 1. & 2. Daille, my The judge∣ment of the late Primate touching the intent and ex∣tent of Chr. Death, p. 35, 36, 37, 39. Compare also p. 31. with p. 38. and both with p. 6. and 21. Lord his Grace of Armagh, and (if my memory fail me not) by Mr. Baxter also, viz. that Christ did procure upon the Crosse a salvable condition for all mankind, or possibi∣lity of being saved, rather then any actuall salvation. In which few words, Mr. B. calleth them all Arminians, (be∣fore he is aware) for whom he pretends the greatest measure of veneration. And thus it will be with such confident Smat∣terers, who have not a tolerable knowledge concerning the subjects of their discourse. Of Monsieur Daille he saith nothing, but that little that I told him, which was, that he writ in defence of Amyrald. And I will tell him this also, that he hath done the Remonstrants a very high piece of service. Mon∣sieur Moulin in this said very well of learned Daille, that he had rather be numbred vvith the Arminians, then opine in this matter vvith the Contra-Remonstrants.
§. 11. Mr. B's next pages (73, 74.) are filled up vvith a Digression into a Book of Mr. Baxter; out of vvhich he Of Mr. Baxter's warning to the Nation against Cassandrian Papists under the names of Episcopal Divines. transcribes as much as serves for his Rancor, though not his purpose, and yet (in one sense) his purpose too. First, he ima∣gines to himself, that it vvould be for his ease, if (as Mr. Whit∣field hath been his second, so) Mr. Baxter might be his third. And because he finds no ground of quarrell, he makes use of his invention for the supplying of that defect. Mr. Baxter is invited, by a preface of good vvords, to clear himself from the suspicion of Arminianism in these points, vvhich I am pretended to charge him with. But because he knows that this is false, and hath not any thing to alledge against the use vvhich I made, of his words in one place, and of his Name in another, he flyes for sanctuary to his old trade of imperti∣nence, and uncharitable suggestions, and proclaimes me to be one of the Cassandrian Papists, vvho have a strong design laid for introduction of Popery, a design so strong, that it is likely to prevail, if God do not Mr. Baxter's words are, if God do not wonderfully blast it. blast it. Dr. Vane, These expres∣sions are Mr. Baxter's in his Christian Con∣cord, p. 45, 46. but cited, and applyed by Mr. Barlee against me. Dr. Bayly and Dr. Goff, are already gone beyond the Seas, but I and others have more vvit then these, and think vve may do our party more service by staying in England, under the names of Episcopal Divines, a great deal more then vve can do by declaring our selves Papists. And against such as I am (saith Mr. Barlee) Mr. Baxter published his vvarning to the Inhabitants of the Nation. Observe, good Reader, the Christian temper of the man. What Mr. Baxter spake in gene∣rall against Episcopal Divines, Mr. Barlee takes care that no Episcopal Divine may be excluded from in the Application: for he vvill have it to extend even to such as I am, vvho am knovvn (by all of my acquaintance) to be as far from being a Papist, as Mr. Barlee is from being a Pope, and I suppose my desires are very much farther. If he does but say this, and not believe his ovvn story, vvhy vvould he sin against God, by sinning against his ovvn conscience? but if he really believes that I am one of those Papists against vvhom Mr. Baxter doth warn the Nation, to vvhat extremityes vvould he proceed for the prevention of such a design, had he the povver of the sword in such an arbitrary and unlimited manner, as novv he hath of his other sharp weapon? Yet this is the man vvho vvould not have me sequestred, notvvithstanding my close
endeavours for the bringing in of Cassandrian Popery. —credat Iudaeus Apella. To the words of Mr. Baxter, as produced and used by Mr. Barlee, I think it may be usefull to say a few things. Of Grotius his temper and design. 1. That if Grotius had a design for the making us all Cassan∣drian Papists, I am very sorry I have not hitherto understood him. By what I have read of his learned and pious labours, I am induced to believe, that his piety and his learning were very equally match't. I do admire the charity and publick∣mindednesse of the man, who espous'd the miseries of all man∣kind, and was not sollicitous how much he suffer'd, for his indeavours to promote the Peace of Christendome, so that his enemyes, in time, might enjoy the fruits of his affliction. If Mr. Baxter might say of his own method and design, that, were the principles which he hath discerned betwixt the Lu∣theran and the Calvinist received according to their evi∣dence, they would quiet the now-contending Christian world; how much more may I say the same thing of Grotius (as to the case in hand) with whom Mr. Baxter will confesse himself not worthy to be named? As for Grotius, how sensible he was of the severall corruptions in the Church of Rome, and how he laid himself out upon a design of Reformation, as well as peace, it is not uneasy to collect from the 10 In particular the seventh and the eighth. first pages of his Votum pro pace. How illegally he was dealt with, for having been faithfull to his trust, in his native Country, he hath Grot. Vot. pro pace p. 55. to p. 63. sufficiently made appear. With how much meeknesse and aequanimity he did support his injuryes, hath been ob∣served with admiration both from his writings and his con∣verse. And had he accomplished his wishes (which were not empty wishes neither) there had not been in all the world, ei∣ther a Papist, or a Puritan; either superstition, or profane∣nesse. Theologie then had been a practicall science. They who now are but Talkers, had then been Followers of Christ. As Schismatick, and Heretick, so Tyrant, and Rebell, had been but Names. To sum up all in a word: Melanchthons and Grotiuses had fill'd the Church; and men had found out a way of Loving God, without believing it needfull to hate their neighbour. I know that Grotius, as a Peace-maker be∣twixt the Papists and the Protestants, hath labour'd to shew his moderation, as well to them, as to these; and to excuse
many things, at least à Tanto, to which he must not be thought to have afforded his Approbation. Melanchthon did the very same, and was hated for his pains, as himself complained to Camerarius and Luther. Nay his moderation provoked some, to give him out a slye friend to Popery. But Grotius went farther in his charitable design. And he who attempted a Reconcilement of two great enemyes, vvas not in prudence to declare a personall enmity to either, but to mitigate the ex∣ceptions and animosityes of both; and to insist on those things, whether faulty, or indifferent, which he desir'd might meet with (in either party) an interchangeable pardon, and an interchangeable complyance. 2. How M. Baxter was betrayed to speak so severely of so The Peace of Christendom attempted by others, as well as by Grotius, and before him. excellent a person, (unlesse it were by taking things upon trust, from some unfavourable Censors of his intention) I am not able to divine, nor willing to venture on large con∣jectures. But I my self was prepared for the reading of Gro∣tius, and for the judging of his design, by having read Thua∣nus before I read Him. I had observed out of Thuanus, (who, however a Papist, was yet a vehement Desirer of Refor∣mation) that many endeavours had been used to make a gene∣rall Reformation, and that some little Dawnings gave hopes to Christendom of such a fair Day. In a famous meeting at Ad Fontem Blaudi cele∣bratus solennis conventus est, in quo Gaspar Colinius pro libertate Re∣ligionis suppli∣cem libellum obtulit, &c. Thuan. lib. 25. p. 760. Fountain Blau (before the world was so rich as to injoy that Treasure, which since was offer'd it in a Grotius) there was a Bill of Petition put up to Francis the second then King of France, in conjunction with two Orations made by the Bishop of Valentia, and the Arch-bishop of Vienna, exhorting all the Bishops to endeavours of Reformation, and of a gene∣rall Councell in order to it. Quod i Pontifex reeu∣set, ut Rex fine eo pro∣nuntiet, utque foedae nundinationes ex Ecclesia tollantur. Id. ibid. usque ad extrem. l. 25. To which if the Pope should refuse his consent, the King should do it of himself. De controversis Augustanae Confessionis Articulis componendis seri ani∣mum adjecit. Id. l. 36. p. 286. There I met with the Foundation, laid by Ferdinand the first; upon which his son, Maximilian the second, did very heartily en∣deavour to build a generall Reformation. Papam urget, ut Calicis gratia Laicis, & conjugii libertas Sacerdotibus fieret, &c. ibid. p. 304. He, together with his Brother, the Arch-Duke Charles, and Albert his son in law, did urge the Pope to  retrenching of severall cor∣ruptions
within the Church, wherein he had also the assistances of two great Cardinals, and seven Arch-bishops. When the Pope was reluctant, he pressed on with Caesar una cum literis suis Argumenta Papae exhi∣buit, cum mandato ut Cardinalibus communica∣renur. ibid. p. 305, 306. Argumentations, which he also commanded should be made known unto the Cardinals. Nay the truly-pious Emperour was farther Maximil. iterum Pontifi∣cm urgebat ut promissa sua impleret. Nec abnubat tune Pontifex: sed postea Cardi∣nalium inst i∣gatu pesitio∣nem Caesaris elusit. Id. l. 37. p. 328. in∣stant with the Pope, for the making good what he had pro∣mis'd; which the Pope at that instance did again re-promise, however the Colledge of Cardinals prevailed with him to break his word. The learned and vvise Chancellor vvas hugely pleased, in his History, vvith this so charitable design, expressing his kindnesse to the Protestants on all occasions, and condemning those incroachments vvhich had polluted that very Church, of vvhich he lived and dyed a member. Grotius, among the Protestants, vvas of the same kind of temper vvith Thuanus and Cassander among the Papists. But neither did their mo∣deration give them the name of Protestants, nor is there any the least reason, that his should procure him the name of Pa∣pist. But they vvere men of moderation in different churches, vvho vvere zealous of advancing the common interest of Re∣ligion, as 'tis exhibited in the Gospell, and in the purest Ages of the Church. Nor vvas their zeal for Reformation any vvhit the lesse religious, because they desir'd it might be regular, and bloodlesse, after the tenor of the Gospell, and according to the temper of Jesus Christ, vvithout the miseries of Rebellion a∣gainst the Deputyes of God, vvhich is worse then the Disease, of vvhich it is intended a means of cure. 3. It had been vvell, if Mr. Baxter had nam'd those Pa∣pists, Accusations must not be too generall. vvho stay in England under the notion of Episcopal Divines; and having nam'd them, it had been vvell, if he had publickly declared he meant no more; for fear his suggestion might reach so far, as to asperse the vvhole Body of the Episco∣pall clergy, in vvhom the Protestant interest doth chiefly stand. If I except Bishop Goodman, I have not heard of any Papist vvho hath vvorn the Protestant for a disguise: which should no more be imputed to the rest of that order, then it vvas to St. Peter, or St. Iohn, that one of their order vvas a Ioh. . 7. Devill. one in 12. is as much as two in 24. The other tvvo, vvhom he mentions, I knovv nothing of, and am obliged by my charity to think 1 Cor. 13. 5. none evill. Nay, I have heard of Bishop Wren, that he is equally a learned and pious Prelate, as far
from being a Papist, as Mr. Barlee from being an Episcopal Divine. And untill I have reason for the contrary, I will be∣lieve him to be as excellent, as excellent persons do represent him. What is added of Dr. Vane, and two Dr. Goff, and Dr. Baily. besides, who are indeed turn'd Papists, may be objected to that Rigor of the Presbyterians, and the havock which they made whilst yet it lay in their power, whereby they did not discover, but make men Papists. Some may possibly wonder they frighted so ma∣ny out of our Church, but I am still wondring the frighted wretches were no more. For when they saw their Mother 2 Cor. 4. 9. persecuted, they esteemed her forsaken; when they saw her (a) cast down, they sillily thought her to be destroy'd. Which defection of a few, is no more to the disparagement of those that are faithfull in the Land, then it was to St. Paul, that 2 Tim. 4. 10. Demas had forsaken him, and had embraced this pre∣sent world. There are a multitude (God be thanked) who being (c) troubled on every side, are notwithstanding c c 2 Cor. 4. 8. not distressed; and however (c) perplexed, are far enough from despair. 4. It may be proposed to consideration, what may possibly Episcopal Di∣vines no Pa∣pists. be the reasons, why Episcopal Divines, professing an enmity to the Pope, and to all that can truly be called Popish, and writing whole volumes in opposition to all his interests, should yet so easily be charged with being Papists, and (which is yet of sadder moment) with a strong design to bring in Popery into the Land, as the publick and generall Profession of it. 1. It is not Popish to approve the Government of Bishops: for so did orthodox Melan. ad Camer. in Hist. Con. August. per Chytr. p. 389. Melanchthon, and moderate Bucer de vi∣ta & usu Mi∣nist. p. 565. Bucer; so did all the great Hist. Conf. Aug. per Chytr. p. 109. & per Pap. p. 137. Protestants in the conference at Augusta, and Concion. Georg. Princ. Anh. fol. 61. George Prince of Anhalt, Earle of Ascaina, whom no man living will call a Papist; nay so did Mr. Calvin, as him∣self declared to Calvin. ad Sadolet. p. 172. Nullo non Anathemate dignos fatear, si qui erunt qui non eam Hierarchiam reverenter summaque obedientia observent. Cardinal Sadolet in excuse of what was done to the Bishop of Geneva. Talem nobis Hierarchiam si exhibeant, &c. If they will give us such an Hierarchie, where∣in the Bishops may be so eminent, as that, withall they may not think themselves above obedience unto Christ, then I confesse they deserve to be deliver'd up to Satan who do not
reverently observe them with all obedience. So did the same Mr. Calvin at Wormes, and Ratisbone, and when he subscribed the Augustan Confession. Nay so did Theod. Beza in Confess. cap. 5. Beza himself; which we should never have believed, if he himself had not put it into the number of his confessions. It is not therefore a Popish thing to approve of the Episcopal or Hierarchical Order. Nor 2. is it Popery to adhere unto a Liturgie, and Rites established in the church by Law, and Canon. For that was done by Quod ad formulam precum & ri∣uum Ecclesia∣sticorum, vld probo, ut certa illa exte, à qua Pastoribus discedere in functione sua non liceat; tam ut consulatur quorundam simplicitati & imperitiae, quam ut cer∣tius ita constet omnium inter se Ecclesiarum consensus. Calvin. Epist. ad Prot. Angl. 87. p. 165. Mr. Calvin, who did humbly advise the supreme Magi∣strate here in England, even Edward the sixth, that we might have in our Churches a set Form of Prayer, from which it should not be lawfull for any Minister to swerve in his Ec∣clesiastical function: (and that for these two reasons) 1. for the help of the more ignorant unskilfull people, and 2. that a Harmony or agreement of all our Churches be∣tween themselves might appear the more plainly to all the world. He farther declared his opinion, that as the Rites and Ceremonies were to be set, as well as the Prayers of the Church Fateor qui∣dem, modera∣tioni locum esse oportere—adeoque ceremonias ipsas ad usum & captum populi esse accommodandas. Id. ib. p. 166, 167. so they were also to be adapted to the use and capacity of common people. He added, that it was Neque enim me latet, proferri posse antiquum ritum mentionis defunctorum faciendae, ut eo modo communio fidelium omnium in unum corpus conjunctorum declaretur. Ib. p. 167. law∣full to make mention of the dead in publick Prayer, after the ancient custome of the Church, that the Communion of all the faithfull joyned together in one body might be de∣clared by that means. From all which it is evident, that Mr. Barlee's jear doth reach as far as Mr. Calvin, who had some kind of hand in liturgicall knacks, and did many times ap∣prove of the Hierarchick Flaunt too. And so did Zanch. de Relig. p. 217, 218. Zanchy in such a measure, that he was censur'd severely for it. The Protestant Churches in France have a publick Liturgy, and yet are no Papists. The Primitive Fathers had Liturgyes, be∣fore Poperie was borne. Nay Mr. Cartwright, and others of the Geneva cut, did make a Dang. poit. l. 3. ch. 10. new Common Prayer in Queen Elizabeths dayes, and agreed to put it in publick practice without consent of Queen or Parlament. They were not grieved at set Formes, but that they were not of their forging.
The Common Prayer had no fault, but that it was established by the Law of the Land. Nor 3. is it Popery, to re∣ject the Presbyterian Discipline. For besides that 'tis a thing, about which its chief Architects could hardly Survey of p aed. Holy Discip. c. 5. p. 72, 73, 74. to p. 87. ever agree among themselves, (the learned Discourser saying one thing, Mr. Travers a second, Mr. Cartwright a third against both, and a fourth against himself, and a fifth against his fourth,) the first disturber of the Episcopal was the male-content Ae∣rius, who was a Heretick for his pains in the esteem of Epi∣phanius, and of St. Austin, and so affirmed to have been cen∣sur'd, for the very fact of opposing Bishops, by the unanimous consent of the In the Rea∣sons of their judgement, &c. p. 9. Vniversity of Oxford. 4. It is not Po∣pery, to yield a just Authority to universall Tradition, the consentient judgement and practice of the universall Church. For (besides that the Socinians are enemyes to that,) it is de∣clared by the Protestant Ibid. Vniversity of Oxford, to be the best Interpreter of Scripture in things not clearly ex∣press't, and that without it we should be at a losse in sundry points both of Faith and manners, at this day firmly believed, and securely practised by us, when by the Socinians, Ana∣baptists, and other Sectaryes, we should be called upon for our proofs: as namely, sundry orthodoxall explications concerning the Trinity, and coequality of the Persons in the Godhead, against the Arrians and other Hereticks; the number and use and efficacy of Sacraments; the Bapti∣zing of Infants; National Churches; the observation of the Lords Day; and even the Canon of Scripture it self. And in the penning of these Reasons, the most excellent Dr. Sanderson is known to have had the chief hand, whom no man sure will call a Papist, but an Episcopal Di∣vine. 5. Nay farther yet: The Episcopal Protestants here in Episcopal Divines the greatest ene∣myes to Pope∣ry. England, (if we reckon as far backwards as from the dayes of Edward the sixth, unto the Age we live in) are very well known to have been the Heroes, who by their Martyrdoms, Confessions, and conquering pens, have both defended, and inlarged the reformed Borders of the Church. Nay, by their Decency and Order in the way of their publick worship, they have shewed to all the world so much discretion and know∣ledge, as well as zeal, and such unpassionate resolutions of
Reformation, that the Conclave at Rome hath even trembled at the thought of an utter Ruin, if such unblamable Reformers should live and prosper. Most remarkable are the speeches, which the French Ambassadour (Monsieur Rogne) gave out concerning our Church of England, both at the Court, and at Canterbury, upon the view which he had of our solemn Cere∣monyes and service in the dayes of King Iames. It was one of his sayings, Confer. at Hanpt. Court second Day p. 38. that if the Reformed Churches in France had kept the same Orders amongst them which we ob∣served, he was assured, that there would have been many thousands of Protestants more there, then now there are▪ and yet our men (said an eminent Person on that occasion) do stumble and strain at some petty quillets, thereby to disturb, and to disgrace the whole Church. But for the preventing of so much happinesse as was in likelyhood to ensue, the Popes themselves took care to sow the seeds of Dissension, even fears and jealousyes among the people, that a plot was laid by the Prelates for the introduction of Popery into the Prote∣stant Churches. The Carmelites, and Iesuits, and other Emis∣saryes of Rome, were sent over into England, transforming themselves into precisians and zelots, and declaiming (in that shape) against Episcopal Divines, a Masse of Ceremonyes, liturgicall knacks, a ceremonious litter, Hierarchical flaunts, in the expressions and sense of Mr. Barlee. By such means as these, the people were led into Presbytery, and by the cruel∣tyes of that, many were driven back to Rome. And so we see who they are, who (quite be side their intentions) have been used as instruments & tooles for the carrying on of the Popish interest. 6. For men of fiery, revengefull, and implacable disposi∣tions, Pory be∣holding to Presbyterians. did proceed to such rigors, and extremityes of dissen∣sion, from whatsoever they saw in the Church of Rome, that they imbittered and Note, that among the many Reasons of the Vniver∣sity of Oxsord, why they could not join with the Covenant against Episcopal Government, this was one of remark, that they should by so doing give advantage to the Papists, who usually object against us, and our Religion, the contempt of Antiquity, and the love of Novelty. p. 9. hardned the Papists hearts, which they should rather have sought to mollifie, by Christian Temper, and moderation. If the Papists do excced us in point of num∣ber, and of strength, (as without controversy they do) we
should endeavour to reforme them by the convincingnesse of our reasonings, and the exactnesse of our lives, by our evi∣dent charity, and visible marks of our sobriety. We must not hope to convert them either by bitternesse of railing, or dint of sword. Should all dissenters in Christendom proceed to that, it would be soon overwhelmed with Blood and Rapin. The empty word Christendom might still remain, but the Mahumetans, and the Iewes, would make a better Ioh. 13. 35. appea∣rance of being the imitators and followers of Iesus Christ. The Books of Iesuites and Presbyterians against the civill Magistrate, above which they would set up their Ecclesiasti∣call jurisdictions, have had such a likenesse to one another, that sometimes the Authors of the one side have been mistaken for the other. And hence it was observed in the Royall Synod, Coer. at Hamp. Court second Day p. 50. what advantage was given by that sort of men unto the Papists; who, mutatis personis, could apply their own Arguments against the Princes of the Religion, which they had framed against the Princes of the Church of Rome. So that the Bellowes of sedition, as well in that Church as in this, have help't to furnish each others Treasures with naugh∣ty maximes, and stores of mischief. When King James had observed Ibid. third Day p. 101. at Hampton-Court, that by the factious be∣haviour of the Puritans, many were driven to be Papists, and that the way to judge them was by their fruits, humility and obedience being certainly the marks of honest and good men; the Presbyterian chieftains, then present, forbore to make any more exceptions against the ceremonyes and orders so well established in the Church, and Ibid. and p. 105. promised to per∣form all duty to the Bishops, as their Reverend Fathers, joyning heartily with them against the common Adversa∣ryes, and for the quiet of the Church. Hereupon it will be pertinent to make this profitable Di∣lemma. Either they thought those things, to which they first refused, and after yielded a conformity, to have been lawfull, or unlawfull. If lawfull, why submitted they no sooner? if unlawfull, why submitted they at last? what made seditions, and insurrections, and disobedience to Authority, in opposi∣tion to those things which are confessedly lawfull? or if con∣fessedly lawfull, but inwardly conceived to be unlawfull, why should the fear of that power which can destory the Body only,
make them fearlesse of Him who can cast both body and soul into Hell? As to persecute, and to suffer, cannot both be for Christ's and conscience sake; so we can never find one, in whom they both meet. Some mens principles do render them lyable to punishment no lesse then capitall, but put them out of all danger of being Martyrs, unlesse it can be a Martyr∣dome to miscarry in a conspiracy, and to be overmatch't by the sword of Iustice. Happy and Blessed is that Nation, where such men's loyalty consisteth in their want of power or oppor∣tunity to make Resistance. But (to conclude this tedious section) From all that hath hitherto been spoken, some will be apt A Counter∣warning to the Nation. to proclaim a Counterwarning to the Nation, that speciall heed may be taken of that sort of men, who for the wreaking of their malice against Episcopal Divines, whom they would have to be exposed to all manner of hardships (even to famin, and sword, as far as in them lyes) would poyson the people with a belief, that they are underhand-dealers for the bring∣ing in of a Popish yoak. All which I say of Mr. Barlee, and of such as he is; not at all of Mr. Baxter, whose words are wickedly wrested beyond his meaning, and made intirely Mr. Barlee's own, by being expounded and applyed in so vile a manner. It is not hard to make appear, in how many respects Mr. Baxter (though not in his person, yet at least in his Do∣ctrins, which are perhaps as dear to him) hath been affronted by Mr. Barlee; who, if he hath any Truth in him, doth over∣throw the very passage which here he citeth with great ap∣plause. But where my advantages are so many, I must (even for brevity) dispense with some. §. 12. In his two next pages (75, 76.) he obtrudes upon His false sug∣gestion of Bp Davenant, and his fumbling about that Bishops works, implying 2 contradi∣ctions within a few lines. his Reader this constant falsehood, that I pretended Bishop Davenant to have been also an Arminian, although he knows that I did rank him amongst Arminius his Antago∣nists. I only pleaded his opinion of universall Redemption; which as Mr. Barlee could not disprove, so he durst not (it seems) so much as try. I referred my Reader to his Pacifica∣tory Epistle, into which Mr. Barlee either would not peep, or thought not safe for his interest to take any notice of what he saw. He cites other words, which were not referred to by me, and which, as they are not to the purpose in any kind, so if
they were, they would serve exactly for my Advantage, by shewing that that Bishop had changed his judgement from what it once was. I did not speak of every part of his life, but meerly of that wherein he writ to Duraeus: which, with his Adhortation to Ecclesiasticall Peace, was printed at Cam∣bridge 1640. no more then two years before his Death. Yet Mr. B. (to serve his turn) affirmeth this to be the second edition, and that a Chaplain of the Bishops did set out a third 1638. two years before the second in Mr. B's account. Would not he make an omnipotent Lawyer, who to salve a crack't Title in his clients Tenure, can prove that Harry the eighth was before Harry the seventh? This is his first contradiction about the works of Bishop Davenant. His second contradiction is more ridiculous, because attended with a pompous parenthesis of commendation. For whereas he saith [it is much more con∣siderable, that the Bishops Animadversions against Mr. Hoard, was, under the Bishops own hand, published three years after the last printed Edition of his Pacificatory to Du∣raeus,] and whereas he saith also but few lines before, [that the Bishop dyed in the year 1642.] and whereas it is Cantabrig. ex Oficina Rogeri Danie∣lis Alm Academiae Typographi M DC XL. evi∣dent to all the world, who will but look, that the Cambridge edition of that Epistle was in the year 1640. all the reasoning of Mr. B. amounts to this, that the Bishop lived at least a year after his Death; vvhich is somevvhat longer then St. Dlonysius is said to do in the Golden Legend. Or at least he must say, to avoid that absurdity, that there vvere then three years betvvixt 40. and 42. nay betvvixt 40. and 41. for he saith in his mar∣gin, that the Animadversions against Mr. Hoard vvere printed A. D. 1641. If he shall novv pretend ignorance in the Bishops works, and their Editions, vvhy vvould he speak at a venture of vvhat he knew not? but if he shall say, he vvell knew vvhat he said, vvhy vvould he wilfully defile his conscience? The reason of it is very plain. For having resolved to accuse me of a notorious mistake, if not somewhat worse, (they are his vvords) he knevv not hovv to make it out, but by saying such things, as unavoidably implyed those contradictions; vvhich either he did not perceive himself, or hoped that I should not be able to perceive, or that at least I vvould keep his counsell, vvithout his having told me it vvas a secret.
2. Now we are taught what to think of his other storyes, that he was more then ordinarily acquainted with that His pretended Correspodence with Bishop Davnant. Bishop, almost to the very last moment of his life, and that the Bishop did once in private sadly bewail to Mr. Barlee the great growth of Popery and Arminianism. p. 75. and that the Bishop did write a letter to him in folio about the cere∣mony of the Crosse in Baptism. p. 76. All this is possible, though unlikely, and not at all to the purpose. And had another man said it, or Mr. B. himself before he made us all to know the strength and plenty of his invention, I should have readi∣ly believed, that so charitable a Prelate might write a letter of instruction to one who stood in need of it, and might shew him his bounden duty to use the signe of the Crosse in bapti∣zing Infants. But he hath brought his conceptions to so fair a market, that he must now affirm nothing, if he intends to be believed, unlesse he is as ready to bring his proof. Numa pretended to hold intelligence with Egeria, and Minos with Iupiter, and Scipio with the same, and Sertorius with his in∣spired Doe, and Eumenes with the Ghost of Alexander the Great, and Mahomet with Gabriel one of the seven Arch-Angels, and Mr. Barlee with learned Davenant one of the Angels of the Church of England. 3. Though Mr. B. pretendeth some kind of Reverence to the Bishop, yet he declaredly dissents from his Doctrin of His exceptions and sawinesse to the same Bp. Christ's Death, as he professed to do from that of Amyrald p. 72. He Correp. Corr. p. 169. confessed that Bishop Davenant and Dr. Ward did extend the phrase of Christs Dying for all, not only [ge∣neribus singulorum] to all sorts of men, but also [singulis generum] to P. p Carle∣ton, Bishop Hall, Dr. VVard, Dr. Goad, Mr. Bal∣canquall, (all Divines of the Synod of Do) and besides, Dr. Preston, Dr. Soughton, Mr. VVhately, Mr. Fenner, Mr. Iohn Ball, Mr. Cuverwl, Mr. Vins, Mr VVoobridge, Mr. Baxter, are all avowed by Mr. Baxter himself to have been, & to be, of Bishop Davnant's and the late Primates judgement in this point. But what the Primates judgement was, hath appeared partly al∣ready, and shall more fully appear hereafter. VVith all these therefore M. B. confessedly is at odds. So is he also with the Duke of andenbughs Divines, & with those of Breme, with Lud. Crocius, Martinius, Iselbug; nay with Dr. Twisse, and the Synod of Dort, if Mr. Baxter may be believed. In raefa. d Disput. every man of all sorts. But he will sue out a writ of melius inquirendum, before he passeth any damnatory sentence upon them, because they have so many handsome orthodox put-off. This is Rare! That Bishop must be re∣prieved though he speakes as I doe, and I must be condemn'd
(as the enemy of God) although I spake as the Bishop did. What is the reason? The Bishop hath his put-offs, and I have none. What is this but to say in effect and substance, that the venerable Bishop did tack about; he stood out in such a man∣ner from Mr. Barlee, as that in a manner he came in; he had handsome subterfuges, and orthodox shifts; whilst Mr. Pierce doth assert the same Doctrin with the Bishop, and all that follows thereupon by unavoidable consequence, without the least fear of displeasing the implacable, and so without making use of any orthodox Tricks, or syncretizing Tergversations, for the keeping of their favours, and acts of Grace? Thus he abuseth that excellent Prelate, to whose favour he oweth his admission into the Priesthood; though he doth not abuse the orthodoxa of his party (to which that Prelate was so averse) whilst he ingeniously placeth it in handsome evasions and put-offs. 4. But sure the Bishop will incur a great deal more of his The Bishop reckons uni∣versall Re∣demption among funda∣mentals, and declares against all who shall deny it. displeasure, by that time I have shewed him one famous Ad hos fun∣damentales Articulos puto respexisse Apo∣stolum Tit. 1. 3. Communis haec fides, sym∣bolo Aposto∣lico compre∣hensa, omnibus Christianis credend proponit, admirandum Creaturarum ex nihilo opificium, Trinitatis mystrium, Christi Incarnti, passi, Resurgentis, glorificati, mi∣seris peccatoribus impensum Beneficium; quaeque ind dimanant, Redemptionem hu∣mani generis, Sanctificationem pecaris populi,—Resurrectionem Corporum, Glorificationem fidelium, &c. Qui ullum ex his Articulis furcillat aut sugillat, licet no∣men Christiani sii vendicet, ab orthodoxorum communione arcendus est, & procul amandandus. Sentent. D. Daven. praedict. p. 10. & 11. passage. The Bishop thought that St. Paul in his words to Titus (ch. 1. v. 3.) had a particular respect to the Apostles Creed; in which are comprehended the fundamentalls of Christianity, to be believed by all Christians: to wit, the creation of all creatures out of nothing, the mystery of the Trinity, the benefit of Christ Incarnate, Crucified, rising from the dead, and Glorified, bestowed upon miserable and wretched sinners; and (as fundamentals derived thence,) the Redemption of Mankind, the Sanctification of a pecu∣liar people, the Communion of Saints, the forgivenesse of sins, the Resurrection of bodyes, and the Glorification of the Faithfull.—All these things (saith the Bishop) are comprehended in this short Creed.—He that detracteth or defameth any one of these, although he may take unto
himself the name of Christian, he is yet to be banished from the Communion of the orthodox. From which words of that pious and learned Prelate, Mr. B. may be pleased to observe 4 things. 1. That he makes such a distinction between the Redemption of mankind, and the sanctification of a peculiar people, as to include every man to be within the pale of that Redemption. All mankind was bought, and paid for. (which is just the thing for which I contend, and more then which I need not care to have granted, upon condition it be not mur∣der'd with any fancifull Put-offs.) 2. That he reckons this among the Articles of our Christian Faith, placing the Death and Resurrection of Christ before it, and placing after it the Resurrection of our bodyes. 3. That the Truth of this is de∣rived from the Truth of the Articles going before. 4. That he who denyes the Truth of it, or doth but pare away from it in any kind, is to be sent to the Anticyrae, banished (I mean) from all orthodox Society. And so Farewell to Mr. Bar∣lee. 5. Bishop Davenant, (in a work bound up with the former) hath laid down 8 such propositions, as he supposeth to be a∣greed How severely the Bishops judgement re∣flects on Mr. B. by Corcedunt ones & con∣sentiu, hs propositio∣nes ss veris∣simas, &c. Adhort. ad pac. Ecclesiast. ap. 11. p. 148, 149. all Protestant Churches. And yet our Correpto∣rie Corrector, in both his prints, hath revealed his disagreement from diverse of them. From whence it is inferred by the judge∣ment of Bishop Davenant, that Mr. Barlee is not a member of any Protestant Church, unlesse we mean an unruly and peevish member. What I say I can justify, if he shall adven∣ture to make it needfull. What Mr. B. Si Ecclsiae Rectoribus idem non per∣suaserit, aut in aliam Eccle∣siam divertere oporet, aut, pro bono Animarum, Ecclesiae cui subest censuram patienter tolerate. Sent. Dav. p. 39. should have done, upon his severall dissatisfactions in the prescriptions and pra∣ctices of the Church of England; and what the Church might have done in castigation of such a member, Bishop Davenant hath truly and justly shew'd him. For the first, he should have gone into some other Church to which he might have been pleased to yield obedience, or have patiently suffer'd under the censures of that very Church in which he lived. For the second, Possunt ab externa Communione tantisper removere, dum suis erreribus alios infi∣cre, & ipsas Ecclesias perturbare desinant. Id. in Adhot. ad Pac. Eccl. c. 4. p. 72. the Church might have proscribed him from her externall Communion, untill he had ceased from
infecting others with his errors, and from disturbing the Churches with his attempts. Nay rather then have troubled the Peace and quiet of the Church, under which he lived in subjection, and of which he professed himself a member, he should have pack't away (saith the Bishop) into some other Church, or have remained in this without disturbance, though he had thought that his opinion, which he maintain∣ed against the Church, had been of such moment, and the knowledge of it so necessary, as that Quod si quis eam qum conta Eccle∣siae senteniam tutur opinio∣nem tantm o∣meni sse sibi persuadeat, ut ex ejus cognitone sa∣lus hominum dpendeat, aut in aliam Ecclesiam di∣vertere, &c. ut supra. Sent. Dav. ad Dur. p. 39. How he mis∣behaves himself about the Primate. Salvation it self de∣pended on it. How little then can he excuse himself (or others of his spirit and combination) for having caused those troubles which have made us a hissing to our enemyes, upon the pett they took at those things which in themselves were indifferent (by their confession) and which the stamp of Authority had made obliging? What they thought to be unlawfull, they should not have complyed with (as they did) for a time; and what they thought very lawfull, they should still have submitted to in all obedience. §. 13. What Mr. B. thinks fit to add as a conclusion to his second Chapter, (p. 76, 77.) concerning the Primate of Ar∣magh, I shall consider in my Post-script, to which my Reader is now referred. I shall only here observe his perseverance in that evill of laying things to my charge, from which he knows I am as innocent as any man living. The Primate's Po∣pery and Arminianisme are Mr. B's insinuations; invented purposely, that he may have something to confute. Nothing is like it in all my writings. But there is something in Mr. B's much more then like it, as I shall discover in my-Post-script. What he saith of the History of Gotteschalc, shews a very great want of heed, or Conscience. For that it was penn'd by the Primate, he doth not deny: that the Primate was an ancient Author, he dares not affirme. That the subjects óf the History are 800. years old, is true, but impertinent, and not of use to Mr. B. any more then to Arminius. For the Primate there tells us, what was held by Hincmarus, and Rabanus Maurus, two great Arch-bishops, as well as by Gotteschalc the private Monk: and how Gotteschalc was condemn'd by the learned Moguntine Councell, as well as favour'd by them at Lions. And if the Primate's judgement was then for Gotteschalc (who was pronounced
an Trithemius apud Hist. Gottesc. c. 4. p. 41. A. D. 848. Heretick in the famous Synod at Moguntia convened by the authority of the Emperour Lotharius) I shall easily prove that he did afterwards change it. The Synod of Va∣lentia which Mr. B. citeth from the fourth Chapter, is not there, but in the twelfth. And the History of that is the ra∣ther to be reckon'd as uncertain, because Hist. Gott. c. 12. p. 186. Baronius and the primate do give us opposite narrations, though I shall more readily believe the later. But whilst Mr. B. takes upon him to shew his Lordships opinion, from what was deliver'd by the Valentian Synod, not in his Lordships own expressions (as Mr. B. in his deep ignorance doth take the boldnesse to affirm) but in the expressions of the Synod; he doth a very ill office to Dr. Bernard, a courtesie to them who affirm his change, and a double mischief unto himself, as shall be shew'd in its proper place.
CHAP. IV. A Tast of some notable Qualifications in Mr. B. which give him an eminent unfitnesse to be either a Disputant, or an Historian. §. 1. THe most obvious accomplishment in this gifted Brother, and that wherein his greatest excellence Mr. B's Breed∣ing and way of Complement. doth lye, (especially since he promis'd to mend his manners, and to do Ep. De. p. 3. l. 1. penance for his passions, upon his knees,) is to win me over to his opinions, (or else to fright me out of mine own) by all the caresses and indearments, which can possibly be expected from a man of his It is the cha∣racter which he gives his own Temper, ch. 1. p. 7. & 8. In his first Book he call'd it his pleasant∣nesse and play∣fulnesse (Ep. Ded. p. 9.) now he calls it his mirth and cheerfulnesse to tole-on Gallants to the reading of him (ch. 2. p. 45.) So Mountebancks have a Zanie commonly called Iack Pudding to tole-on Customers for the buying of their wares. And when Domn invented a new Game, he called i . ortho∣dox and godly Temper. I hope I shall not be proud of his large expressions, because I am able to distinguish betwixt his judgement, and his civilityes. The age we live in is very court∣ly, and men will give fair language, because it is fashonable, and handsome, and humane too; if not to signify their opi∣nion of the person to whom they speak, at least to testify the breeding and civil deportment of the speakers. It must not therefore be imagin'd, that Mr. Barlee's meaning is as ob∣liging as his words, but that his words are the marks of his education. §. 2. For as this liberall Encomiast is pleas'd to complement, The language of the B. I am an English Heretick, a back friend to true Religion, an underminer of necessary Reformation, a second Prede∣stinated
Thief, sedulously impudent, and a Bespatterer, a very Erra Pater in Divinity, an insulting Thraso, an insolent Note, Reader, that be pro∣fested (in his Ded. Est. p. 2.) that no man valued me more then He, no man should be more sollii∣tus of my Soul, Fame, and outward ssey, then Himself. If therefore thse are the over flowings of his Love, ho terrible is his hatred to those who are not in his fa∣vour, as I (it seems) am? Boaster, a verse from the true Faith, yea adverse to it, a so∣phisticall Wrangler, a dangerous Enemy to the Church, to be compared with the hypocriticall Pharisees, a maintainer of the same opinions with low-spirited, plebeian, mechanick Sectaryes, an Angel of Darknesse, an Apostate, and a Wolf, mischievous to God and his Church, superciliously scornfull, a great Delinquent, and as an Herring-man, the composer of a Play-book for my Iovial proselytes against the merry Time, an able Jester, playing upon him before Lords and Ladyes, Inhuman, Barbarous, like him in whom the evill spirit was, and like the Spanish Bulls falling upon their Drivers, a facetious and most dexterous Roscius, one of the three great wasps of the Nation, one by whose Abili∣tyes the Devil is adorned, guilty of Socinianism, true to the cruell Grotian design of extirpating the Protestants Calvi∣nisticall, of the Grotian Caball, a filcher of his Parishoners, of Schismaticall Practises against his Parish, as infecting it with Arminianism, Socianism, Pontificianism in part, a carryer on of vile designes, a fawning Tertullus, an insolent Provoker, a Tom Tell-troth, of a malevolent design, a breaker of St. Paul's Hand, disingenuous, & unconscionable, of a frontlesse Front, and scornfull Spirit, a notorious Lyar, virulent, proud, slanderous, and of furious indignation, one whose very light is darknesse, and who takes the Presbyte∣rians to be more It is his own expression (Reader) as all the rest: 'twas never mne. Knaves then Fools, a great wanton, full of malice and poysenous mischief, a circumstantial rituallson of the Church, a demure Junior, justly called a Sorcerer, one to whom the Anabaptists and Quakers are great Friends, one who bewitcheth the people, and deserves to be ranked a∣mong the  or witches, a clamorous Brazen-fac't person, of insufferable insolence, one that hath lost his con∣science with his eyes, prodigiously Satyrical to a Miracle beyond imitation, one who intended to gull the world, and delude the Church, This he hers in with this utroden Preface, [as I am an Eccle∣siastick, a Christian, and a Gentleman, &c.] a Monster of ingratitude, of a stony and brazen foreead, a Iuvenal Divine, a wilfull Impostor, setting up an Idol Fancy of Grace, a Pope above all Coun∣cells except the Papall, guilty of minor Atheism at least, de∣void of all Christian ingenuity as well as Grotius, a gracelesse
Person, Grotius his Imitator, a monstrous uncharitable Cen∣surer as well as Grotius, a Prevaricator, without regard of conscience, a master Railer, one who recedes from Armi∣nius to the worse, towards rank Pelagianism and Socinia∣nism, whose Correct Copie begins and ends in Pelagianism and Semi-Pelagianism, guilty of much Hereticall pravity, irrational, a Submortuarian, an Apostolarian, a Neophyte, Antiscripturall, a downright Pelagian in the very chief point, deeply drencht with Massilianism, of ridiculous shifts, crafty insinuations, supercilious Arrogance, putting gulls and cheats upon his Mother the Church, wretchedly and un∣conscionably abusive, a great Practiser of Hypocrisy, one whose Proselytes are but too great Approvers of Hobbs his Leviathan, a maker of saplesse, senselesse, subitane Comments of Scripture, a wofull Calumniator, a Thrasonicall Boaster, stubborn, wormish Fancy, intolerable, extravagant, an Hel∣vidian, Antiscripturist, like the old Hereticks making their brains their Bible, wanting honesty, loud lying, horribly wicked, absurd, foolish, childish, malicious, frantick, slanderous, insolent, scornfull, ridiculous, against whom the dreadfull judicial hand of God is highly lift up; and again, one who hath the just hand of God upon him, and likely to be dementated by God for perdition, a Manichee, holding that which the boldest Jesuite would tremble to admit into his Creed, one who flurts and flounceth at his Neighbour for want of Logick, a gracelesse Traducer, odious, hatefull, Note that the 4 comple∣ments next following are cited from Crackenthorp against the Bishop of Spa∣lato upon his return to Rome, and applyed only to me by Mr. B. without shame or modesty, or any the least love of the Truth, one who hath drawn a Brawn upon his forehead and his conscience, one who proclaimes his sin as Sodome, and worse then Sodome, with a stubborn mind, which Sodom ne∣ver did, having a design highly Jesuitical, rendring the soundest Protestants odious, to make room for the Pontifi∣cians taken into his bosome, basely abusive contrary to con∣science, blowing hot and cold like a Satyr, of a lavish Tongue, a broad conscience, a crafty pate, one whose Reli∣gion grows upon the stock of Policy, far in the way to Rome, like malicious persons guilty of the Plague; and (to shew that he goes out at the same Door which he came in at) The vast quan∣tity besides of Mr. B's Court∣ship. I am finally an Heretick to be rejected. That these are all his own complements, is so well known to
as many as have had the patience to read his second book, and so almost-impossible to be denyed by himself, that I think it not needfull to mark the pages where they are written; which would prove a greater trouble to the Printer, and to the Cor∣rector of the Presse, then matter of satisfaction to any Rea∣ders. But as I have them all in readinesse, and given a view of them to many who have desir'd to be Spectators of so strange a SIGHT; so if Mr. B shall murmur at my omission of the pages, he shall not fail of them, as soon as I know what he would have. So far are these from being more then what his book hath afforded, that they are only a sprinkling of his behaviour. For a Gentleman in the Country having a great curiosity, to know how much of the Volume might have been spent in meer railing, (if it were thrust up together) took the courage, for once, to make a Tryall; And the totall of his collection did amount to no lesse, then eleven whole Pages in a spacious Quarto all as full as they could hold, and over∣flowing the very margins. Now had I the leisure to take ac∣count of all the like courtesies bestow'd on others (for the 11. pages-full I spake of were all on me) I leave the Reader to imagin how fine and slender his book would be, if such large Collops were par'd away. In the little account which I have given, there is a greater affluence then he could meet with in his Textor's Epithets, or in his Sylva Synonymo∣rum. It may be wonder'd at by some, how a man of his diligence in the way he goes, should forget (this bout) to call me De∣vil, A Copie of Mr. B's Reor∣mation. but (in stead of that) should chuse to call me an Angel of darknesse, (p. 7.) The reason of it is very evident. For he confesseth, that before, he was somewhat . . p. 45. playsome, and had Epist. Ded. p. 2. exberances of passions; but now he is reformed, upon the admonitions of his Friends, who did give him a c. 1. p. 6. Hint that he was somewhat over-heated, & therefore he gives them Ibid. most solemn thanks. He now mislikes p. 8. the hare-brain'd fury of some men, falsely called zeal; He is for Ibid. pru∣dence and necessary moderation. And therefore having, be∣fore, called my Copie of Notes a Noon-day Devil, he is now contented to call my Person an Angel of Darknesse, which amounts to no more then a Mid-night Devil, which is not so bad, as being a modester Devil, then that which walketh
about at Noon. In his first Book indeed I was a Satanicall and Diabolical blasphemer, nay an exceeder of the Devil himself in blasphemy, and worse then Diabolically wittily wicked. But that was one of his Ibid. p. 6. extravagances, for which he will not defend himself. And therefore now the world is mended (to my unspeakable comfort) and I am only a Mid-night Devil, not one whit worse, or more wicked, (as then I was.) So that now he is assur'd, Ib. p. 8. that none of Christ's cor∣dial Friends have any great reason to blame him, because he is against both extremes. Before, I was for major Atheism, now I am only for minor Atheism, because now he hath hit the golden mean. p. 4. 'Tis true indeed, that in this his opus emendatum, he doth also seem to be over-heated, as before; some Ibid. excesses of passion, stile, and Temper, do remain (like Canaanites) in the Holy Land: Though God, p. 4. ac∣counting him faithfull, hath put him into the ministery; yet he is hetherto in via, on this side heaven, not fully arrived un∣to his state of perfection: Sorcerer, and Witch, Apostatarian, and Wolf, and eleven pages-full of zeal have not been can∣didly expressed; and there is something of mortality still cleaving to him, whilst he admires at my impudence for not believing I was a Ranter. Mr. B's Iu∣stification of himself. But let us be so just as to hear him speaking for himself. p. 6. What have I done? (saith Mr. B.) Is there not a cause? was not our Saviour sufficiently zea∣lous? And did not All Cor∣reptorie Corre∣ctors with Mr. B. all the Apostles, especially St. Paul, imitate our Saviour in this? He that shall meet with the like, and behave himself more modestly, let him throw the first stone at me. Calvin was lyable to errors and passions as my self. p. 62.—p. 7. Have I not offered to do open penance for my passions, if they prove against me either scurrility or calumny? Is this Laodicean luke-warm age so full of heats and zeal against seducers, as that he who thinks it his duty earnestly to oppose opinions, practices and designs, must be unreasonably blamed for so doing? Take heed (good Rea∣der) that you fall not into the danger of thinking hardly of this Ib. p. . orthodox and cordiall Zelot. He tells us plainly (c. 3. p. 70.) that whosoever they are who will not yield to what he saith, is worse then distracted. But that he tells us on another occasion. Keep we close to the purpose, and we shall find good reason for the worst of his words. He did
wisely consider, That Ibid. Dr. Bern. and Dr. Reyn. im∣plicitly accus'd by Mr. Barlee of foul mat∣ters. other mens soft milky faint-hearted coldnesse, disguised under the pleasing term of prudence, fair∣nesse, peace, moderation, &c. hath been one of the two things which have brought us to that wofull passe that we are at in all Ecclesiasticall matters. (There he mumps the Re∣verend Dr. Reynolds, who timely advis'd him to soft words, to omit my Person, and fall wholly to the Argument. Again) what a milky faint-hearted person doth the Reverend Dr. Bernard appear to be in his sight, who told him At the end of his first letter to Mr. B. that the fruits of the spirit are meeknesse, gentlenesse, &c. and ad∣vis'd him to lay aside all verball Animosityes, and personall Reflexions, and calmly to fall upon the matter? What? would they have Mr. Barlee not to be valiant, and call men sorcerers, witches, wolfes, Devils? Ib. p. 8. The age is not so full of orthodox cordiall zelots, as that they need to be Ib. p. 7. lin. antpenu. discourag'd. Mr. B. Ib. p. 2. blesseth God for his Grace, who for well-igh these 14. years hath not suffer'd him to behave himself un∣christianly, ignorantly, or rudely. For what though he let fall so many slanders, perjuryes, contradictions, and railings, as have been written with a Sun-beam? yet having had Grace irresistible, he was not suffer'd to do amisse, was not able to sin, he was so mightily withheld. p. 6. in marg. Si quid intumuit pietas, if his godlinesse did swell, and boyl up (as hath been shew'd) ignocat lector, we must pardon him in conscience; and so Dr. Twisse had said before him. If I, or other morall men shall wipe off his calumnyes, we are presently Master Raylers, for we are Angels of Darknesse; and reason good, for we resist Mr. Barlee in his inventions. But when He shall rail, and invent slanders, who hath that priviledge indulged to him, the case is then alter'd, for he makes it known to the world, that God hath So he saith in his Post-script, &c. called him to be Faithfull; and all is no more then a godly Tumour, as he is pleas'd to expresse it to us. In his Introduction to this his second volume, he solemnly p. 4. prayes to the God of all Grace, that he may be mightily assisted and wisely directed in the management of so great a work, that if through his exceeding great weaknesse, as is the Note, his severall pro∣mises to do penance, i good men shou'd judge him guilty. Here he confesseth, that diverse good men did so judge: Yet p. 9. he cannot say he hath done evill; and p. 8. hath no reason to accept of my pardon. For again (p. 8.) they must not only say, but clear it to Him, that he is guilty. VVhich he doth not intend shall be in hast. judgement of diverse good men, he did give too much way
to his passions at first, by not hitting the golden mean, he may be more successfull in his second attempt, lest the Church and the world complain of him. Iudge now, Rea∣der, whether his Prayer hath been heard, or whether when he pray'd, he spake as he thought. Before, he gave too much way to his passions, and did not quite hit the Golden Mean; but now he thinks he hath nick't it. Salva res est, saltat senex. Postscript. He even skips for joy (pretty Lamb!) and doth not re∣pent him of his crueltyes, because he designs to kill a Here∣tick; and Ep. Ded. p. 2. English Hereticks (he thinks) are not to be kill'd with kindnesse, as some have vainly imagin'd. But 'tis time that I come to another Section. §. 3. It is no small part of my vindication, that Names and His like eruptions against others. Epithets are given to me by that incomparable Syringe, (for such I may call our Author's Quill,) which hath squirted ink into the Faces of the most excellent persons in severall kinds. For if Mr. B. may be believ'd, c. 2. p. 46. Against Gro∣tius. Grotius was an unparallel'd Prevaricator in Religion, and cruelly spitefull against Pro∣testants. To admire his writings is a dreadfull sign of de∣mentations of many great wits, and of their inclinations to Popery, Socinianism, wicked carnall policy. There is no Christian clergy-man under the cope of Heaven, be he Pon∣tifician, Episcopal, Presbyterian, or congregational, but they have reason to be an enemy to him and his writings, for betraying all Ecclesiastical power into the hands of meer laicks. p. 63. He was a prodigious enemy to Calvin, a betrayer of his own native Country, from which he was justly and perpetually exiled. He made it his businesse to be a Judas against the Protestants, p. 62. & shew'd himself devoid of all Christian ingenuity. p. 13. Castalio's Books are viperous & Socinian. p. 64. Against Ca∣stalio and Episcopius. S. Episcopius was a lying-Socinian-Antitri∣nitarian-Cretian; spake against the Dictate of his conscience; most wantonly and sawcily trifled with the Synod. c. 3. p. 29. Against Dr. Taylor. Dr. Taylor may at last swallow the later sequel of Jansenius, that Christ dyed not, ergo he is not incarnated. The Lord be mercifull unto him. c. 2. p. 60. Against Mr. Thomson. A man desperately unadvised, & for his affection to the Protestants, such another as my self (a Cassandrian Papist c. 2. p. 73.) c. 2. p. 26. Against all the orthodox together. Drunken Dick Thom∣son was bewitcht with the conceipt of his own parts, as much as any Babylonian, intoxicated by the cup of the whore.
In a word, all the great and good men, who for above 1200. years, in all Countryes, have opposed Intoduct. p. 2. lin. 3, 4, 8, 9. those opinions which Mr. B. is now of, were so many [Dragons and Le∣viathans, sharpning their tongues and pens and wits a∣gainst the omnipotent Soveraignty and Grace of God.] Reader, you must not be offended: For Mr. B. tells you, that Mr. Calvin was lyable to errors and passions as himself. Against Mr. Calvin. And if he means, as lyable as himself, he useth Mr. Calvin a great deal worse then his Arminians. What would you have a man do, when he is tortur'd with so many twitches of the aking tooth? even men of mild tempers will be apt to cry out, after the measure that they have smarted: how much more may an p. 8. orthodox and cordial zelot? pangs and torments make some men Rave. It being naturall to the Creature, to ease it self by any means; and to lessen its Agonyes, by giving them the quickest and largest vent that he is able. Many men have blasphem'd in fits of hast and vexation; not for want of right principles, but of strength and patience to make use of them. It hath been matter of satisfaction to some stomack full souldiers, whilst they have grovelled upon the earth in blood and slaughter, at least to brow beat their enemyes, and (for want of other weapons) to look blows at them, and call them Doggs. I will not vindicate those persons, whom Mr. B. hath thus reviled; because I think it their vindication, that none but a Correptorie Corrector would have dared in publick to have revil'd them. I will only put him in mind, that this is now the second time wherein he hath printed his own disgraces, by giving the Of Mr. Thom∣son in particu∣lar. name of Drunken Dick to that renowned Scholar Mr. Thom∣son: a person admired for his Abilityes by the most pious and the most learned of the Belgick Protestants; and highly com∣mended by Bishop Abbot, who writ against him. Pasci∣tur in vivis livor. Had that Great Man been alive, M. B's su∣periours might have malign'd him. Or had I cited any one passage out of his learned Book, Mr. B. then might have pre∣tended some small occasion for this asperity. But that upon no occasion offer'd he should have Drunken Dick Thomson in both his Prints, bewrayes a marvellous Cacoethes in the inward old man. If Mr. Thomson were ever drunk, it is more then I know; I am sure his writings are very sober: Nor came I soon
enough into the world to know him by any thing but his writings. In the judgement of Mr. Baxter, I do not speak mine own judgement) Mr. Baxt. Disput. 3. p. 329, &c. He that hath oftentimes been drunk may yet have true grace, and be in the number of the Godly. Nay there are worse things then that, which a man may commit, and yet be Godly, saith Mr. Baxter. Id. ib. p. 33. Note the pro∣bable Reason, why Mr. Bar∣lee doth so highly exoll Mr. Baxter, c. 2. p. 73. How many Profes∣sors will rashly raile, and lye in their passions? how few will take well a reproof, but rather defend their sin? How many in these times that we doubt not to e godly, have been guil∣ty of disobedience to their guides, and of schism, and doing much to the hurt of the Church? a very great sin. Peter, Lot, and its like David, did oft commit greater sins. And yet a Ib. p. 326, 327. man must be guilty of more sin then Peter was in de∣nying and forswearing Christ, that is notoriously ungodly; yea then Lot was, who was drunk two nights together, and committed incest twice with his own Daughters, and that after the miraculous destruction of Sodom, of his own wife, and his own miraculous deliverance. The sad ef∣fect of that oinion, that the Regenerate man cannot cease to be re∣generate, let his sins be never so great. and this is said by Mr. Baxt. to be the opinion of most of our Divines, meaning (I suppose) the Calvinistical: for I know none else of this opinion. Nay a man that is notoriously ungodly (in the sense in hand) or unsanctified, must be a greater sinner then Solomon was with his 700. Wives, and his 300. Concubines, & grosse Idolatryes, when his heart was turned away from the Lord God of Israel, which appeared unto him twice, and commanded him not to go after other Gods; but he kept not that which the Lord commanded. Thus far Mr. Baxter: from whom, in con∣science, I am bound to declare my dissent, and to warn my weaker Readers not to believe a word of it. I will only say for Mr. Thomson, that he was not dry drunk, nor added Drunkennesse to thirst, as many Precisians vvere knovvn to do. What vvas said by the Prophet, (Isa. 51, 21.) I may also say in another sense, that many have been drunken, though not with wine, but vvith somevvhat worse. I vvill not imitate Mr. B. by raking inhumanely in dead men's Graves. But I have heard of a great one of Mr. B's party, vvho, as often as he vvas vvilling to exhilarate himself vvith the devv of Bacchus, vvould make a short exhortation to his Bons Compagnions, holding forth to this purpose, if not in these very words: [Come, Be∣loved in the Lord, let us be refreshed vvith the othr bottle of Sack: vve have an interest in the Creature through Jesus Christ: let not the vvicked drink all.] I name not the man,
and so have revealed no secrets. But I am willing that Mr. Bar∣lee should see the uglinesse of his arguings against a Doctrin, from the personal corruption of some one man who did assert it. How easily might any man requite suchusage (as God for∣bid that any man should) by saying impatient Note, that this is only the putting of a case, whereby M. B. may learn to hate his own pra∣ctise, by ha∣ving seen it in other colours. Iack Calvin, or Calvin was a proud Iack? Is not that the same with Drunken Dick Thomson? for was not Richard the name of the later, as well as Iohn of the former? nay did not Mr. Cal∣vin confesse he was impatient? and that the Beast was grown masterfull, he could not tame it? Was not Bucer a mode∣rate man? and did not he call Calvin Fratricide? and is not that much worse then Drunken? and is not all this printed by their very best Note, that Bezaunsealed that consession of Calvin: whom Mr. B. unawares doth affrm devoid of all Christian ingeuity, c. 2. p. 62. His slf-con∣tradictions. Friends? But never did Mr. Thomson accuse himself of being Drunken, much lesse from the Print-house. And therefore Mr. B. was ill advis'd. §. 4. He was also ill advised in being no kinder to himself, then to pull down commonly with his right hand, what he had raised with his left. Had his memory lain in his fingers ends, he would either not have written the former parcells of his Book, or at least he would not have contradicted them in the later. To shew this at large, were to compile a whole volume of self-contradictions. But yet my Reader shall have a tast of what hath been the greatest part of my entertainment. One while he tells he hath abstersed Ti le-page. all calumnyes; and yet an∣other while he pretendeth to have c. 2 p. 20. omitted many; nay brief∣ly to touch upon a few, and not to mention a world more. Had he followed the advise of his Father Pliny, saepius respiciendo Titulum, he would not have swallow'd so great a Camell with∣out having felt it in going down. He said in his Title [A Full Abstersion of All Calumnyes;] and yet he rap't out an c. 2. p. 17. Oath, that of all those Forgeries and Fictions which I had charged him withall, there were but 3 in all his Book to which he seem'd to give credit. Nor had he sooner said so, but he nam'd a fourth, to which he avowed his giving credit. As if he thought that Abstersion had signified Recantation, and that he meant only to say, A Confession of all calumnyes except those three, He pretended a Stationer for the one, and a conscionable Divine for the other. two of which he also p. 18, 19. confessed to have been ca∣lumnyes indeed. First he made himself smutty, and now with a char-coal he strives to make himself clean. But never was any man fowler in the full Abstersion of a chimney. At first
he c. 1. p. 5. promis'd his Reader, that he would write in a certain method; but solemnly brake it a little after, by p. 11. declaring his purpose to quit that method, and for brevityes sake to be immethodicall. For above 30 years space, he durst to lay down his life, he c. 2. p. 22, 23. never swore a rash Oath; yet he Ib. p. 17. swore most rashly not above 3 leafs before, and no lesse rashly in his Cor∣reptorie Correction p. 174. besides that he swore the Scotish Covenant, and another Oath besides that, which if he did not swear rashly, was rashly broken. He p. 22. never cursed (if you believe him) in 30 years; but yet believe me, he cursed himself (Correp. Corr. p. 25.) and here curseth others (c. 2. p. 38.) and together with himself, the I have proved from their printed works, that they hold God to be the cause of sin, in those very words. chief men of his party, upon whom he c. 3. p. 54, 55. wisheth that myriads of Anathematisms may light, if they hold that God is the fountain or cause of sin. Yet he holds it himself in the very next page; where he saith that God is the naturall cause of the mere act of sin, and the accidental cause of the very obliquity of the act of sin, (p. 55. c. 3.) He c. 2. p. 12. denyes that he accused me of assertive Socinia∣nism, and yet p. 38. accuseth me often in the Great, and addes c. 3. p. 4. rank to the Socinian. He frequently called me Arminian, and Arminius my c. 3. p. 25. Father; yet he reckons up c. 3. p. 4, 5, 14, 15. many things, wherein he con∣fesseth I do recede from Arminius, and that irreconcilably; and yet he feares not to say, that I have Ib. p. 25. all my Principles from Arminius. I am but c. 2. p. 46. inclin'd to Popery; Ib. p. 38. yet am half a Pontifician or Papist; nay a p. 73, 74, 75. whole one. He saith he c. 3. p. 11. never call'd me Heretick; yet Ib. & p. 149. often doth it. He pleads for the c. 2. p. 6. &c. lawfulnesse of his railing; and yet c. 3. p. 3. denyes his pleading for it. He saith his Manuscript Copy of my Notes doth not differ from mine, in c. 2. p. 47, 48. any material thing; and yet (in the very next page) he saith they are Ib. p. 48. two distinct things, and that 'tis false to say, that they are one and the same for substance. He would not presse me to things which I was most likely to p. 52. refuse to have my Doctrins tryed by; and yet would be p. 55. and 52. tryed by no other then his Senior Sym∣presbyters. Grotius is often a p. 46. Socinian; and yet a p. 73, 74. Pa∣pist, which no Socinian can be. The same p. 46. Grotius is an enemy to all Popish and Episcopal Clergy; which no Papist can be, and be a Papist. He saith his Senior Sympresbyters have p. 40, 41. receded from their subscriptions; and yet for all that, that
they have been p. 52. least upon their Tropicks in these Tropical times. God (saith he) is the naturall c 3. p. 55. cause of the Act of sin; and yet that sin hath no efficient cause. (Corr. Corr. p. 55.) Throughout his first Book he was much and often for the way of the Sublapsarians; yet (being beaten out of that) he Ib. p. 15. de∣clares himself now to be a Supralapsarian. He sometimes Epist. Ded. p. 2. commends me for extreamly gallant parts, and diverse rare excellencyes, and Postscript. fine Abilityes, and of a c. 3. p. 108. super∣lative wit; yet at other times I am a c. 3. p. 148. wordy and windy man, of a blunt judgement, and fitter then any of my neigh∣bours to supply the place of an c. 2. p. 33. Idiot. It is frequent with him to slight my Arguments, as if they had nothing of force in them; and yet he confesseth that he is brought to an extremity, to his very last Reserve of forces, which if they fail, the Cause is lost. This I say he confesseth, if he understands the meaning of his Proverb, c. 2. p. 11. Deventum est Triarios. If he doth not, I cannot help it. He confesseth that his Epist. Ded. p. 2. passions against me. are exuberant here and there, and talks of giving me satis∣faction; but yet he boasts of his c. 1. p. 8. moderation, and will not so much Ibid. as accept of my pardon. His fictions and railings he calls his Frailtyes, and doth c. 2. p. 55. confesse they are great and many, and that he began his first Book with a Confession of them; and yet his whole first Chapter is not only to excuse, but (in some places) to commend them. He snatcheth severall occasions to tell the c. 2. p. 27. Mr. B. a Trum∣pet to his own praises. world, [that he learned Hebrew ma∣ny years since, and hath attained to some little something; and from the 18th year of his Age to this very hour, men of the greatest Note for learning and piety have given large At∣testations to his scholarship (which he ever writes with ll) when they have not been sollicited to it by any thing but their own forwardnesse.] And again, that the most illu∣strious Luminaryes of the Church did grace his labours with their unexpected Encomiums. p. 2. And p. 35. that some of the greatest eminency for learning and piety, did in letters ex∣presse their good Resentment of his labours, & thankfulnesse for his pains. But yet in a grosse contradiction to the first of these passages, he hath published two Books; Note, he professeth to have review'd his sheets with his own eyes, and to have drawn up the Errata, &c. In Epist. ante Catal. Err. whereby he hath shew'd it to be impossible, that the most learned and the most pious should commend his learning. For if they were learned, how could they be so much mistaken? and if they
were pious, how could they speak what they knew not to be true? Since Mr. B. hath so partial an opinion of himself, and had such need to let it fly, as that he could not forbear to say in Print, that he is p. 27. not hardly opinionated against himself, and also shews what it is that hath done him hurt; it will be a charitable attempt, to lay that spirit thus conjur'd up, and to mind him of something for his Humiliation. He tells his Patron (he saith, not as a spaniel) that he knows not any mere Epist. Ded. p. 1. in∣dividual alive, to whom, under God, he would more desire to approve all his Travails. As if he thought that individual had signified a Man, which every child could have told him is a generical word, & as aptly spoken of a Beast, a Tree, a Stone, or a Devil, as of any man whatsoever. I had said that sin was quid positivum: he saith I put an c. 2. p. 56. Apotheosis upon sin; as if he thought it derived from , pono; unlesse he means that I made a God of it, and then it is infinitly worse, as I shall shew in my second part. He calls me c. 3. p. 18.  in such a way, as if he thought it had signified a young man only. For he could not intend to say, that I am newly converted to the Christian Religion (as the word importeth) because he calleth me Apo∣state, and Apostatarian, and twenty things to that purpose. So he useth the word c. 2. p. 71. Apostacy (and writes it with a [c]) as if he thought it had signified who-know's-what. Nor can he ex∣cuse it any way possible, unlesse by confessing he bore false∣witnesse. I did but dip by accident into his Correp. Corr. when I chanced to light upon this rare Corr. Corr. p. 27. passage. Heartily I can wish, that you would not steer the ship you are one of the guiders of per Archipelagum, through the main Ocean unto Rome it self. It seems he thought that Archipelago (which I mention'd in my Notes) had been the oblique case of a La∣tin word, because he knew Pelagus was Latin for a Sea. And such was his knowledge in Geographie, that he thought the Archipelago had been the Ocean, through which we saile from hence to Rome: or if he knew it to have been the Aegean Sea, his mistake was more ridiculous, in thinking that that Sea was on this side Italie. As great a jest as that Preacher's, who told his Hearers, they must passe through the dangers of the Red Sea, before they could arrive at the Cape of good Hope. I need not speak of his citing Aristotle and Chrysostom in Epist. Ded. p. 3, & 4. Latin, because I know not what it may signify; whether
that he thought they were Latin Authors, or met with a Tran∣slation at second hand. It were well if he were able to write true English on all occasions, as well as upon some. Examples of the contrary are extremely Introduct. p. 4. rife in his publick works. Who∣soever shall consider, how he Epist. Ded. p. 4. lin. 2. ad lin. 0. prayes perfect non-sense in his Dedicatory Epistle, and how in the end of his Postscript, he is skipping for joy out of sense and syntax; and shall compare what I have shew'd ch. 2. §. 17. he will say that Mr. B. was somewhat too lavish of his praises, upon such an obnoxious and faulty self: his faults being greater then Moneo ne semet ipse ta∣ducat, e qui Latine on didicit, Latine scribt; talis sc. ut: b Amico monitus pri∣mam syllabam in voce legen∣dum esse bre∣vem, id ita mu∣taverit, ut ge∣rundium nobis substituerit foemininum: qui vocem elixerit nescio unde nobis elicuit. Grot. Vot. pro pace, p. 63. those of Ri∣vet, of which the grave and wise Grotius took publick notice. And in this I have follow'd that great example. §. 5. What he alledgeth to shew his learning (for no other reason can I imagin) concerning the Books in his study, of which he proclaimeth unto the world, that Mr. B's Rhe∣toricall digres∣sion to the sum of 150l. at which he pri∣zeth his study of Books. he should be loath to part with them for 150l. (ch. 3. p. 126. lin. 7, 8.) is as far from being argumentative, as any thing which he hath spoken for his Doctrin of decrees, or of God's being the Ch. 3. p. 55. cause of sin. And though it merits not an Answer or confutation, yet because I cannot imagin vvhy he should put it into his Book, unlesse he thought it to be of force to serve for a part of his Vindication; I vvill respect him so far, as to make him a return by these de∣grees. 1. I never did accuse him of having a cheap study of Books, nor did I ever conceive it could be any mans crime. Nil refert, si legeris quan∣tum habeas; sat est, si ha∣bueris quan∣tum legas. Seneca. Grotius vvas the Owner of very few Books: he liv'd most upon borrowing the Books of others, and that from the chiefest parts of Christendom; vvhich having contracted into his pa∣per, and thence digested into himself, he became an * ani∣mated Library, or an * Ambulatory Pandect, of all the best learning in all the vvorld. 2. What he saith of his Books is gratis dictum; neither proved by witnesse, nor by an Inventa∣ry of the particulars. and vve vvho are English-men, do not like your Dutch reckonings, nor is it the likelyer to be so, be∣cause he sayes it, vvho hath been found so often to give us the issues of his Invention. The Boy in Horace vvas so known to speak falsely, that vvhen at last he spake an important Truth, none of the neighbourhood vvould believe him. 3. He doth not tell us hovv much his study of Books is worth, but for hovv ** . much he vvill not leave them; vvhich is only to tell us his great affection to those Authors, vvhom he hath indeared unto him∣self
by many late obligations. But another man perhaps may be as glad of their room, as he can be of their company. 4. Ad∣mit 150l. would buy a great study of books, (which yet I can∣not apprehend) if he meant to infer himself a man of great learning, I deny his sequel. For then the richest man living would have it in his power to be the learnedst. Many Statio∣ners are masters of much more learning, then the best Scholars can pretend to: but there is commonly this difference, that the Stationers learning is without him, the Scholars within him. Yet the Stationer hath a mighty command of his learn∣ing, (as well as Mr. W. B.) For as he bought it at his pleasure, so he may sell it at his need; and till then, may hang it upon a Tack. We see 'tis very ill arguing from the Quantity of the Study to the Quality of the Student; whose greater commen∣dation were, to have no more Books then he can put into his Brain. Whosoever shall impose a Treasure of mony upon a Mule, will not certainly enrich, but load the creature. But if he prized his Books to save his Executors a labour, he should not here have put it in his Book of Abstersions; he should ra∣ther have reserved it for a Codicill of Instructions, to be an∣nexed (when time serves) unto his last Will and Testa∣ment. §. 6. I must not thus insist upon the other like parts of his His Dexteri∣tyes in speaking beside the purpose. vindication, and yet I may usefully represent them (for many reasons) by drawing up a short Catalogue of his escapes from the Question of Gods Decrees; wherein will be seen his Dex∣terityes in finding work for the Printer, and providing mate∣rials for a Book, without indangering his Cause upon all oc∣casions, the very mention of which he had found by expe∣rience to be unsafe. Hereupon he takes occasion (because no good body would be so courteous as to offer it) to acquaint his Readers with many particulars of his life, which the publick∣minded man would not have to dye with him. Ex. Gr. 1. He 1. Introd. p. 2. hath been in this very Country well-nigh these fourteen years; never behaving himself unchristianly, ignorantly, or rudely, amongst many discerning gracious Christians, a∣mongst divers most venerable and eminent Scholars. 2. He is averse from the very Act of writing fairly and slowly. 2. p. 5. 3. He would not for 500l. that other men should be put to it with Printers, Correctors and Transcribers, as he hath 3. Postscript.
been. 4. Of divers late years he hath preached by the hour-glasse. 5. He catechizeth in his Parish, as well as 4. Ch. 2. p. 21. 5. p. 24. 6. p. 23, & 24. preacheth. 6. His Carrier (he tells us) comes to him on Saturdayes in the afternoon, and goes by ten a clock on Munday morning next after. 7. A Bishop of my name (to whom I never had any relation) was wont to make clinches 7. p. 29. as well as He. 8. We must know, at what glad Tdings his 8. p. 38. 9. p. 41, 42. Sympresbyters would have jumped. 9. He layes up an Ar∣ticle against me, against the time that ever we may be so blessed, as to enjoy Presbyterian Censures. 10. He tells us a 10. p. 47. Tale which he was told by an Oxford Stationer, to commend his Book for Orthodox, because it was so little bought. 11. A 11. p. 66. certain man whose name was Forbes, a Scotish Divine, was for above 30 years Preacher at Delph. 12. And he did 12. Ibid. speak to Mr. Barlee in the presence of Dr. Ames. 13. He was more then ordinarily acquainted with Bishop Davenant (if 13. p. 75. you believe him.) 14. Bishop Davenant did once in pri∣vate sadly bewail to Mr. Barlee (as Mr. Barlee tells us) the 14. Ibid. great growth of Popery and Arminianism. 15. We must not dye in Ignorance, that the Bishop writ a large letter to him 15. p. 76. about the Crosse in baptism. 16. And (which is most wor∣thy to be communicated to late posterity by the indelible Cha∣racters 16. Ibid. of the Presse) the Bishops letter was in folio. To conclude in a word, (that I may not violate my promise of giving in a short Catalogue) one while he strokes Mr. Whit∣fields Gray haires; another while he cajoles a Worcester∣shire Minister: now he tells us (but unsincerely) some Table-Talk at Daintry concerning Socrates and Iob; anon he gives us to understand the severall parts of his Age. Somewhere he tells us what the brethren intended, in case Presbytery had prosper'd; and that he writes but a scrawling hand at the best. Into such kind of subjects hath he been pleased to step aside, from his pretended confirmation of irrespective De∣crees. §. 7. There are but two things more in the making up of my How great an Artificer of escapes. Accounts, with which I shall at present detain my Reader; viz. the odnesse of his excuses, and the prettinesse of his Wit. A Tast or two of each will be an opiparous entertainment. As for the former, his facility is such, that though his Tetters are never so spreading, the least drop of his soveraign Ink will
cure them all in an instant: If angry blisters have been disco∣ver'd upon the two-edged member, he gives us to know he is of a very small Stature, and little men are still fretfull (p. 5.) If any thing ailes him in point of literature, or manners, it is no more but that his memory was terrible false to him (p. 18.) or the Printer did him a shrewd turn (p. 19.) or he had mo∣tives to it which shall be namelesse (ibid.) or he was told it by a Reverend Minister (p. 18.) or by a person of true honour (p. 18.) or by a conscionable Divine (p. 19.) or by W. C. (p. 18.) or by a Gentleman-entertainer (p. 44.) or else it crept at the, Presse out of his Margin into his Text (p. 19.) and so all's well. If he is told of his clinches, he shewes Scripture for it where there are none (p. 29.) If he is caught in the Act of doing violence to my Words, he saith, he did but allude to them, not quote them directly (p. 53.) When he is brought to such a pinch, he knows not which way to answer, or any o∣ther wayes to evade, then he saith of his opponent, that he hath words and wit at will (p. 53.) or else he tells us a story of Dr. Twisse (p. 54.) and that he hath heard the Doctor spake it a The repeated jest was but this, that as the Iewes did set a Crown of Thons upon Christs head, so the Arminians put a Crown of Scorns upon his Grace. hundred times over (ibid.) the whole vertue of which sto∣ry doth consist in the tinkling of Thorns and Scorns▪ (ibid.) Thus let the Difficultyes and streights of our great Artificer be never so many for number, or never so mon∣strous for shape, with a dash or two of his pen he winds him∣self out of all, he makes all fair and unreprovable. There is not a fault in his manners, nor (I warrant you) a flaw in any one part of his undertakings. So much for his artifice in draw∣ing good over evill. §. 8. And because in the course of his studyes he hath at∣tain'd to a pair of jests, which in a volume of that bulk may run the hazard of being lost, I will adde my mite to their con∣servation. It seems he had learn't (by one means or other) that his Sympresbyter with the long breath (which admonish't Mr. Baxter to keep his distance) had in a Latin Epistle, (upon such an occasion as he could get,) shew'd the Dimen∣sions of his wit in the mistaking of my Name. No lesse then four whole times, without the fourtieth part of a reason, he was resolv'd to call me Persius: and a little after took care to say (what he thought would be pretty,) Difficile est Satyram non scribere. Thus lay the Hint, upon which Mr. Barlee held
forth as shrewdly in his Abstersion, that I am Ch. 2. p. 53. a Iuvenal Divine. He thought it was pleasant for Iuvenal and Persius to be both predicated of Me; and so hath left unto posterity this Memorandum, that when two Sympresbyters joyn wit to wit, they are able (betwixt them) to break a jest. As his first jest is on my name, so is his second upon his own: in allusion to which, he is again (saith he) call'd out to Introduct. p. 5. thrashing. For Mr. Barlee to be a Thrasher, it seems he thought to be as lepid, as for the high-wayes of Egypt to be∣come all Travellers, when the Dust of the Land was wholly turn'd into Lice. But he should have known whilst it was time Gen. 8. 17. (what is now too late) that he who is not skill'd in thrashing, must take great heed how he fights with a Flaile; lest in fetching back his weapon to lay it on so much the harder, he prove so unfortunate as to break his own head. Had I been in his case, and he in mine, this Book, without Question, had been Intitl'd, Mr. Barlee thrashed with his . own Flaile, and found in the winnowing to be but Chaff.
AN APPENDAGE Touching the judgement of the late most lear∣ned and pious Primate of Armagh, as to the matters in controversie betwixt the Two Parties. THat it concerns me very neerly to perform my promises to my Reader, and so to communicate the Grounds of what I have publickly afirmed, concerning the judgement of the right honou∣rable and learned Primate of Armagh, as to the Doctrines which I controvert with the unjust Usurpers of his Authori∣ty, and bold Invaders of his Name, my Reverend Friend In his two let∣ters to Mr. Barlee. Especially p. 61. lin. 14, 15, &c. Doctor Bernard hath made apparent; for if I have wronged so great a Person, it is by so much the greater wrong, and exacteth from my conscience by so much the greater repa∣ration. Nor can I but take it very kindly from so Reverend a Person as Dr. Bernard, that by opposing what I reported in that particular, he hath given me an Occasion to shew the Truth in its Lustre, (which till now was exhibited in some∣what a thick vail) by laying upon me a Necessity to clear my self. To clear my self (I say) not from any aspersions which Dr. Bernard hath cast upon me, (for there are none in his letters, if rightly taken, and applyed, he hath rather open'd a way to my vindication) but from the sinister and irrational uses, which Mr. Barlee and his peers (if yet he is not a peerless person) have had the skill or the unskilfulness to make of those letters, against the intention of Him that writ them. It is not therefore my purpose to clear my self, or my Informers, or the precious memorie of the L. Primate, by a pofessed work of Hostility against those let∣ters of Dr. Bernard; but rather by shewing that those let∣ters
were so warily written, as to have nothing in them of hostile against me, or mine: not pretending to prove my Af∣firmation to have been false, but alledging some Circum∣stances by which it might seem to be unlikely, and obliging me thereby to prove it eminently true. First, he ingenuously professeth, that as it is hard to prove a Negative, (p. 47.) so, according to my Caveat, he doth not take upon him to do it, (p. 56.) but immediately adds, He understands not the Ground of my definitive sentence, &c. (ibid.) And therefore the utmost I have to do, is to make my Ground visible, that an obscure Truth may not suffer for want of a right understanding. Secondly, As Dr. Bernard hath candidly professed, that he took not upon him to prove the Negative of what I said, (p. 56.) so he professeth to be content that I enjoy my opini∣on, if I censure not him for not forsaking his own. (p. 57.) And sure he cannot but be inclinable to agree with me in the end, who differs from me in the way upon such amicable Termes of Reconcilement. Thirdly, Though Dr. Bernard was willing (as well he might) to put the Belief of my Affirmative to some kind of Stand, (at that time of the day, whilst yet he knew not the Ground upon which I marched) yet he pretended not to do it by any other then probabilities (p. 58.) And we know that probabilities doly in the middle twixt Truth and Falshood; it is not in their Nature, and so belongs not to their Office, to make a proof, but to ingender a perswasion; They are proper to Rhetoricians speaking in genere Delibe∣rativo, not to those who intend a Scientifical Demonstrati∣on. And such was the modesty of that reverend Person, that he professed only to stick to his perswasion (not to his know∣ledge or assurance, which in that case was impossible) confir∣med (as he goes on) by probable Testimonies, that there was no such change in the Primate near his Death, (p. 61.) where he confesseth that his Testimonies were no more then pro∣bable, and such as only begot a perswasion in him; nor doth
he seem to be perswaded, that the Primates judgement was never changed, but that it was not near his Death. And if it was longer before his Death, then I supposed it to have been, I am extremely glad of it, because abundantly happy in that mistake. Fourthly, As Dr. Bernard affirmeth (the third time also) a naked Improbability of what I said, (p. 69.) so he seemed to believe, that I had no other witnesses of what I said, then p. 64. com∣pared with p. 70, 71. such as were present at his Sermon, wherein he taught, that by the death of Christ all receive this benefit, that they are saveable, or put into a Capacity of salvation, that termes of peace are procured for all mankind, that all mens sins are become pardonable, mercy attainable, and the like. From whence I easily gather, that had he been timely enough acquainted with the other evidences which I received, he had not opposed his probabilities against such pregnant and cogent proofes. Fifthly, whereas it is said by Dr. Bernard, He was per∣petually with the Primate when last in London, (p. 48.) he must not be thought to mean, that he was never absent, but that he was present very often: for it appears that he was absent, when his Grace and Dr. Walton discoursed together of these affairs. Nor am I moved in the least measure at what he seemeth at least to intimate, p. 52. because he seemeth only to do it, but doth it not. A person of his pru∣dence could not be so extravagant, as to put speeches into my mouth, which never proceeded out of my thoughts. I did not only never say, (no not so much as in a Dream) that the L. Primates Opinion was wholly for Arminius, but expresly said he was an Anti-Arminian (as Dr. Bernard doth acknowledge by his recital of my words p. 50.) I only said that he asserted universal Grace and Redemption, as well as Arminius; meaning a salvability, procured for all without exception: more then which I look not after, nor do I care to have granted: And I am sure my L. Primate affirmes no less, even in that which Dr. Bernard hath publisht of
him. All which doth not hinder, but that in several other things his Grace did differ from Arminius, as I and my Bre∣thren have alwaies done. It is sufficient for the honour of that exceedingly learned and pious man, (I mean Arminius) that though he wanted not his Errors, (as what man living can be without them?) yet he was Orthodox in the main; and more exact in his Iudgement, as well as life, then your other Presbyterians are wont to be. Sixthly, what is spoken by Dr. Bernard (indiscriminate∣ly) of universal Grace and universal Redemption p. 64, 65. (betwixt which two there is a very wide Difference, al∣though the one does evince the other) I am not at all con∣cerned in: It having never been my opinion, (nor com∣patible with it) that the same measure of Grace was equally and alike conferred and applyed to Iudas, which was to Peter: But on the contrary, that though All have a sufficient, yet some have a more abundant measure; one hath five Talents, another hath two, a third but one; everyone according to his several exigence or ability (Mat. 25. 15.) and according as the Master is pleased to deliver out his goods (v. 14.) but he that hath least hath sufficient, if he hide it not in the earth (v. 18.) but rather trade with it (v. 16.) according to the purpose of him that lent it, (v. 15. 19. 21. 27.) As he who had five Talents did gain five more, (v. 15.) and as he who had but two did also gain his other two (v. 17.) so he who had one, and onely one, might have gained one more, if he had not been a wicked and slothful servant, (v. 26. 30.) As he who improved his two Talents into four, received the very same Euge (v. 23.) with him who impro∣ved his five to ten, (v. 21.) so had the third servant improved his one Talent into two, he had also received that blessed say∣ing of his Lord Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou vers. 21. 23. hast been faithful over a little, I will make thee Ruler over much enter thou also into the Ioy of thy Lord. A little mony is sufficient to dive a little Trade, & is capable of yielding a por∣portionable increase. But although one Talent is less then two, vers. 27. 30.
yet considered in its self, 'tis not a little, and compared with other summs, it is a very great deale; for a single Talent is no less then a hundred eighty seven pounds and Ten shillings, which is a vast summe of mony in some mens purses and esteems. A Talent of Grace is infinitely more precious then one of Mony: And whilst I thankfully acknowledge, that my Talent of Grace is sufficient for me, (though a farr less Mat 20. 15. measure then God hath given to some of my Brethren) mine eye is not evil because I see that my Masters is very good. I do not envy my Brother for having five to my one; but am heartily thankful for his Abundance. So farr am I from believing, that Gods Grace is dispensed to all alike, that I fear those professors have less then others, who have proudly adventured on its Inclosure. I say therefore again, that I am not concern'd in those words of Dr. Bernard, con∣cerning the same measure of Grace common to Iudas with S. Peter: and by so much the less, because he candidly professeth, (p. 65.) that he would not be understood to interpose himself in the controversie, or to affix thus much upon Mr. Pierces judgement; of which, if his Readers will but take a due notice, as well as mine, I shall be freed from the danger of being injur'd by their mistakes. Seventhly, Dr. Bernard concludeth his second Letter to Mr. Barlee with a great Civility to my self, and with a very course Complement to my Delator, professing to have appeared in this affair, neither in patronage of Mr. Barlee, nor out of any opposition to Mr. Pierce, (p. 71.) Which as it was more then I expected from a perfect stranger (whose Favour too had been courted by the renowned Raiser of false Reports) so from a person of that Temper which since I find him to be of, I could in reason expect no less. And how many advantages soever other men may have over me in other kinds, yet in offices of Huma∣nity and mutual Forbearance, I am very unwilling to come Eph. 4. 2. Col. 3. 13 behind them; but will say of Dr. Bernard, a reverend per∣son, (as Abraham to Lot in another case) why should strife Gen. 13. .
be between us, when it appears that we are Brethren? These are sincerely the very Reasons why I take no other course to clear my self, and my Informers, and the Honour also of the L. Primate, then by publishing what I have spoken in several letters to Dr. Bernard, which lying by me already written, and comprehending the main (though not the All) I have to say of that particular, have fitly saved me the labour of writing all over again in another Forme. I should otherwise have chosen to extract the substance of my letters, and (out of that) to have made a close Narra∣tive of all my Meaning, if both my time and my patience would have sufficed for such a work, I have forborn to pub∣lish Dr. Bernards letters with mine own, not that I thought I might not lawfully do it, (as Mr. Barlee had done before) but because I was not sure that he would take it in good part, and because I knew it was not needful; there being nothing of Concernment in any one of his letters, but what may easily be gathered from one of mine. For the Reverend Dr. Bernard at his lodging in Grayes Inn. SIR, THere are three things especially by which I am urged The first Let∣ter. to give you the trouble of this address. First, a Re∣port which came to me from several hands, that you have said something to me by way of letter; which, although it came not to my hands, I am to thank you for as heartily as if it had. But a second Report hath made me guess at the Contents; For I have heard that you were angry with Mr. Barlee, and with me, for doing wrong to the memorie of the late most learned and Reverend Primate of Armagh. And again I am to thank you for being angry in such a Case, wherein my Anger concurrs with yours, and that against mine own self, on supposition that I have injured that ex∣cellent
Person, whom I laboured only to vindicate from Him who did. But as I heartily intended the Primates Ho∣nour in what I publickly spake of him, so I cannot yet think that my intentions were misguided, or have missed of the mark at which they aim'd. For Mr. Barlee had printed such things of the Primate, as did imply him a patron of those sad Doctrines which he asserted. And because I was inform'd by several persons (for learning and Piety be∣yond exception) That though his Grace in former times was universally thought to be the prop of those Do∣ctrines which Mr. Barlee asserted, and I oppos'd, yet in the latter part of his life he declared his aversion to those opinions, and his perfect Concurrence with Bishop Overal; I thought it my duty to make this known, that so Mr. Barlee might be defeated, His Grace righted, the common people disabused, and many learned men profited by that example. And supposing (as I did) that my Lord Primate his Grace had once in times past been extremely different in his judgement from Bishop Overal, as having embraced the way of the Anti-Remonstrants, how could I possibly do less then conclude from thence his change of judgment? But I have thirdly been inform'd, that the cause of the dis∣pleasure conceived against me, is not my saying that the Primate was at last of the opinions which I am of (in these points) but my implying his having been otherwise, by my affirming his change of judgment. And again, for this cause I am to give you great thanks; it being most suitable to my wishes, that his Grace may be proved to have been alwaies of the judgement which I am of, and that by consequence he never chang'd it, and that I (by consequence) was much mistaken on the right hand, as Mr. Barlee and his Abetters were more mistaken on the left. In the mean time it is evident, that what I spake of him in my books, was safely spoken in all respects. For what I said that I was told, I was told indeed, and that by excellent persons, whom I shall name when time serves;
how truly or falsely, viderint illi. And this must be granted me by all the world, That my Lord Primates opinions in the declining part of his life were either changed, or not changed, from what they formerly had been. If they were, it is happy for me that I did not err in what I publisht; and if they were not, it is much more hap∣py I was mistaken, and misinform'd: for as 'tis much for my purpose, that so eminent a Prelate was perfectly orthodox at the last, so it is more for my purpose, that so eminent a prelate was alwayes orthodox. On which side soever the Truth doth lye, it will reflect very severely upon the pre∣tentions of Mr Barlee. For if my L. Primate forsook those Doctrines which he and his party are wont to plead for, it is some discredit to their Cause, that so great a person thought fit to leave it: but if he was never of those opinions which they report him to have been of I know not how they can excuse so bold a Fiction. And now Sir, that you see how truly zealous I am, and ever have been, in vindicating the Honour of that Great person from such Aspersions as the Adversary hath cast upon him, I shall make no doubt of having a fair opinion from you, concerning the Ground on which I go, and the end at which I drive. And to give you a right understanding of me, as well as to assure you that I had answered your Letter, had I recei∣ved it, was the principal inducement to this present im∣portunity from Your Humble servant Tho. Pierce. Brington, Octob. 5. 1657.
For my Reverend friend Dr. Bernard at Grayes Inn. SIR, IT had (it seems) been happy, if your first Letter to me The first Let∣ter. had not finally miscarried; for then I should have given you such a satisfactory Account, as would (I think) have prevented, (at least have altered) your resolutions of sending Letters to Mr. Barlee concerning me and my wri∣tings. To the next part of your Letter I have these things to say. First that I did the very thing which you are sorry I did not. For before I durst publish what I had heard of the Primate, I did consult with such persons, who (I did verily believe) could best inform me, (as having been conversant with him to that very purpose) and were most worthy to be believed, (as being persons of great fame for Life and Learning.) Next, I desire you to consider, how unjustly diffident I must have been, if I had not believed what I was told by several grave persons, at several times, as from the Primates own Mouth, in private partly, & partly also in publick, and all attested to me under hand and seal, which upon fit occasion they will be ready to make good too. How impossible will it be thought, that three or four di∣stinct persons, all of the Priesthood, and of unquestionable Integrity, should either by chance or by conspiracy, write the very same fiction (if it were such) to the very same party, who is not intimate with either, and to one of the number a perfect stranger? Nay, what if my witnesses are (some of them) strangers to one another, and of so ex∣emplary veracity, that each is instar multorum? will any man blame me for my belief, and not rather believe them as I have done? When the thing by me asserted is matter of Fact, it cannot possibly be proved with more advantage
to me, or satisfaction to such as judge, then by ear-wit∣nesses upon Oath: whereas the Negative to that is so im∣possible to be proved by any mortal, that I suppose no oath can be admitted. What the Primate hath said to you, you may very well remember, but you cannot remember what he hath not said. Nor can you know many things which he said to others, much less can you know he never said them. All which I recommend unto your timely consideration, because I am kinder to your credit then to be willing that you deny what can dilucidly be proved; which I therefore suppose you will not do. And if in stead of a denial of what shall be proved by my informers, you affirm some∣thing else in derogation to it, it will be expected that your proofs be as good as mine. If they are not, it will redound to your prejudice; and if they are, it will not at all re∣dound to mine: but all the dishonour will be the Primates (which God forbid) if he shall be found to have breathed both hot and cold, by declaring himself at once for two opinions, whereof the one is not consistent with the other. I have said (and shall prove) that he declared for that opi∣nion which I am of; and if afterwards you shall say (what you will also prove) that he declared for another inconsi∣stent with mine, you alone in that case will cast a cloud over his name. And if we differ about the time of his De∣claration, (you placing it in his former years, as I in his last,) that indeed will salve his Honour, but withal it will make as much for mine as I can wish, because it will help me to prove his change. In the mean time I am glad that you affirme the Primate not to have been of Mr. Barlees judgement; which is as much to the ruine of his Correp∣tory Correction, (where he useth that Reverend and lear∣ned Prelate as one of the heads of his party in these Af∣fairs) as I need wish it in that particular. I am as sorry for that heat which you say you find betwixt me and Mr. Bar∣lee, as I am glad that I do not find any in my self. 'Tis true indeed, I was forced to clear my self from his Inven∣tions,
and to disown his ugly Names, as well as to vindicate the Truth from his adventures. But in the repelling of his Fire, I do not remember that I was ever once heated. And if you have seen what stuff I had to deal with, I suppose you will think I could not have used him with greater mild∣ness. But I find my self tedious; and therefore my thanks to you for your promise to send me that which you have publisht, shall put an end to this large trouble from Your assured friend and servant Tho. Pierce. Brington, Octob. 31. 1657. For my Reverend friend Dr. Bernard at his lodging in Grayes Inn. SIR, YOur last, which was dated Novem. 19. together with your book (which it seems you sent with it, if not be∣fore The third let∣ter. it) did not come to my hands untill the fifth of this Instant, and then through the hands of Mr. Barlee, I was un∣willing to send you my Thanks for your book, until I also might send you some small account of my perusal; which by the first opportunity shall now be done. But first let me acknowledge (by way of answer to your letter) that you have indeed afforded me so much respect, (above what you have given to Mr. Barlee, (in your second Letter directed to him) as I cannot be offended with any want in that kind. Nay you farther load me, in one passage, with such a weight of commendation, that I know not how I
can support it, but by his credit who laid it on. You have obliged me besides with a righteous construction of my In∣tentions, which have aimed at the promotion of peace and Truth. In which respect I am desirous, that even whilst we differ in some few things, we may be as they who agree in all. I shall not snatch at occasions of having controver∣sies with you, though there is nothing more pleasant then to dispute with persons of so much Temper. And had my Neighbour of Brockhole either embraced your Advice, or taken his Copy from your Example, by how much more strongly he had opposed me, I should have loved and va∣lued him so much the more. But so ill is the use which he hath made of your Letters and of your Name, and some expressions in your book do reflect so sternly upon my Credit, and (which is more) upon my cause, that I think it concerns me either to clear what I have done from be∣ing any way injurious to the memory of the Primate, or (if I cannot do that,) to make some ample satisfaction for having wronged it. That I intended no more then his greatest Honour, all the world is my witness, for as much as I as∣serted him to be of that judgement, which all men are of who have the highest of my esteem: And to grow out of that which I think is error, to the possession of that which I think is Truth, is not inconstancy, but improvement, as I interpret. When I left those Doctrines into which my Teachers at first betrayed me, I cannot say I revolted, but I was rather set free. To be fickle, is one thing; but to grow and increase, is quite another. Whatsoever I could in∣tend as an honour to my cause, I could not choose but in∣tend to their honour also, by whom I could think my cause was honoured. When I say that King Iames, Bishop Andrews, Philip Melanchthon, Tilenus, Dr. Potter, Dr. God∣win, and many others whom I could name of eminent learning and integrity, did turn away from those Tenents which are called Calvinistical, in exchange for those other which unconsidering persons do call Arminian, I make ac∣compt
I commend them for bowing to the sceptre of so∣veraign truth: And this doth justifie my Intentions in all I said of our Reverend Primate. But the question still re∣mains concerning matter of Fact, whether his Grace did change his judgement from what it formerly had been. I began in the affirmative, but you say No: And both per∣haps with good reason, because we are diversely informed, unless we can shew by some Inquiry where lyes the Error. I grounded my affirmative upon the Difference which I found betwixt the judgement of the Primate when he writ the History of Gotteschalc, and that account of his judgement which I had from those Persons who are of vast Importance in my esteem. To transcribe their Certi∣ficates, which they have severally given me under Hand and seal, of what they severally heard from his Grace his mouth, is too large a task in the present hast that I am in; nor am I sure that you desire it. And therefore deferring for a time the special part of my Advantage, I will offer to your Equity and Christian candor, what I have just now obser∣ved from several passages in your Book. First, you thank p. 43. Mr. Barlee for the large expressions of his affection to the late Archbishop of Armagh, and the readiness to clear him from some injury done him by Mr. Thomas Pierce: whereas it seems very evident, by that account which you give of the Primates judgement about the true intent and extent of Christs Death, that Mr. Barlee is less qualified for the Bi∣shops vindication in that affair, then any man in the world in all respects. I beseech you bear with me whilst I give you my reasons. 1. Mr. Barlee, in his last book, declares ch. 3. p. 15. lin. 19. Cor. Cor. p. 130. 131, 133. and particularly 194. himself a Supralapsarian. Yet 2. in Correptory Corre∣ction, he had again and again usurpt the name of the Primate for the patronizing of his opinions. He doth in one place oppose him to Bishop Overal, as a more moderate Bi∣shop, affirming Bishop Overal to have played upon Calvin, and to have traduced the Puritans, whom the Reverend Primate p. 130. (he saith) did clear. He citeth the History of Gotteschalc a∣gainst p. 133.
that notion of Christs death and satisfaction, which you have now printed from the Primates own Hand. He directs me to him as to a choice orthodox writer (in the Barlean conceipt of the word Orthodox,) besides what he p. 194. doth in other places, which I have not leisure to search after. 3. But now you tell him in your Letter, that the Pri∣mates judgement was in a middle way, different as well from Mr. Barlees, as from mine. Whether from mine, we shall p. 52. see anon. But if at all, I am sure much less then from my neighbours. In the mean time it is demonstrable, that if Mr. Barlee was in the right, when he vouched the Primate for his opinions, I was also in the right, when I said that the Primate had changed his judgement. And for this your book shall be my warrant, as well as the Primates own words, That he concurred with Bishop Overal. Next I pray Sir consider; whether any one Paragraph in all my books (touching the true intent and extent of Christs Death) is any way dissonant from what now you publish, and that (say you, very truly, without all Question) from the Pri∣mates Letter of Resolution to the request of a Friend. First, I have nothing in behalf of the two extremes (p. 2, 3.) in any part of my writings. Next, I have jumped with the Pri∣mate in what I publisht, (before I had the possibility of seeing that which you have sent me) not onely much to my comfort, but truly almost to my Admiration. For his Grace writes thus: That the satisfaction of Christ was once p. 4. done for all, the application is still in doing. The satisfa∣ction of Christ onely makes the sins of mankind fit for par∣don. All the sins of mankind are become venial, in respect of the price paid by Christ to his Father,—but all do not obtain actual Remission, because most offendors do not take p. 4. and 5. out or plead their pardon as they ought to do.—By this way being made (that is, by assuming our nature) God holds out unto us the Golden sceptre of his word, and thereby not only signifieth his pleasure of admitting us unto his presence, &c. but also sends an embassage unto us, and entreats us
that we would be reconciled unto him. 2 Cor. 5. 20.—By p. 6. the vertue of this blessed oblation, God is made placable unto our nature, but not actually appeased with any, untill he hath put on the Lord Iesus. All men may be said to have inte∣rest in the merits of Christ, as in a Common, though all do not enjoy the benefit of it, because they have no Will to take it. The well-spring of life is set open to all, Rev. 22. 17. Faith is the vessel whereby we draw all vertue from Christ. The means of getting this Faith is the hearing the word, &c. (Ephes. 1. 13.) which ministreth this general ground for p. 7. every one to build his faith upon.—This Gospel of salvati∣on many do not hear at all, being destitute of the ministry, &c. Many hearing do not believe or lightly regard it; and many that believe the truth thereof are so wedded to their p. 8. sins, &c. that they refuse to accept the gracious offer that is made unto them.—Yet we may truly say, that good things were provided for them on Christs part, and a rich price was put into the hand of a fool, however he had no heart to use it, (Prov. 17. 16.) Our Saviour—hath procured a Iubile for the Sons of Adam, his Gospel is a Trumpet to pro∣claim liberty, &c. Luk. 4. 18. but that some desire no deli∣verance, derogates nothing from the generality of freedom p. 9. annext to that year, (Luk. 4. 18.) The slavish disposition of him who will not be free, (Exod. 2. 5.) maketh the ex∣tent of the priviledge of that year not a whit the straiter, because he was included in the general Grant as well as others, however he was not disposed to take the benefit of it. The neglect of the men invited (v. 5.) doth not falsifie the word of the King (v. 4.)—See Rom. 3. 4.—Ezek. 18. p. 10. 29. 30.—The proclamation was general (2 Chro. 36. 23. p. 12. and 1 Ezra. 2.) They alone did follow, &c. whose spirit God had raised to go up, (Ezra. 1. 5.) But they that remained still in Babylon could not justly plead that the Kings Grant was not large enough, or that they were excluded from going up by any clause contained therein. The matter of our Re∣demption purchased by Christ lyeth open to all, all are invi∣ted
to it, none that hath a mind to accept of it is excluded from it. The beautiful feet of those that preach the Gospel of peace do bring glad Tidings of good things to every house where they tread. All are not apt to entertain this Message p. 13. of peace, though Gods Ambassadours make a true tender of it to all unto whom they are sent; but if it meet with such as will not listen to the motion of it, their peace returneth, &c. (Luk. 10. 6.) The proclamation runs (Rev. 22. 17.) with a Quicunque vult, lest we should think the largeness p. 14. of the offer abridged.—Yet none can come except the Fa∣ther draw him, (Joh. 6. 46.) The universality of satisfa∣ction, and especially of Grace, do not derogate from one ano∣ther.—It doth not follow from Ioh. 17. 6. He prayed not, therefore he payed not for the world. His satisfaction doth p. 15. properly give contentment to Gods justice.—contains the preparation of the remedy necessary for mans salvation.—We may safely conclude, that the Lamb of God offering himself a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world, intended p. 15, 16. by giving sufficient satisfaction to Gods justice, to make the nature of man which he assumed, a fit object for mercy, and to prepare a medicine for the sins of the whole world, which should be denied to none that intended to take the benefit of it.—In respect of his mercy, he may be counted a kind of uni∣versal Cause of the restoring of our nature, as Adam was of the depraving of it. Now Sir, if your leisure will serve you to compare with this what I have printed, Correct Copy p. 55, 56. then p. 18, 19. then Philanthr. c. 1. p. 22. especially ch. 3. Sec. 23. particularly p. 96. and then ch. 4. Sec. 26. especiall p. 31. where I distinguish of , For) which needs must note either the end, or the effect; and then say expresly, that in respect of the later, Christ died effectually for none but the elect, but in respect of the former, he dyed intentionally for all and for every one, and give examples of each notion out of several Scriptures towards the end of that page; I believe you will say (when you have done) that you concluded me in
the first extremity you mention p. 2. as Mr. Barlee in the second, p. 3. with as great a mistake of my opinion, as with a just account of Mr. Barlees. If you mean any thing else, by saying the Primate was in the middle betwixt us two, I shall be glad to know the meaning of it. But if you find upon search that I have publick wrong done me, and that Mr. Barlee grows insolent upon occasion of your Letters (though quite besides your fair intentions) I make no doubt but you will right me after the measure that I am wronged. But I am weary of being wearisome, and there∣fore shall hasten to subscribe, SIR, Your assured friend and servant Tho. Pierce. Brington, Dec. 11. 1657. For my Reverend friend Dr. Bernard at his lodging in Grayes Inn. SIR, IAm heartily glad to find in your last (what I expected) so much Candor and equity as there you shew; both in The fourth Letter. comparing the Primates judgement with the several pas∣sages of my books to which I pointed, and in granting the near approches of the one to the other. And although your
words are, that you have found me much inclining to the judgement of the Primate; yet I suppose your meaning is, that you have not found wherein we differ. Differ we may in explications, or inferences, or endeavors of Reconcile∣ment (where it is more to be wished, then possible to be had.) And so the Primate and you may differ; nay so great Authors may oten differ from themselves, by their chari∣table essayes to make agreement between their brethren. But as to the true intent and extent of Christs Death, compa∣red with the end and the effect, there is a very pleasant Har∣mony betwixt us both. I will first demonstrate wherein we agree, and then I pray (Sir,) tell me wherein we differ. 1. I agree with his Lordship in an utter dislike of the two ex∣tremes (p. 4.) both Mr Culverwells on the right hand, and Mr. Barlees on the left. 2. I do perfectly agree to the mid∣dle Doctrine (p. 6.) not so much as desiring that it should be expressed in other words, then those his Lordship there useth, to wit, That by vertue of this oblation God is made placable unto our nature, but not actually appeased with any, untill he hath received his son. And that all men may be truly said to have an Interest in Christ, as in a Common, though all do not enjoy the benefit thereof, because they have no will to take it. 3. I do fully agree to what he saith of Gods Intention, to make the nature of man a fit subject for mercy, and to prepare a medicine for the sins of the whole world, which should be denied to none that intended to take the bene∣fit of it, p. 16. lin. 2. and 8. where Gods intention is sincere, as well as universal, but it is conditional of mans intention. 4. I agree to what he saith p. 35, 36. That the general sa∣tisfaction of Christ prepares the way for Gods mercy, by making the sins of all mankind pardonable, the interposition of any bar from Gods justice notwithstanding, and so puts the sons of men onely in a possibility of being justified. Now, Sir, that by the death of Christ all men have the benefit to be∣come salvabiles, or are put into a Capacity of salvation, or that Termes of peace are procured for all mankind, or that
for all mens sins mercy is attainable, (as your self have ex∣pressed it in your second Letter to Mr. Barlee, p. 64.) is as much as I have ever contended for in my writings. Sal∣vability for all without exception, as it is the main thing in the Primates Tenet, so it is also the main in mine. For 5. Actual pardon is quite another thing; and readily gran∣ted by me to be an effect of Christs Resurrection (Rom. 4. 25.) and of the consequents thereof, as his intercession (Ro. 8. 34.) so that this is a fifth thing wherein I agree with that Reverend Primate. 6. I agree to what he saith, p. 21. That Christ obtained Remission of sins, not for the Reprobate, but elect only; and not for them neither, before they be truly regenerated and implanted into him. For election being no∣thing else but the purpose of God resting in his own mind, makes no kind of alteration in the party elected. And you have read in my writings, that though in respect of the end, Christ dyed intentionally for all, yet in respect of the event, he dyed effectually for the elect only. 7. I agree to the reason which the Primate gives, why so many are damned forwhom Christ dyed with such a merciful and pure intention; even because they refused what was sincerely prepared for them, p. 8. sincerely offered to them, sincerely intended to do them good, and not harm: but they had no will to take it; they would p. 16. p. 6. p. 10. p. 16. p. 8. p. 9. not come, when invited; they intended not to take the bene∣fit offered; Arich price was put into the hands of a fool, how∣soever he had no heart to use it, Prov. 17. 16. He was not disposed to take the benefit of it. 8. I agree also in this (p. 12. and 13.) That they who miss of the Redemption which was purchased by Christ, which lay open to them, and to which they were invited, had not been excluded from it, had they had a mind to accept of it, and would they have listened to the motion of it, when a true tender of it was made by Gods Embassadours. And for the reason of this I give the old maxime, Nemo tenetur ad impossibile, or (to express it with Bishop Davenant) Impossibilium nulla est obligatio. The Tender is not true, nor the intention sincere in him that offers, Sentent. Dav. p. 3.
if he who must be damned for not accepting is not allowed so much as a possibility to accept. And therefore (9.) I agree with the Primate in what he saith p. 16. That in re∣spect of Christs mercy, he may be counted a kind of universal Cause of the restoring of our nature, as Adam was of the de∣praving of it. Now that the Cause doth not take its par∣ticular effects in the impenitent, is not because it is no cause, nor because it is not universal, but because of the impeni∣tency in them that perish. Its universality is very perfect; it being in the second Adam, as in the first: the Virgin Mary is not excluded from her share in the first; no more then Iudas (the son of perdition) from his share in the second. 10. I agree to that part of the Primates Doctrine, p. 22. that forgiveness of sins is not by our Saviour impetrated for any unto whom the merit of his death is not applyed in particu∣lar. 11. I agree with the Primate, that Mr. Amesinclined too much unto the other extremity, p. 23. that the Armini∣ans drove the Calvinists or Anti-Arminians unto this extreme Absurdity, to say that the greatest part of mankind were bound in Duty to believe a lye, p. 24, 25, 26, 27. and that, as Mr. Culverwell, so any man else, would flye rather into any error, then yield that Christ in no manner of wayes dyed for any Reprobate, and that none but the elect had any kind of Title to him. p. 26. Nor do I mean only a bare sufficiency for the Reprobate in the Death of Christ; For (12.) I agree with the Primate, that to preach a bare sufficiency cannot yield sufficient comfort to a distressed soul, without giving a further way to it, p. 31. And let the distressed soul be what he will, he is not bound to believe a lye, any more then Barnabas is bound to preach one. And to demonstrate that the Primate doth mean exactly in his writing, as I did in mine, he doth illustrate his meaning by the very same case; and that in a way as extraordinary, as if he, or I, or both together, had been purposely overruled by the providence of God to stop the mouth of our Correptory Corrector. I pray, Sir, compare the 32. page of the Primates judgement, with ch. 3. p. 96. of my Div. Philan, defended, and you will
find the King of Spain (in both those places) shewing the folly of those men, who say that Christ did dye sufficiently for all, but not intentionally unless for the elect. You cannot easily imagine, how much contentment I have taken in this concurrence of our minds, either by miracle, or by chance, or I know not how else. Nay (13.) I agree with the Pri∣mate in the point of Application p. 11. if it is so understood, as that it may be reconcileable with p. 6. and 8. and 10. and so it will be very happily, by being understood of Gods gi∣ving grace to believe and perform the condition, (which is Gods proper way of applying the Remedy unto us) and our making good use of that Talent of grace, (which is our way, through grace, of applying the remedy unto our selves) that as in the offer it is general, so it may be particular in the acceptation. And that this is his Lordships meaning as well as mine, I find demonstrated by himself, p. 39, 40. No mans state is so desperate, but by this means it is recoverable▪ (and this is the first comfortable news that the Gospel brings to the distressed soul:) but here it resteth not, nor feedeth a man with a [bare] possibility, but it brings the word of comfort nigh unto him, even to his mouth and heart, and presents him with the medicine at hand, and desireth him to take it; which be∣ing done accordingly, the cure is actually performed; but o∣therwise not, if he will not take it at Gods intreaty. The medicine then remains in its bare aptitudinality, and doth not actually cure him. What is the reason? because there is not a concurrence of the mans desire unto his Makers; be∣cause he submitteth not his will to the merciful will of his Redeemer, according to that of our blessed Lord, [How of∣ten would I, and ye would not?] Thus have I given you a parallel of our concurrences in opinion as to the matter in hand. And I have done it so much the rather, because you say very piously, that if you were mistaken in me, you will be ready to acknowledge it to my advantage. You did not probably judge of me by what you found in my writings, but by what you heard from byast
men. Be pleased therefore to reflect upon some passages in your Letters to M. Barlee: as p. 52. l. 2. where you seemingly imply me to have said, that the Bishop was wholly for Armi∣nius; whereas I did not onely not say it, but I said he was not so: and lin. 8. where you place his judgement in this point in a middle way different both from mine and Mr. Bs. without shewing what it is in which the Primate and I do differ; but leaving the Reader to imagine, that I do differ from him as much as Mr. Barlee: next p. 58. where you im∣ply me to have intimated the Primates penitency of his sins; which as I never meant in the place you allude to, so my words have quite another sound with them, and import the contrary. Again p. 65. you clearly imply me to make no difference betwixt the grace given to Iudas and that to Peter, although you say a little after, you do not affix thus much upon my judgement. The Primate might be changed, yet not to that pitch. Again, p. 61, 69, 70. you reflect upon me very severely; and I am sure you will say so, when I shall prove by your Testimony, and by his Lordships own, (as well as by others) that he did indeed admit of a change in judge∣ment. I would do it now presently, but that my letter is grown so long; and I must hasten to the next part of yours. Mr. Barlee tells you in a Letter, that in the main he doth also perfectly agree with the most venerable Primate. Which I can prove to be impossible, unless he will sing a Recanta∣tion of both his books. But or the doing of that, it is not enough that he sees his errors, unless he hath also a single heart to take off the scandals which he hath given: which he cannot do in a private Letter, because the scandals were given in print. It would be a good jest, to hear him name the main things, wherein his perfect agreement with the Primate doth consist. If he speaks knowingly, and in ear∣nest, he doth also, for the main, agree perfectly with me: And if so, for what reasons hath he rayled against me so voluminously, as against an Arminian, Massilian▪ Pelagian, Papist, Carpocratian, Socinian, Atheistical Lucianizer, &
sexcenta hujusmodi? It appears by my Notes (the first thing I printed) how inoffensively I provided both for my credit and my cause; I mean my credit in the righteous∣ness of my cause, and in the candid management thereof; no other credit do I pretend to. And how Mr. Barlee fell foulely from my opinions to my person, Thousands have seen, and stood amazed. It it were not a needless (perhaps an unexcusable) expence of time, I believe I could shew you, that Mr. Barlee differs from the Primate in the 13 parti∣culars, wherein I shewed my agreement with his Lordships Doctrine. How Mr. Barlee did differ from your account of the Primate, in his Correptory Correction, I gave you some touches in my last. And as my Time or memory will permit me, I will present you with some examples of Mr. Barlees Hostility against our renowned and Reverend Pri∣mate. 1. In the second chap. of his second Volume, p. 72. (lin. 4, 5, 6, 7. from the Bottom) he saith, that I and the Arminians do maintain the end of Christs Death to have been the procuring for men a salvable condition onely or a pos∣sibility of being saved, rather then any actual salvation. Now though I said no such thing in the place by him cited (Philan. c. 3. p. 63.) or any where else, as I remember, yet I have said in effect what the Primate saith in plain Termes, (p. 4, 21, 34, 35, 36.) That by vertue of Christs Death God is made placable to our nature, but not actually appeased with any, no not with the elect, before they be tru∣ly p. 4. p. 21. regenerated (which St. Paul was not, untill it was late; nor the Thief on the Cross, untill it was later) but by Christs satisfaction, he made the nature of man a fit subject for mercy, p. 34. the sins of all mankind pardonable, p. 35. and so put the sons of men only in a possibility of being justified, p. 36. Or, as his Grace doth elsewhere speak, Christ provided good things for all (even for the worst) p. 8. so as the Reprobates in refusing what was truly tendered to them, can blame none but themselves, p. 34. So that you see Mr. Barlee hath concluded the Primate an Arminian, as well as me, nay more then me; because it was He that said
what I consent to, but never said. I only said (in the place This Mr. Bar∣lee doth con∣fess to be a Truth undeni∣able. Corrept. Cor. p. 170. before cited) That Christ is the means, the meritorious cause, and the head of our election; and that upon the condition of believing in his Son, God gave the promise of eternal life, John 3. 26. which being after the Tenor of the Primates whole judgement, doth again conclude him an Arminian with. Mr. Barlee. Nor will it avail him to say, that he spake of the end of Christs Death, not of the effect peculiar to it; for (besides that even so he is opposite to the Primate, p. 35. lin. 10.) he interprets himself by actual salvation, as that is opposed unto a salvable condition. And if he meant any otherwise, he doth not only speak ignorantly, but in the depth of that ignorance he wrongs the Arminians in a most horrible degree. And though I dissent from Arminius in many things (as Mr. Barlee confesseth, and maketh to ap∣pear) yet I agree with him in some, as doth also our Rev. Primate. Nor do I strive to differ from him, as if I thought him an ill man, for I find him a most grave and learned writer, and I read he lived a very strict life; and as he for∣sook the Presbyterians in point of Doctrine, so at last he saw the mischiefes of their Discipline also, and did endea∣vour a Reformation. But however I honour his great lear∣ning, and good life, as without all doubt the Primate did; yet neither He, nor I, can therefore be said to be Armini∣ans. 2. Mr. Barlee tells us (c. 2. p. 76. lin. 4, 5. from the bot∣tom) that he hath set down the Primates opinion in his Historia Gotteshalci in his own very full Expressions out of the Va∣lentine Councel. And he referrs us for that his fact unto his Corrept. Cor. p. 133. in marg. But 1. it is evident, that the opinion asserted by that Synod (Can. 4.) was quite at en∣mity with the Primates (as you have lately set it out) in se∣veral respects. Nay they brand it with the Title of Com∣mntum Diaboli. So that either Mr. Barlee hath much in∣jured the Primate, or else your self must acknowledge his change of judgement. Nay 2. Mr. Barlee doth unworthily abuse the Primate, in calling those his own full expressions,
which were no more his, then they were mine, but the nu∣merical words of that Synod, which the Primare relateth as an Historian only, not at all expressing his own opinion, nor adding so much as his Approbation; and I verily be∣lieve, that even then he disapproved that 4. Canon of that Synod, which doth not only deny that Christ dyed for all, but doth imply (what is worse) that he was not the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the world. You may quickly con∣sult the place Hist. Gottesch. c. 12. p. 181. Mr. Barlee might have said (by a parity of reason) that the Primate was a Pelagian, because (as an Historian) he setteth down some of the Pelagian Doctrines, and because by denying Origi∣nal Sin, they did also evacuate the universality of Christs Death, as St. Austin maketh appear, lib. 6. contra Iulian. c. 4. T. 7. p. 432. 3. Mr. Barlee declareth his dissent from Monsieur Amyrald (c. 2. p. 72.) as before he did from Bishop Davenant and Dr. Ward (Correp. Cor. p. 169.) and then how far must he be from coming up to the Pri∣mate, who goes as high, and (I think) higher then either of those three, even as high as Bishop Overal, of whom hereafter? 4. Mr. Barlee follows Dr. Ames, (whose Dis∣ciple (I think) he somewhere professeth himself to be) from whom the Primate hath declared his great Dissent p. 23. Nay (5.) Mr Barlee is clearly for actual salvati∣on, where the Primate is only for salvability (as hath been shewed;) and so his opinion is slit asunder, part of it lying in the first extremity, part of it in the second, betwixt which two my Lord and I are in the midst. 6. Mr. Barlee will have St. Pauls words, 1 Tim. 4. 10. where he called Christ The Saviour of all, to be only meant of a Temporal salva∣tion common both to men and beasts; which is as opposite to Corrept. Cor. p. 105. p. 6. 8, &c. Correp. Corr. p. 106. the Primate, as light is to darkness. 7. He saith with Dr. Twiss, that every sinner to whom the Gospel is preached is not bound to believe that Christ dyed for him in particular, but that there is salvation in no other; and this is contrary to the Primate, p. 24, 25, 26, 27. 8. He saith that the word
All 2 Cor. 5. 14. must be understood of all a certain kind, & that Ibid. p. 107. the word Dead is meant of their dying to sin, not in it; point∣blank against the p. 4. Primate, as well as against De Civ. Dei. l. 20. c. 6. p. 1340. Tom. 5. Austin, who confuteth the Pelagians by understanding that Text as I have Correct Corr. p. 19. done, and (which is more) by making the same use of it. 9. Correp. Cor. p. 108. He saith that none but the elect and Believers were concluded in unbelief, with that intention as to obtain mercy; in contradi∣ction to the Primate, p. 16. and to St Paul, Rom. 11. 32. 10. He ib. p. 108. saith, that those false Prophets, 2 Pet. 2. 1. were only said to be bought by the Lord, sacramento tenus; in op∣position to the Primate, p. 35, 39. 11. He ib. p. 108. saith, we should wonder that Christ would dye so much as for any, rather then grumble that he did not dye for all; in abuse and derision of the Primate, p. 24, 26. Nay (12.) he saith more ib. p. 109. lin. 1. 2, &c. p. 108. l. ult. penult. plainly then in the place before cited, that this is an uncomfor∣table Arminian proposition, That Christ by his Death hath not purchased actual salvation for any, but a possibility of sal∣vation for all. And yet it is the Primates own Doctrine, p. 6. and p. 35. and p. 36. and p. 38. where he also addeth, that that Disease is curable, for which a soveraign Remedy may be found; but cured it is not, untill the medicine be applyed to the patient: & if it so fall out, that the medicine being not apply∣ed the patient miscarries, we say, He was lost; not because his sickness was incurable, but because there wanted a care to ap∣ply that to him that might have helped him. 13. Mr. Bar∣lee Note that man hath his part in the applica∣tion. saith that of Bishop Andrews, and St. Bernard, which strikes home at the Primate through each of their sides. (And I pray Sir observe this thing especially) I had Correct Copie p. 20. in marg. cited from Bi∣shop Andrews no worse words then these, That saving Grace is not conferred, but yet offered unto all, and God is ready to confer it also: and the like words from St. Bernard, ibid. That Gods mercy is offered unto all men, and none are without it, but such as reject it, or accept not of it. To which Citations Mr. Barlee returns this answer; Correp. Cor. p 109, 110. As for what you quote out of your Saint like Dr. Andrews, when you shall have proved him to have been as very a Saint, as every body knows he was a learned Doctor, I shall then be more
troubled that I find him so much an Arminian. I am not scared at what he dictates rather then proves; for that he saith nothing but what Faustus the Father of the Se∣mipelagians did, and what hath been answered a thousand times, or been warily expounded. And if any such ex∣pression did unwarily fall from Bernard, in a Sermon; knowing what a declining age he lived in, we may well say, Bernardus non omnia vidit, but wonder he spake so well elsewhere, by which he hath made amends, &c. Here it is plain Mr. Barlee esteemeth that to be false Do∣ctrine, which our Reverend Primate and the Scriptures have taught for true, as well as Prosper, and St. Austin. Next, he pronounceth Bishop Andrews an Arminian, and by con∣sequence the Primate, who doth (in that) agree with him. After, he implyes that Bishop Andrews was a Semipelagian, by having said nothing but what was said by Faustus, which yet in the Instance there brought appears to be admirably false: Or else he knew not the difference betwixt ingeri, or impendi, and offerri; the 2. former were the words of Faustus, the third only of Bishop Andrews. Nay such is the spirit of the man, that he implyes his disbelief of that Bi∣shops sanctity, or bliss, whilst he gives it for his reason why he is no more troubled at his finding that Bishop so much Ar∣minian. Yet you know that Bishop Andrews was never yet excelled by any meer mortal, (I do not mean the Apostles or Virgin Mary) either in Orthodoxy, or learning, or holy life. 14. I had said in my Notes (p. 56.) that no good thought ariseth in us, unless suggested by Gods preven∣ting Grace; nor increaseth, unless strengthened by his subse∣quent Grace; nor is consummate, unless perfected by his grace of perseverance; and that by this, it was God who made men to differ, when one is better then another; and so again p. 70. yet because I afterwards denyed the irrestibility of Grace, and affirmed that the regenerate might fall away (who yet could not be regenerate without special Grace) Mr. Barlee calls this in a jeer, A goodly special Grace, which hath Corrept. Cor. p. 42.
mischievous qualifications. And how this toucheth the Pri∣mates Doctrine, I need not say in words at length, 15. Mr. Barlee saith in his 2. Volume (c. 3. p. 5.) That my Cor∣rect Copy begins and ends in Pelagianism and Semipelagian∣ism: Which yet begins and ends with the Primates Do∣ctrine, as I conceive, and as I think you will say, if you look on the beginning and ending of it. But this is more then I intended, concerning the manifold disagreement betwixt the venerable Primate, and the irreverent Mr. Barlee. To the rest of your Letter I shall speak as a Laconick. Your willingness to bear an equal share of a blame is very ho∣nourable and lovely; so is the end which you propose in our Reconciliation. In order to which, there is no honest thing which I will not be ready to do, or suffer. My charity to his soul is so sincere, that as he is frequently in my prayers, that God will reforme and forgive him, and for ever keep him from the Danger of the Roaring Lion, so my prayers, for him are no less cheerful, then those others which I pour out for my greatest Friends and benefactors: yet be∣ing wonderfully slander'd, and that in print, and the cause of God (as I esteem it) being also slander'd with my self, (I being slander'd as a Ranter, a Sorcerer, a popish Complotter, and a witch, nay my God being slandered as the Author of sin,) I shall not dare for all the world to omit a publick vindica∣tion. Most sure I am, that there is no breach of charity in doing justice; nor is it an injury to my Neighbour, that I clear my self from his Aspersions. But I am too long for a Laconick. I take it not amiss, that you sent me your book by Mr Barlee. I have not time to transcribe the Cer∣tificates, nor am I sure that the Certifiers will be willing to be named in private Letters: yet if you much desire them, they shall be sent; and sooner or later, I shall tell you their names too. Their forwardness in the business is just like mine, neither more, nor less. Our ends are equal∣ly noble, the manifestation of Truth and Innocence. I shall not vindicate my self by publishing answers to your
two Letters to Mr. Barlee, because written by you, with whom I desire nothing but amity. Had they been writ∣ten by another, I should have done it before this time. But you have more then an ordinary Civility and respect from Your assured friend and servant Tho. Pierce. Brington, Jan. 4. 1657. For my Reverend friend Dr. Bernard at his lodgings in Grayes Inn. SIR, THough your leisure did not serve you (in your very short return to my last long Letter) to send me such The fifth Let∣ter. an answer as I did flatter my self you would, (upon the notification of those Degrees, not of distance onely, but enmity, which shew a great Gulf fixt between the judge∣ment of the L. Primate, and the casual opinings of Mr. Bar∣lee;) yet will I not run into the error of misinterpreting your mind, to which you make it your request that I give a right interpretation. What I did hope for by the last Carrier, I make no question but I shall have by the next; to wit, your full approbation of what I declared touching the Primate, and your acknowledgement of a mistake in publickly saying I was mistaken. To make this honourable, and eligible, and (to a person of your Candour) altoge∣ther
unavoidable, I am resolved to seize on the present Time, whatever shift I make for it; whether I borrow it from my sleep, or from any thing else which is as needful, (for through some special Emergencies both in my Pa∣rish, and in my Family, I do not know that (at once) I was ever oppressed with more impediments.) And first I will give you the Certificates of three most pious, most lear∣ned, and (I had almost said) most irrefragable persons, whom (as you say very well) you may possibly honour as much as I. And that as for many other reasons, so in par∣ticular for this also, that they were ever, and are still, most serious Honourers of the Primate of happy memory, whose judgement could not but direct him to have them also in special Honour. The first and chief of these Certificates is from the Reverend Dr. Walton, even before I had the hap∣piness to have seen his Face. Of which I transcribe you this following Copy. This I can testify, that having often Discourse with the late most Reverend Father in God, James L. Primate Part of a Let∣ter from Dr. Walton to Mr. Pierce. of Armagh, concerning divers controversies in Divinity, and in particular, the last time that he was in London, which was not long before his Death, concerning the con∣troversies of Grace, and Free-will, Election, and Reproba∣tion, and the Dependents thereupon; He did declare his utter dislike of the Doctrine of Absolute Reprobation, and that he held the universality of Christs Death; and that not onely in respect of sufficiency, but also in regard of efficacy, so that all men were thereby savable; and that the reason why all were not thereby saved, was be∣cause they did not accept of salvation offered. And that the Grace of conversion was not irresistible, but that men might and often did resist and reject the same. And that in these points he did not approve the Doctrine of Geneva, but was wholly of Bishop Overalls opinion. All which I took the more notice of, because he was generally con∣ceived
to be of another judgement. And all this will be attested by Brian Walton. The second which I received (for I do observe the order of Time) was this which fol∣loweth. BEcause you desire me to speak my knowledge of my Part of a Let∣ter from Mr. Gunning to Mr, Pierce. Lord Primates judgement concerning your Questi∣on, as in justice to the Truth, and to the honour of his Grace, and for that you are threatned (as I hear) by some, that they will in print testify, that the contrary to your Thesis was my Lord Primates judgement, in the last years also of his life; I shall truly therefore give you his Discourse with me (as much as tends to this purpose) and my memory of his Sermon. At a Sermon which my L. Primate preacht at St. Pe∣ters Pauls-Wharfe, the last that he intended to preach there (as it was said) I was an Auditor; having heard that he had preached that Sermon in more places then one, before, and did himself profess to think it a Sermon (as indeed it was) containing such Necessary Truths, as without which all preachings and Sermons would be un∣fruitful. It was on Rom. 8. 30. (part of the verse) In which Sermon he very earnestly pressed the sincerity of Gods universal call to every one of all sinners to whom the Gos∣pel was preached; alledging & pressing almost throughout his Sermon, the universal free invitations of all, by God, throughout the Scriptures: as that of Ap. 22. 17. whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely: and so that of Esa. 55. 1, 7. and added with much godly zeal, that without this being made good, all preaching to convert
sinners (as yet in their sins) from the evill of their waies, would want a firm foundation. This was his main scope in that Sermon. I went to him in one of the week dayes following that Lords day, and gave him my thanks. And in the process of our discourse, which was wholly spent upon the subject (much too long to be told at large) his Grace expressed his judgement in these following Re∣sults. That God together with his word preached, doth give internal Grace to all that are called by it, that they may repent and be converted, if they will. Yea they all can will. And that so many will not, it is because they resist Gods Grace, according to that of Acts 7. 51. Yee stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do alwayes resist the Holy Ghost. He father said, That God gives to all who are called, posse non resistere. And distinctly concluded in these words; Bishop Overal was in the right, and I am of his mind. This will be attested by Peter Gunning. The third Certificate I receievd was at first by word of mouth, and afterwards by writing, in these following words. CAlling to mind that you questioned me, whether my Lord Primate said to me, that Christ dyed for all Intentionally, I have thought fit to say further, that I did answer you affirmatively; not because I do remember that he used that word, but because I am satisfied he could mean no otherwise. The sufficience of his Death not sig∣nifying that which either of us understood to be in que∣stion. And that sufficience of Grace which Dr. Ward main∣tained (with my Lord Primates Approbation) that the Gospel bringeth to all that hear it preached, argueth the
Intent of his Death, (and not only the value of it) being given in consideration of it. Thus much as by a witness will be deposed by H. Thorndike. THere were two persons more who did contribute to my Belief of what I published of the Primate. But the one will not be named (nor can I honestly do it with∣out his leave) and the other spake what; he had heard only, but not immediately from the Bishops own mouth. Nor indeed do I care for their Attestations, (though if I did, I could produce them,) because the Three which I have given you are from persons very eminent for exactness of judgement, and of integrity, acute Discerners, and careful searchers, and faithful Relaters of the Truth. Now Sir, if you shall possibly deny that His Grace was ever of Calvins judgement, as to the matters above mentioned, I shall not be concerned to prove the contrary, but rather taking you at your word, I shall require all those who have endea∣voured to gain credit to their Calvinist-Opinions by their unjust usurpation of that venerable Name, that they make him satisfaction for having done him so great a wrong. A∣mongst whom, I am sure, Mr. Barlee is one: who either in∣jured the Primate in a very high measure by urging Him as a patron of what he held against me, or else I righted him very highly by making known his change of judgement. And certainly you will say, that you were very much mi∣staken, when you acknowledged your self much Mr. Barlees Debtor, for his (I-know-not-what) Readiness to clear the Primate from some injury done him by Mr. Pierce; because, you know, he neither did clear the Primate, nor was ca∣pable of clearing him; nay (farther yet) that he had injured the Primate, and that he had injured you also, by having injured that Account which you have publickly given of the
Primates judgement, (it being irreconcileable with that, for which he vouched him in his Book extremely often.) Nay farther yet, you know my own great Readiness to clear the Primate, and that I am qualified for the work, and that in all my Letters put together I have actually cleared him. And though it seemeth very sufficient to serve my turne, that if ever the Primate had been exactly of the opinions which Mr. Barlee affirmed him to have been of, he went off and departed from those opinions; and if he was never of those opinions, he was grievously injured by Mr. Barlee: yet I have more to alledge in mine own behalf, then what is abundantly sufficient for the defeating of Mr. Barlee. For let the Terminus a quo be what it will, from which the Primate departed, unto the Terminus ad quem of which I speak, it is clear that he admitted a change in judgement, on supposition if he removed from one opinion unto a∣nother; and even that change in judgement of which I spake, on supposition that he departed from that which is called Mr. Calvins, in adherence unto that which I de∣claredly am of. That so he did in good earnest, appears to me by a Certificate which I received from your self: For in your second printed letter to Mr. Barlee, p. 67. you say the Primate was appointed by the Synod at Dublin A. D. 1615. as a principal Person to draw up the Articles of Religion a∣greed upon, which fully determine the points we speak of. But the 32. Article agreed upon by that Synod is in effect the very same with the 7. Article of Lambeth; and saith in plain termes, That there is not such a sufficient measure of Grace vouchsafed unto every man whereby he is enabled to come unto everlasting life. It is not said in that Article, that every man is not actually saved, or not effectually brought unto life everlasting; but that every man is not enabled to come: which is as much as to say (if I am able to under∣stand it) that every man is not put into a savable condition, or doth not receive a possibility of coming to life everlasting. For if the former had been the sense, it had amounted only to
this, that every man in the world is not one of the elect, but some are Reprobates; all are not saved, but some are damned: which is so jejune a saying, and so unnecessary a Truth to have a place in that succinct Body of credenda, that I cannot imagin it to have been the thing meant. And we know, to be enabled, is just the same as to be render'd able; and to be render'd able, is to receive a capability; which is clearly also imported by a sufficient measure of Grace, as the word suf∣ficient is distinguished from effectual. And if this is the meaning (as I conceive it needs must) then the contrary to * p. 4, 6, 8, 10, 16, 31, 35, 36, 38, 39. and p. 64. this is often asserted by the Primate in your account of his judgement of the true intent and extent of Christs Death. Again you say in your first printed letter, (p. 45.) That there is one Doctrine of Calvins, which must be exempted from my universality, and which will not be found to have been rejected by the Primate, viz. that Massa corrupta was the object of predestination. Which how it can consist with the Primates words to my three informers (mentioned be∣fore in their Certificates) as I cannot possibly discerne my self, so I conceive that no man living will ever be able to demonstrate. Nor indeed can it consist with that Account which you have given in the ibid. above-cited pages. For if Christ did dye for all mankind, to procure for all a salvability, to make the sins of all venial, to put them all without excep∣tion into a possibility of being justified, and so by conse∣quence of being saved, of which they that fail to reap the benefit do only fail for this reason, because they have no will to take it; (which are the Primates expressions) if, I say, Christ dyed for all the sins of the whole world both actual and original (as saith the Article of our Church, to which the Primate hath subscribed) how can the greatest part of man∣kind be absolutely reprobated, or but passed by in massa, without respect unto their Actual sins? For if that can be true, Christ dyed not for them; the passing by being con∣trary to the giving of Christ for their Redemption. In stead of which, the Calvinistical writers do solemnly use Gods
offering of Christ, not for them, but to them, who were pas∣sed by in that mass. And this they labour to reconcile with the full intention of God Almighty, that they to whom he is offered shall not possibly enjoy him. Of which what reason can they imagin but only this, that they think he was not offered for them, so as to make their sins pardonable, and their persons capable of Mercy? I will not here take a view of what Infusions have been received by such Mistakers as Mr. Barlee, from his Lord∣ships History of Gotteschalc, and from his celebrated Cate∣chism, whether printed with, or without his leave, (nor was it, you know, till very lately, that you proclaimed the dif∣ference between his reputed and real works.) And as I will not do that, so will I not make any comparisons betwixt the Doctrines of Bishop Overal, and those of Gotteschalc: I having already made it apparent, that as my Certificates were helpful to me for the making good what I had pub∣lisht of that great name, so you and I (thus put together) have also been helpful to those Certificates, for the making good of those things, whereof they have certified a Three∣fold knowledge; which as a threefold Cord being not easily to be broken, I shall hope will be so happy, as to draw your suffrage to make it stronger. I know not what should scare you from a concurrence, except a shew of dishonour which a change of judgement may seem to carry along with it. But that I am sure hath no place here; for to change ones judgement upon just Grounds (as well from good to better, as from evil to good) is the most honourable mark of a mans mortality, and I think peculiar to the True lovers of Truth. Before I am able to let you alone, Sir, (how much Busi∣ness soever is at my elbow to pluck my pen from my paper) I will tell you what I read lately in the life and Death of Dr. Iackson, composed by the strict and impartial hand of Mr. Vaughan, then whom I do not believe there lives a more consciencious and punctual speaker, as being one who
might have written Dr. Iacksons life from his own, had it been possible for a man of his singular modesty to have un∣derstood his own merits: which I say to this end, that you may certainly believe what he relateth, concerning the Care which the Primate took (being a Mourner at the Fu∣neral of that Rare Man) to have the writings of Dr. Iackson very religiously preserved; that such inestimable  might not be wanting to posterity, but might performe their proper work of bringing Religion into its wits: whereas had his Lordship been Calvinistical (as Mr. Barlee would fain have made him by his notorious creative Faculty) he would rather have taken care that such books might have been buried with their Authors Body, and in a Grave ten thou∣sand times deeper. For Mr. Barlee doth somewhere tell us, that Doctor Iackson was the Father of English Armini∣ans, (my Lord his Grace of Armagh it seems was one of his children) and miserable is England, if such mens writings as c. 2, p. 46, 47. Dr. Iacksons and Castalio's are become as pleasing to the dainty wits amongst us, as ever Titus Vespasian was, who was styled Deliciae humani generis. So zealous was the good Primate (if Mr. Barlee hath any Truth in him) to contribute his care to our undoing. And now as soon as I have told you, that I meant Dr. Godwin, the Author of the Roman and Iewish Antiquities, (whose Christian name I think was Ioseph) who was con∣verted by reading the Remonstrant writings, as Dr. Chri∣stopher Potter of pious memory had been a little before him; that I am not the Author of Tilenus examined before the Triers; that if ever I go to London (which I have hardly ever done willingly) I shall gladly make an acquain∣tance with you; and that if I punish Mr. Barlee, it shall be meerly in my defence, and very much less then he deserveth; I think there is nothing in your Letter, to which any more can be expected from Your most assured Friend and servant Tho. Pierce. Brington, Jan. 28. 1657.
A Postscript. A Postscript to this last Letter sent to Dr. Bernard together with it. ONe thing comes into my mind since the subscription of my Letter. You say in your first printed letter to Mr. Barlee, That P. 45. the Doctrine of S. Austin was it which was confirmed by the Primate, and so elsewhere (I think) to that purpose. But Mr. Baxter Account of the Controv. about perseve∣rance, &c. in setting down the fourth opinion p. 4, 5. hath publickly avowed, that S. Austin's opinion was for the final falling away of some effectually called, regenerated, justified, and sanctified. And because some are so immodest as to deny it, he saith, he asked the Reverend Bp. Usher, in the hearing of Dr. Kendal, whether this were not plainly the judgement of Austin: who answered, that without doubt it was. Then he addes many places out of Austin by which this appears. And whereas he judgeth this opinion of Austin to be P. 15. unsound, nay con∣trary to many Texts of Scripture, he doth obliquely in so doing defame the judgement of my Lord Primate, in case he concurred therein with Austin; as I cannot but think he did, both by what was spoken by his Grace to Dr. Wal∣ton, and by what you have affirmed in the place above-cited. Thus, Good Reader, I have accounted for what I spake in my former writings, touching the judgement of that Venerable and Learned Prelate. Not out of any the least design▪ of breaking Peace or Friendship with Dr. Bernard, (whose publick Letters notwithstanding had made it neces∣sary for me to do some justice unto my self, in a way as publick:) but partly to perform what I had publickly pro∣mised to make appear; partly to gratifie the importunities of some, who would needs have me publish what I could say of this Business, that they who had met with my Re∣port onely, might be acquainted with my Grounds too; and partly to demonstrate to the most contrary-minded, that I
durst not be thought a Raiser of false Reports. If now our Readers will be pleased, to put the Reasons of my affirma∣tive into one scale of the Ballance, and Dr. Bernards proba∣bilities for his Negative into the other, (allowing either none, or equal Grains) I hope that He, and I too, shall be well content with the Decision. The End. The ERRATA. PAge 4. in marg. line 3. read Travers. p. 15. l. 20. for giving, r. given. p. 34. l. 5. from bottom, r. That. p. 35. l. 12. after atain dele to. p. 35. l. 31. for shalir. shalt. p. 56. l. 2. from the bottom r. word. p. 82. in marg. l. 3. after Dedar 9. r. April. p. 67. in marg. l. 2. for praed. r. praet. p. 98. l. 19. for Carmelites, r. Carme. p. 99. l. 5. from the bottom, for made r. need. p. 103. l. 20. r. (ch. 1. v. 4.) p. 103. in marg. l. 14. 5. r. Tit. 1. 4. Books written by Mr. Tho. Pierce Rector of Brington. THe Sinner impleaded in his own Court, wherein are represented the great discouragements from sinning, which the Sinner receiveth from Sin it self. 2. Correct Copy of some notes con∣cerning Gods Decrees, especially of Reprobation. The 3 Edition with some Additionals, in 4. 3. The Divine Philanthropie defended, in answer to Mr. Barlee, in 4. 2 Edition. 4. The Self revenger, to which is ad∣ded an Appendage touching the judge∣ment of the late L. Primate of Armagh. in 4. new. 5. The Divine Purity, defended in answer to Dr. Reynolds, in 4. new. Books written by D. Hammond. A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New-Testa∣ment by H. Hammond, D. D. in fol. the second Edition now in the Press. 2. The Practical Catechism, with all o∣ther English Treatises i two volumes' in 4. 3. Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episco∣paus Jura ex S. Scripturis & Primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli & aliorum, in 4. 4. A Letter of Resolution of six Qu∣ies, in 12. 5. Of Schisme. A defence of the Church of England against the excepti∣ons of the Romanists, in 12. 6. Of Fundamentals in a notion re∣ferring to practice, in 12. 7. Paraensis, or a seasonable exhortato∣ry to all true sons of the Church of Eng∣land, in 12. 8. A Collection of several Replies and Vindications Published of late, most of them in defence of the Church of England, now put together in three Vo∣lumes. Newly published, in 4. 9. A Review of the Paraphrase and Annotations on all the Books of the New-Testament, with some additions and alterations, in 8.
A Catalogue. Books and Sermons written by Ier. Taylor, D. D. , A Course of Sermons for all the Sundayes of the Year; together with a discourse of the Divine Instituti∣on, Necessity, Sacredness and Separati∣on of the Office Ministerial, in fol. 2. The History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, third E∣dition, in fol. 3. The Rule and Exercises of holy li∣ving, in 12. 4. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12. 5. The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the dayes of the week, together with a shott Method of Peace and Holiness, in 12. 6. The Doctrine and Practice of Re∣pentance rescued from popular Errours, in a large 8. Newly published. A Collection of Polemical and Moral discourses, in fol. 8. A Discourse of the Nature, Offices and Measure of Friendship, in 12. New. A Collection of Offices or forms of prayer fitted to the needs of all Christi∣ans, together with the Psalter or Psalms, of David after the Kings Translations in a large octavo newly published. The mystery of Jesuitisme, discovered in certain Letters, written upon occasion of the present differences at Sorbone, be∣tween the Jansenists and the Molinists. Displaying the Corrupt Maximes and Politicks of that Society. 2 Edition The Law of Laws, or, the excellen of the Civil Law, above all other human Laws whatsoever: shewing of how great use and necessity the Civil Law is to this Nation. By Robert Wiseman, Dr. of the Civil Law. Sold by R. Royston at the Angel i Ivy-lane. The Grand conspiracy by Mr. John Challington, in 12. The History of the Church of Scot∣land by Dr. Spotishwood Archbishop of S. Andrews, in fol. Etymologicum parvum, in 8. by Mr. Gregory Schoolmaster of Westminster. The Contemplation of heaven with a descant on the prayer in the garden, in 12. The Magistrates Authority, a Sermon by Mr. Lyford, in 4. The Quakers wild questions objected against the Ministers of the Gospel by Mr. Richard Sherlock, in 4. The Communicants guide by Mr. Gove, in 8. The plain mans sense exercised, by Mr. William Lyford, in 4. Anglicisms Sattinized, by Mr. Willis, 8. The persecuted Minister written by Mr. Langly, in 4. Lyfords Legacy, in 12. The Cateschism of the Church of England paraphrased, by Richard Sher∣lock. 2 Edition. An Apology for the Ministry by Wil∣liam Lyford. The Examination of Tilens before the Triers in Utopia in 12. newly pub∣lished. The end of the Catalogue.
