W1638 E294_24 99860994 113121
A SAD RELATION OF THE MISERIES OF THE Province of MUNSTER in the Realm of IRELAND: Signified by Letters written from thence very lately, by a Gentleman of good credit, to his brother here in LONDON. By which it doth appear, in what imminent danger that Province now is for to be lost, and how numerous the Rebels now are there gathered together in their Siege of Youghall, with a Dis∣covery of their barbarous and cruell usage to those English they take prisoners. London, Printed by G. Miller, 1645.
A sad RELATION Of the miseries of the Province of Munster in the Kingdome of IRELAND. Anno 1645. the 19th. Iuly, in Kinsall. Brother BENJAMIN WHETCOMBE: MY last was of the 21th. past, of which you need no repe∣tall, having many sad passa∣ges to relate which have happened since; as the Re∣bels taking of Lismore, and all the Ca∣stles thereabouts; Lismore men made
very stout resistance, untill it was beaten down about their ears; they killed 3. or 4. hundred of them, and after came forth up∣on Quarter: They have layen down before Youghall, and have environed it round: Another Army is lately fallen on the ea∣sterside of the River, where they have planted 3. peeces of Ordnance, which doth much anoy the Inhabitants: On Tuesday they made an unfortunate shot into the powder room of the Duncannon frigat, which blow her up and about 18. of her men, many of the rest dangerously hurt and burnt, and another Ship (I remember not her Name) with much difficulty got forth out of the Harbour, and lieth now with the Happy entrance, and the May flower, about Cable Iland, where I fear they can do no great good, so that that Town is in great danger to be lost likewise,
for I know they have not provisions in it for 15. daies, and they have not any thing to encourage the poor Souldiers within nor without, their Cows are starv'd, no hopes of the least benefit of harvest, and unlesse some speedy relief out of England, 2. or 3. thou∣sand men and provisions, or some miracu∣lous deliverance from above betide us, their work will be soon done, I am very doubtfull before the fine of the next moneth we shall be all destroyed, and they ready to transport themselves for Wales or England. Ne∣ver were there the like barbarous acts com∣mitted by any Nation as these do daily practise; the men which they took in Ro∣stillo house, and such other prisoners as they have taken since, are carried about in the Army maked as ever they were borns, manacled with ropes and iron so that they have not the benefit of their hands to beat
the flies from their bodies, but are eaten and stung, and so scorched with the Sun, that it is most lamentable to behold. It is repor∣ted that within these 4. or 5. daies, they be∣gin to allow them (especially the women) raggs meerly to cover their nakednesse; this you may report and affirm to be truth. On Tuesday last we redeemed 20. poor souls by exchange, which came to us in this con∣dition: I would have this made known to the Welch and Cornish, and to such Eng∣lish as do adhere to them against us, and be resolved whether this be as they would have it; you will finde their work being once done here, they will be posting into England, or some out of England will come unto them, and neither can be good; which might easily have been prevented, had all those that speak us fair been our friends, our bloud will be required at some of their
hands: Many things more of the like na∣ture I could enlarge of, but the Boat is up∣on departure that must carry this to Cap∣tain Claxtonn, who I hear is bound for England, God be his good speed. I could wish my children were with you, but I can∣not bring it to passe: J charge you in the Name of the most Highest, if J suffer, that you enquire after them, and have such care of them to be educated, as behoveth a kinsman, and to be a father to them. Now the God of all comfort and consolation, keep and preserve you from all evill; in whom J rest; Your loving Brother, Tristram Whetcombe. FINIS.
