W3495 E95_11 99858938 110998
THE KINGS CHRONICLE Latter SECTION. WHEREIN The way, the good Kings, Priest and People have taken for the well-posturing the King∣dome, is fully dclared, and made glorious before the Eye of the Beholder by GODS own Right Hand, for the encouragement of all, who will walk in the same way, observe the same steps and motions there; and fixe their Eye upon the same Marke, The Glory of GOD; Their owne and the Peoples safety. By HEZEKIAH WOODWARD. JER. 32. 39. I will give them one heart and one way. PROV. 12. 28. In the way of Righteosnesse there is life: And in the path way thereof there is no Death. DAN. 11. 32. The People, that doe know their GOD shall be strong and doe exploits. LONDON, Printed by G. M. for George Miller and Thomas Ʋnderhill, and are to be sold at the Signe of the Bible in Wood-street, 1643.
TO THEIR EXCELLENCIES ROBERT Earle of ESSEX Lord Generall of his Majesties Army by Land: ROBERT Earle of VVARWICK High Admirall of his Navy by Sea, for the Defence of the KING and KINGDOME; his Crown, their life, Religion, Lawes, Liberties, GRACE and PEACE be multiplied. WHen I looked upon the subject matter of this Book▪ the History of the good Kings their good way, good Ayms, good ends; The glory of God, Their owne and their peoples safety: I thought so honourably of it, as that it would become the hand of the highest Person in the Kingdome. But considering again, That my selfe, the lowest of ten thousand, has his hand in it, my thoughts fell very much in my own sense, and much also in my Dedication, from a King to his Subjects; notwithstanding, I think so honou∣rably of it still, and still shall so thinke (not as it comes from my hand, but) as it comes from Gods
mouth, That the Dedication will become two Per∣sons, though Subjects, yet the most Excellent in three Kingdoms. Such are You, who, feeling the weight of Duty to Your Prince and Country, doe wish from an entire and ingenuous heart, O King live for ever: And to his Kingdom, That it may be the Lords Kingdom. Vpon this, The noblest design that ever was on foot, You do move, laying out Your selves and jeoparding your lives, To main∣taine the Cause of God, His Gospell, The Crowne of Your King, The Glory of the Kingdome. You will find a mighty resistance, All the Powers of darknesse against you, the King of the bottomles pit, and all his Subjects associated now and folden together like thornes. But You cannot be discoura∣ged, The God, Whom You serve is Great, The Cause You Owne and Appeare for, is His Cause▪ The way You are in, is troden before You, by all the truly Noble of the world, who made themselves and their people a Blessing. You can suffer no more from the tongue and hand, then what all the good Kings and Princes have suffered before You in this way, not more hard words, nor more un∣godly deeds. You cannot be brought to greater straits, then these Nobles have bin in before You: A Ship tossed with Tempests, is the Embleme of
the Church: So He suffers the Cause of His Church to be carried as a Ship in a Storme, now VP, and yet the Righteous are where they were, not raised above the height of an holy confidence and humble dependance, knowing the manner how GOD brings His People to a wealthy place; Then DOWN, That the wicked may rise in their hope, may be lifted▪up, and made lively and strong to prosecute their owne way, and to hasten their owne ruine. But still GOD is the same, as wakefull as ever; His Cause the same, and it shall be as victorious as ever, and the more opposition has or shall be made against Him, by the Assemblies of the wicked; The more glorious the victory shall be▪ And the more weight shall be added unto Your Crown of Glory, who have not forsaken their Master in the houre of Tempta∣tion, but have stood by Him, have owned His Cause, laid out Your Selves for Him. So You have done; surely the Lord remembers this, and will let You know, What a good Master You have chosen, His Attributes shall be laid out for You; His VVisedome, Power, Goodnesse; As You have laboured to advance His Name, He will make Your Name to spread, and to cast a sa∣vour, sweeter then the most precious oyntment
to all Generations, when the Name of the wic∣ked shall rot, and their memoriall be as the Cities, GOD over-threw and repented not. Now blessed be GOD, Who hath instructed You to Discretion, giveth Courage and Might, that You can be valiant for the Cities of Your GOD, and can resigne all into His Hands, to doe that, which is good in His Eyes. That which He do' is good still, and will be best at the last. In the meane time You know You serve a good Master, and have a good Cause in hand; And therfore can say with the whole Family of GOD; The LORD is our Iudge, The LORD is our King, He will save us. Amen say all, That love and feare the Lord all the world over, Amen and Amen.
THE PREFACE to the CHRONICLE. WEe have seene the wayes of Ahabs House, whether they led, and their counsels whether they tended, To the Destruction of all Judah; A Destruction at which the Nations stood astonied, for it was A casting out of Judah from out of GODS sight, A removing of them farre off, whom He had brought so neare, by so many engagements. If we have let this sinke downe into our hearts, This Destruction from the LORD upon His owne people, will be a Terrour to us, so as we shall reade and feare, and doe no more presumptuously. We come now to behold the way of the good Kings; one and the same still, not varied, not any turnings or windings there, (The wayes of the crooked Serpent:) But direct  and forward, By the same Rule; To the same end; In the use of the same meanes. This requires all observation: That these good Kings, all and every one, had a single eye, and such were their Aymes: They set before their eyes, honest and good ends, The GLORY of GOD: And the advancement of His Kingdome: They were resolute, constant, and true unto those ends (not , not off and on) And they moulded and shaped their actions thereunto, by love, which formes a Person nothing more dexterously; Love to GOD, Love to His Truth, Love to His People, Love to their Peace. To summe▪up their Actions here▪ That we may, with more understanding, enlarge
upon them afterwards. The first and prime worke was, The re∣moving of all Abominations from out of GODS sight, which abominable Idolaters had set-up before Hieyes. 2. Then they ASSOCIATED themselves, came up to GOD and His earmes, entred into Covenant with Him, and kept close unto Him. 3. And all this with a perfect heart: and so they made them∣selves and their People, as a brazen wall, and an Iron Pillar; The blast of the Terrible-ones could not move them. The pur∣pose and tendency of all that followes, is, to cleare all this for the instruction of the living, That they may doe so also: But I must cleare Davids intentions towards his Master Saul first, to be Loyall and Legall. IT is this three and twentieth Day of December, 1642. Ordered by the Committee of the House of COM∣MONS in PARLIAMENT concerning Printing, that this Booke, entituled, The Kings Chronicle be printed. John White.
SECT. II. THE KINGS CHRONICLE. The Story of the Kings of Iudah is continued; Their wise ordering their Militia; their direct wayes and motions to a desired end are recorded. §. 1. A digression, shewing DAVIDS Military designe to be loyall and lawfull: and the true Causes of all the Warres against the Church, now or in former times, discovered. But the lawfullnesse of this Militia now runs-out beyond all paralels. I Must turne backe that I may goe forward in the Chronicle, and begin with David, (for he fought the Battels of GOD,) To learne from his Story, Who taught his hands to warre, and his fingers to fight. That we may reade in or∣der, we must looke upon him a little before he was King, when he returned to Ziglag, and found nothing there but ruines and ashes 1 Sam. 30. 36: The desire of his eyes, taken captive; and heard threat∣ning words besides: so David was greatly distressed; But he incou∣raged himselfe in the Lord his God. And see what the Lord does for His servant David, because he trusted in Him ver. 6.! Truely that is very notable; how God strengthened David: and how An expression ordinary in the Psalmes, and a duty to be observed. David fortifies himselfe in the LORD his GOD. But I cannot come to that yet; I must first set David cleere from Malignant spirits; for his Actions then, are questioned now
in a Paralel. I will set downe the Case as fully as the most Malignant spirit can doe; and then we will see how the sa∣cred Scripture cleares it, even the Innocency of David then, and of those now, who practise after him. But it will be said at first entrance, and so I shall dissolve the Story into a Dia∣logue, That; Object. We must live by PRECEPT, not by the Godly mans practise. Answ. True; for the practise may vary: but the precept is a standard, I meane a standing rule; And yet I must, for I am commanded so, To follow Paul as he followed Christ: I may live by the godly mans practise, while they live by the precept, keeping close thereunto. Object. But what is the practise of one man, to justifie the practise of the whole Body of a Kingdome? specially when his practise may be a question, and then it cannot be an Argu∣ment, seeing the lawfullnesse of Davids practise was never de∣cided. Answ. Yes, that it was long agoe. The sacred Scripture decideth it, and I will reade the Records of that decision now; Besides, David was not alone; he had others joyned with him; and one, amongst the rest, who renders Davids practise in his Military designe to be unquestionable by cleare testimony from Truth it selfe; THE SPIRIT CLOATHED AMASAI 1 Chro. 12. 18. 12. 8.; (i e) as it is expounded in another place Iudg 6. 34. Instruxit eum voluntate & facultate ad hanc expedi∣tionem perti∣nante, Trem., The Spirit of JEHOVAH furnished Amasai with power and a willing heart, for that expedition, The helping forwards David Military designe; The Spirit of the LORD does not cloath a man, does not so fully set him forth, compleating him with heart, and hand, and councell, and strength to practise against His holy will. So I come to Davids practise; and will heare what can be said against it, and give the Malignants good leave for our better observation, to urge against it to the utmost. Object. David was but a private man, now a subject, desi∣gned to the Crowne indeed; and within a few houres the Crowne was set upon his head: But who regarded that? he was a private man now, a poore cast-out, a miserable creature, at the lowest.
Answ. Reader, I will cut off the objection by the middle for thy sake, that thou mayest note here with all thy heart this first, That it is GODS way and method to say Man low, before He raiseth them; to pluck downe the head, before he will set a Crowne upon it; as David here, before he must be highest in the Kingdome, he must be the lowest there. 2. Note also, for it will cleere our case exceedingly, That indeed David now was but a private man, yet he did so and so, as we shall reade presently: Now let the objection run-on to its full length. Object. And though a private Man, and at the lowest, yet see how proudly he carrieth himselfe! Surely he had treasonable thoughts against his Master, the LODS anoynted; he that scrupeled, at the cutting the lap of his Coate, will not scruple at the taking off his Masters head; he had treasonable thoughts against the LORDS anoynted now: he purposed to Rebell. Answ. No indeed not he; not a thought that way ever came into Davids heart. Object. But (no) answers not the question; The case is ap∣parent, David had gathered together a great Army. Answ. The same Answer must serve, when all is said, No; David did not gather together a great Army; They gathered to him; they came in to him for his guard and rescue; they were not called-in. The persecution of Saul against David was very notorious, and at length raised the hearts of the people, like a great bell, which being set up, made a loud sound, and cal∣led-in for Davids helpers; so they flocked-in to him, till his Hoast was as the Hoast of the LORD 1 Chro 12. 22: A sure token, that God was with him too; and that Innocency was in his hand. Object. That is a grosse mistake; and Davids carriage is mistaken too, cleane different to what the behaviour of a sub∣ject should be. David should have dealt plainely, thus; Masters, remember your selves, and me, subjects all: Saul is our King and Master; we can set him no bounds, and if he be no law to himselfe, he may doe as he does, persecute me, and over∣take me. But I will out-runne him if I can, and hide me where I may; If I cannot, yet, not a hand will I lift up against him; no nor suffer any hand to be lift up against my Master
Saul▪ So he should have said and done. Answ. So he said and did, as appeares in the Text 1 Sam 24. 5.; and will more appeare anone. Object. Nay, cleane contrary; he goes forth to meete his helpers; Tells them, his heart shall be knit unto them 1 Chro. 12. 17.. Answ. He tells them so indeed; and said he not well? If yee be come PEACEABLY unto mee; if as neighbours and Bro∣thers, and come not to betray me to mine enemies; but will helpe me against them, Then my heart shall be knit unto you. 1 Chr. 12. 1. Ye may see plainely what ye take in hand; The rescuing a poore Innocent, that keepes himselfe close because of Saul and his bloody Courtiers ver. 1.; ye see, there is no wrong in my hands; I can appeale to Heaven in this; The GOD of our Fa∣thers looke thereon and rebuke it. ver. 17. Object. Call you this a coming PEACEABLY? It will carry a suspition, at the least of the contrary. Answ. Yes: But what careth a wise man for suspition in such a case: doe not suspect but be confident, that a wise man will keepe the hand of the violent man from his throat, if it be in the power of his hands so to doe. Object. What! keepe Saul the King from cutting his throate? Answ. Yes, Saul the King: for what glory had it beene, if Saul the King had cut Davids throate, any more then if a beg∣gar had done it. The objection holds on. Object. Is this a coming PEACEABLY, when Men of might come-in unto David, and Men of Warre, fit for the Bat∣tell, Armed with Bowes and Arrowes; the chiefe Captaines, ver. 8. mighty Men of valour for the Warre, and for number infinite? Is this a coming PEACEABLY, when every Tribe sent in their thousands, Benjamin also even of Sauls Bretheren? ver. 2. Answ. Yes; all this PEACEABLY. But I thanke you for the last, for that is notable, even of SAULS BRE∣THEREN OF BENJAMIN. Davids cause was so just; Sauls quarrell so unjust; Davids Innocency so appa∣rent; Sauls bloody intentions so cleare to all the Tribes round about; That even Sauls Bretheren came-in to help David, with thousands from each Tribe, and all to rescue him from a
Murderer; And all this coming-in was PEACEABLY. Object. Peaceably! strange! what? Men to come-in, whose faces were like the faces of Lyons; Armed with Bowes; could han∣dle ver. 8. shield and buckler; and all this peaceably? Answ. Yes peaceably all this, To maintaine the peace of the King and Kingdome; To safe-guard Sauls life; I am not mistaken, I say Sauls life, even the soule of his life, for it was in rescue, if it could have beene, of Sauls body, from out of the hands of bloody men, and in compassion to his soule, It will appeare anon; only we must goe about a little, and it will be worth our labour, for it will instruct us touching this present Military designe, the loyalty and lawfullnesse thereof: But that indeed this now is a transcendent businesse, hath no paralel, exceeds that, in the sacred Text, as much as a whole Kingdom is more then David (then, at that time a private man:) As much as all the faithfull in the world, are more then that one Prophet Elisha: yet see what he did to preserve his life 2 Kin. 6. 3 ; Indeed, life is a precious thing, and worthy our safe-guarding. I adde this by the way, to shew, as was said, That this pre∣sent businesse exceeds all paralels, as much as the publike and common good exceeds the private, and particular; As much as a thousand thousand heads exceed one head; But to that which is undertaken; which is this; 1. That David and his helpers helped Saul and his Kingdome; 2. That David did what he did in very compassion to the soule of his Lord, and Master; with respect to his owne soule too, for that was but reasonable. To goe-on then to the bottome of the businesse, and to find-out the ground of this quarrell, and in whose heart warre was indeed. We may make more then a conjecture from the words we shall heare, for they were drawne Swords; but we will search into the bottome of the quarrell. Saul was wroth with David. What had David done? He had killed Goliah, and in him Ten Thousand 1 Sam. . 7.. A Glorious Act that! David had wrought Salvations for Israel. He had slaine a mighty, a proud and insolent Adversary, him that defied, that cursed David by his gods  Sam. 17. 43▪. Little David had slaine this great Goliah, the Champion, that CAME up out of the Campe of the Philistines, ver. 4.
him had David slaine: And in that one Adversary, David slew a whole Legion of Devils. Such a salvation had David wrought for Israel. But for this very Act was the King of Israel highly displeased; The killing of Goliah caused the very heate of Sauls displeasure a∣gainst David: Saul was very wrath for that, and he eyed Da∣vid (marke that) from that day and forward 1 Sam. 18. 9.; and did against him, as we may reade. Why? Because he had beheaded Go∣liah, ver 9. that was the reason. Indeed his rage increased and was exceeding; he became Davids Enemy CONTINUALLY ver. 29. from the very day, David had shaved-off Goliahs head. And see how contrary he walketh against David! For it commands our observation; sometimes in a rage with David, and mani∣festeth his madnesse, so that all may see it 1 Sam. 18. 11; sometimes he u∣seth wiles and crafts. He deales treacherously and subtilly, pre∣tending honour to David, because so worthy, and he should be Captaine (forsooth) over a thousand. And then when that would not doe, Saul assureth David, he will respect him as a ver. 13. Father his sonne; he will take the same care of David, as of his owne child, For he should have his Elder daughter to wife▪ Only David must be valiant, and encourage himselfe to fight the LORDS battels. Who would not trust such words as these? ver. 17. Truly David, a simple hearted man, did believe it, That Saul had a zeale for GOD, the establishing Religion, and, a full purpose to honour him; He should have his daughter to wife; and the condition was to Davids heart, for he could be valiant, and fight the battels of the LORD. David could not suspect, That a wicked heart is like a pot-sheard covered with silver drosse Pro. 20. 23.; or that a man may speake faire, when there are seven abominations in his heart ver. 25.. There were no fewer in Sauls heart; he cared not what he said, nor what he did, nor did he regard the hundred fore-skins of the Philistines; he regarded this, how he might execute His Will upon the innocent. What he said to Day, he unsaid the next day, or did worse; David should have his elder daughter that he should; but when she should have bin given to David, she was given to another the very same day, it is worth the noting, at the same time. And yet 1 Sam. 18. 19. David must be told, that Saul delights in him, and all his ser∣vants
love him, (see what a thing the Heart is, how desperately wicked ver▪ 22.) And if it will please David, he shall be the Kings sonne in law notwithstanding. And it pleased David well, for he said, in effect, Saul honours the poore Shepheard very much, For is it not an honour to be the Kings sonne in law ver. 23.? So Da∣vid performes the condition, which Saul requird m, and Saul performed his word to David; he gave him Michal his daugh∣ter to wife ver. 27.; but he had said (in his heart) before, I will giue him her, that she may be a snare unto him ver. 21.. Thus it was almost visible, That there was warre in Sauls heart, and seven abominations beside: But yet Saul cannot prevail against Da∣vid, neither by open rage, nor secret cunning. How so? Be∣cause the LORD was departed from Saul, and was with Da∣vid ver. 12.: Therefore David behaved himselfe wisely in all his wayes, for the LORD was with him ver. 14.. And that troubled Saul most of all, for it defeated all his counsels; it made him afraid of Da∣vid; yet he would try all wayes he could find out to kill Da∣vid. Then Saul spake to Jonathan his Sonne Chap. 19. 1. (he was an honest man, and loved David with his heart ver. 2., for he delighted in him) and to all his Servants (they were all wicked, for their Ma∣ster hearkened unto lyes Prov. 29. 12.) THAT THEY SHOƲLD KILL DAVID. So the Master and the servants, did all what they could to take away his life. But the poore Worme pluck'd in his head as he could, he dealt very subtilly 1 Sam. 23. 22. Good reason why, for, Saul secretly practised mischiefe against him Chap. 23. 9.; And David knew it. Nay, Saul had destroyed the City of the Priests Chap. 22. 1.: His servants indeed would not execute their Masters bloody command ver. 17, 18., but Doeg did y; (A bloudy Master cannot want a bloudy Doeg) if the other servants will scruple at so nice a point, Doeg will not, he fell upon the Priests and slew on that day 84. persons, that did weare a linnen Ephed▪ Nay he did more then so, like the Doegs of our dayes, they could not be avenged of David▪ the faithfull servants of the Lord, therefore they slew poore naked men and women, yea and dogs too. So Doeg then, he smote Nob, the City of the Priests with the edge of the Sword, both men and women, children and sucldings, and oxen and asset, and sheepe with
the EDGE OF THE SWORD. It is twise repeated ver. 19. to expresse the extreame cruelty of that execution. See here what a bloudy persecution is raised, when Saul seeks Davids life, and Doeg is his minister! But what doth Saul say now? Can he call GOD to re∣cord upon his soule, That his heart is upright? That he hath a zeale for the Lords battels? So he said, can he say so still? Yet may be he could; but no wise-men regarded what he said, when they saw Doeg was with him, and had made such a mise∣rable destruction. Wise-men did observe what Saul did, and who were his ministers; and they knew as well as David himselfe, That the persecution was raised against the most faithfull servant in Sauls Kingdome; and therefore it was, that who so were faithfull in the Kingdome, next to David, were slain too for his sake. Now Saul might speake, and sweare and protest, and call GOD to witnesse, it could not be regar∣ded; his bloudy execution (for it was his, he commanded Doeg to fall) upon the Priests, and that cruell out-rage against Nob, undeceived all the people in the Land, and in point of Law. But Saul now makes no pretence; he marcheth on now (for he was now entred into blood) , with open face against David, and see what an Army he hath gathered toge∣ther, three thousand chosen men out of Israel; mighty hunters 1 Sam. 24. 2. all, and they all hunted David, as one hunteth a Partridge in the Mountaines Chap. 26. 20., and once, nay twice they had him in a coop, inclosed 1 Sam 23 26. him in a Cave with more then five hundred drawne Swords round about; but the Lord gave David the day, and the advantage; Truely Davids deliverances and rescues Chap. 24. 3, 4. were the greatest miracles that GOD wrought in those dayes. But why all this prosecution and persecution against David? That is the enquiry: What had David done? It was halfe answered before, and but the halfe; he had killed Goliah, and in him ten thousand. Now we must heare the other part; but reade first and note it, David shall have enough urged against him; That he conspired against his Master Saul 1 Sam. 22. 13., for Saul saith, as if he did beleeve, that David sought his hurt Chap. 24. 9., and he went in danger of his life every day. Who? Saul, he was
afraid of David that David would kill him; so he said, and so his Courtiers said also, but what said the honest Priest, for we must beleeve him, Who is so faithfull among all thy Servants, as David Chap. 22. 14.; and Saul knew it to be so too, though he spoke, that David conspired against him, and that he sought his life; they were but fained words, he feared David no more, then a dog feares the hare, or a wolfe a lambe: and Saul cleares David at this point also, in his words and in his heart both 1 Sam. 24. 16, 17, 18. 1 Sam. 26. 21. Chap. 23. 8. 1 Sam. 23. 17.. But Saul conspired against David to take away his life, that was visible, he called all the people together to warre to besiege David, for the reason above said, and for this which followes, Thou shalt be King over Israel, and that also SAƲL MY FATHER KNOWETH, marke that, and then you have the other part, and are come to the bottome of the busi∣nesse. What ever the pretences were, this was the ground of the quarrell; Sauls house shall not be established; David must succeed, and not Jonathan, and SAƲL KNEW IT. Why then would Saul resist, fighting against GOD, and a good conscience? The answer is short; because he vvas an e∣nemy to GOD, and to the good pleasure of His will; There∣fore he endeavours nothing more earnestly, then to make void the decrees of GOD, though yet they are as the everlasting hils and perpetuall Mountaines. Indeed this ever was, and is the great designe of the vvorld, What? To dethrone David, The Lord Christ King of Saints: He shall not rule in the King∣domes of the vvorld; not over them; they still said so, and so they say still; so they set themselves, taking counsell together, still against the LORD, and against His ANNOINTED. And so vve have the vvhole ground and reason of the quarrell, vvhich vve vvill reade over again. 1. David had done vvorthily for the people of God, in one Adversary he had slain ten thousand. 2. The mercies of God vvere made sure to David, his King∣dome must be established for ever, Saul vvould make all this Null, and of none effect. And this hath been the cause of all the warres against the Church from the beginning of the world; and vvill be the same to the vvorlds end. David
should not be King then: Thence rose the quarrell, and it has continued ever since upward to this day. What an hea∣ving and shouldering doe we make now, That His Seed may not keepe His Throne, and have, according to the Promise, the Kingdomes of the Earth for His possession? And yet, if we aske these men, they will answer in coole blood, That the LORD CHRIST doth raigne, and must raigne; He will take to Himselfe Power, be the Nations never so angry: Notwithstanding, what they thinke in coole-blood, thus they Rev. 11▪ 17, 18 doe in their Anger; They breake His bands in sunder, and cast away His cords from them. This is the ground of the quar∣rell, the dethroning of the LORD CHRIST; as this has, Psal. 2. 3. so it will cause the bloudiest warre, that ever was read of in the world. My Promise was to make a discovery hereof only, and no more. Now to the maine businesse, 1. To vindicate David and his hel∣pers, from doing wrong or injustice against Saul. 2. Then I shall cleare Davids compassion to Saul, and to his owne soule; All this in standing upon his guard, and defending himself. 1. The first is as cleare as the Sunne-shine, David tooke no∣thing from Saul, but added to him, he would have maintai∣ned Ziglag for him; All Davids designes were to safeguard Sauls life; and still his in-rodes were upon Sauls Adversaries; All his wayes were not alwayes warrantable there; then hee wandred erring from the way, when feare surprised him, and that was more then once; but not once in all his life, did he doe the least hurt to Saul, but much good service. Obiect. By your leave, David might have hurt Saul, and have slaine him too: For, had not the LORD told David, that the men of Keilah 1 Sam. 23. 10, 11., notwithstanding their engagements to David, yet would deale treacherously with him, he had stood upon his guard there, and fortified the Towne, and maintained it against Saul; who, so glad of that advantage, and calling together all the people to befiege ver. 9. David, might have endangered his life there, that he might. Answ. Yes indeed might he; No doubt but Saul would have made a furious on-set upon Keilah for Davids sake, (it was
as some Towne our thoughts may be upon, well fortified, and had gates and barres,) for he was the very But and white wher∣at malice shot all her Arrowes; and if the Keilites had been faithfull to David, he would not have been treacherous to him∣selfe; and then in the heat of the battell, and hot charge against David, he could not teach the arrows, or what other instru∣ments of death they had, to make difference betwixt Saul and a common Man. Saul might have forborne, and have taken leisure enough to looke to himself, David had work enough, to prevent Saul, and to save his owne throat. If Saul will runne upon the Sword, who can stay him? It is all the an∣swer that needs to a question but supposed. But seeing we are upon that Chapter, let us observe the bold confidence of the man; David is come to Keilah sayes he; he is shut in there, by entring into a Towne that hath gates and barres ver. 7.. Well, what if he be? There is a POWER with David, that can breake Gates of brasse and barrs of Iron. But observe, I say, how▪ confident the man is, and yet how mistaken! He is sure enough now, sayes Saul, I have him now fast enough: GOD hath delivered him into my hand. Look ye! Saul thought that GOD shined upon His bloudy counsels: (indeed the LORD gives some successe that way, that the counsell of the wicked may be carried head-long) when as in∣deed GOD went cleane crosse unto him, and declared His Name to be Wonderfull for David; onely the LORD gave Saul this advantage to manifest the spirit of the man, and to discover the treachery of the people, that was it. But Saul understood none of all this, he thought, as was said, that GOD blessed His indeavours, prospered his designe, though it was the persecution of David, throughout all the thousands of Judah 1 Sam. 23. 23.. How came Saul to be so blinded in an evill way? Say hard∣ned and brawned too; Then looke in the Chapter immediate∣ly before; and that will give you answer to both 1 Sam. 22.. Saul had taken a bloudy Edomite to his side; had rushed furiously into a Towne of Priests, and we have read what a slaughter he made there. He washed his feet in the blood of the Lords chiefe servants; he must needs be blinded now and brawned in an e∣vill
way. This in passage: But I thinke I have cleared this, which was the first: That neither David, nor his helpers did any wrong to Saul. I come now to the second thing, which is the chiefe of my undertaking; That David in seeking to defend and safeguard himself, did show compassi∣on to Saul, even to the life of his life. 2. Sauls understanding was now so clouded, the light which was in him, was overspread with such a thicke darknesse, that he accounted the delivering up David into his hands (which the people, so brutish and vile they were, so blind also, they followed Saul up to the knees in bloud; and such enemies to their Kings peace, were ready to doe) so as he might sheath his sword in Davids bowels, even this, To be a mercy to his soule, Blessed be ye of the Lord, for yee have compassion on me 1 Sam. 23. 21.: See there, Saul blesseth murtherers, whom GOD curseth, and he should have put to death. And he accounts it a COMPASSION to his soule. What? To have the opportunity given him for the taking away Davids life. Lay this together, consider on it, then we must conclude, that David, in standing upon his guard, and admitting such helpers, which GOD sent-in un∣to him, did show compassion even to his Masters soule: As he did to his own soul, in rescuing that by all faire means out of the hands of a murtherer. I said, compassion to his Masters soul; That is compassion indeed, to keepe a man from shedding in∣nocent blood. That restraint is a blessed restraint, which keeps the foote from the path of the destroyer: That counsell, blessed counsell, which checks and stopps a man in the pursuance of bloody designes. We may say of such restraints, and of such counsellours, as we weade; Blessed be the LORD GOD of Israel, and blessed be the advice; and blessed be those counsellours, who would keepe this day from shedding in∣nocent 1. Sam. 25. 32, 33. blood. We will looke over this once more that we may observe in passage thence, and stand humbled at our observation; first; 1. What a thick cloud man hath cast over his understanding! What does Saul call a compassion on him? The delivering up of David into his hands, that so he might sheath his Sword in
his bowells: And now that the Ziphites will (after the man∣ner) doe Saul this kindnesse to deale treacherously with Da∣vid, ver 19. aand betray innocent blood, Saul will blesse them in the Name of the LORD. Truely here is a strange compassion, and as strange a blessing, yet not strange from Saul, a stranger to the Common-wealth of Israel, and has made such a slaugh∣ter, and committed such an out-rage upon Nob, for that must be remembred still all along, 2. Compare we the compassion the Ziphites would have shewne to Saul, with the compassion David did shew unto him 1 Sam. 24. Chap. 26,, Then we shall see plainly, that the Ziphites compassion was trencherous and bloody, they can shew no compassion; But David can; his compassion is compassion indeed, mercy to the Body, and to the Soul also. All this David shewed to Saul. Now in the next place, we must give David leave to shew, 2. Compassion to his owne Soule; so I said; And is not the soule worthy whereto a man should shew compassion? Why should a man suffer the thred of life to be cut, his soule to be let-out by a bloody hand, which no sooner is let-out, but it lancet forth into the deepes of eternity, where it must live for ever? Why should a man neglect his life, his pretious life, which is given him here, to make provision for a happy life hereafter. We have heard what David a private man did, for his Master Saul, and for himselfe, how just and innocent in all; now heare him out, what he saith; If you be come peace∣ably unto me, mine heart shall be knit unto you, but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is no wrong in mine hands, the GOD of our Fathers looke thereon and rebuke it. In the next place, heare what Abigall saith; The LORD will certainely make my Lord a sure house 1 Sam. 25 28. How a Chro. 12. 17. knowes she that? Because my Lord fighteth the Battels of the LORD. What Battels were they? Offensive against the Philistines, defensive against Saul. And evill hath not found in thee all thy dayes: Yet a man is risen to pursue thee, and to seeke thy soule. Who was that? Saul; But the soule of my Lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with the LORD thy GOD, and the soule of thine enemies, them shall He sling out as out of the midst of a sling. She was no Prophetesse, but it
was just as she said. In the last place, heare what Amasai saith, for he spake by the Spirit; Then the Spirit came upon A∣masai, who was chiefe of the Captaines, and he said, Thine are we David, and on thy side, thou Sonne of Jesse, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers, for thy GOD helpeth thee. Then David received them, and made them Captaines of the band, David might receive those helpers, and employ them, for they came unto him with a blessing from GODS Mouth, and with a Warrant from His Hand. And so the sacred Scripture hath cleared Davids Militia to be loyall and lawfull. The same Oracle sayes as much, and more in the justifica∣tion of our Militia, raised for the Defence of our Lord the King, his Crowne and Dignity: The Malignant Party will interrupt me here; they and they only are a WALL to the King, a De∣fence to the Kingdome by night and day 1 Sam. 25. 19. So they say, and you may beleeve them. Now what shall I say? That our Militia (I call it ours, because our Lawes, Liberties, Lives, the life of our lives, Religion and all, are concerned in it) is raised for the offence of the Kingdome, to open the doores and frontiers thereof, that the Beasts of prey may enter-in there∣by; to make the Nation the portion of Foxes. I may say so if I will, but no sober man will think me sober for saying so; Therefore I will speake-out my words, That the sacred Scrip∣ture says as much, and much more in justification of our Militia, raised for the fortifying the Kingdome (the King also, for what is good for the one; is good for the other: As what is good for the Bee-hive is also good for the Bee) That it may be a WALL about the Kingdome indeed by night and day; for the safe-guarding of All we count good there, his Majesties Per∣son, Crowne, and Dignities; our Lawes and Liberties, and the life of all, our Religion; This great Businesse is managed ac∣cording to the cleare mind and will of GOD, that His Glory, and the Glory of the Land, should be maintained with all that we count dearest unto us, our dearest blood, in resisting those, who doe oppose that Glory, and would spoile us of so un∣esteemable a jewell; It is pure obedience in this case, and for those in Authority, to bring, forth the Sword, and Speare, so
to stop the way against such a spurious company; A Malig∣nant generation, a viperous brood, such evill doers, bloody Edomites, who say now (and doe as they say) as their Fathers before them in the day of Jerusalem, rase it, Psal. 37. 7. rase it even to the foundation thereof, which may awaken the Nation, and stirre them up to defend themselves, and avenge themselves of such Adversaries. But I forbeare, supposing the Readers judgement (if he is not willingly ignorant) cleared in this matter, by those many cleare Treatises in every mans hand, which doe fully state the busines, and make full answer to the cavils against it. I goe-on now where I left; I have cleared the justice of Davids Militia; now it is objected, The justice of ours is not so cleare. Object. What is all this to justifie the Militia now on foote? For first, David did this in a quiet way, shifting from place to place, like an hunted Partridge, to shelter and defend himselfe, and no more: David was offended, but he gave no offence at all. It is granted also, That there came-up to David day by day, out of all the Tribes, untill he had a great Hoast, like the Hoast of GOD 2 Chro. 12. 2. and yet we reade not of any thing this Hoast did for Davids defence: or of any thing, that Saul did against David. Answ. To answer the last first, It is cleare in the Chapter, That, to the 23. verse, those are numbred, who came-up to David, to defend and safe-guard him, against the malitious at∣tempts of Saul and his bloody servants, who sought by force and fraud, to take away his life. Past all question, that was the end, and tendency in coming to David in Troopes; and not to pick Cockleshels, as, I reade a great Hoast was com∣manded to doe, to shew, I think, the authority and force of their Generalls command: They came for the purpose afore∣said, there is no doubt of that; And yet the Scripture is silent in what they did for David: very little sure, but standing-on his side, and making such an appearance for him, it must needs strike some terrour into his Adversaries; It is more then pro∣bable also, That Saul at this time, observed the Philistines ga∣thering strength againe, and they were Enemies indeed, which might take him-off from pursuing David: for sure this ap∣pearance,
on Davids side, was neare the time of Sauls death, and Davids coming to the Throne. But this I would have noted in our passage here, That, as we reade not here of any deliverance, that God wrought for David by this great Hoast: So shall we never reade, that God wrought any greate deliverance for His Church by great Hoasts at any time: No? What say you to the Yeare 88? I say it is our weakenesse, I might say our wickednesse, to give the glory of that deliverance, as we doe, to our great Hoast; The LORD fought against that Sisera, as won∣derfully then, as, in ancient dayes, Hee did, when the Starres in their courses fought against him Judg. 5. 20.. And so He scat∣tered, not the ships only, but the bones of them that encamped against us. The Lord put an hooke into the nose of that inso∣lent Adversary, as once He did into the nose of him (so like a Beast) and turned him backe not by the way 2 Kin. 19 28., which he came forth; but so, that he, who came out against His Church one way, did flie before Her seven wayes Deut. 28. 7.. Thus the LORD did, that He might be magnified and have all the glo∣ry. I might be large here and to excellent purpose, but then, I should digresse from the businesse in hand; only let me say this, That GOD wrought then for David, when David was alone, skipping from this place unto that, now from this hole into another, when Saul would search him out through∣out all the Thousands of Judah: Then the LORD wrought gloriously for David, and then David could see the Bare-ARME of the LORD in his deliverance, which he not seene if the LORD had done it by his great Hoast. This is n GOD usually hangs the grea∣test weights upon the smal∣lest wyars: He doth the great∣est works, both in the way of mercies and of judgements, by the silliest and weakest execu∣tioners. spoken not to take us off from making provisions, and taking such helpes, That GOD sends-in unto us: But that we put no confidence there; nor give glory thereunto; which, because we are apt to doe, therefore the LORD workes no great matters by His great Hoasts, unlesse they be Hoasts of Froggs, Liee and Flies: By these contemptible things, the LORD has confounded the Adversary, because the Adversary, and His people much more, must say, The finger of GOD is here *. It pleaseth the LORD to worke the grea∣test things by the weakest instruments, That man may say, the
Arme of the LORD was made bare here, His hand brought these mighty things to passe. So much to that part of the obje∣ction; The other is; Object. That David passed-on in a quiet way, made no noise at all: nor made he a warre offensive, unlesse against the Phili∣stines, the enemies of GOD. Answ. Briefly, to the last first; It was not possible that David should defend himselfe against Saul, and not offend him, as in the case of Keilah, had not the inhabitants there been treacherous: we reade not that they came to a set battle, therefore there could be no offence, and therefore little noyse indeed; Secondly, As little as might be, as he will doe, that shifts for his life; his worke was to save one, and then hee saved all, and that hee might doe, and not make much a doe, or much stirre in the Land. Here now a whole Kingdome, All that is deare or neare unto us in it, whe∣ther Persons or Things are to be saved, defended, rescued, de∣livered. This will be a hot and sharpe contention sure, for it is to make a Kingdome Honourable, the head of King∣domes, now set low because of the abominations there; It is a contention for the Faith, and not against flesh and blood only, but against principalities and powers, against the Ephes. 6. 12. Rulers of the darkenesse of this world, against spirituall wic∣kednesse in high places. The wicked there had turned the Kingdome quite from GOD; now it must be turned a∣gaine, and, as was said of Pauls preaching, upside down with it's face towards GOD againe. It must needes follow, that we shall be full of stirres, a tumultuous peo∣ple now, that the wel-posturing a Kingdome, this Reforming Work in hand; for (I allude to that place) Hell from beneath Esa. 14. 9. is mooved to meet this worke: It stirreth up the dead a∣gainst it, even all the chiefe of the Earth: It will raise up from their Thrones, all the Kings of the Nations. It was ever so, it must be so now, now that Jerusa∣lems wall, the breaches there are making-up, specially after such Ruines there; it must needes make the Nations an∣gry,
so grievous it is to the Head the Pope: To the Tayle, the Prophets, that teach lyes: To the brutish Peo∣ple, and to the King of the bottomlesse pit. But it is the surest and clearest signe, that the worke is of GOD, To promote His Glory, which is so opposed by all the Devills in hell, and his servants on earth. This is enough to assure us, wee must looke to heare a voyce of noyse from the City now, and the like from the Countries: For now the worke is not to save one Man, no nor one Kingdome, but three Kingdomes, To posture them against their Adversaries, and to set them with their face towards GOD. Obiect. Then here is like to be a confused noyse, and garments rolled in blood. Answ. Yes, for it is the battell of the Warriour; besides, the Land hath beene defiled with bloud, and it cannot be cleansed, but by the bloud of them that shed it. Wee shall never rade, That a Kingdom was established before the wicked were taken away. Therefore David begins there, as we shall see anon, and gives his son Salomon the like charge too, that he suffer not the Murtherer to live, nor the vile per∣son neither, hee must turne the wheele over the wicked: And thou wilt doe it, sayes he, for thou art a wise-mans, and thou lookest thy Throne should be established in righte∣ousnes. c 1 King. 2 9. 2. As the Nations are angry; so the LORD is angry too, His Sword shall be filled with blood, as we reade it was by His owne command, and at that very time, when the enemy thought to have power over His people Est. 9. 1. & 15. 16.. Sure∣ly the LORD has a Sacrifice now in these King∣domes, as in Bozrah; and a great slaughter, as in the Land of Idumea, For it is the day of the LORDS ven∣geance, and the yeare of Recompences for the controversie of Esa. 34. Zion. Obiect. But the sword knowes no difference betwixt the Righteous and the wicked; it may be bathed in the bloud of the Righteous too. Answ. True, and yet there shall be a great difference, for
it is the LORDS sword in whose hand soever it bee, and Hee will make a difference; and the will of the LORD be done. If now be the time when His WIT∣NESSES must be slaine, the will of the Lord be done. His Antipasses cannot be discouraged in standing to their Testi∣mony; for what ever indignities shall be done unto their bodies, though in the openest place of the great City; what ever insultation over them, yet they cannot bee discouraged, for it shall be done against them in that place, where our LORD was crucified; there is a strong conso∣lation See Cure of Fear, p. 56. &c.. g Revel. 11. 8. I will recollect what hath been said and conclude; Our MILITIA is raised for the Defence of King and King∣dome, of all that is deare and precious to us there; there∣fore in the justice of it, it exceeds all Paralels, and is ac∣cording to the Mind and Will of GOD: His Host sent∣in unto us for the saving of His Owne Kingdome. What workes Hee may doe by it Hee knowes, wee know not; His manner is not to worke great matters by great Hosts of men: He has broken the Ship to peeces, yet brought the passengers safe to Land Act. 27.; Hee may confound all our confidences, and yet doe the worke for the magnifying His Owne Name, in creating wayes and meanes for De∣liverance; making the unfaithfullnesse in man, To advance His faithfullnesse Gods power is magnified by mans weaknes; His wisdom by mans folly; His truth & faith∣fulnes by mans treachery and falsehood, Chr.: And Mans improvidences, To serve His Providence. And this wee are sure of also, That the Host of GOD never miscarried; if they have turned their backe upon their enemies, as sometimes they have done, it is to make them set their faces more stedfastly Hea∣ven-ward ever after. If the Adversary and Enemy puts them once to the worst, they take great advantage by it, for they are made the better all the dayes of their war∣fare. Let us doe our Dutie, that is our worke, opening our Mouthes wide, and our hearts and our purses: And let the LORD alone with His worke, Hee will worke like Himselfe for the good of His Church in a good time, His owne time. His people would not have things done
better or sooner then their GOD pleaseth to doe them: For the Time when Hee doth it is best of all: And there they rest and stay themselves: For His words tou∣ching this Matter also, Shall be fullfilled in THEIR SEASON Luk▪ 1. 20.. Now wee passe-on to The ACTS of David.
THE ACTS OF DAƲID. CHAP. I. David is delivered out of the straits, and enlarged. Before hee sate downe in his Throne, he does Justice, shedding the blood of the Murtherer. He sets his heart and hope in GOD; therefore he had dominion over the mighty. His care is about the Arke; GOD careth for him: He does his duty, that is mans worke; GOD safeguards him; makes provision for him; that is GODS worke. There's a breach made upon him, which hee makes up by Repentance, and is made better by it. He doe's Judgement and Justice, chargeth his sonne Solomon so to doe: Directeth him the way to make Himselfe and People prosperous; Hee dyeth. GODS Servant, David, is destitute of an har∣bour▪ GOD provides for him a Kingdome. Now his strait was greatest, his Deliverance was nearest; he is set on the Throne present∣ly after he thought himselfe on the dung-hill at the lowest. David knew his head was long before annoynted, yet he will not stirre till he consults with the Lord, resolving to doe nothing, without a word from His mouth, and, having that, he orders his Militia, pursues his ene∣mies, and overtakes them: redeemed all the enemy had ta∣ken from him, returned to Ziglag with the spoyles of them, 1 Sam. 30. 7▪ that spoyled him; Devides the prey into equall portions; and then a few hours after, he heares of his Crowne, which he
might have received from an unhollowed hand, before that time, even from the hand of an Amalekite; but David had 2 Sam. 1. 7, 8, 9 10. good experience of GODS faithfullnesse; He could pos∣sesse his soule in patience, he would not now make haste, for he is going to his Throne. A man had need walke softly, that is going thether, and be very circumspect, that is laying his hand upon a Crowne; for of all ornaments, he must be care∣full how meetly the Crowne is set upon his head: As it is set on at the first, so it stands ever after, either firme and steddy; or, like a tottering wall and broken fence. David is very wise and exemplary at this point; for, he that was a Subject but now, and in a very low estate, begins to be lifted-up on high, he is entring upon his Government Great cauti∣on, providence and circumspe∣ction is to be u∣sed at our en∣trance upon an office: so also about our first actions there.; now he must look, with all his eyes, how he begins, and not so much how he Times his beginning, (though that be a great point of wisdome) but with what discretion he enters the government, and sits down in his Throne. We will observe now with what circumspe∣ction he layes hand on a Crowne: How hee ponders his steppes, now hee is entring the Throne. Thus it was; There comes a man to him out of the Campe from Saul, like a mourner, but with joyfull news in his mouth (he thought) for though he must tell David, That the people of Israel were many of them fled, and many fallen; and many dead, and Jo∣nathan dead also: yet this would make amends for all, and com∣fort David, even over the death of Jonathan; and Saul is dead also 2 Sam. 1. 4.: Thus the wicked man museth as he useth; and judgeth of Davids heart by his own; That David will not thinke of Jonathan in the day he heares of Sauls death: and quite forget the affliction of Israel (for that is the manner of men) now he heares of a Kingdom: and will kisse that mans hand (though an Amalekite) which tenders him a Crowne. We reade on, David questions the man, and the man is as ready in his answer, assuring David concerning the truth of the whole matter; but cleares this, which he thought would be most welcome, and sweeten all the bitternesse in Israels slaughter, and Jonathans death, That Saul is dead also; I am sure of that
sayes he, very sure, for I my selfe stood upon him and slew him; And, because I would be yet surer, I have, (like Souldiers) pilla∣ged ver. 10. him too, I have taken the Crowne from his head, and the Bracelet from his Arme, and have brought them hither unto my Lord: So he has tendred David a Crown, expecting a reward; he shall have it anon. This sounds very ill in Davids eare; he is not glad to heare his Enemie was fallen; No, though he stood betwixt him and a Crowne: David does, as a man, that cannot see matter of joy, no not in being set-up, and chief in the Kingdom, When Israel is set under: Israel mournes, he mournes also; and as the Master, so all the Servants do, likewise all the men that were with him ver. 11.. David questions the man yet farther, whence and what he was? He tels him, That he is the sonne of a stranger, an A∣malekite ver. 13.. The very same; his actions told David as much before; he shall have the reward of an Amalekite; he destroyed Saul (his own confession was so) he was not afraid to stretch his hand against the LORDS annoynted; The hand of Ju∣stice shall be now stretched out against him (since it was not stretched out before, when GOD commanded 1 Sam. 15. 3.) to cut him off from the Earth. The Crowne of an Israelite is tendred by the hand of an Amalekite unto David; he looked upon it with disdaine; and his head shall be taken from his shoulders, because he was so bold to take an Israelites▪ Crown into his hands. It was a custome (it may be it continues still) That at so∣lemne times, when the Crowne is setting upon the head, Pri∣soners are loosed; the Jewes had such a custome on the day of their Feast Mat 7. 15.; They had it by tradition, and took-it-up, as they did other things, upon trust: but they had it not from David; he slew that notable Murtherer at that solemn time. I heard a great man say, that this great work now in hand, The well▪ Posturing the Kingdom, could not be prosperous. Why not prosperous? Because the very first step into it was in blood, he spake feelingly that spake thus; But, the more likely to prosper will every wise-man say; If there had bin more blood-shed, it had prospered the more, even so much, as that the Church
might have washed her feet in the blood of her Enemies. But we must leave the issue of these things in GODS hands. We have observed how David enters into his Throne; we have found his first Act very exemplary for Judgement and Justice, though very crosse to the custome of after times; He is step∣ping-up now to the Pinnacle of honour; That he may stand sure on that tottering place, his first step unto it shall be exem∣plary for Justice to all Kings and Princes after him; his first step shall be underlayed with Justice and paved with Judge∣ment. We go-on, observing all along, how direct a way David goes in still (he is going to a Throne) to establish his Throne for ever, and make his Crowne flourish upon his head; He enquires of the Lord (He will not move a stepp but by directi∣on 2 Sam. 2. 1. from GODS mouth) touching the place of his annoyn∣ting. And God so orders all for him, that all might know he was designed, preserved and called to the Kingdome (as mi∣raculously as Queen Elizabeth was) by GOD Himself. And yet he finds opposites, as she did (The Kingdome of David shall have all the opposition, the Devils in hell, and all their Angels on Earth, can make against it:) but David prevailes over them all; he waxed stronger and stronger 2 Sam. 3. 1., and the house of Saul weaker and weaker. Davids Militia was so strong now (for God was with him) That he tooke courage, and marched to Jerusalem, laid siege to 2 Sam 5. 6. that strong-hold, which held out all the dayes of the Iudges: The Adversary thought it impossible, that David could take it, and that the lame and blind would defend it: and so they jee∣red at him; not considering, that they had to doe with more then a Man. David comes against his Adversary in the strength of God: He looked not how strong the City was, for then he had been discouraged, he considered how strong God is, and the more easily prevailes against his Aduersaries, the more rea∣dy they were to mocke and jeere at him: Neverthelesse David ver. 7. tooke the strong-hold of Sion, the same is the City of Dauid. And David went on and grew great; How so? The Lord God of Hosts was with him h. Then what could stand against him  His enemies could not stand before him, for the LORD
brake forth upon them like the breach of waters ver. 20.. GOD was with him, no matter how many were against him: The God of all the Hosts in Heaven, Earth and Sea, they shall all fall and be destroyed; and the gods, they in their hasty flight left be∣hind them, David and his men burnt in the fire, that is notable. ver. 21. Note this also, GODS being with, or departing from a people, is the cause of all the reall comforts and sorrowes in the world: It is the cause also of our standing or falling before our enemies. We reade on, Now Davids care was about the Arke; It was well his 2 Sam. 6. care was so well placed. Be carefull for that, and be carefull for nothing; (that is) let your care be about the service of GOD, that it be according to rule, after His Will, Whose service it is, and then you may cast all your care upon GOD, for He careth for you 1 Pet. 5▪ 7.. Let a man seeke what he should seek in the first place; and let GOD alone with all the rest; Though they be many things, yet all shall be added Mat. 6. 33. . unto him; (i. e.) they shall be cast in to him without his care, as an ad∣vantage or surplesage to his reckoning. Let a man doe his duty, which is his worke; and let GOD alone to safeguard him, to make provision for him, for that is GODS worke. A∣gaine; Davids chiefe and first care was about the Arke. It was most fit it should be so. Indeed a good Prince must needs be∣thinke himselfe first, how to advance Religion; what should the Deputies of GOD rather doe, then honour Him, Who hath honored them, and Whom they represent? But they should have looked to the manner, and what Law 2 Sam. 6. the LORD had set-downe, for the removing and carrying ver. 3. of the Arke: The Testimony of Gods presence is in their hands, and they handle it rather as Philistines then as Israelites: The Arke should have been carried on the Priests Numb. 7. 9. shoulders, they set it upon a Cart. See how ready Israel is to follow an exam∣ple against the Rule, and to doe as the Philistines did; so did they, and a way they went merrily, a very little way, for quick∣ly, (See the Tides and changes in worldly things!) The Lord turned their dancing into mourning; He made a Breach upon them, and so He taught the generations following, this great
lesson; That when we cannot doe any thing in the degrees that GOD requireth, yet we must learne to doe all things in the FORME that He requireth: David hath learnt his les∣son Ps. 2. 11. now, settles to the worke againe, doth all according to the Law, Decently and in Order, he serves the LORD with feare, and rejoyceth with trembling; he will account of world∣ly joy and contentment as it is, a thing very momentany, of very small continuance; he will never trust prosperity againe, there may be a change within an houre, nor will he let himself loose to a fearlesse joy. 1. The breach is made upon Ʋzzah, but it strikes David also to the heart, and see how softly he walks, and humbly before his GOD, (His judgements were before his eyes) he was a∣fraid of the LORD that day, and said, how shall the Arke of the LORD come unto me? 2 Sam▪ 6. 9. Thus a good man learnes much by affliction, and is made bet∣ter by anothers stroakes, for the hand of GOD, that was sore up∣on Ʋzzah, pointed to Davids sin also, and the LORD might have been as quicke with him, being the chiefe person there, and a Leader to His people: So David enquires wisely into the matter and cause of this the LORDS displeasure, and he finds it out and expresseth it; Our GOD made a breach upon us, for that we sought Him not after the DƲEORDER 1 Chr. 15. 13.. See how that breach made-up Prince, People and Levites, and made them all whole againe; So the Priests and Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the Arke of the LORD GOD of Israel; SANCTIFIED THEMSELVES ver. 14., that is to be noted; Take we heed of an inconsiderate rushing in∣to, or upon Gods service, such, especially, as concerne the Arke: A man must be prepared and sanctified for such works. 2. Looke to thy feet (thy heart, thy affections) when thou art going into▪ Gods house: He is in Heaven, thou art on Earth. The Admonition is seasonable; when our foot is en∣tring upon Gods worke, when we would doe a worke for God, Ioshuahs direction is as usefull as it was to the Priests, when they should see God working for them; Sanctifie your selves, Iosh. 3. 5. for to morrow the LORD will doe wonders among you: So, Sanctifie your selves (for to morrow you are to worke
for GOD;) as you expect He should worke gloriously for you. 3. This is of high concernment for us simple ones, who are all for the work, not regarding the manner; It is spoken to us in a figure. We also are all for the matter and substance of the work; if our prayers be said (as we say) If we have sat out the hour, and heard the Sermon; and, when that is done, have received the Sa∣crament, that is enough, the work is done. Assuredly this is as if we should thinke; if the Arke be carried, and brought to his place of rest; no matter for the manner how, though it be put in a Cart, and the Oxen drew it. We must looke to the man∣ner of our performance, or else looke for a breach upon us: Sooner or latter God will make it, for He is the same, He was in Davids dayes Sieut Deus est semper, sic justi∣tia Dei semper; sicut omnipoten∣tia Domini indeficiens, sic censura inde mis∣tabilis: sicut Deus jure per∣petuus, sic justi∣tia perseverans Sal. de. Gub l. x p. 60. 1 Cro. 15 3.; and then thus it was; Our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought Him not after the due order. Then we must remember, how they ordered themselves after this breach was made upon them, and as they did, so should we doe in our services, before God make a breach upon us (Because you did it not at THE FIRST 1 Chr. 15. 13 ver. 14., therefore the breach was made upon them at the last) So the Priests and the Levites sancti∣fied themselves to bring up the Arke of the LORD GOD of Israel. So must we doe according to the charge in Ioshuab, and this here, Sanctifie your selves both you and your Brethren, specially ye that are the chiefe of the Fathers, that yee may doe the service of the LORD after the DƲEORDER. David has given the charge, and he leads the way▪ the breach upon Ʋzzah is still in his eye, not to dishearten him from re∣moving the Arke, for he saw, that a blessing did accompany the Arke, and was visible there, where the Arke was: but to make him wary and very circumspect in his walke now a∣bout to remove the Arke. And see with what deliberation he does it, still eying the Rule, and his way, and the breach upon Ʋzzah, so having gone six paces, he sacrificeth. Then he goes-on rejoycing carrying the Arke into his owne City. His wife sees no beauty in her husbands zeale and holy mirth but folly rather and madnesse. David cannot endure a reproach from her, whom he loved, cast upon his zeale for God, he checks her very sharply: And because her mouth was so open
against her husband in the cause of his God, The Lord shut-up her wombe, she should beare no child unto him, Whom she had contemned, Shee had no child to the day of her death: a great reproach that in those dayes, among men Lu 1. 25.. But David riseth the higher by his outward abasement: And that, which in his wives eye would make him vile and contemptible, should 2 Sam 7. 3. make him honourable and gracious; for what he did was be∣fore the Lord, and His abasement before Him, is his way to Glory, therefore he is resolved to be yet more vile then so, and base in his own eyes. Thus K. David, and his people have done now, touching the Arke, it is brought in a due order to it's place. But David takes not his eye from off it, his care is still about the Ark, That, now the Lord had given him rest, the Ark might rest too, and in a fit∣ting house wch he will build for it. No, but he shall not; and yet the Lord takes it very kindly from him, That it is the purpose of his heart to build GOD an house 1 Kin. 8. 18.; Go and tell him, saith the LORD, I will build thee an house 1 Sam 7. 11. 1 Chro. 17. 10. 1 Chron. 9. 3., that I will: wilt thou lay out thy self for Me and My House, I will build thee an house, and it shall be a sure house, It shall continue for ever; Thou shalt be no loo∣ser for the good-will thou intendest to Me, or the good service thou wilt doe for Me, I will build thee an house, and it shall be established for ever. Reade-on and observe how comfortably the Lord speakes to David, and how sweetly David answers the Lord: I observe only this, That The only way David could take to establish his house for e∣ver, was to take care of Gods House on Earth The reason why our hou∣ses, many of them melt a∣way, as if they were made of Snow, is, be∣cause we mind not Gods house, and His service there.: So he did, and 2 Sam 8. 14, 15 see what provision he made for that building, because he had set his AFFECTION thereupon; and see how he prosper∣ed? What exploits his MILITIA wrought! No Enemies could stand before him, for the LORD preserved David wh∣thersoever he went. The Enemy had no power to stand before David, for GOD was with him. We see then where our strength lyeth, not in multitudes of Charets, and troopes of Horse-men: Though our Arme be weake, and our Adversary strong, yet his gods are but fewell for the fire; GOD is with us, and He is strong. We reade-on, That David grew mighty, got himselfe a name; for it followes, presently after, David
reigned over all Israel, and executed judgement and justice to all ver. 13. his People b. JUDGEMENT and JUSTICE! These ver. 15. are like the two Pillars JACHIN and BOAZ 1 King. 7. 21., the up∣holders of the Throne. David executed judgment and justice: To whom? To ALL the People; to the poore and needy, to the Dumbe Pro. 31. 8. man, that cannot open his mouth for himselfe, or his purse to bribe another to speake for him; whom the vile Judge, as an evening Wolfe, has appointed to destruction: David will open his mouth for this man, for this Dumbe man, for he will doe judgement and justice to ALL the People. To his Courtiers also; if they be proud and stout, David would not suffer Ps. 101. 5. them; and if they be privy SLANDERERS, David will CƲT THEM OFF; He would turne the WHEELE over the wicked: Heare him what he saies, for never any King did speak and practise better. I will EARLY (marke that, he would begin betimes. Iudgement and Iustice should be his first worke, as we heard) I will EARLY destroy all the wicked of the Land: that I may CƲT OFF ALL wicked doers from the City of the LORD. This is to execute judgement and justice, to doe it EARLY, and to have a speciall eye to the Slanderer; and to him that hath an high looke, and a proud heart; to the deceitfull person also, and to him that telleth lyes. These should be rooted-out, they are the Pests and Plagues of the Court, and of the Kingdom. But upon whom were Davids Eyes fastned for good? Upon the faithfull in the Land, they should dwell with him; and they, that walked in a perfect way, they should be his Servants. An infallible signe of a good man this; Marke you, doe you see a man setting his Eyes upon (i. e. do's he favour, do's he take by the hand) Doegs wicked bloody men? He is a Saul. Do's, he set his eyes upon the faithfull in the Land? He is a David. Signes and tokens may deceive you, but this never failed; do's he de∣light in wicked men? Doe they dwell with him? Doe such vile persons serve him? Will he not suffer them to be cut off, he is a wicked man, for his eyes are upon the wicked to favour them; he will not execute Iudgement and Iustice. Has he a re∣spect, doth he heartity favour (i. e. does he take by the hand)
good men? Do's he delight in such? Is his heart towards them? he is a good man. The government is upon Davids shoulders, he will do Iudg∣ment and Iustice, for he is set upon GODS THRONE, (as 2 Chro. 9. 8. Solomon was) to be King for THE LORD HIS GOD (a mighty consideration) Therfore made He thee King over them. What them? over Israel. Why King over Israel? To do Iudge∣ment and Iustice to ALL the people. But David did some injustice too in the matter of Ʋrijah the Hittite. 1 Kin. 15. 5. 2. Sam. 12. 9. True, he did indeed, He killed Urijah with the Sword, and so he called for the Sword home to his house; It came, and never departed from his house, according to the word of the Lord: ver. 10. And so we may reade-on and of nothing but the Sword, the Sword, now in the brothers hand, and therewith he slew his brother: Now againe in the sonnes hand, the beloved Son, and he would dethrone his Father. It is very notable, but it belongs not to this place. We may look upon the Sword in Da∣vids house, so as to keep it from our owne: And thinke of the Saints fals, so as to make us looke to our standing; we may pon∣der their stepps and their failings in the way, so as that we ad∣mire free Grace. We may speak of their fals too, when there is just reason so to doe, but with trembling; pointing at them, as SEA-MARKS to bid us beware, that no man presume to come thither; though one man plunged in there, and yet escaped, many have fallen-in and were drowned. David did transgresse in the matter of Ʋrijah; but David wa∣tred his bed with his tears. David did according to the desire and pleasure of his Eyes; but he was over-whelmed with sorrow. We have our direction at this point in these words; He that once persecuted the faith, now preacheth the Faith, which hee once destroyed. What then? And they glorified God in me Gal. 1. 23, 24. There is a direction for us, when we thinke or speake of the godly mans fals. But indeed, in this place, we are to say nothing touching this matter, unles we will go against the rule, and the practise of all the godly, even of God Himselfe. Sarah had her infirmities, so had Moses too, though the meekest man upon Earth; their FAITH is only mentioned and no more.
David himselfe might have said much in the dispraise of Saul; he do's not so, he fills his mouth with Sauls commendation. 1 Sam. 1. 17. Iob did speak when time was, unadvisedly vvith his lips, as an impatient man. See in his third Chapter, he breaks out a little. A little! You vvill say, he breaks-out a great deale, he curseth the day and the night both. True, and yet I said well enough, he breakes out a little; a little in reference to those breakings, that vvere upon him, under vvhich he vvas pres∣sed down, and lay flat, then behold a little impatiency; I may vvell say so: I or indeed St. Iames mentions none at all, he tells Iam. 5. 11. us only this, You have heard of the patience of Job, as if we never heard of his impatiency. Matthew the Publican, saith he of himself, but no Evangelist besides himself. Of Paul before. Luther another Paul, but of a more hot temper (the fitter for those cold days, and the vvork he vvas upon) Epist. contended, upon a time, vvith Mr. Calvin, somwhat too eagerly. Well, said Calvin, though Luther in his haste, o∣vertaken vvith infirmity, should call me Devill. yet I must call him, as I do account of him, An excellent Servant of the LORD. And so we see vvhat the servants of the LORD have done; and yet vve are shown a more excellent way. For see vvhat the LORD do's in this case, My Servant David, a man after My Owne Heart, who did that which was right in 1 Kin. 15. 5. Mine Eyes, and turned not aside from any thing, that I com∣manded him all the dayes of his life, save onely in one thing, And that I have passed over, as if it had never bin done; And shall vve recall it? Surely the LORD speaks much for our com∣fort, Ier. 31. 34. and for our instruction too, I WILL FOR GIVE their iniquity, and I will remember their sinne NO MORE. Shall vve then remember it? We heard what David did, and from GODS owne mouth; And when we reade what he did in the matter of Urijah, we must do as St. Paul saith the Iews Gal. 1. 24. did, when they heard what Paul had bin, And they glorified God in mee. And now we will draw towards the shutting-up of Davids day, for we must heare of him, as of the longest lived man, that ever was, AND HE DIED. We will passe-on in his story, and make a stand there, where David found him∣self
even in the hands of death. Then we reade with what af∣fection he speaks to the people; even as one that had set his af∣fection upon them, as he had done upon the House of GOD: He vvas now leaving them and that house, vvhich must know him no more; and now, marke vvith vvhat affection he speaks; Heare me my brethren and my people 1 Chr. 28. 2.. Then reade vvhat hee 1 Chr. 29. 3. spake, and what his charge was to the people, that they and their souls might prosper ver. 8, 6.; then how he blesseth Solomon, and chargeth him, but that requireth double observation; he char∣geth him to keep the charge of the Lord, for that was the way to prosper in all that he did, and whithersoever hee turned himselfe  Kin. 2. 2.. We will set a Marke upon the charge to his sonne; And thou Solomon my sonne, KNOW thou the GOD of thy Father. Is that all? No, there is much more, which 1 Chr. 28. 9. commands our observation, but upon this we set the marke, it is the greatest part of that charge, and in observance of it, hath the greatest recompence of Reward. If a dying Fa∣ther can bequeath it to his children, he leaves them a richer legacy then is imaginable. And thou, my Sonne, KNOW the GOD of thy Father; He is JEHOVAH, has His Being in Himselfe; gives Being to All; The Great and Ter∣rible GOD, The gracious and mercifull GOD; That gives Being to all His Promises, to all His Threatnings. NOT ONE THING HATH FAILED Iosh 23. 14. 1 King. 8. 56. Exod. 15 11. Gen. 48. 15, 16. Know this God, none like Him, Glorious in holinesse, fearefull in Praises, doing wonders. The GOD of thy Father, before Whom thy Father walked; The GOD Who ed him all his life long, and redeemed him from all evill; My sonne, KNOW this God. They that so KNOW Him, will love Him, will feare Him, will serve Him with a perfect heart, and a willing mind They that love Him not, nor feare Him, nor serve Him, they KNOW Him not; so we reade still; they KNEW not the LORD: VVe have set the mark theron, as the chief part of the charge; and it must bee remembred first and last. The second part is, touching Gods House, whereunto the Father had set his Affection, and made answerable provision; his sonne now must put to his hand and his heart to make an
House like GODS House, exceeding MAGNIFICALL, WON∣DERFƲLL GREAT, for so is the God, to Whose Name it 1 Chro. 22. 5. must be built. The remaining part of the charge is, touching the 2 Chro. 2. 5. execution of Judgement and Justice; and there we must set a marke too: how David chargeth Solomon touching cruell Joab 1 King. 2. 5., and malicious Shimei ver. 8., both these must be removed upon the first opportunity, for Solomon must learne by-times, what he must never forget; That the drosse must be remooved from the silver; The wicked must be taken from the King, else his face cannot shine, nor can his Throne be established in Righ∣teousnesse Prov. 25. 5.. Then David, having seen his sonne sitting upon his Throne, and charged him concerning His Duty to GOD and to His House, that he must build it exceeding MAGNI∣FICALL, as we heard; and having blessed the LORD, and 1 Chro. 22. 5. 1 Chro. 29. 10. 1 King. 1. 48. his sonne, and the people, and commanded them to blesse the LORD 1 Chron. 29. 20., DIED in a good old-age, with Blessings and Supplications in his mouth, full of Dayes, Riches, and Ho∣nour. ver. 28.
THE ACTS OF SOLOMON. CHAP. II. Solomon his chiefe desire, and how GOD answered the same, ma∣king him a most glorious King; what ecclipsed all his glory, and took away his heart; The Glory of the world had daz'led his eye, and his Queens Idoll had put it quite out. The Lord cleared his eye∣sight again, so that he could see into things, and account all Nothing. SOLOMON his sonne, the Beloved of the Lord, blessed with the blessings of the LORD, with the blessings of the Father, and of the People 1 King. 1. 47., reigned in his stead. His Father said to the son, Thou art a wise-man 1 King. 2. 9.; Solomon said to God, Thou hast made Thy Servant King, and I am but a LITTLE CHILD 1 King. 3. 7., and yet I must goe out and in, before a great and wise people. All this was true, and in a true sense of this LITTLENESSE, and the peoples GREATNESSE, Solomon prayed for an understanding heart ver. 9.. That desire pleased the LORD so well, that He granted it, made Solomon excell therin all the wise-men on the Earth 1 King▪ 4▪ 30, 31.. Aske the greatest thing; GOD will give the least without asking: He gave him also therwith, that he desired not, both riches and honour: so as there was not any like him all his dayes; nor in all these yeares after him 1 King. 3. 13.. Then sate So∣lomon upon the Throne of David his Father (nay, upon the Throne of GOD, to be King for the LORD 2 Chron. 9. 8.) and his Kingdome was Established Greatly 1 King. . 12., for he was strengthened therein, and the LORD his GOD was with him and mag∣nified
him EXCEEDINGLY 2 Chro. 1. 1.. Then we reade of his magnificence; The Glory of his Court; The beauty of GODS House; his Dedication; his Prayer there, and that is excellent. Truly, I know not well what to say next, but Idols and their abominable services, will darken all this glory; for thus it was; Solomon was the greatest example of Wisdome, Riches and Honour, that ever was in the world: and the strangest example of humane frailty, that ever we reade▪ off, being so wise a man. But what is man in his best estate, though the wisest and the strongest? Not Substantive enough to stand of himselfe, nor wise enough to order his steps. If the LORD, Who is our strength and our wisdome, with-draw His hand, we fall, and possibly so low, that he, who was a mirrour of wisdome even now, becomes anon the mirrour of folly. Hold me Lord, and I will hold Thee, said a good woman, who saw how weake she was in her self, and how strong she might be in her GOD▪ There mans strength lyeth. It is an high point of wisdome to know all this: And that wicked and Idolatrous Counsels, spe∣cially from her, that lyeth in the bosome, will weaken strength, and besot reason; and those are the lessons we are to take hence. How the LORD met with him is remarkable allso, which I passe-over, touching onely upon it a∣non. Concerning his fall and recovery againe, there is pregnant proofe in sacred Writings; and no matter what fooles say, though they write books about it, no wiser at the end, then at the beginning. True it is, though Solomon was really so wise, so rich, so honourable, yet, when he A WOKE (for I allude to it) when he came to himself, behold it WAS A DREAM 1 King. 3. 15., his wisdome, his riches, his worldly power, Behold! It is a dreame, Vanity of vanities all is vanity; so said he, who haste∣ned to find satisfaction; who more then he? Eccles. 2. 25. he kept not from his eyes, what they desired, nor with-held his heart from any joy; ver. 10. yet so said Solomon the King: for what can the man say, that commeth after the King? Even that, which hath bin already ver. 12. said; Solomon said of All things under the Sunne, they are va∣nity and vexation; he could looke thorow All, and discerne a
Nothingnesse at the bottome. Surely this did argue, he had a spirituall eye, and that GOD had instructed him to discreti∣on. As GOD made all things, by His power, of Nothing; so he, by wisdome from GOD, made Nothing of all things; Nothing in reference to that one thing Necessary; or Nothing, in reference to Heaven, our putting forward or backward in our race thither-ward, to our Crowne. The conclusion is, He, that sees all things to be Nothing, see's also GOD to be all things: He that sees a Nothingnesse, in the creature, sees a ful∣nesse in GOD, an All-sufficiency in Him. It is cleare from Solomons writings, That so Solomon did, and that makes clea∣rer proofe to them that have questioned it (I thinke no wise∣man ever did) That Solomons heart was turned from Idolls to serve the Living GOD. We reade-on now, That we may learne to looke the better to our standing by Solomons fall; and to avoid with all our care the snares that are in a prosperous and full e∣state. That little more, which concernes our present Theame, is this; Solomon was a King of Peace, and enjoyed long peace, he and his people; Judah and Israel were many as the sand, which is by the Sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry 1 Kin. 4 20.: An interrupted peace, never broken till Solomon broke Covenant with his GOD, and then all breaks to peeces, but till then all was peace, Eating and drinking and making merry. Here was a considering time for Solomon the wisest, and for all his people. They were now in a Land, where Silver and gold was as plentuous as stones 2 Chro. 1. 15:: But that more precious commo∣dity, BREAD, That they eate without scarcenesse Deut. 8. 9.; there was no lacke of any thing, houses full, and wells full, vineyards full and barnes full, a fullnesse of all good things. What is to be done now? It should not be questioned, because the an∣swer Deut. 6. 11. 12. is neare; But, because of our evill and forgetfull hearts, we are still remembred, as often as we meet with all this full∣nesse; Beware Least thou forget the LORD, That hath done thus and thus for Thee, and hath given thee all this fullnesse. O remember and forget not to blesse the LORD thy God for all this good, which He hath given thee. Beware now
(marke what cautions are given to a people that is full) That thou forget not the LORD Thy GOD, now when Deut. 8 10. 11, 12. Thou hast built goodly houses, now when thy heards and flocks are multiplyed, Thy silver and thy gold is multiplyed, and all that thou hast is multiplyed, now looke narrowly to it, els ver. 13, 14. thy heart will be lifted-up, and thy spirit will be flat and downe; Thou wilt forget the LORD Thy GOD, Who gave thee all this fallnesse, and multiplyed thee so exceeding∣ly, if thou art not now aware and lookest narrowly to thy selfe. A man cannot easily beleve, how he can forget GOD, when he hath so many remembrances of Him still before his eyes, fields full, and Barnes full, and house full and table full; yet now thou wilt forget God or never, Remember Solomon. It will make us beware; the wisest man that ever was, yet, when all good things were multiplyed to him, his heart was lifted up, and his spirit fell downe flat, he forgate the Lord. Note, It is an hard thing (impossible without speciall assistance) to keepe the heart downe and humble, when the person is lifted-up with the fullnesse of all things; the hardest businesse well to husband peace and plenty, for the good of the soul, that the soule may prosper as the outward man doth, an hard worke it is; pray therfore, That we may be filled with the fruits of Righ∣teousnesse; Phil. 1. 11.; that we may not be drunke with the world, wherin is excesse, but be filled with the Spirit, even with all the fullnesse of God: Then we shall beware and not forget, then we shall blesse Ephes. 5. 18. 3. 19. the Lord for all His fullnesse; then we shall well husband our rest and peace, as the Churches before us, They had rest: What then? And were edified, and walking in the feare of the Lord, and in the comfort of the holy Ghost, were multiplyed. The digression is Act. 9. 31. necessary, if it be a digression: And these considerations and cau∣tions very usefull, when we are, as those people were, in those dayes, Eating and drinking and making merry. There we break∣off. It follows; No warrlike actions were performed by Solomon, nor memo∣rable, excepting his buildings, which were great, wonderfull and very many a Chron. ., with other works of magnificence, wrought for the glory of his owne State, not much inferiour to
that house hee built to the honour of GOD in fewer yeares by six, then he was building his own, which he was buil∣ding 1 King 6. 38. Chap. 9. 1. thirteene yeares, and the building the house of GOD but Seven; That was not for his honour. But wee must observe his prayer at the Dedication of Gods House, for that is notable 1 Kin. 8. 2 Chr. 6.. As for the workes, though very MAG∣NIFICENT, yet they might be quickly compassed by him, who could set downe and count his cost, and quick∣ly cleare all disbursements, That made SILVER and GOLD, as plenteous as stones, and had Cedars in aboun∣dance 2 Chro. 1. 15. Chap. 9. 20. Touching his MILITIA, we reade much in a little; He pro∣vided 2 Chro. 1. 14. for the troubles of warr, in the leasure of Peace: And, to maintain his peace, he maintained a mighty MILITIA, for hee had foure thousand Stalls for Horses and Charriots, and twelve thousand Horse men, whom hee bestowed in the Charriot▪cities, and with himselfe at Hierusalem 2 Chr. 1. 14. 9. 25.; and he raigned over all the Kings, from the River even to the Land of the Philistines, and to the border of Ae∣gypt. ver. 26. But it came to passe, when Solomon was old, that his Wives turned away his heart after other gods (the words 1 Kin. 11. 4. are cleare, as soone understood as read;) And the LORD ver. 9. was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned away from the LORD GOD of Israel, Who had appeared unto him TWICE, and had warned him touching that Mat∣ter 2 Chro. 7. 17, 18, 19, 20.. If the LORD graciously appeare unto a man once, and he regard not; this will kindle GODS wrath: But if he appeare TWICE, and yet he will not beware, this will make His wrath burne, for the more mercy, the more displeasure, if mercy be despised. We reade-on, and how the LORD charged him touching that matter; Solomon had a faire warning, much grace was showne unto him; GOD appeared to him TWICE, and charged him as of∣ten; yet Solomon did contrary, hee hearkened what his ver. 10. Wife said, not what GOD said; Hee kept not that, which c ver. 11. the LORD commanded. Therefore his sonne should not
keepe his Kingdome intire e. Surely, The LORD would rend it out of his sonnes hand. Howbeit not all, for Da∣vids ver. 12. sake. And yet Solomon himselfe should out-live his ver. 13. Glory, he should see affliction, and feele it too from one Adversary, and then another; For thus it was; When this Kings heart was divided betwixt strange Wives, and as strange vanities; when hee turned from the LORD, Who had appeared to him TWICE, and so instructed him, touching the establishing his Throne: Then the LORD stirred-up Adversaries, now one, and then another; The one did great mischief f 1 Kin▪ 11. 9▪; and the other abhorred Israel ver. 25.. Solomon should have abhorred Idols, those cursed and mis∣chievous things; he did not so, he clave to them in love, for his heart was turned after other gods and goddesses: he did smart for this in this world; The Lord did stir-up two 1 Kin. 11. 4, 5▪ Adversaries, the one did Solomon great mischiefe; the other ser∣ved him, as he should have served Idols, He abhorred Israel. To shut up Solomons Story, wee have but this more: Hee raigned over Israel fourtie yeares. The Sunne of his glori∣ous ver. 4▪ Day did set in a Cloud (that wee may not admire persons, but free Grace) Then it was night with him, went to bed, and slept with his Fathers. Re∣hoboam his Sonne raigned in his stead. Wee have read his Story, his Sons followes.
THE ACTS OF ABIJAH. CHAP. III. Abijah, none of the best men, but a good Captaine, and well able to posture his Kingdome; He relied upon the LORD and over∣came his enemies, destroyeth Jeroboam utterly; In whom we see what end the Lord makes with Idolaters; Abijah waxed mighty, but dieth. ABijah, Solomons Grand-child, Son to Rehoboam, 2 Chron. 13. begins his reigne, and quickly ends it, he reig∣ned but three yeares: he was not much better then his Father, for he walked in all the sinnes of his Father 1 King. 15. 3.: but he was a much wiser man. I register him amongst the good Kings, be∣cause he ordered his Militia according to Rule; nor was he such a foole, as to humble himselfe before stocks and stones, or thinke them gods, which were made with hands, or put considence thereon: he was valiant also and stout-hearted, and could looke-up to GOD, who gives spirit, courage and in∣vention, when and where he pleaseth. We reade-on in the Chapter, and his Acts there. In the close of the former Chapter we reade, That there were warres betwixt Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually. And in Chap. 12. 15. this Chapter we find it intimated, That Jeroboam pursues the Warre against Abijah, and, finding himselfe twice as strong, (for he set his battle in array with eight hundred thousand men mighty in valour) sets upon Abijah by force and fraud
both, after the manner of an Idolater: Abijah setts his battle in array against him, but before he fights, he speakes; and, That he may be heard, craves audience, heare me thou Jeroboam and all ver. 4, 5. Israel. What Abijahs sins were, the sacred Text tells us in ge∣nerall tearmes, he walked in all the sinnes of his Father. What his words were we shall heare, as full of wisedome and grace as any we shall reade throughout the Chrouicles; These are his words. Ought you not to know, that GOD has given the Kingdom over Israel to David, and his seed by a covenant of Salt, firme and stable to him for ever? You doe now, in see∣king to reverse this decree, rebell against GOD: ye have in∣deed, ver. 6. vaine men as ye are, and children of Belial, strengthened ver. 7. your selves against my Father Rehoboam the Son of Solomon; and he could not withstand you, being a man, and no more, young and tender hearted: No hard matter to prevaile against a man, and such a man: but you must not think to withstand ver. 8. the Kingdome of the LORD in the hand of the Sons of David. You have multitudes, twice as many as I have, but what are they against the LORD; You have gods good store also, They are but such as Jeroboam made you for gods; gods of mans ma∣king, will do their makers and their worshippers little service. But wot you what! ye have cast away your strength, for you have cast-out the Priests of the LORD, and the Levites too; and, instead of them, you have made you Priests after the manner of the Nations of other Lands; and fit Priests they are ver. 8, 9. for such gods, all of Jeroboams making. Thus Abijah has mustered-up Jeroboams Troopes, his multitudes of men, of gods, and of Priests, like their gods. Then he tells Jeroboam where his and Judahs strength is, But as for us, the LORD is our GOD▪ and we have not forsaken Him (that was very comfortable;) and the Priests, which minister unto the ver. 10, 11, 12. LORD, are the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites waite upon their businesse, for we keepe the charge of the LORD our GOD; But ye have forsaken him; and, behold, GOD Himselfe is with us for our Captaine, and His Priests with sounding Trumpets to cry alarum against you: O children of Israel fight you not against the LORD GOD of your Fathers, for you shall not prosper.
Thus Abijah has declared to Jeroboam and all Israel the whole Counsell of God, touching that matter, the Kingdome of Judah, the Stability of the same. But see the treachery of Jeroboam and all Israel! While Abijah was thus wisely advi∣sing Israel, Jeroboam was dealing treacherously with Judah, (that is the manner of Idolaters) Jeroboam caused an abushment to come about behind Judah: so when Judah looked back behold ver. 13. Jeroboams Troopes were there; and when they looked for∣ward, the Troopes were there also, before and behind Abijah has dealt fully and clearely evn in the sight of his enemies, in mking known uto them the cousell of the LORD: but he has lost time, which the Ido∣later has im∣proved to the bringing of Iu∣dah into a snare; whereby the Lord would tell Iudah, That there is no trea∣ting with an Idolater. Truly Ju∣dah has Lost much by standing to parle, treat and debate mat∣ters with Idolatrous Israel; while Abijah is opening to Israel the purpose and counsell of God: Jeroboam is wholy carelesse of that, minds only how he may crosse the counsell of GOD, and has brought Judah into a snare; he has caused an Ambush∣ment to come about Judah before and behind: And now he makes no doubt, but he shall reverse the purpose of GOD, (The great designe and project of the world, the very trade they drive) touching the Kingdome over Israel, given to David by a cove∣nant of Salt, an everlasting covenant. When Judah saw this they cryed unto the LORD. Then was Judahs time to cry, and Gods time to help, for the battle was before and behind. Then Judah cryed, and the Priests did their office: Then it came to passe, that GOD smote Jeroboam, and all Israel before Abijah and Judah: And reade what a slaughter there was, there fell downe slaine of Israel, five hundred thousand chosen men: Thus the chil∣dren ver. 15, 16, 17, 18. of Israel were brought under at that time, and the children of Israel prevailed. How so? It followes, because they relied upon the LORD GOD of their Fathers; Judah relied upon his GOD, JEHOVAH is my strength Esa 11. 2., there is the strength of Judah, and it never failes. Israel relied upon multitudes of men, of Priests, and gods; all of mans making. It is the con∣clusion we made before; An Idolatrous people, who make flesh their arme, leane-upon gods, and Priests of Mans making, are a weake people; they have no power to stand before Judah Hoast, while Judah relies upon the GOD of Hoasts. Let Judah stay themselves thereon, on the Almighties Arme, and he shall shatter. Idolatrous Israel to peeces; so did Abijah here, he pur∣sued after Jeroboam, and tooke his strong holds from him, neither did
Jeroboam recover strength againe in the dayes of Abijah, And yet Jeroboam, such an Idolater, so treacherous, (for while Abijah ver. 20. was opening to him the counsell of GOD touching the stabili∣ty of Davids Kingdome, he was contriving an ambushment a∣gainst Judah) so treacherous, so rebellious, but I said all before, such an Idolater, shall not scape so; he had made gods for Israel, after the similitude of Calves, that eate hay; and Priests for these gods, and he had dealt treacherously with Judah; GOD will be avenged of him for all this, He will vindicate His Glory, The LORD will smite Ieroboam also; He had smote him before, and all Israel with him, but then Ieroboam made an escape; The Lord smites him now with a deadly stroake, he shall make no more gods, nor Priests, after his order to offer sacrifice unto De∣vils. The Lord smote him and he died. The time when this de∣struction ver. 20. came upon him is remarkeable; Then the LORD smote him with a deadly stroak, that he died, when Judah might say of him, as David said of his Adversaries, They are lively and strong, and full of wiles, and are multiplied Psal 38. 19.. When Jeroboam was very proud, then the Lord brought him exceeding low; when his thoughts were most mischievous against Judah, then the Lord broke him to peeces. Let Iudah relye upon his God still; trust in the Lord for ever, in assured confidence, That, when the Idolater hath made his ambushment, and cooped-up Iudah with his Troopes before and behind, then is Gods time to worke, and to magnifie Himselfe; then the Lord comes-in for them, that relied upon Him; then He smites His Adversarie: Hee causeth feare and dread to fall upon them: By the greatnesse of His Arme, His enemies shall be as still as a stone Exod. 15, 15.. So it was here; Iudah prevailed over Is∣rael because they relied upon the LORD GOD: and the LORD strooke Jeroboam and he died. But Abijah waxed mighty; What ver. 21, 22. his Acts, and wayes, and sayings were, are recorded all, but the Records are lost. Yet we are sure of this, if it had not beene re∣corded, Abijah made his bed in the darke, was laid in it, and slept with his Fathers.
THE ACTS OF ASA. CHAP. IIII. ASA do's that, which is good and right before the LORD, for he takes away the abominations from before His eyes, then waxeth mighty; obtaines a glorious victory over as mighty an hoast, as ever we reade of. A good Prophet takes the oceasion, and in∣courageth Asa to goe on, and doe more for GOD, That did all for him. Asa hearkens; he and his people enter into covenant with GOD; and then he would not spare the highest person in his Kingdome, because she had committed folly there with stocks and stones. He hath his infirmities in body and mind both; but there is a Mantle wide enough to cover all; he fell into a sweet sleepe, and was laid in a bed of spices. ASA his Son reigned in his stead; An excellent man, 2 Chron 14 yet his Father bad enough, and his Mother starke naught; for she served I dols, and worshipped before stocks and stones; Good principles are from our good GOD; not borne with us, nor conveyed unto us by all the labour and diligence of godly Parents. (Yet they stand bound to doe what they can:) Nor can the worst Parents, such as Asa had, wicked and Idola∣trous both, lodge Idolatrous principles in that heart to cor∣rupt it, which GOD will sanctifie. Notwithstanding what the Father was, and Maacah his Mother, yet Asa was a very good man, a great example of wisedome in the posturing himselfe and his Kingdome, and of successe thereafter.
Asa did that, which was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God ver. 2.. What did he doe? He tooke away those a∣bominable, those accursed things, which brought Sodom to Jerusalem, the Idols there from before the eyes of the LORD, for He tooke away the Sodomites 1 Kin. 15. 12 the Altars of the strange gods, and the high places, and brake downe the Images, and cut down the groaves. That was a good beginning; to thrust-away those cursed things, which will thrust us away from God, and God from us. So Asa began, and his very first stepp brought him ver. 3. halfe way to the end; such an Energy, influence, and effectuall working the beginning hath into all the periods of time follow∣ing▪ This taking away of Altars, and strange gods; this brea∣king downe of Images is indeed the prime and first worke, it must have the priority, as in nature, so in time. The Rubbsh must be cast-out before the building can goe up, these abomi∣nable things, which make a Kingdome naked, which consume like a Moth, nay like a Cancer, eating out the heart of a King∣dome, these must be thrust away first, else the Kingdome can∣not be set in a Posture of Defence; nor is that done (till this be done, till these abominations be cast-out) which is good and right in the Eyes of the Lord: When Asa did doe so, it followes (to give cleare testimony that so he did) For hee tooke away the Altars, and brake downe the Ima∣ges. Having so well begun, he followes▪ on the worke as well, he commanded Judah to seeke the Lord God of their Fathers, and to doe the Law and Commandement; We must marke this, that we may put the more observation upon it; And commanded Judah, that is, he made an Ordinance in Judah, that Judah ver. 4. should seeke the LORD, and doe the same, as Asa had done (which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD) doing the Law and the Commandement. Now this Cammand or Ordinance was in season, for the verse before tels us, He took away the Altars; and the verse following tells us somewhat ver. 3. ver. 5. more, That he tooke them away out of all the Cities of Judah. Had not Asa done so, he had done a deceitfull worke, nay, he had mock'd God; he had made a show only to doe that, which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD, if he had suf∣fered
those Altars and Images, such abominable things to stand before the Eyes of the LORD. We must observe Asa's way and method still; and how one thing followes another, and gives cleare proofe and strength to that, which went before, He did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD; For he took away the Altars, brake down the images, and (then) commanded Judah. All this was done decently and in order. But how did Asa command? By the word of a King sure, and there is power Eccles 8. 4.; Yes, and by his example sure enough, for that is the greatest command; He will do what himself com∣manded, He tooke out of all the Cities of Judah, the high pla∣ces ver. 5. and the Images, and then, he commanded Judah; what fol∣lowes now, that there is such a cleare riddance of that, which is so contrary to the Militia of a Kingdome, that we may call it the Malitia [the malice] of the same, unhallowed Altars, dung-hill gods: What followes after this riddance? And the ver. 5. 1 King. 15. 12. Kingdome was quiet before him. Yes, quiet now, for these A∣chans, these troublers, Altars, Images, which brought Sodom into Jerusalem Asa tooke a∣way the Sodo∣mites out of the Land, and re∣mooved (the cause) all the Idols there. Admit the I∣dols, y cannot doubt of the Sodomy, for the reason given, Rom. 1 23. Dr. Hall Cont. 2. King 9. 22. &c. are removed, then quietnesse and rest, and not till then. If we should aske Jorams question, Is it Peace? We must be answered, as Jehu answered him, what Peace so long as the whoredomes, and the witch-crafts are so many? What peace so long as Images stand, and Crucifixes stand, and Altars stand? But Crosses are broken downe; and Altars are throwne downe; and Images are stampt to pouder; Then it will be, as it was here, The Kingdom was quiet, GOD gives it rest, it is a peace of GODS giving; Mercie and Truth are met together, Righteousnesse and Peace have kissed each other: And the Kingdome was quiet before him. And now he has leasure, while the time is calme, and the ver. 6. Kingdome quiet, to provide for the troubles of warre, which Psal. 85. 10. he did, He built fencea Cities, for he had no warre in those yeares, because the LORD had given him rest; Asa had rest and Peace from GODS hand, that was a good, an assured and se∣cure peace, for God set His Hand to it, then gave it to Asa▪ Therefore he said to Judah, let us build Cities, and make ver. 6. walls and Towers, Gates and Bars, because we have sought the LORD our GOD; We have sought Him, and Hee
hath given us rest on every side: so they built and prospered. We will looke over this againe, for the way Asa goes-in to po∣sture his Kingdome, is exemplary, safe and excellent, there is ver▪ 7. not any one steppe he takes, but is remarkable, He did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD, for He tooke the abominations from before His eyes: Then he commanded Iudah to seeke the LORD, and to doe the Law and the Commande∣ment: Then, sayes he, let us build Cities and fortifie them, for we have sought the LORD after the right manner; we have sought Him by Prayer and Fasting, so as He is found of us; We are sure we have sought Him, and as sure, we have a bles∣sing from His hand: He hath given us rest on every side; Wee will build and GOD will prosper, for we have done the Law and the Commandement in removing the Idols from before His Eyes. Then reade how strong he is, and what an Army hee hath, Five hundred and fourscore thousand, all these were mighty men of valour. ver. 8. Now Asa has done according to the mind and will of GOD▪ in Posturing his Kingdome; hee hath removed all that, which is offensive to the eye of his LORD, and so has made his Kingdome, as a wall of Brasse. It is well he hath done all this, for he will find presently, That the Nations are angry, That Hell from beneath is moved at this Posturing∣worke, and stirreth up the dead against it: Next newes hee heares is, That Zerah the Ethiopian is come out against him with an Host, as the sands for multitudes, a thousand thou∣sand, ver. 9. and three hundred Chariots, and they were come-up unto Mareshah, in the very borders of Judah; enough, if multitudes of men, and Chariots, and gods could doe it, to licke up Judah as an Oxe licketh up the grasse. What now? Asa was glad with all his heart, that the LORD had instructed him to discreti∣on: though he had enemies without (he cared not how ma∣ny) yet he had made a faire riddance of his enemies within, I∣dols and Idoll services, he had cast-them-out, those mischie∣vous things; he had commanded Judah, to seeke the LORD▪ and to doe the Law and the Commandement; he had used the meanes in fortifying his Kingdome; he had not slept away the peaccable time that God gave him, but improved it to the
strengthening himselfe and his Kingdome; now he can mock at feare, and laugh at his Adversary, though, to looke upon, very terrible. Laugh at his Adversary, who is come out against him with an Host of a thousand thousand; laugh at him! Yes, he might laugh at all the Adversaries in the world, and in hell too, that had cleansed his Land and his heart of Idols: He can looke his Adversary in the face, and have him in derision. Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array [We ver. 10. must use the meanes, else we doe not trust but tempt GOD,] And Asa cryed unto the LORD his GOD. [What! Laugh and cry both together? Yes, one and the same man may doe both, and both together: He cannot laugh at his Adversary, who is a Legion, that cannot cry unto his God.] Asa cryed [That is, he set his face stedfastly to heaven; his eyes were up∣pon ver. 11. his GOD] And said, Lord, it is nothing with Thee to helpe, whether with many, or with them, that have no power [It is all one to an Almighty Arme, to worke with many or with few: with meanes or against meanes; but then His Arme has the Preheminence, when it is made bare of flesh, and works for them that have no Power. But had Asa no power now, when he had an Host of five hun∣dred thousand; All these mighty men of valour? This Asa accounted no power. Alas! what can two Armes of flesh doe, but dash together like two Potsheards, breake and consume one another. Asa durst not trust in his Chariots, nor in his Horsmen; who ever did so were brought downe and fal∣len; he would Remember the Name of the LORD, That was Ps▪ 20. 7, 8. the way to stand upright:] Helpe us, O Lord our GOD, for we rest on Thee. [A mighty Argument to draw God to his side. Our Fathers trusted in Thee; what if they did; it fol∣lowes ever, they were delivered; because they trusted on Him] We rest on Thee. [A sure prop, it never deceives; I say, Ps. 23. 3, 4. never deceives that man, who has done as Asa did, That which is good and right in the Eyes of the Lord, Helpe us, for we rest on Thee; and the Lord will helpe his servants. Why? be∣cause they rest on Him; Hee will not deceive their Trust, and it was Asa's confidence in the LORD his God.
In thy Name we goe against this multitude, [(i. e.) not in our owne, but Thy strength, in the power of Thy might, in whose hand multitudes are, but as one man; and Thou canst make one man chase multitudes] O Lord, Thou art our God, Thou art ours, and we Thine by Covenant; Thy Name is called upon us; we have an interest in Thee; Thy people, Thou art our God.] Let not man, a poore weake creature, let not him prevaile; [Put him in feare, O Lord, That the Nati∣ons may know themselves to be but men Psal. 9. 20.; Men, not God, their Horses flesh, not spirit Esa 31. 3.; Let not this man prevaile against Thee. Doe but stretch forth Thy hand, shew Thy selfe to be God, then both he that helpeth shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they all shall fall together. And so it was, for Asa had done that, which was good in the eyes of the Lord; has given Him the glory of His wisdome, power, mercy, goodnesse, has secured himselfe and his People, under the shadow of the Almighty; improves his interest there; then enters into his Chambers Esa. 26. 20., as he was commanded, for he has committed the whole matter unto God, has told Him plainly, That he will rest on Him. And it pleaseth GOD wondrous well, That He is rested upon; now see what GOD will doe for them, that trust in Him: So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before ver. 12, 13. Judah, and the Ethiopians fled: And Asa, and the people that were with him, pursued them unto Gerat, and the Ethiopians were overthrowne, that they could not recover themselves, for they were destroyed before the Lord, and before His Host, and they carried away very much spoyle. Here was a wonderfull victory, such an one as Israel had many yeares before over Midian Numb. 31. 49, for very probable it is, there was not, at this time, as then, a man lost on Israels side: My reason is, the Lord did drive them with His Tempest: they were destroyed before the Lord and before His Host, the Lords Host: And now the Cities of the Phili∣stines shall besmitten too, and those that wished well to the Ethiopians. The feare of the Lord shall come upon all their neighbou∣ring ver. 14. places, and all shall be spoyled. Thus Asa prospers, he and his people had removed all that, which enfeebles a Land, makes a Kingdome naked, those dung-hill-gods, those mischievous things; and see how he
sinites and layes all plaine before him, prospers every way, and returnes with spoyles in abundance to Jerusalem, to pay his vowes there, as wee shall reade presently, for wee reade∣on. ver 15. Asa is no sooner come to Jerusalem, but a Prophet meets him 2 Chro. 15. there (a good Prophet, upon whom the Spirit of GOD came) deales plainly with him, as a Prophet of the LORD, and that had the Spirit of the LORD, assureth him, saying; The Lord is with you, while you be with Him 2 Chro. 15. 2.: Bids him consider seriously how it was with King and Kingdome, when they were without the true GOD, and without a teaching Priest ver. 3., and without Law: when ignorance raigned, when vile and abominable things were exalted, set upon high and served; when Sodom was in Jerusalem, and the cause of that abomination, Idols there. Bids Asa consider how it was then in those darke times; he must find upon easie search, those times to be darke, vexatrous and miserable; nothing prospered with Israel; nor peace, nor warre; not Counsels, nor designes, nor debates, nor preparations for the one or the other; nor Parliaments, nor plantations, nor traffique (the synnewes of the State) nothing prospered; all went backe, tending to a miserable desolation; In those times there was no Peace to him, that went out, nor to him that came in: but ver. 5. great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries; ver. 6. Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City; how so for GOD did  them with all adversity. They had forsaken Him, and He plagued them; but here was the complement of their misery, The Lord forsooke His people, and then all the fore-mentioned followed, for when GOD forsakes a people, it shall be a miserable time with them, there shall be an how∣ling, because of oppression, They shall be vexed with all ad∣versity. When Asa heard these words; (O it is a great matter, almost all in all, when Prophets will deale faithfully with their Lord and Master.) When Asa heard the Prophet say so, for the Prophet had set the judgements of GOD as a Mountaine before Asa's eye; Then he tooke courage, and went on to∣wards a more thorough Reformation; tooke away the abomi∣nable Idols (as before out of Judah and Benjamin, or made
clearer riddance then before he had done:) so also out of the Cities, which he had taken from mount Ephraim; If he were ver. . Lord of their Cities, they should serve his GOD too, that they should; Is not Asa their King? Then the Cities of Ephraim too, over whom he was King, should serve his GOD, and not the gods of their owne hands and choosing; And he would refine the worship of his GOD, impured with Idolatrous ser∣vices; and renew the Altar of the Lord, which, their Altars, made unto Devils, had quite defaced. Now marke, GOD had made a Mountaine, a plaine before Asa; and the hils to melt; He wrought so wonderfully for Asa, that strangers were taken with it; The people round about came flowing in to him, They fell to him (sayes the Text) out of Israel in a∣bundance. Why fell they to Asa? That is expressed too, They ver. 9. saw that the Lord his God was with him: Yes, He was so, and He will be so, while we are with Him; so the good Prophet assu∣red K. Asa. Now he engaged himselfe to serve the Lord more; Oh! It is well when Gods goodnesse towards Prince and people make them all the better; are bonds of assurance to serve God more; to be yet more vile in their owne eyes; and to walke more humbly and more faithfully with GOD! Now Asa will doe great service to his God, and to himselfe also: The greatest service that ever was heard of, if it be done, as he did it, in a right manner, and we keepe unto it. But marke first how me∣thodically, how orderly Asa goes-on; there must be a Thank∣offering first, he had a glorious victory, God must have the glo∣ry of it. Thus Asa did, in a full and free acknowledgement, That GOD did all for him; he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, ver. . and the strangers with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon together at Jerusalem; and there they offe∣red ver. 10. unto the Lord of the spoyle, which they had taken: The LORD had given the enemies and the spoyles into their hands; in homage to This Lord, the Giver of victories, they rendred backe into their LORDS Hand of the spoyle, which he had brought to theirs. A very just, reasonable and equitable thing, and but according to the command and rule: Offer unto God Ps. 50. 15, 16.
Thankesgiving, and pay thy vowes unto the most High. Asa had called upon the LORD in the day of trouble, the Lord kept promise with him, and delivered him: Asa stood bound now, in the strictest bonds, to doe as hee did, To offen Thankesgiving unto GOD, for that was the onely way be could take, To glorifie the LORD, the Giver of victo∣ries. Asa goes on, he and all the people are gathered together at Jerusalem something should be done now, which might well become so solemne a meeting: And this it was; Asa could not thinke, that he and his people could be joyned close e∣nough to their God, Who had wrought so and so for them, such Salvations: yet they would joyne themselves as close as they could; They entred into a Covenant to seeke the Lord: How? That is worth the asking; still the manner how, for that commends all; with all their heart and with all their soule. That is the way, with all the heart and soule, for so 2 ver. 12. the LORD shewed Himselfe with them; Assuredly, He did them good, With His whole heart, and with His whole soule Jer. 32. 4.. Aye, but very likely, they should find some refractory and stubborne spirits, very crosse to this great worke, this engaging the heart to serve the LORD; Some men or women among the great ones, or amongst the small ones, having a spirit of contradiction, would not joyne with their Brethren; great ones might be stout, and small ones might be carelesse. It might be also the Cities of the Prophets, and many of the Le∣vites would be refractory now, they would not come-in and protest to serve the LORD, and to renew Covenant with Him. No I That were strange indeed, that men, who had un∣derstanding in the visions of GOD, should be backward here to renew Covenant with their GOD, to seeke and to serve Him, Who SOƲGHT them out at the first, and served 2 Esa. 62. 12. them ever since, all their dayes; Who gives them plenty of all things, richly to enjoy; gives them leave to reape where they fowed not; and to dwell in houses, which they built not; and yet unwilling to renew Covenant with This GOD, Who hath so engaged them to come unto Him, and to keepe with
Him all their dayes! If any would be so abominable, refracto∣ry and stout, that they would not come-in, they should be brought-in; If they would not yeeld to a golden Scepter, they should stoope to an iron Rod; if not submit to a sweet easie yoake, they should be broke to peeces with that of iron; And whosoever would not seeke the LORD GOD of Israel, should ver. 13. be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman. Well now; and yet it is not so well as we may thinke it is: for though we seeke the LORD with all the heart, and with all the soule, yet all the heart is deceitfull, and at the best a flee∣ting and unconstant thing; GOD knowes, for indeed we know not, how deceitfull the heart is Ier. 17. 9, 10.; Now we have it, we thinke at command, it deceives us quickly, gives us the slip, and is gone. Therefore there is a Caution put-in for that; They bind themselves fast with bands and coards, as with iron and brasse; They sware unto the LORD; [they protested ver. 14. to serve the LORD; they solemnly vowed themselves His sworne servants; They avouched the LORD for their GOD: Deut 36. 17. They had sought GOD and found Him, none like that GOD; then they sware, that they will hold Him fast, and keepe unto Him.] But was it not with some of them, as it is now with all our vile Priests, and treacherous Prophets; did not their Protestation faulter in their mouthes? No; All Ju∣dah (marke that ALL) Judah sware clearely, as if they were best content, that all the world might take notice, They sware with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and ver. 14. with Cornets. But the heart commonly does not love to be in bonds, and fetters; was there no griefe of heart, no regret and giving-back there? No; for then it would have shewed it selfe, as it does in our Priests, they could not have framed to sweare with a loud voice; But the Text cleeres it, That it was the merriest day, that ever they saw; And ALL JUDAH ver. 15. REIOYCED AT THE OATH: for they had sworne with all their heart, and sought Him with all their whole desire. And they that so seeke, shall find; so it followes, And Hee was found of them: And they that have found GOD have
found all in that finding, Rest and Peace; and that is all; and that followes too, And the LORD gave them Rest round about. It is not imaginable, much lesse can it be expressed, what peace, what a shower of Blessings followes this entring into Covenant, and keeping to it I will leave this to the heart of the Reader, and goe on, when I have said but this; That then Asa had made himselfe and his Kingdome strong▪ then he had postured, he had set himselfe and Iudah in a posture of defence, when he had done as we have read. And they whose aime is so to doe, must doe as he did; for when all is done, nothing is done, till that be done, which Asa did; till we, in a contrariety to the wicked in their wicked way, shall ASSOCIATE our selves, as the wicked all the world over, to breake bands, and cast away coards, so we, To bind our selves with those coards (which the wicked breake) To enter into covenant with our GOD; To keepe close with Him, and walke humbly before Him all our dayes, Amen. We reade on. Asa had engaged himselfe, had bound his heart with bonds and coards, so he goes on, for he will proove himselfe, as was said, a compleat patterne of Reforming, of right posturing his Kingdome; I say, Asa goes on, meets with a Mountaine in his way, which he will make a plaine; He has engaged his heart to walke-after the LORD Deut. 13. 14., and feare Him, and obey Him; serve Him, and cleave to Him; And now he must not spare; nor must his eye pitty, no not the stoutest I mage in all the Country; No, though a Brother in Law, or his Son, or his Daughter, or the Wife of his bosome, or his friend, who is as his owne soule, though any one of these should set it up, yet Asa must throw it downe, his eye must not pit∣ty nor spare, for so the charge Deut. 13. 8. is; and Asa must doe there∣after, for he hath sworne. Let me object, like a foole, after my manner, as if I were in Asa's stead; The Answer shall make a∣mends for the folly of the objection, for it shall be given from Gods Mouth; I object, Ob. I may expresse my Authority, that GOD has given me, over my Brother, I am in place over him, and, in that respect, he is my inferiour; And over my Son, and Daughter, I am their Father; And over my wife too, GOD has made me
her head, and Master; But now suppose (though I need not suppose, but for instruction sake) That a Queene should say, let us goe, and serve other gods, whom thou hast not knowne, thou ver. 6. nor thy Fathers; suppose, she should say so, and so doe, set up an Idoll in a grove? Nay yet higher, suppose she be a Queene, and a Mother too, what must be done then? Thus I have made a question, where no wise man ever made any: I answer, or rather the Lord by me, by way of expostulation. An. Is there any command can give check to GODS com∣mand? Is there any Relation so neere, as that betwixt GOD and His people? Is there any Bond so strong as the Bond of a Covenant? Is there any such a Binder as an Oath? I have bound my selfe in an Oath, nay I have entred into a Curse if I performe not. I must now, in the feare of GOD, and Neh. 10. 29. dread of a Curse, throw away, that, which sought to thrust me away from the LORD my GOD; Who hath wrought all the works in me, and for me. I will not say now, as Hierom sayes, That, in such cases, I must thrust away my Fa∣ther, Hier. li. 2. Ep. 6. Per calcatum perge patrem. and mother, who would thrust me from GOD; And, if, being thrust away, they will lye in my way to with-hold me from following GOD, I must trample upon them; I will not say so. But this I will say, I must breake downe their Idolls, then stampe them to pouder, and more also, but it fol∣lowes presently. This I have set downe for the information of us simple ones; for we shall meete with an Idoll in the bosome, which will plead as much as all this, and intice more secretly; but if we remember the Covenant, the Oath, and the Curse, we shall be too hard for that Idoll, though it be a beloved one, and it shall downe, and be thrust away. Now marke what Asa did, for he instructeth very much, a very great example of well posturing his Kingdome. A foolish woman, a notorious Idolatresse, some say an Adul∣teresse also (these commonly goe together, for the reason ren∣dred, Rom 1. v. 23, 24. and are, whether hees or shees, the stoutest fooles in the world, for they are stout and proud before GOD, and humble before stocks and stones) had committed folly in Israel, worshipping an Idoll in a grove, some called it
Priapus, an obscene god, but guilded over, and made, by art, a pretty gaudy thing; And she thought verily she had beene a priviledged woman, she had a licence to lift up her heart and eyes to lying and strange vanities; she was the Mo∣ther of Asa, the King ver. 16., and, why might not she doe as she pleased, under her Sonnes protection, being Queene and a Kings Mother? Againe, this foolish Idolatrous woman (for she had degraded her selfe by falling before an Idoll, and such an Idoll, which was named before I was aware) considered not, That Asa the King had entred into a covenant with his GOD, therefore he must not suffer any abomination to stand before His eyes, with whom he has entred covenant, and strooke hands. Oh but hee might spare that one Idoll, it was the Queenes Idoll, and the Queene his Mother, he might spare that: No but he might not; better spare a Thousand then that one; for, though one be no number, yet it is the beginning of a number, and you may quickly adde one to it, and then one is two; and now it will multiply, specially a Queenes Idoll. Certain∣ly the Devill blesseth Idolls, for they multiply like fishes: Solo∣mon had many Wives, and halfe as many Concubines, and yet but one Son: But his Wives Idolls, multiplyed, and filled Ci∣ty and Country both. Therefore Asa did not spare Maacah, though she was his Mother, he plcked her downe, and that is very emphatically exprest; And also Maacah his Mother, even HER, he removed from being Queene, because she had made an 1 King. 15. 13. Idoll in a grove; The Idoll must downe too, and be destroy∣ed; that followes, for if he would not spare his Mother, NOT HER, then, not her abomination sure, that should be destroyed, and so it was; And Asa CƲT DOWNE ver. 16. her Idoll; Was that all? No; Idolls must be dealt more rough∣ly with then so; and STAMPED IT; yet that was not enough to consume an Idoll utterly; Now he makes an end of an old block, and BƲRNT IT. Where? It is a good que∣stion, ver. 13. and the answer is notable, at the Brooke Kidron; That when he had stampt it to pouder; burnt it to ashes; he might shew his just indignation against it yet farther, he would drowne it too; And all this for just reasons, cleare in the Text.
1. That he might show Maacah his Mother what a vile god she served, that might be stampt to pouder, then burnt, and then dround. 2. To shew his just indignation against Maachas Image; she was Queene-Mother, her Idoll, even hers, must be served so, for it had brought more then a suspition upon her, That she was as uncleane as the spirit she served in that obscene Image: Besides, it was the Mother of Abominations, by the Devils blessing it had beene not only fruitfull, but had multi∣plied, filling the City and Countryes round about with Idols; And these, the Devill working effectually by them, filled Je∣rusalem with Sodomites, they made Jerusalem, the beloved City, a Sodom, which GOD overthrew, and repented not: for so we reade; when they knew GOD and glorified Him not as GOD, but changed the Glory of the incorruptible GOD into an Image made like to, what? I cannot tell, but what the Carver plea∣sed; Therefore GOD also gave them up, &c. I pray you reade Rom. 1. 23, &c. the place, and there you shall see Idols and Devils and Sodo∣mites yoaked all together. Therefore Asa cut downe Maachas his Mothers Idoll, EVEN HERS, and stamped it, and burnt it at the Brooke Kidron; That when he had done all this, he might doe yet more, drowne it also. Truly now Reformation is risen to the highest, it did not stick at the head. While Re∣formation sticks there, a Kingdome is never well postured; but there we leave it. The Chapter concludes thus; There was no more warre till such a time. We goe-on now, to enquire into that time. And now we have heard as much as can be expected from an excellent King; the truest subject to the LORD his Ma∣ster; a stout and valiant Souldier, every way provident for the peace of his people. He was a King, and a very good King, whose Actions we have beene treating of all this while; He was a Man too, that we all know, but we doe not alwayes wisely consider that, and answerably make an allowance. It followes now, how he acted as a man, standing alone; and there, we looke to find slips and falls, infirmities, some worse then that in his feete, whereof he died. Surely the wise GOD suffers it to be so; leaves Man, as we
doe our Child, to try how substantive he is, how he can stand alone; and behold he totters presently, perhaps fall. slat upon his face. Why so? for excellent reason; That man may know, when he stood, he did not stand alone, but underpropt by an Almighty hand; that sustained him: And what he did, he did by an Almighty hand too, that did it. O blessed be GOD for mans infirmities, whether these be in his head, or in his feete, or all over his body; These, as the Lord gratiously orders them, makes him know, and know to purpose, that he is a man. A great point of knowledge this, and this of all men Kings are very unapt to know: Kings said I; alas! we poo∣rer men, beggars in comparison, forget it often times, as our words and deeds doe testifie (for we blow as bigge in our little Ponds, as Kings doe in their great Seas Vide Dominum saevientem in servos, &c. Flucts easdem, Lips. de Const. l. 2 p. 25.) much more may Kings forget themselves quite, being upon their pi∣nacles. But then God leaves them (and so He may doe and in much mercy) that they may try, what is in their hearts; He knoweth it well enough, for He knowes all things, But He would have them to know it also. Blessed be God, I say againe, for our infirmities, That, though our heads may stand high, yet, looking downe to our feete, (our infirmities, our weakenesses) we are kept low, and made to walke softly all our dayes. And so I shall speake of Asa's weakenesses or infirmities, for to that head I shall ranke them all; and then cast a covering over them, wide enough to hide all. Baasha King of Israel, came up against Judah; blocks-up 2 Chron 16. the passages to the intent that he might let none goe-out or come-in to Asa King of Judah ver 1.. That which seemes strange is, why Asa, being able to bring into the field, and Army of five hundred and fourescore Thousand, all mighty men of volour 2 Chron. 14 8., thought it fit rather at this time, not to draw them forth; but to fight rather with money 2 Cro. 16 2, 3., and to purchase his peace with the treasures of GODS House and his owne, at the hands of an infidell. A learned Knight in his History of the world, speakes thus for him, That Asa's many thousands of hands, employed in the late service against Zerah, might be now busied about their Lands, and other Trades, and better to winke at that apparent inconvenience, which the building
of Ramah would bring upon them in after-times, then to take off his peoples hands and intentions from so necessary em∣ployments. Well, but this pleads nothing for to excuse Asa; he might winke at the building of Ramah (which yet he had not done, if his understanding had not beene clouded with feare) But he ought not to shut his eyes at this, That he called∣in Benhadad the King of Syria into GODS inheritance upon these two deare rates; The breach of Benhadads league with Baasha; and the expilation of the Temple. Here was an in∣firmity, a very great one, to call-in a Heathen King, and to make him breake covenant. Let this goe, for we will passe it over. But Hanani the Seer will not let it goe so ver. 7., he came, and, like a good Prophet, reprooves even Asa the King, saying; Did not the LORD deliver a huge Host, with very many cha∣rets and horse-men into thine hand? Thine enemies did ride upon horses, and were very swift; but the LORD thy GOD, did ride upon the Heavens for thy helpe, and in His excellency upon the skie Deut 33. 26.. And it is His manner so, To spie abroad even over all the world, where this faithfull man is, whose heart is strong and perfect with his God, That He may shew Himselfe strong in the helpe of such a man. Ah! thou shouldest have relyed upon this GOD, Whom thou hast, so lately, found to be a strong ver. 9. GOD; so faithfull, and true. Thou shouldest have relied upon Him, and not on the King of Syria. But because thou hast done so, thou must heare of it in plaine tearmes, though thou art King, and feele the smart of it too; Herein thou hast done FOOLISHLY (there is plaine English; That was the man∣ner in those times, and then it was better with Kings then in after-times) Therefore from henceforth thou shalt have warre 2 Chro. 16. 9. There is one infirmitie discovered; the King had done FOO∣LISHLY, which shewed plainly, that the head was ill-af∣fected, and the very heart faint. There is yet more discove∣ry made of his weakenesse; he will not abide reproofe; he is so sick, that he beats the Physitian, and then anon, huggs him too much, as if he could cure heart and feete, and all; for be relyed upon him, and in so doing he made him a god; We looke over all this in order as it was done. 1. He will not abide reproofe; That was a great infirmity,
and the very note of a brutish man Pro. 12 1.. He beates his Phisitian, that good Prophet; that was yet a greater infirmity; Then Asa was wroth with the Seer, and put him in a prison house, for he was in a RAGE▪ with him because of this thing. Good man! he was in a rage indeed; but it was his infirmity. We reade on, and behold the greatest weakenesse of all! And Asa op∣pressed some of the people the same time. We thought verily that would follow, after we read that he was in a rage, and with his best friend, that he had in the world, for he told his Lord the truth, and his Lord was in a rage for that thing; then it followe, and Asa oppressed; in a rage with a Prophet, and for telling the truth, and oppression of the people, went all together. 2. Poore weake man! for by this time he found and knew himselfe to be so, and no better; and, as he grew old, so his in∣firmities growing upon him, His disease in his feete was now EXCEEDING GREAT: He should then have sought (that is, trusted) to the LORD; his eye should have beene ver. 12. fixed upon Him, the great Phisitian, that makes a man (every whit) perfectly whole, feete, and heart, and head and all. Asa did not so; a poore weake man leanes upon man; weakenesse upon weakenesse; Asa sought to (i. e. relied upon) the Phisi∣tians; put confidence in them, so made them gods. What shall we doe with all these, for here are many infirmities? We must learne hereby how to judge of others; and to make use of their infirmities, so as to strengthen us against our owne. If we judge at all it must be by the rule, observing the best actions See Childs portion, p. 94. that we can see in men, and judge not by their sud∣daine and inconsiderate wayes, but by the course of a mans life, and according to the more constant way and frame of his spirit. And here we may observe a great variety, and change in the wayes and actions of good men, as here in Asa; In the 14. Chap. he does that, which is right in the eyes of the Lord, and commands Israel so to doe: and then he beares-up himselfe See Iob in his second Chapter, then looke up∣on him in the third. in the Hand and Power of GOD, and do's wonders. In the 16. Chap. he is cleane-off againe, and fainting before a crea∣ture, and then do's like a man, standing, working alone with∣out divine assistance. In the 15. Chap. he is hearkening to the good Prophet, and very attentive to his words, and stri∣king
Covenant with his GOD, and bringing his people into Covenant with Him. In the 16. Chapter, he is wrath with the Seer, puts him into prison, and oppresseth the people. It is a resolved case; Man is not Substantive enough to stand alone; if GOD leaves Him, he fals, but that was noted before. We will note this here, That the inward-man, the inward frame of spirit is subject to as many changes, as the outward man; nay, it is exposed to more invasions, and greater incursions, whereby to unsettle it, and put it out of frame, then is the out∣ward man, the outward frame of body: which consideration, if laid to heart, teacheth us first, 1. To walke softly all our days, and humbly before our God; To fixe our selves upon His Arme, and stay our selves there con∣tinually; To say, as we heard before: Hold me, LORD, els I cannot hold Thee: if Thou takest me not by the hand, to hold me there, I shall slip, perhaps fall too, I know not how low. And 2. To breath after that place, where the Spirit shall be put into a constant frame of Holinesse: It shall warpe no more, de∣cline the good way no more, but be constant and unmoveable for ever. And thus we have learnt to judge of others infirmi∣ties, and to make use of them to our selves. Now we must find out a cover for all this, and, blessed be GOD it is found out to our hands. Blessed be God the Father of our LORD JE∣SUS CHRIST, there is a Garment pure enough and large enough to cover all these infirmities, and heale all thy diseases; Ps. 103. And this I leave to Faith, for it is not in sight. There is ano∣ther Garment, which I may call the mantle of Sincerity, that will hide great infirmities also, and under that covering, so wide and large, I will leave Asa: Though after such experi∣ences of the commings-in of GOD unto him, yet he fainted before His creature; he was afraid of a man. Though the high places were not taken away: Though he was in a rage with a Prophet, for telling truth; and an oppressour too: Though in exceeding great distresse, and then sought not to the LORD, but to the Physitians; though all this was in Asa, overta∣ken 2 Chro. 15. 17. with infirmities, yet this mantle of Sincerity is wide enough, Neverthelesse the heart of Asa was perfect all his dayes. Under
that covering we leave him, which hideth a multitude of sins: Remembring still, what man is in his best estate, and what were the first wayes of Asa: He did that, which was good and right before the LORD, and remooved the abominations from before His eyes; commanded the people to seeke the LORD, to doe the Law and the Commandement; he entred into Covenant with all his heart, he did not spare his Mother, nor her Idoll, no not her. Certainly, The LORD remem∣bred all this for good; he did many things amisse, like a man, but he tooke away the Sodomites, and the Idols, which caused them; he did that which was right in the eyes of the LORD, he commanded all Israel so to doe (it may doe you good to reade it againe and againe) he brought them into a Covenant with their God, and all this with a perfect heart, this must be remem∣bred to all Generations, Notwithstanding the heart of Asa was per∣fect all his dayes. Chap. 15. 17. Now heare the end of all the sons of Adam; So Asa slept with his Fathers, and died in the one and fortieth yeare of his reigne: and they buried him in one of the Sepulchers, which he had made ver. 13, 14. for himselfe. He was a wise-man sure, he had serious thoughts of his long and last sleepe, who had prepared his Bed before night came. This might be a meanes to set his soule in a good readinesse, and his house in good order, that when death came, he might have no more to doe but die. I knew a man my self, that had done the like, he had, with his owne hands, made his Bed, his Coffin, I meane, many yeares before he dyed; I have seene him lye downe in it with much comfort, for so hee could thinke of his latter end; hee told mee it was his manner daily, and it was a meanes to keepe him exceeding humble. We reade of two, our Country men both, in their times very eminent persons here: They made themselves, not Beds, but Monuments, and the one remaines a Monument of his pride to this day. The other made himselfe a Monument also, and glorying much in the Power he had put forth against the Lutherans, (the faithfull servants of CHRIST) would glo∣ry of it also, when he lay under his Tombe a sleepe; and, that he might not perfect his owne praise with his owne hands,
sent over his mind to Erasmus, with an ambling Horse Esa. 22. 15. Even unto Shebnah, &c. Quoties hunc locum lego simi∣le exemplum mihi possimum in mentem ve∣nit, &c. Vil. Cal. in versum 17., That he would, after his manner, expresse his worthy deeds in crush∣ing the Lutherans, and then returne it to him, to be set upon his Tombe. But see the lucke of it! This man was cut-off by the shoulders, his body buried we know not where, but without honour, neare to the block, where his body and his head were parted: And no other Epitaph over him, that we reade off, but the Axe the instrument of the execution. I mention all this here, to show the different workes and aymes of men: some made themselves Sepulchers, to tell the world their pride, and where they placed their glory: Others made themselves Beds, to tell themselves what they are Dust, and Ashes, and thether they must when all is done; and that there is a grave for their glory too: But if they doe glory, they will glory in the LORD. Asa had prepared his Bed before night came; when night came, death I meane, he was ready for it, and his Bed ready made: His people laid his body in it, after that they had made his Bed, the sweetest of any, that ever we reade off, for it was ver. 14. filled with sweet Odours, and divers kindes of spices, prepared by the Apothecaries Art. He had left a Name behind him, better then precious ointment; it was as an ointment powred forth, ther∣fore they layed his body a sleepe amidst Spices: And so they made, in our language and manner, a very solemne funerall for him. The good Father is dead, and yet he is not dead, he lives in his good son, whose Acts follow.
THE ACTS OF JEHOSHAPHAT. CHAP. V. Jehoshaphats heart is lift-up in the way of the LORD; taketh care, That all the Cities and People of Judah be taught out of the Booke of the Law; and so waxeth great exceedingly. He go's downe to Samaria, and returnes to his house in Peace; but that was a wonder which GOD wrought: He stands the firmer af∣ter his fall, and is more zealous: Chargeth the Judges, and the Priests: A world of Enemies come against him, he cryes to the LORD, is wonderfully delivered, and his Enemies destroyed. His Sunne sets in a Cloud too, but he shall rise gloriously. AND Jehoshaphat his sonne raigned in his stead, fol∣lowed-on in his Fathers stepps, closer with his 2 Chron. 17. GOD then his Father did (towards his latter end) and more successefull. He strengthned him∣selfe against Israel, and set his Kingdome in a po∣sture of Defence; but before we reade any thing of his Militia, how great and prosperous that was, we reade first, That the King walked in the first ways of David [those were good wayes, when David fullfilled all GODS WILS] and sought to the ver. 3. LORD GOD of his Fathers. [There is the first seeking; Act. 13. 22. . and if we so seeke GOD at first, that we find Him, good suc∣cesse ver. 4. followes, even all good, in it's owne nature so, or made so, for in finding God we find all things.] It followes, And walked in His Commandements, and not after the doings of Israel, [those were strange doings, for they served Calves, strange ver. 4.
gods] Therefore the LORD stablished his Kingdome ver. 5., for his heart was LIFT-ƲP in the wayes of the Lord: Lift-up, He could not else have stept-over the blocks, stopps and walls in his way, those high places, if he had not been more bold, ver. 6. Cum audentio∣rem factus esset ad promoven∣dum verum Dei cutum quàm fusset A∣sa Pater ejus. Trem., and resolved in his way, then Asa his Father was (towards his latter end.) But because his heart was LIFT-ƲP in the wayes of the LORD, It followes, Moreover he tooke a∣way the high-places from out of Judah ver. 6.. [A man may talke much, he will doe but little, unlesse his heart be lift-up in the wayes of the LORD, he will never be able to doe any great matter, nor over-come any great difficulty: if his heart be not lift-up, if not, and there be a rub in the way, he will stumble; but if an Hill be in the way, he will faint be∣fore it, because his heart is not lift-up in the waies of the Lord, as Jehoshaphats was. And so Jehoshaphat has made a good Beginning, and he timed it well, as his good Father before him. He tooke away the abominations, and then He appointed the chiefe of his Priests (whom he calleth Princes, found faithfull, and after his owne heart) to their charge. What was that? Not to gather in their Tithes; nor to over-see their Rents, and in-comes, as the manner is. No, he charged them, touching that onely thing necessary for Priests to doe, though Princes, To teach in the Cities of Judah ver. 7.: And because there is much teaching worke in a Kingdome, enough to set all on worke, Priests and Levites all, of all rankes, for there is great want; great want of Knowledge, and for want of knowledge, the People perish: Therefore the King appointed inferiour Ministers, (Levites) to teach the People out of the booke of the Law of the LORD ver. 8, 9.. So they went Circuit through all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people. A blessed work. This is the way of well-posturing a Kingdom, to take away the Idolatrous pla∣ces and services, then to take care the people be taught in the booke of the Law of the LORD, through all the Cities of Ju∣dah. Jehoshaphat knew well till this was done, nothing was done; an untaught people will ever be an untoward and con∣trary people, they will stand in a Posture of offence against GOD and His holy wayes. Woe, woe to them, who have
taken no care, that the people might be taught in the Law of their GOD: And blessings be upon the soules of them, who, seeing the mischiefe of ignorance, what those people are, that are an untaught people, make it their prime and chiefe worke (after the casting-out of Idolls) To provide for a poore peo∣ple, nuzzled in ignorance, that they may be taught in the Law of their GOD through all the Cities of Judah. This was Je∣hoshaphats care; he will have his Priests and Levites, all doe their worke, which becomes them, belongs properly to them, to keepe the Charge of the LORD, Teaching the people the Law of GOD, throughout all the Cities of Judah. These two Conclusions doe naturally follow from these premis∣ses. 1. To appoint Lecturers (call them what you will) The Spirit cals them (The Messengers of the Churches, and the glory of CHRIST 2 Cor. 8. 23.) Preaching Ministers, such as can teach the People the Law of the Lord, is a princely duty, the prime and chiefe worke of a Parliament, not below that great Councell of State. 2. That a well exercised, taught and trained People, I doe not meane in the use of their weapons, and military Postures, (though very commēdable all this, & very serviceable to a King∣dome, but) exercised, and taught out of the Booke of the Law of their GOD, is the Militia of a Kingdom, makes the King and his People secure at home, and feared abroad. So it followes, presently after the People were so taught and trained, That the ver. 10, 11 Enemies of Jehoshaphat round about, feared and submitted them∣selves; would rather stoope to the dust of his feet, then stand out with him to try the power of his Militia: Indeed it was terrible to the Inhabitants round about; for we reade-on in his ver. 12. Story, That he waxed great exceedingly; built Castles and Cit∣ties of store; he had much BƲSINESSE, and the men of Warre mighty men of valour were with him. But out of all this we note only; The comely order, his Militia ver. 13. comes last. All his worke before was this, to instruct and teach his people touching the Law of their GOD; To enter or inroule himselfe, and his People, the Souldiers of the GOD of HOSTS: To make Him their Generall. That was his
care, and how he prosecutes it we shall see hereafter. Here we may reade that Jehoshapat had a greater Host, then the Ethiopi∣ans had, who came forth against his Father. Yet, as we shall see anon, Jehoshaphat put no trust in them. The Number of them are recorded according to the House of their Fathers ver. 14.; and one amongst the rest shall be named, Amaziah the son of Zi∣chri; for he willingly offered himselfe unto the LORD first ver. 16., and (that's the ready way to doe good service for the Land) then with his two hundred thousand mighty men of valour, waited upon the King his Master. Doubtlesse he did the King his Master good service, for he had offered himselfe to the LORD first. Thus we have seene Jehoshaphats strength, and what made him so exceeding great; now we shall reade his weake∣nesses too, what brought him exceeding low; he had joyned affinity with Ahab, which consumed his house, and destroyed his Kingdom utterly. But so much is recorded before Sect. 1. Ch. 4.; here we shall see, how he acted standing alone, and upon his owne bottome, and what an hazard he ran, going downe to Samaria, and with Ahab to battle, this followes. Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and 2 Chro. 18. 1. joyned affinity with Ahab: Jehoshaphat had matched his sonne Jehoram to Athaliah, Ahabs daughter (or sister, I am not resolved whether, but I take it for granted, That Athalia was Jezabels daughter, being so like her) A strange over sight in a wise King! But it may be, the young Prince was head-strong; he might say to his Father, Get her for me, for she plea∣seth Iud. 14. 3. me well: And the Father was loath to crosse the sonne in his first love. What gained the Fathers consent wee know not: but so it was, Jehoshaphat joyned affinity with Ahab. How Sect. 1. Chap. 3. his sonne prospered, we have read; and what befell the Fa∣ther, we shall now reade, no small trouble, and a very great danger. It was not possible, (I say) not possible, To come cleare off and joyne affinity with Ahab. We reade-on: And 2 Chro. 18. 2. after certaine yeares, Jehoshaphat went downe to Ahab to Sa∣maria. He and his company find royall wellcome, he is enter∣tained like himselfe, a King, and a Brother. Then Asab makes a request to him, and perswades him, To goe with him
to Ramoth-Gilead; WILT THOU GOE WITH ME? Yes, answered Jehoshaphat, I am as thou art, and my people ver. 3. as thy people. A strange speech from a Wise-man, and as strange a compliance; I am as thou art: hee was not so; Ahab was a grosse Idolater, Jehoshaphat a faithfull servant of the LORD: My People as thy people; That was not so neither; Jehoshaphats people were in Covenant with their GOD, as wee heard, their Ʋowes were upon them: Ahabs people not so. Truely it is dangerous to come neare an Ido∣later; To goe to him to Samaria, may alter a man as much, as the going-in once into the High-Priests house; There they were set downe together, and Peter sate downe amongst them Luk. 22. 55.. Wee know what followed presently; his zeale to his Ma∣ster, cooled before the fire; he was in the High-Priests house, and then as one of them Obad. 11.. We will reade-on where we were; Jehoshaphat is in Samaria, feasting with Ahab. Now he can deny Ahab nothing, We will be with thee in the Warre. See! 2 Chr. 18. 3. There he had passed his promise, but now hee will enquire about the lawfulnes of the warr, and successe in the same, which he should have done first. Touching the justice of this warre, there was little or no question to be made: for Benhadad, who owed Ahab his life, breakes one Article of the League, in with-holding Ra∣moth Gilead 1 Kin. 20. 34. most unjustly from him; Therefore Ahab might justly moove a warre to recover his owne from a per∣fidious Tributary; But that Ahab should make a League with Benhadad then (which was his sinne) or that Ieho∣shaphat should joyne with Ahab now, there was no reason of a religious stampe, though some reason there might be of State: And yet therein Iehoshaphat should have enqui∣red first, before hee had passed his Promise. Surely a good King can order nothing wisely with Ahab in Samaria; hee will bee with Ahab in the Warre, That is granted; But counsell is for the warre; Let us enquire I pray thee at the word of the Lord to day. It was well remem∣bred, but had he remembred that before, he had not gone ver. 4. downe to Ahab to Samaria; much lesse had he made promise, to be with him in the warre. But Jehoshaphat will enquire before
he begins his march; And Ahab agrees with him to enquire, for he knew he had Prophets enough, (as bad as himselfe) who could speake to their Masters mind, though it was to his destruction; Jehoshaphat should see, that Ahab would order his warre with councell; and that he had counsellours enough, that would approve of the warre: and those Prophets too; how many? foure hundred These 400. Prophets. A∣hab had reser∣ved from the dint of Elijahs Sword; Now these shall re∣quite his kind∣nesse; they live to betray the life of him, who saved theirs; That no King after Ahab may dare to rescue or up∣hold an Idola∣trous Priest from the block, and one, and that one onely an honest man Our judge∣ment must be swayed not by number of men, but by weight of rea∣sons: One good man will give better reason then 400. vile Counsellours: so many a∣gainst one, and but that one in the right; and for the prospe∣rity of his Ma∣ster.. A false worship shall have false Prophets enough: And a wicked King shall have wicked Counsellours more then enough; and all for warre: GOEƲP AND PROSPER. Jehoshaphat is jealous of these 400. Prophets, (too many to be good) and would preferre an honest mans judgement, especially in point of warre, before them all; Is there not here a Prophet of the LORD besides, that we might enquire of him? Yes, said Ahab, there is one man more, but I HATE him. Why? I will answer that; Because he was an honest Pro∣phet, and would speake the Truth, and that is alwayes evill to an evill heart. But yet Jehoshaphat prevailes, and the man is sent for by a messenger sent from Ahab, who must lesson the good man before he come (as some have beene taught what to say from Mans mouth when they were to speake from GODS Mouth) and put words into his mouth ver. 12.; Behold, saith he, one Prophet hath taken to himself hornes of Iron, and has de∣stroyed the Kings enemies already in a phancy ver. 10., and all the other Prophets are of the same mind, and lippe too, and con∣clude, It shall be prosperous; They say to Ahab goe up and prosper: And thou must frame thy mouth, when thou com∣mest unto the King, to say so too; goe up and prosper. No but I will not, said the good man; Does thy Master pretend to enquire of the LORD, and dost thou tell me what I must say: And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, even what my GOD saith that will I speake. A good resolution, and but becom∣ing ver. 6. a Prophet of GOD. And now the good Prophet is with the bad King, and the ver. 13. first words he sayes are ironicall, which make the strongest de∣niall by affirming, (which the King does not well under∣stand;) But see his hypocrisie I he seemes eager to heare the
truth, which yet he hates, and cannot endure to heare; how many times shall I adjure thee, that thou say nothing but the truth ver. 15. to me in the Name of the LORD? What a notorious hypo∣crite was this! he adjures the man to tell him the truth in the Name of the LORD, and when he has heard it, he will turne his back upon it, suffer him to be stricken; nay, he will com∣mand him to prison too, and to be fed with the bread and wa∣ter ver. 26. of affliction there. How long? till I returne in peace. See there! Ahab expects to returne in peace, though he went to warre against the expresse will and word of GOD. But that is no wonder; his bloody sinne had closed-up his eye, and care both; he will rush-on to his owne destruction: The sentence was passed upon him, it must be executed, In the place, where doggs licked the blood of Naboth, shall doggs lick thy 1 King. 21. 19. 22. 38. blood, EVEN THINE. An Idolater will please himselfe with vaine thoughts; dreames of peace, and yet seeke warre, and pursue it; and persecute those that stand in his way, though they would hold him back from running into ruine. And still be thinkes, it will be well, untill I returne in peace. He is missed by lyars, they by the Devill 2 Chr. 18. 21., they hurry him in∣to a warre, and yet Ahab dreames of peace, untill I returne in peace, That is never. His iniquity is top-full; wrath is run∣ning over; Though he will not heare the truth, yet he shall see it fulfilled, according to the word of the LORD, by Mi∣caiah; Thou shalt not returne in peace, for so the LORD hath spoken, And he said, hearken all ye people. ver. 27. Now this had beene a wonder to the reader, that Jehosha∣phat, notwithstanding all this, went-up with Ahab to bat∣tell, but that we finde him joyned in affinity with Ahab; gone downe to Ahab to Samaria, and at a feast with him. All this, nay any one of these, was enough to take away the heart from the wisest King, that ever was; But take all to∣gether, and then see how one thing drawes on another, till Jehoshaphat be drawne into a desperate condition, to the very pit brimme of destruction; No doubt, for this very end, that no good King after him may joyne affinity with Ahab; goe downe to Samaria to him; feast with him there, and then joyne in a warre with him. I will only repeate the danger he
was in, and note the deliverance, and then goe-on. The Captaines of the Charets saw Jehoshaphat, and taking ver. 30. him to be the King of Israel, they compassed about him to fight: Good man! he was in a coope now, Captaines of the Cha∣rets round about him, But he cried out: he had one refuge left him, and a way for escape; he cried to Heaven, and the LORD helped him; after His manner, a present helpe in trouble, (who would joyne in affinity with Ahab against the expresle command of such a GOD?) And GOD mo∣ved them to depart from him. GOD MOVED THEM. Marke it, The Captaines of the Charets thought verily they had the prey in their hands, and they would devoure him pre∣sently; but they must stand and deliberate upon it, as those that must aske GOD leave first. They thought so and so, but there came a motion into them; and they depart. We say, Captaines and Souldiers doe all in warre, with their strength, and with their counsell: No, we are mistaken greatly; GOD does all; As he moves, so the Captaines and their weapons come and depart: just as it was here with Jehoshaphat; GOD moved them to depart from him; then they turned back from pursuing: It was upon GODS mo∣tion; so the Enemy moves or stands. And Jehoshaphat the King of Judah returned to his house in 2 Chron. 19. 1. peace to Jerusalem. The goodnesse of Jehoshaphats GOD! Jehoshaphat was wandred quite out of his way; he had beene at Samaria; with Ahab in the battle; in a bloody skirmish there; GODS Hand was with him notwithstanding, delivers him, and brings him off with a motion and back to his own house in peace. Iehoshaphat will not presume any more, he feares GOD and His goodnesse, Who would not take his servant at an ad∣vantage. Doubtlesse Jehoshaphat thought upon it; he had joyned in affinity with Ahab; in a warre with Ahab; was taken for Ahab; was hemmed in by the Captaines of the Chariots, yet escaped; saw Ahab wounded, with an arrow, shot at a venture, but directed by an invisible hand, and so slaine before his face; and yet he returnes to his house in peace. So GOD could doe, and doe it easily, upon a motion. But now the Son of that good Prophet, who dealt so
plainely with his Father, deales, in the same plainenesse of language, with his Son Jehoshaphat, saying; shouldest thou helpe ver. . the ungodly, and love them that hate the LORD? (i. e.) Thou shouldest not have done so, but so doing thou art much to blame. Do's not the King interrupt him? No; The Kings heart is melted within him, in sense of that he has done against the LORD: and the goodnesse of the LORD towards him; he has a patient care now, and lets the Prophet goe on; he will speake comfortable words presently; Therefore is wrath upon thee from before the LORD. Now marke how he com∣forts ver. 2. him againe; Neverthelesse, though thou hast done so and so; yet all that thou hast done shall not blot out the remembrance of the GOOD THINGS thou hast done, in that thou hast taken away the groves out of the Land. Marke that, the taking away Idolatrous things, Altars and the like, and Idolatrous servi∣ces, (in truth of heart) makes amends for many miscariages, and shall be remembred and reckoned amongst good things found in the man, where there are evill things too, but they shall be, (as if they had not beene) remembred no more. See againe? Jehoshaphat stands the firmer after his fall: Af∣ter his deliverance he followes-on Hose 6. 3. to seeke the LORD; he dwelt at Jerusalem ver. 4. Resedit (i. e) quievit habenis regni Ioramo commissis, &c. Trem., (i. e.) he set his Son Jehoram in his Throne there, while he goes in Person, and visits the Churches! Priests are deceitfull many of them, and Levites too, he will visit his people himselfe; his own eyes and eares shall tell him how they thrived. We are an unconstant people; now we set our faces towards Heaven, then we turne back; so it was with the people of that time, but Jehoshaphat went out againe ver. 4. (he had sent forth the Priests and Levites, as we reade, it may be he went out himselfe then also) through the people from Bersheba to Mount Ephraim, and brought them BACK to the LORD GOD of their Fathers. They were revolted and gone, Jehoshaphat sent Priests and Levites after them, and then went forth himselfe. And see the suc∣cesse: he brought them back to the LORD GOD of their Fa∣thers. Then he prosecutes the worke of the LORD; rectifies
things amisse in the Church and State, sets Judges in the ver. 5. Land, gives them a charge very strict, and pressing to duty; Take heed what you doe, you judge not for man, but for the LORD, ver 6. Who is with you in the judgement: You are gods on earth, in ver. 7. GODS stead, let the feare of the LORD be upon you, and no iniquity in you, for there is none with the LORD your GOD, no respect of persons, no taking of gifts: [A corrupt Judge from that day this charge was given, to this present houre, never respected this Scripture] Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the Priests, and of the chiefe of the Fathers of Israel, for the judgement. Of whom? of the ver. 8. poore and needy, and of the rich also: but it is called the judge∣ment of the LORD: That they might consider well their charge and not trespasse against the LORD, and so bring wrath upon themselves and upon their bretheren; Thus shall you doe in the feare of the LORD faithfully and with a perfect heart ver. 9.. Corrupt Judges, vile Priests, treacherous Levites, trespasse sore against the LORD, and against their bretheren; they bring wrath upon themseves and upon the Land ver. 10.: But doe thus in the feare of the LORD faithfully and with a perfect heart, and ye shall not trespasse. Ye shall have Rulers over you, and officers before you, all this for your incouragement; but this is for the comfort and incouragement both, of all the good; Deale couragiously and the LORD shall be with the good. These very words gave heart and courage to the inhabitants of Libnah, to forsake his Sonne Jehoram, when he had for∣saken the LORD, as saith the learned Knight in his History of the World. And yet there is a question mde, whether the Priests might forsake Jehoram or not. Heare the case, consider on it, and then judge; This is the case; Jehoram followed-on in the wayes of Ahab and after the counsells of Athaliah his wife, a wicked woman; that is cleare in the Text, and so is this; That Jehoram forsooke the Law of his GOD, and forced the people so to doe. These Priests, the inhabitants of Libnah followed-on in the wayes of the LORD, keeping the charge of the LORD, and close to the Law and the Commandement; They would not be forced to forsake the LORD, so they tur∣ned
the back on Jehoram and forsooke him; This is the case, and this the question; Whether the Priests might follow-on in the wayes of Ahab to destruction; or in the wayes of the LORD unto salvation? More briefely; whither they might forsake Jehoram, or forsake the LORD, whether GOD be King or Jehoram? That is the question. The Judge of all the world hath made answer hereunto (as His manner is) by Himselfe Ezech. 14 7.. He hath laid fore judgements upon Jeho∣ram, and He will be sharpe and quick in answering those, who make question, whose wayes are to be followed, the wayes of Ahab or the wayes of GOD: And who is to be forsaken, Jehoram or the Law of GOD. The sacred Text makes cleare answer here, the Priests forsooke Jehoram, be∣cause he had forsooke the LORD GOD of his Fathers. They 2 Chro. 21. 10. that will not take this for answer, shall be answered in ano∣ther manner, as Iehoram was answered; the LORD will answer them by Himselfe: This in passage by occasion of Jehoshaphats charge, Deale couragiously, and the LORD will be with the good. Thus Jehoshaphat hath ordered the Church, and State according to rule, and very wisely postured the Kingdom. ver. 11. Now wee reade on, and behold a whole world of 2 Chron. 20. Enemies are marching-on against Jehoshaphat. What way will he take now, for they think to swallow him up? He was not to seeke his way now; he had prepared his heart to seeke GOD Chap. 19. v. 3.; that GOD, Who had moved the Captaines to depart from him; That GOD, Whom he had sought with all his heart, and tooke care that all his people should so seeke Him would be found now. He that had prepared his heart to seeke the LORD, was prepared for his adversary; Jehoshaphat he was not to seeke now (the Enemy was upon him) what way he was to take; he that had so lifted-up his heart in the wayes of the LOLD, that he had stept over the groves, and taken them away; and had given a charge, that judgement and justice should be executed to all the people; That all the Cities of Iudah should be taught, touching the Law out of the Booke of the LORD; he whose heart was so lift-up in the wayes of the LORD, could tell what to doe now, even lift-up his eyes to Heaven; The doores of that Sanctuary
alwayes stand open, to those, whose hearts are so lift-up; And when a man, looking before and behind, and on every side, and knowes not what to doe; when refuge failes, then he can tell what to doe; lift-up his eyes to Heaven, heare what GOD will say; (He will speake peace,) and waite patiently, in the use of all meanes, what GOD will doe; He will doe wonders; where? At the mountaine of straites: certainely He will, and Jehoshaphat will lift-up his eyes unto Him; and thereon stay himselfe. It is a cleare case, so every man should doe, lift-up his eyes to GOD in time of trouble; Nay, so every man will doe, whose heart is not like a stone; but Iehoshaphat only can lift-up his eyes thither, and finde present help from thence, for he lifted-up his heart in the wayes of the LORD in the dayes of his peace. And this I thought most worthy our noting from the expres∣sion in the Text, which yeelds us this comfortable conclusion; That hee and hee only, whose heart is LIFT-ƲP in the wayes of the LORD; can LIFT-ƲP his eyes to the LORD in the day of trouble, with assured confidence of present helpe. Now we reade on in the Chapter. A great multitude cometh against Iehoshaphat, and Jehosha∣phat FEARED and set himselfe to seeke the LORD, and ver. 2. proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah ver. 2.. [That's a good feare, which drives a man, not to his heeles, but closer to GOD: and it will be well sure, for it empties his heart of all crea∣ture confidence, and then GOD comes-in.] But was this a time to fast, and pray; or rather, was it not the fittest time to lay hold on Bow and Speare, and prepare for Battell? No, Iehoshaphat looked not to Bow nor Speare, but lookes to GOD, acknowledging, he hath no might, nor knowes he what to doe, but looke-up. We have no MIGHT, saith he; we know not what to doe ver. 12.. No; let reason come in now, that would tell him; he has MIGHT enough, and may know what to doe; he had men of warre, mighty men of warre 2 Cro. 17 13, 14, 15, 16.; see a list of them; their numbers, greater then was the Host of the Ethiopian; And yet, no might, nor knew he what to doe! Let him bring forth these men of might, and march on; so reason would coun∣sell. Iehoshaphat was wiser then so, for he had a better coun∣sellour:
Asah! what can these two do, flesh against flesh, but, as we doe, eate each the hers Arme? he and his people looke sted∣fastly to the Father of Spirits, the GOD of Hosts, Who cre∣ated the Smith, that formes the Instrument, and the waster to de∣stroy Isa▪ 54 16▪; our EYES ARE ƲPON THEE  20▪ 1. The King relyed more upon HIS GOD, as appeared in seeking to Him, and praising of Him, then upon his many companies, or could have relyed for dependance, if those many had beene multiplied by Thousands. And we heare his prayer, he cal∣led upon GOD, and SO he was delivered; he remembred GOD, Who is GREAT and TERRIBLE; in Whose Neh. 4 14. hand is power and might; art not Thou GOD in Heaven ver 6.? Then he pleads his interest in This GOD; art not Thou our GOD ver▪ 7.? Then he calls to mind the Right Hand of the Al∣mighty, what He had done of old; And SO he is delivered, and had the victory, a glorious victory, wherof we may say in∣deed, as a great Commander greatly beloved, said of a late victo∣ry, never was there seen lesse of man, and more of GOD; for the Enemies here, every one helped to destroy one another ver. 23.. So, when Judah looked towards the great multitude, behold they were dead bodies, fallen to the earth and none escaped ver 24.. And when Iehoshaphat and his people came to take away the spoile of them, they found among them in abundance; both Riches and precious Iewels more then they could carry away, and they were three dayes in gathering the spoile, it was so much ver. 25. [It is not in vain to fix the eye upon GOD.] Then Jehoshaphat makes a memoriall thereof, calls the place where GOD gave them that victory, BERACHAH ver. 26, 27, 28., a Valley of Blessings. So they returned, every man of Judah, Jehoshaphat in the fore-front of them to Jerusalem with joy and praises in their hearts and mouthes. Praise was comely then, for then GOD gave them the victory; He must have the praise and glory; He made them to goe againe to Ierusalem with joy, for the Lord had made them to rejoyce over their E∣nemies. ver. 27. He caused His Feare to come upon all the Kingdomes of ver. 29. those Countries, when they had heard that the LORD fought a∣gainst the Enemies of Israel. So the Realme of Jehoshaphat was quiet: For HIS GOD gave him rest round about; he had ver. 30.
a Pace of GODS making, from His hand, That was a sure peace. Rest indeed; such a Peace the LORD will give to that man, whose heart is lift-up in His wayes. More is recor∣ded, touching this King, the time when he began and ended his Raigne; his Mothers name also, and how he walked, even as his ther Asa, doing that which was good in the sight of ver. 32. the LORD; Howbeit the high places stood still, as in his Fathers dayes; but the people are blamed for that (indeed we are jly blamed, we are the blocke in the way, the Hill, the Mountain, a mighty hindrance to Reformation) An unprepa∣red heart is such an hindrance, and such an heart we have, then such an hindrance are we, for we have not prepared our hearts unto the GOD of our Fathers. It is now, as it was then: Howbeit the high places were not taken away, for the people had 2 Chron. 20. 33. not yet prepared their hearts unto the God of their Fathers. The high-places will not downe, till the stout heart falls; till the high thoughts and imaginations there are downe, these a∣bominable things cannot be taken away; till the heart be pre∣pared for such a mercy, till it be squared (whether by blows or sweet intreaties, that is not the question, but squared, and most likely as stones for the building, by hard blows) to GODS holy word, and will, till this be done within, and upon the heart, this execution will not be done upon the abominations before the eye. The heart must be prepared, must be put into a frame of holinesse before they can be fit for, or deale with ho∣ly things, Give not that which is holy to doggs, neither cast Mat. 7. 6. your pearles before Swine; Swine will trample pearles under their feet, and if you give holy things to dogs, they will turne againe and rent you. What should a rough and an impolished Stone doe in GODS building! What should an Hypocri∣ticall heart doe with a sincere worship? An unprepared heart with pure and prepared Ordinances? These agree no better then old cloth to a new garment; then new wine with old bottles. Holy things relish no better with an unholy and un∣prepared heart, then did Mannah to the Israelites. Now our soule is dried away Numb. 11. 6.. Was there nothing to stay their soules, and to refresh them? Yes, they had Angels food, excellent food, Meat from Heaven, Mannah, was their food, but that
was as good as nothing; There is nothing at all besides this Manna before our eyes. See there! Leekes, Onyons, and Garlike, Aegiptian fare and slavery to boot, would relish bet∣ter with them, for their hearts were in Egipt. We might ob∣serve the sore wrath of GOD upon that people, who were so contrary in their choice and liking, and upon the people here, whose hearts were so unprepared: Their next King fitted them very well, he was to them according to their stubborne hearts; he gave the people their Idolls, they loved so well, bids them serve stocks and stones, and they, that would not shew themselves so brutish, he would have forced so to doe. But we must observe our selves, it is our owne case, We have not prepared our hearts to the GOD of our Fathers; We will not be reformed; we count Reformation, as that perverse Is∣raelite did, a killing; we account no better of it, and it is so Exod. 1. 13, 14. indeed to an unprepared heart. But O what sorrowes, what breakings will these our stubborne hearts cause unto us! The LORD is about His strange worke, and he will accomplish it. Now the LORD sanctifie His Owne worke, and pre∣pare a people for Himselfe by all this. The LORD prepare our hearts also, that we, who would not be drawne by allure∣ments, may be compelled by hard blowes. Amen. The rest of the Acts of Jehoshaphat first and last are written, but the writings are lost ver. 34.. And yet some of his last Acts are re∣corded; not so good as the first. Toward the end of his dayes, he was as his good Father, overtaken with infirmities ver. 35.. And af∣ter this he joyned himselfe with him, who did very wickedly; and to make Ships to goe to Tarshish. A Prophet tels him round∣ly of it, in effect thus; Though hand joyned in hand, and strength with strength, yet the wicked shall not be unpunished Prov. 11 21.; no nor the Righteous man neither, That joynes himselfe with the wicked, The LORD hath broken thy workes; and so it was; And the Ships were broken, that they were not able to goe to Tarshish. Surely the LORD will have his Servant ver. 37. joyne himselfe to the LORD, not with those that hate the Lord; If he doe joyne strength with such, it shall doe him no good, but hurt, it shall weaken him. But thus Jehoshaphat did, and it is the last Act of his, that
is recorded. So the wise GOD permits it to be; other∣wise, the very best Kings (which was intimated before) might forget themselves, how weake they are, standing alone. If there were nothing of humane frailty, even in open sight, to staine their best workes, they would cast too great a lustre in their eyes; if no cloud to ecclipse the speciousnesse of them, they might make an Idoll of their Acts, and their credit by them: And we poore People would thinke of them, and give unto them, above what is meet: Therefore it is (there may be other Reasons, which GOD knowes) that the Sunne of the most glorious Kings, that ever were upon the Earth, hath, in the close of their day, set in a cloud, he shall rise in glory. That which followes now touching Iehoshaphat is that, which will ever follow; for it is concerning his death and bu∣riall, which needs not be mentioned any more, seeing it hath been to this day, and will be ever to the worlds end, the end and close of all, as with Iehoshaphat, he went the way of all the 2 Chro. 28. world after his Fathers, slept with them, and was buried. His Son Iehoram, a very wicked man, reigned in his stead; and hee has a Son too like the Father, and yet, though Partus sequitur ventrem, not halfe so bad as the mother: Father and son both blundred-on in the wayes of Ahabs house, and after their coun∣sels to destruction, as we read before. Then Athaliah play'd Rex, till Iehojada cut her short, wee will reade his Acts now worthy such a Priest.
THE ACTS OF JEHOJADA. CHAP. VI. Jehojada the chiefe Priest takes an excellent way for the Posturing the Kingdome, executeth judgement and justice: makes a cove∣nant betweene GOD and the people; betweene the King and the People; breakes downe the Altars and Images of Baal, slay∣eth the vile Priests there, appoints Officers for GODS House, and sets Porters that no uncleane thing shouldenter enter there. IEhojada, a Chiefe Priest indeed, and a Prince too, takes care to set the Kingdome in a Po∣sture of Defence against an usurping and inso∣lent Idolatresse: the way he takes is remarke∣able; he first causeth the Captaines to enter in∣to a Protestation 2 Chro. 23. 1. or Covenant with him; Tels them Gods Counsell, touching the succession in Davids house ver. 3.; orders the Militia of the House of GOD, after that cals forth the Captains, makes them provision of Arms, and then sweares alle∣geance to their true King; appoints every man his place ver. 4, 5.; sets a guard about the King; every man with his weapon in his hand ver. 7.. All is done as Iehoiada appointed; Then the King is brought forth, the Crowne is put upon his head, but he is not made King yet. The Testimony is put into his hand. What is that? The Law of GOD, the Kings Law-Booke ver. 18., whereof you reade, Deut. 17. Wherein the King must learne, how to serve GOD, and to governe his people. This is the Testimony they gave into his hands, and so they
made him King ver. 11., And having annointed him, they said, GOD save the King, Amen. But Athaliah sayes not so; she expect∣ed to heare, GOD save the Queene, when in truth, there could be no such prayer put up for her; she heares of a King, and she cals out Treason, and she doubles it, Treason, Treason. Who does so? Athaliah, that fire-brand in Judah, who had consumed the noblest Families therein, and murthered all the Seed Royall: The most notorious woman in all the world, except one, and that was her Mother Iezabell. See the man∣ner! This wicked woman cryes out Treason, Treason; calls others by her owne name. But what was the matter, that oc∣casioned such an out-cry? This was all; The Crowne was set upon the right head; the testimony was put into the Kings hand; he is of the house of David, he must be King; and the people put up a Prayer for him, heartily, GOD save the King; and all the people reioyced. Thinke upon it, ponder it well. Is there any Treason in all this? Yes, saith Athaliah; Treason, Treason! That was Treason in her account, That the Seed of David should raigne: That there should be such accla∣mations, such prosperity wished to the Kingdome of David. But her time is come, she must be made drunke with her own blood, that had shed the blood of her husbands children. No matter what she sayes now, Iehoiada will not dispute so cleare a case; He charges his Captaines, saying, have her forth of the Ranges ver. 14.: And if any one be so foole-hardy, as to appeare on her side, Slay him also with the Sword, but defile not the house of the LORD. So they laid hands on her ver. 15.. And where was she slaine? It is worth our observation; just at the entring the horse-gate; she was hurried out of GODS Court, and could not reach home to her owne Court, before she felt the Sword in her bowels; she had lived like a beast, tyrannized like a Lionesse; she must be slaine neare to her Stable, entring the Horse-gate. Looke about you and consider; you will finde that some ignominious death has befell the Idolatresse; and a place where very sutable to the manner of her life. Where was she buried? There is no answer to that. As her Mother Ieza∣bell was trampled under the feet of her enemies herses: So A∣thaliah was slaine at her owne horse-gate; Iezabell was de∣voured
by dogs, as the LORD had threatned. What became of Athaliah, we doe not find; she was slain, and before the Horsegate: That was as much as Jehojada was to looke after, not where such a wicked woman was to be buried. And now here was a good worke dispatched; what was that? Judgement and Justice was executed; The wicked Councellour was remooved, shee, that had destroyed the Seed Royall, and councelled her owne Sonne to his Destru∣ction. A good riddance indeed! Now Jehoiada goes on comforta∣bly; And what do's he? He made a Covenant betweene Him, [GOD] and betweene all the People, and betweene the King, that they should be the LORDS People ver. 16.. Of infinite considerati∣on . all this; He made a Covenant betweene GOD, the People▪ and the King; He shewed the King the meaning and purpose of the Testimony, put into his hand; bids the King remem∣ber, he was in GODS stead, sate in GODS Throne; must doe all by GODS booke: That is his Covenant betwixt GOD and his people, now that GOD has made him King over them.] That they should be the LORDS people. Had Jehoiada sate muzing, as many dayes as he spent minutes upon this great businesse, the crowning the King, securing him, and his Kingdome; he could not have thought of a speedier and more compendious way then this, to engage them to be the LORDS People. If they be so, they have assured confidence for ever. The LORDS vineyard, it is the security of that vineyard; The LORDS Kingdome, it is the security of that Kingdome; The LORDS People, it is the security of that people. Touch not these annointed-ones. Why? They are Mine: Nor the Prophets, for the same Reason, they are Mine also, and as the Apple of Mine Eye, So I tender them, saith the Lord. It is so, and so you may runne through all the Cities, Townes, Houses, Gates, Ships, Strong-holds and Forts; it is the Lords City, a secured City, &c. But looke to it now; if not the Lords, we have no security from His hand for our Peace: Every thing may do us hurt, nothing shall doe us good, if not the LORDS: Goe yee upon her Walls and
destroy; Take away her battlements Ier. 5▪ 10.. Ai, if we had an Arme like GOD, we could easily doe it might the Adversary say; But it is not so soone done as spoke; the walls are high, and the battlements very strong. No matter how high they are, nor how strong they are, you shall take them. Why? They are not the LORDS (i. e.) Their defence is departed from them Numb 14. 9.; The LORD protecteth them not, and then woun∣ded men shall take the Fortresse Ier. 37. 10.; and the lame the prey Esa. 33. 23.. In being or not being, the Lords people is summ'd▪ up all our comforts, or all our woes. Therefore of mighty considerati∣on this is, That they might be the Lords people. And now the people of GOD rise apace and downe falls Baall, and they shatter his house all too peeces over his Lordships head; and yet the worke is not done; they break downe his Altars, and I∣mages all to peeces l: And yet they have but little more then 2 Chro. 23. vor. 17. halfe done: But here will be a perfect Reformation present∣ly, when they have slain the Masse-Priest, Mattan the Priest of Baal before the Altar, and that is done now, and before the Altars: I pray you note it; That Priest of Baal, like our Mass-Priest now, had been offering before the Altars, and when he did so, he offered sacrifice to Devils. Now he must be slaine before the Altars; where he had wrought such abominations, there he must be slaine. Now Jehoiada has but one worke more to doe, then the Reformation is compleat, and Judah is as well-postured, as can be expected. He appointed the Officers of the house of the LORD; set the Porters at the gate of the house of the LORD ver. 18., that none, which was uncleane in any thing should enter in there ver. 19.. In∣deed there cannot be too much Caution about the house of the LORD, a double watch there doe's well, for if any thing that is uncleane enter in there, it will diffuse it's selfe there like a Leprosie unto all the people. Of mighty Consideration this allso, for filthinesse from the Priest, is as spreading as oyle from the head, spreading it's selfe through all the people, for from the Prophets of Jerusalem is pro∣phanenesse gone-forth into all the Land. And now the MI∣LITIA Iet. 23. 15. was as compleated as it could be, for so it was
ordered: And so successefull it was, That all the People of the Land reioyced, and the City was quiet, When was it quiet? The Answer to that is very considerable; Af∣ter  Chron. 13 20, 21. that, they had slaine Athaliah with the Sword, that wicked and idolatrous woman; the City was quiet, and not before. Shee was still divising iniquity, and working evill upon her bed, and when Morning was light, shee practised it, as the power was in her hand, and this did greatly disquiet the City: but it was quiet after that they had slaine Athaliah with the Sword. The rest touching good Jehoiada followes in the Story of King Ioash, but it is gone before in this Chronicle: For Ioash was, though a good Prince, yet a very bad King, and the most un∣thankefull Person that ever wee reade off. Hee has an A∣maziah, a sonne little better then the Father: Amaziah an Ʋzziah, both naught: Ʋzziah a Iotham, a very good man, wee will reade what he did, and not much, but ve∣ry well.
THE ACTS OF JOTHAM. CHAP. VII. Jothams Story is short, for his life was not long; he lived long in a short time. He built much, and was mighty; A mighty Reason, why he was so. KING Iotham followes in the Story, for hee succeeded Ʋzziah, and the plague, that rose-up in his Fathers fore-head, must needs 2 Chro. 27. . be in the sonnes eye: So he was fore∣warned not to meddle with Temple-work, but to leave that to the Priests, and to see that they were faithfull in it. And yet this is noted of the people, not for the credit of the King; And the ver. 2. people, yet did corruptly: And this of the King, he built ver. 3, 4. MƲCH, an exceeding high Gate (sixty Cubites up∣right, saith Iosephus) and Cities, and Castles, and Townes: Hee subdued the Ammonites, and made them Tributaries, Ejusmodi ver Prcep fuit, ut nullum in e virtutis genus desideres. they gave unto Iotham very largely: He prospers, for GOD was with him. I will adde hereto the Testimony Iosephus gives of him: This was such a Prince, as a man could find no kind of vertue wanting in him; He worshipped GOD so religiously; he governed his men so righteous∣ly; he was so provident for the City, and did so great∣ly
amplifie it, That by his vertue and prowesse, he made his whole Kingdome not contemptible to his Enemies; but to his Servants, Inhabitants, and Citizens, prospe∣rous and happy. In short, his raigne was not long, but as happy in all things, as himselfe was devout and vertu∣ous. So Josephus. I will rest in that Testimony, the Spirit gives of him, and conclude with it. So Jotham be∣came MIGHTY, because bee prepared his wayes before the LORD his GOD. How old he was, and how long he raigned is recorded in the same place, and then good ver. 6. Jotham slept with his good Fathers. Ahaz succeeds him, a bad Sonne, but Ahaz has a good Hezekiah, and his good∣nesse is upon everlasting Record. Wee will reade his ACTS now.
THE ACTS OF HEZEKIAH. CHAP. VIII. Hezekiah his first worke is the purging of the Temple, and first care, the setting faithfull Officers there. Then about the COVENANT and the PASSEOVER, this way he takes to secure his Kingdome, and hee findes it a sure and secure way, which never yet failed, and never can faile unto the Worlds end. No Adversary can doe a Kingdome hurt without, when Idols are throwne down within. Hezekiah has a great Deliverance, from a proud Adversary, then a great Affliction, Hee findes changes in the World, tells us what we must looke for there, but peace in GOD. HEzekiah, Jothams Grand-child, began his raigne, and Reformation together; he was religious, and wise both, and must delay no time, for in∣deed 2 Chro. 29. 3. his Father King Ahaz. had caused a De∣formation ver 3. through his Kingdome, and weak∣ned his MILITIA very much. So that it did but stand in a fainting Posture. Therefore Hezekiah be∣stirred himselfe, and let no time run-out to waste. In the first yeare of his raigne and moneth, he opened the doores of GODS House, and repaired them [It was observed before; he must looke well to GODS House, that expects GOD should looke to and establish his house, and there he must begin and
end both] brought in the Priests and Levites, chargeth them; Sanctifie now your selves, and sanctifie the house of the LORD GOD; carry forth the FILTHINESSE thence ver. 5., make cleane worke there; Remember my sonnes, the fierce wrath of GOD, yet before your eyes: He hath delivered us to troubles, to astonishment, and to hissing; keepe his judgements like front∣lets before your eyes: And be not negligent in such a time as ver. 11. this. And he found the Levites (the ordinary Ministers) very obedient in word and deed, for they were more upright in heart to sanctifie themselves then the Priests ver. 34.. But so he charged them. And for himselfe, it is in his heart to lead the way, making a Covenant with the LORD GOD of Israel •, that His fierce wrath may turne away from us ver. 10. [would we have the fierce wrath of the LORD turne away? Then we must come up close to Him in a Covenant:] So the King doe's, and see how all follow, and how quicke they are, how they bestow themselves. Indeed the King is a leading-hand, whe∣ther he goes on the right or the left, the people observe not curiously, but they follow. It was well here, K. Hezekiah kept strait-on, and see how well all performe their duty! But you must note, The good King is at their elbows, as chiefe O∣ver-seer there, he is zealous for the bringing forth the uncleane∣nesse ver. 16. out of the Temple; and the Levites shew their zeale too, [The Kings presence presseth much to duty, els the Le∣vites are but slaggs; but now they are very active, and out they carry the filthinesse, and throw it into the brooke Kidron. And very much filthinesse there was, for Ahaz in his transgression ver. 19., had made holy things common, which caused the King, Priests, and all more worke and trouble, as it is alwayes when the Predecessour is wicked, but they went through it willing∣ly; The Kings zeale and example carried all smooth before them with rejoycing; [nothing is hard to a willing mind: And zeale in GODS service feeles no burden there] A great deale of worke was done in a little time; And Hezekiah rejoy∣ced with all his heart, that GOD had so postured the people (i. e.) set them in such a good frame to obedience: So we reade; 2 Chro. 29. 36. and Hezekiah rejoyced, and all the people, that GOD had pre∣pared the people, for the thing was done SVDDENLY.
We will note it twice over, if thrice it will doe us no hurt, The Kings heart is upright; the peoples heart prepared, all are willing; what now? Great things are done suddenly. Reade back-ward now, people hang backe, are not a willing people; The heart is not prepared, not upright; What now? Things are done heavily. Come-on againe for now we are quite-off. Here is a Covenant; All ASSOCIATE themselves, the King, he is the Leader, Priests, Levites, People, these follow close, ASSOCIATED; here are many; and yet but one shoulder, one hand, and one lip; and, which makes the U∣nion, one heart and one mind; and now things are done sud∣denly. In his Epist. I remember here what one Man did, and how suddenly, Mr. Foxe comes into my mind now, he tooke an excellent worke in hand, we all know it, he had an excellent spirit, an upright heart he had, and his heart was, next to GOD, with the upright still; he did that in a few moneths, which, we would scarce thinke could be done in so many yeares: But he was all for GOD, and for His Church, indeed he was for he was no-body for himselfe: and he did all those volumes, in refe∣rence to such a worke, suddenly. Now the LORD give us such hearts so upright, so prepa∣red, and then, we also shall be so willing, and shall doe things suddenly. The King go's before we will follow, he is a fair and full example in our eyes. He has made himselfe, and his people sure in a Covenant; 2 Chron. 30. now he applyes himselfe, and sets his heart to the Seale, the PASSEOVER. And marke well, for I can can but point to it: What meanes he makes, That all Judah, Ephraim 2 Chro. 20. 1. and Manasseh shall here of it, He takes counsell about it (if ver. 2. I were not in haste, I would note it) for, notwithstanding all the haste, he will consult upon it, and take deliberation, how such a company should be called together and fitted, I meane, Sanctified for so solemne a worke: The Proclamation ver. 5. issued forth, and the Posts carry it throughout all Israel from Beersheba even unto Dan, according to the Kings Commande∣ment, ver. 6. and these words, Turne againe unto the LORD, and He will returne to the remnant of you: Be not like your Brethren, that trespassed against the LORD GOD of
their Fathers, who therefore gave them up to Desolation, as you see, &c. [still the good King sets the judgements of GOD, as a mountaine before the Peoples eye] Be not stiff∣necked, if you will continue so, the fiercenesse of GODS ver 7, 8. wrath will beat you to peeces: But if you turne to Him, He will returne to you, and shew you favour in the eyes of them, ver 9. that leade you Captive; and He Himselfe will be a gracious, and mercifull GOD unto you. I have read the Contents of the Kings Proclamation, and Letters, I thinke you never read the like: How is it entertained? With scorne and mocks ver. 10.. Thus it was, such a pious Proclamation; such Letters, as full of Grace as of words, have bin entertained with disdaine and de∣rision; when the contrary, A Declaration for Liberty, Letters as full of dishonour to GOD, as of sillables, have bin entertai∣ned with hand and heart and all acceptance. Such a brutish people we are, and yet all are not so; Neverthelesse divers of Ashur and Manasseh, and of Zebulun humbled themselves and came to Jerusalem e: Also in Judah the hand of GOD was ver. 11. 12. to give them one heart to doe the Commandement of the King, and of the Princes by the word of the LORD. The hand of GOD, Marke that, till that be given-out, He∣zekiah may call and call, and pull and pull, and have no an∣swer; he may as well pull at a Bell without a Clapper to call the people to Church (as our Phrase is:) But GODS hand is reached forth to a person, or to a people, and then they come-in to doe according to the Law and the Commandement▪ suddenly. I cannot forget that word. I doe not speake this to make men slacke in their commands, or their indeavours: but to quicken all; and, when all is done, first and last, to looke-up to GOD, for He speakes with a ver. 13. Strong hand. I cannot stay upon things here, they be so many, and so notable; my contrivance is here to thrust out of the throng. And there assembled at Jerusalem much people to keepe the Feast, a very great Congregation, and they arose. What then? ver. 14. It followes. I warrant you; and away they tooke the Altars, even all, and cast them into the brooke Kidron. That brooke was fatall to Altars and Images, thereunto they tumbled those
dung-hill things, after the uncleanenesse found in the Temple. They were now about to celebrate a great Feast, never the like since the time of Solomon; and downe the Altars must, else they had bin ill fitted for a Feast, and worse fitted for a Bles∣sing and such a rejoycing: downe they be tumbled, and into the Brooke, and then they kill the Passeover, all decently and ver. 15. in order. And the people goe so stoutly on in this good way, That they shamed the Priest quite, that they did, for the peo∣ple had more zeale then the Priest (and that is very possible, the more their shame indeed) so the Priests, beholding the peoples forwardnesse, blushed at their owne cold∣nesse; and for very shame sanctified themselves after the manner. But the multitudes, they were many; were newly met from all quarters; things could not be in an outward conformity to the Requisites of that solemne time, nor to the Purification of the Sanctuary, then Hezekiah bestirrs himselfe, knows which way to looke, puts-up a sweet Prayer for his People: Thether they came in great multitudes, with their faces stedfastly set to Jerusalem, and with good hearts sure, upright and sincere; The King prayes; Now the good LORD pardon every one, that prepares his heart, who sets that right, the good ver. 18, 19. LORD pardon him, though legall preparatives are wan∣ting, some things there out of order: yet pardon good Lord, where Thou seest a ready will, and a bent heart, in a good posture and frame towards Thee, and doe desire with desire, That all things in Thy service might be done according to Thy Mind and Will, and all suddenly; Good LORD pardon those persons, that have those hearts, Amen. What followes? The LORD hearkened and heard Hezekiah, and healed the ver. 20. people, That he did, and it will still be so, where there is, as it was here, such an heart, and such a prayer. Goe-on I pray you, for it is better and better; The LORD hath spoken comfortably; Hezekiah speaks Comfortably ver. 22. too (GOD spake so first, but I can but point to things) To whom speakes the King so comfortably? To those that were good sure, and were good Teachers, for so we reade, That taught the good
Knowledge of the LORD; Good knowledge, for it makes men good, and so do not Riches nor Honours, nor any other thing, which we call good under the Sun; yet that is the good we most of all looke after, not the good knowledge of the LORD, That made it so good; Know the LORD, and you know all things; if you know Him not, you know nothing: A com∣prehensive knowledge indeed, but it was noted before p. 32.; Observe this here: What is the work, the duty of a Mini∣ster? To teach the good knowledge of the LORD. What shall I say to them, that doe not thus? Nothing; The Lord will say enough to them, to make them speechlesse: And the good King will never speake comfortably unto them, who do not teach The good knowledge of the LORD. We go-on, And behold how merry (in the Lord) the good King, and his good people are! For they were upon the service of the Lord; Their hearts were taken with it; here was Pass time indeed; for in an holy mirth, as well as in a Calvish brutish Mirth, time passeth away and is gone before we are aware; O it is all in all, when a man feeles a relish, a delight and sweet contentment in the service of the Lord (as he doe's, that is targht The good knowledge of the LORD) he is as merry in his service before the Lord, as we are when we have our min∣strell with us, and are dancing and skipping after our measures, and manner of Heathen people before a May-pole, there learning the knowledge of warre, by such feats of Activity as are lear∣ned at May-games (for so much I have learnt by reading) That such sports will make us fit for warre; and is it not even so! Have we not gained well by our May-games! Have we not got experience to fit us for warre by our activenesse before a Minstrell! Our sporting with the Lord, has made us fit for warre indeed, to be consumed by the Sword of the Almighty; And truly, though I am no Prophet, I feared all this more then 7 years ago. I have not forgot my selfe all this while, I know where I am, though out of my way a little: Nor doe I forget how much I was mistaken a little before, where I compared the mirth of that man, who delights himselfe in the good know∣ledge of the LORD, in service done to His Name, where I
compared I say, his mirth to our mirth, in our warrlike exer∣cises, I meane, rioting in the Day-time. And yet there is some conformity, agreement and aswerablenesse, not betwixt mirth and mirth; person and person: but betwixt heart and heart, affection and affection, set upon this mirth. (I expresse my selfe, as well as I can) We in our warrlike exercises have passed away the time, we know not how: The Holy day (we will call it so, for whether it be the LORDS DAY (Ho∣ly indeed) or Saints dayes in our conceit, all one to us, to Whom that Day is most holy, whereon we may be most pro∣phane) The holy Day is too short, we wish it longer, and that every Sunday had it's seconds (so one expresseth it) as two Sundayes have (now my mind is upon their sports, I will name dayes, as the Heathen did) Red-Letter-Dayes are as plea∣sing to us, as to children; we may riot on them, and they may play. Why now our minds, our affections meet, Heart answers heart, ours upon our sport ver. 23., theirs in the sacred Text, Let out upon their service before the Lord; and so we will look up∣on that again, and shall finde it just so; They had continued seven dayes at their Feast in their holy mirth, Offering Peace-offerings, and making Confession to the LORD ▪GOD of their Fathers (the more hearty the con∣fession, the more hearty their mirth: As the sowrer the Herbs, the sweeter the Passeover) And now those dayes were over. The whole Assembly (marke you that) tooke counsell. About what? To keepe other seven dayes: And as they advised, so they did; They kept other seven dayes with gladnesse. Looke you there, how hearts and affections answer, theirs and ours. And it must be so, for this reason; While the heart is altogether carnall, it let's forth, and spends it's spirits upon prophane things: Answerably, as a spirituall heart let's forth it selfe to∣wards holy things. But here is a wide difference againe, our mirth is of no continuance, it ends with the day, when we shut-in our doores at night, we shut forth our mirth for the most part; and if death, or something like it, should stare us in the face, the night after we have bin so merry after our man∣ner: where is our mirth then? The very relish of it is gall and worme-wood, and we are dead with very feare. The
righteous not so, because such is not their mirth; They can keepe dayes with gladnesse, and doe's their mirth cease with the day? No they have their Songs for the Night, even their night of sorrow, their deepest affliction. I have not been too long upon this point, but though ▪ breake-off, the sacred Text carries it on further, for behold nothing but joy and gladnesse and blessings, never the like since the time of Solomon; There were mighty Prayers too, full of spirit and life, Their Prayer came-up to His holy Dwelling place, even unto Hea∣ven. ver. 27. They goe-on in the work of the Lord, as men refreshed with 2 Chro. 31. new wine▪ and see how they execute the wrath of the Lord upon Groaves, Altars, Images, breaking, cutting, hewing, throwing them downe, till they had utterly destroyed them all: Their hearts were now warmed with zeale, they could ver▪ 2. not now hold their hands still, till they had utterly destroyed them all. Then the King appoints the courses of the Priests and the Levites, every man to his service; and portions to the Priests and Levites also, that they might be encouraged. Thus did Hezekiah, what he did, and how he did it, we will note it down more fully anon. Now it will be said by some, That I have spoke a great deale, and little to my purpose, which indeed is, To shew how a Kingdome is fortified, and it's MILITIA maintained and made strong; and to this, I have said nothing, so it may be said; And if so, my answer is; That they are much mistaken in the matter, for I have said all, that makes for the security and establishment of King and Kingdome; when I have set downe all that Hezekiah has done, for that great purpose: we have not all yet; we have heard what he hath done, in refe∣rence to the Covenant, to the Passeover, to the Priests, to the services therein; what he hath throwne downe, and cast forth, and what he hath brought-in: In all this the King hath enga∣ged himselfe and his people to their GOD; he hath intitled GOD to his Kingdome, that the Kingdome may be the LORDS Kingdome; his people, the LORDS people; he will have the house of his GOD, to be kept as GODS house, and
those that serve therein to be sanctified ones, the Lords Priests and the Lords Levites; and that they may attend the worke there, that unum necessarium: They shall not take care about many things, fr the King will take care for them; so he com∣manded to give the portion of the Priests and the Levites, That they might be encouraged in the Law of the LORD 2 Chro. 31. 4., which was not noted before. 2. He will suffer nothing to stand, which cut-faceth the command of his GOD, all shall downe which his LORD GOD will have throwne down. This was the way to make himselfe and his Kingdome, to stand fast and firme for ever, as the perpetuall hills, and everlasting Mountaines: The way to make himselfe, and people as a wall of Brasse, and the Blast of the terrible one, as a puffe of wind against it, I meane, against 2 Chro. 31. 1. a Pillar of Brasse, or a Mountaine made of Northerne Iron and ver. 20, 21. steele. We shall observe it to be so anon; we will recollect here in two verses, What Hezekiah did, and the manner how he did it; Thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah, and wrought that, which was good and right and truth, before the LORD his GOD. What had he wrought? That was spoken before, but we will reade it againe: for me thinkes the words runne like a whirle-wind or a Tempest, so carrying Idolls and Images downe before it, and scattering them; he brake the Images in peeces, cut-downe the Groaves; threw-downe the High-places and the Altars, out of all Judah and Benjamin, in Ephraim also and Manasseh. How long was he upon that worke? Ʋntill they had utterly destroyed them all. Now marke the manner of performance, in what sinceri∣ty, truth and uprightnesse of heart, Hezekiah did all the fore∣mentioned, for the manner and the carriage of the heart com∣mends all, in all that we doe; And in every worke, that hee began in the service of the house of GOD, and in the Law and in the Commandements, to seeke his GOD, he did it with all his heart, and prospered 2 Chro. 31 23▪. Now King Hezekiah may take his rest, lye downe and sleep; he can repose his head in the lap and Armes of the Almighty, for he had done the Law and the Commandement; he had re∣moved the cursed things; but now he will not be carnally se∣cure,
rather the more watchfull, because of this thing, for now he shall heare of enemies rushing like mighty waters. Why now? Because now he has angered the Devill, and all his servants; he has cut them to the heart, and they gaw their tongues for paine: For King Hezekiah has persecuted them, their Groves, Altars and Images with his Tempest. Now the Enemy will come-in like a floud, and if Hezekiah sleepe now, as we call sleeping, the Enemy will come upon him before he shall know or see. The King keepes his watch; has done his duty, postured his Kingdome by plummet and rule, for they had ASSOCIATED themselves (I purposely menti∣on it againe and againe, because there is no other way) King and people have entred into a Covenant: So now, if the Adversary doe come, he comes upon the greatest disadvan∣tage. But this the Adversary considers not, he is not comming but come: So we reade, Senacherib King of Assyria came and entred into Judah, and encamped against the fenced Cities d; that 2 Chron. 32. 1. he did, he durst come into Judahs land, while it was the LORDS Land, and her Cities the Lords Cities, and thought to win them for himself. What made the raging Beast, for he do's not speake like a man, so confident? It is worth the labour to heare this, for in feeling this mans pulse, if I may call him so, we may know the temper of others like him, What sayes he? This is the first fault he finds in the King, he bad his people be confi∣dent, That the Lord his GOD would deliver them out of the ver. 11. hands of the King of Assyria. This hee layes to the good Kings charge, and he is well content to be charged with it. 2. That Hezekiah had taken away his high places, and His Altars; The good King is content with this too, but he will ver. 12. have the man know, That the things he tooke away were not the Lords, but the Devills; his high places, and his Altars; The Priests there, the Devils Priests, and the services done there, were done to Devils too. 3. That Hezekiah said, Yee shall worship before one Altar. The good King said so indeed; for it is according to the com∣mand of GOD; and however, more Altars may be com∣manded,
and Priests to serve before them, yet it is against the command of GOD, Who commanded to worship before one Altar; and now that is removed, we have but one still, and He is the Priest, and the Sacrifice, and the Altar, and All. Hearke how he blasphemes now, None of all the gods of other Na∣tions, ver. 13, 14. could deliver their people out of my hands, or my Fathers band: And doe's Hezekiah thinke, that his GOD can deliver him and his people? There shall be no reply to this; For they spake against the GOD of Jerusalem, as against the gods of the people of the Earth, which were the worke of the hands of men 2 Chr. 32. 19.. Then he wrote letters to raile on the LORD GOD; Rayling letters, and a rayling Rabshekeh, all raile, and there the charge is also, Answer him not. ver. 17. But one thing I would have noted, which passed while Rub∣shekeh was railing. Eliakim desireth a courtesie of him, That he would not speake to the people in their owne language, for that would dishearten them (halfe dead already) A plaine hearted man, and he considered not, That now Rabshekeh would roare, stand up and cry out the lowder in the Jewish language, That 2 King. 18. 26, they might be the more disheartened. You must not expect a favour from an enemy; nor let him know where your sense is quickest, for there he will pinch hardest. I remem∣ber a proud Tyrant, delighting in proud wrath, had slaine a son ver. 28. before the Fathers eye; The Father thanked him, and held-in his griefe pretty well; one asked him how he could stand so cheery before a Tyrant, and thanke him too. Great Reason, said he, to conceale from the Tyrant, where my care lay, Ha∣bebam alterum, I have another sonne, and faine I would hold that one, and so I bit in my sorrow. If we let that goe, yet take this example in the sacred Text, learne we never to expect a favour from an Adversary, he will do you none at all, but all the injury that can be. The King cares for none of all this, nor his rage, nor his blasphemy, for there was nothing in sight now standing, to offend the eye of his GOD; Hezekiah had destroyed all those cursed things utterly, and then Senecherib may sweare and curse and rage, and blaspheme; though it troubles the good King, (it is as a Sword in his bones to heare his GOD blasphemed:)
Yet I say in point of hurt and danger, to him or his City from without, the good King is carelesse, because there are no pro∣vocations within. Indeed the proud Adversary did the good King much good, for it made the King to strengthen himselfe with such meanes, as his GOD allowes him; he called a Counsell of warre, gathered much people, stopped all the ountaines, strengthened himselfe, built up the Wall, raised∣up the Towers, made darts and shields in abundance. But his more speciall care was to engage himselfe to his GOD, and his GOD to him: See how he encourageth his people, with us is the LORD our GOD to helpe us, and to fight our bat∣tels: 2 Chr. 32. 3, 4, 5 Then it followes, And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah. So the victory is got already; but we will see how wonderfully matters were brought about, and what destruction from the Almighty, befell this proud Adver∣sary. It was unto him according as the LORD had said; ver. 8. He sent a blast upon him, he heard a rumour; The LORD 2 Kin. 19 2. caused him to fall by the Sword of his owne sonnes, in his owne Land. But by what meanes these great matters were brought about, that is our enquiry now, and it is worth our obser∣vation. Senacherib wrote letters, sayes the Text, To raile on the Lord God of Israel; an old fashion, and yet not worne out of use: I have cast mine eye upon the like now a dayes, both in prose and verse, as rayling as were Senacheribs letters here, and as foolish as were the Songs the drunkards made of David, let them passe in the crowd, he that reades them, is as he that made them; and he that makes them, is as he in the sacred Text, a Rabshekeh, and as those Drunkards the Prophet menti∣ons: I was saying Senacherib wrote letters. What do's Heze∣kiah with them? Not rayle too, we must not returne railing words, not if we contended with the Devill; nor did he goe to his closet to make answer to them, for then he had done a∣gainst his owne command, Answer him not 2 Kin. 17. 36.. Hezekiah recei∣ved the letter and read it, and Hezekiah went up into the house of the LORD. What more? And spread it before the Lord; ver. 14. The King layes open the whole matter before the LORD, Tels Him how the Infidell had dealt, how he had reproached
and blasphemed His Name. Aye, GODS Name; had he reproached a man, in respect of common nature and princi∣ples, like himselfe, then Hezekiah had held his peace; he had not spread the matter before the LORD; but in Hezekiah, the LORDS Servant, That Beast opened his mouth, and blasphemed the living GOD, so he remits the matter, puts it over to GOD, Revenge is Thine, Thou shalt repay is, for Thy Glory is interessed here. An excellent patterne before the servants of the LORD in these times; you shall have a com∣pany of drunkards, worse, if it can be, will give up their ton∣gues and their pens to the Devills-forge, intreating him, that he will sharpen them against the face of the Righteous; he will doe it; for, as the LORD will worke with, and for them, who will give up their tongues, and hands, and hearts to Him and His service: So also the Devill will doe for his servants, intreating him (they are not so shamelesse as to intreat GOD) That he would inable them to blaspheme and reproach GOD, and His Servants. The Devill grants their request with all his heart, they shall doe it, and it is done; away they runne well apaid to their fellow Printer, as forward as themselves, and serving the same Master, and next Morning out it comes. What is done with it? The same now, as in ancient dayes, accor∣ding to the very patterne, It is spread before the LORD; here LORD Thy Glory is concerned; for ours, it is of no account with us; we have laid out our selves for Thee, and to promote Thy Glory; our lives are not deare unto us, so we may drive on this great designe against Thine Adversa∣ries: But therefore, for Thy sake we are reproached: Open Thine eyes Lord upon it, we are a scorne and a derision, Drun∣kards make Songs over us. Thus it is spread before the Lord. And as sure as this is Scripture, which we are now upon, so sure the Lord will answer these foolish and brutish Men in His wrath, and vexe them in His sore displeasure. Wee goe∣on. The letter is spread, And Hezekiah prayed before the Lord, 2 Kin. 19. 15. as followes. What now? Now you shall see the Scene Alters, and a strange exploit wrought. You reade of a Prayer, and no sooner put up, but answered, That, which thou hast prayed to me
against Senacherib King of Assyria, I have heard. And present∣ly, see what a slaughter there is! Who slew all them? The ver. 20. Angell of the Lord; That is true, but we say as truly, Elisha's Sword did it; That is Prayer, I thinke, for I do not conceive what other Sword Elisha had: But that is not granted on all  Kin. 19. sides, yet this is most cleare, That Hezekiahs Prayer, that did the execution; Prayer commanded the Angell, I am not mista∣ken, I say, commanded (for Prayer commands GOD) The Angell to come out of Heaven, to execute the vengeance of the  Esa. 45. 11. Lord upon that cursed Host. I could say as much of Prayer, as is said of Faith, it is the most efficacious of any thing in Heaven or Earth, next to the blood of CHRIST: I say next, for it has it's Energy, and efficacious working there-from. It has the quickest motion of any thing in the world, and has as quicke a returne. What alwayes? That was well remembred; No, not alwayes, but in some cases; many times the eye is dim with looking upward; and the heart faint with expectation. Of what? Of the Re∣turne of Prayer. How so? For excellent reasons; The children of GOD must not alwayes aske, and have presently; they must be held in expectation; their time is now; they have prayed now, and now they would have a Returne; No, GODS time is not yet; They must not thinke to sow and reape together. Their graces must be exercised, and they taught to wait, and in patience to possesse their soules; They must stay till GOD may be magnified in His Salvation; E∣very Salvation is His, but His Name is not magnified, except things rise to a height, and there be an extremity of danger. And when the case is so; Refuge faileth the Church, then God comes-in; The returne of Prayer is speedy then; And this was the case here; The Adversary very proud, the Church ve∣ry humble; The Adversary very high in his demands, the Church very low; The Adversary would heare of no conditi∣ons of peace, unlesse Israel would be his servants, he refuses all ffers. So the valiant men did cry, and the Ambassadours of Peace did weepe bitterly Esa. 3. 7. [There is no Treaty with an Infidell, or an Idolater] The Adversary despised the Cities, and regarded ver. 9. no man ver. 8.. The Earth mourned, Lebanon was ashamed, Sharon ver. 10.
was like a wildernesse. Now is GODS time to arise, and to be exalted; now He will appeare in His glory: He will regard Psalm. 102. the Prayer of the destitute: And the returne shall be speedy: And see what an exploit it hath wrought? It returnes with an Angell, which went out, and smote in the Campe of Ashur an hundred fourescore and five thousand: So when they arose early 2 King. 19 35. in the morning, behold, they were all dead corpses. So Senacherib departed, returned to his house, thought to dwell in safety at Nineveh: And it came to passe that he went into the house of ver. 36, 37. Nioch his god, there to worship; and there he must be slaine: he had blasphemed the true GOD, he must be slaine before his Idol; and by the Sword in the hands of his own Sons; he had reproached the Sons of Jacob, the servants of the Lord; he shall be slaine by his own children. Thus the LORD did for Hezekiah, according to the good word He spake unto him, and whereon the people rested 2 Chro. 32 8.; He cursed from Heaven (after His manner) bold and daring en∣terprizes managed against His hidden ones: The LORD said, upon all the glory shall be a defence Esa. 4▪ 5., and so it was. The feare of the LORD is his Treasure Esa. 33. 6.; It was spoken of King Heze∣kiah; that all may make GOD their feare, then He will be a Sanctuary. To recollect all; Senacheribs Host were all slaine in a night, prayer commanded an Angell (for there is no intermediate thing in sight) the Angell does the execu∣tion: The King slinkes away, thinkes to hide himselfe in his house, from the wrath of the Almighty; The Sword, which he thre atned Judah, finds him-out and slayes him before his gods, and the execution is done upon him by his own Sonnes; he falls by the Sword of his owne Sonnes in his owne Land 2 King. 19. 7.. Thus the LORD dealt with the Adversaries of Judah, and guided them on every side 2 Chro. 32. 22.. And many came to congratulate the King, and rejoyce with him after this victory, so they brought gifts unto the LORD, and presents to Hezekiah: so that he was ver. 23. magnified in the sight of all Nations from thenceforth. Now whether Hezekiah did boast of the LORD, the giver of victories, all the day long, I cannot tell; he was an excellent Man, and yet but a Man, he might looke on his own arme too much, and on GODS Arme too little. Certaine it is
he gloried in his riches; it may be also, but that is one mans conjecture, he rejoyced too much at the destruction and lamentable end of his enemy. But this is cleare from the con∣nexion of the Chapters, which we must observe here; That our joyes doe not runne smooth and cleare away, there is a a mixture and mudd with them, and a settlement at the bot∣tome; nor is our peace here below, a solid, continued, or an interrupted peace; no, as our outward peace may be plun∣dred: so our inward peace may be and is often ecclipsed. We must looke for changes here below; our comforts, as not full here, so nor permanent; we must looke for that in Heaven. Nay, commonly thus it is on earth; when our joyes here below are at the highest, yet there is a cloud above them, which, at that instant, that point of time, will oversha∣dow them: when we are at the heights in our joyes, then feare some depth of sorrow; there is such a connexion be∣tween these two, joyes and sorrowes. So it seemes it was here with Hezekiah; In those dayes; what dayes were those? good and joyfull dayes, as we may imagine upon such a glo∣rious victory as that was, and comming-in of Ambassadors to joy with him. See now! But then, in those dayes, Hezekiah 2 King 20 21. was sick unto death. The King was joyfull no doubt, and very comfortable, being so wondrously delivered, and like enough, was thinking of building Tabernacles upon his comforts, well perswaded they would be of some continuance; but behold then at that time, sicknesse came and overshadowed all. Peter seeing the glory, was so well pleased with the sight, that he spake of making Tabernacles for continuance; But what sayes the Spirit, so indeed he said, not knowing what he said Luk. 9. 33.. Indeed we doe not, when we talke of building Tabernacles upon our comforts, expecting a continuance of them. There is such a connexion betwixt joy and sorrow, as there is be∣tween 2 King. 19. & 0. 1. those Chapters and Verses 2 Chron. 32. 23, 24.: The one concludes with joy, the other begins with sorrow. And in those dayes Heze∣kiah was sick unto death; that is, his disease was deadly in it selfe, for it was (supposed to be) the plague: And now the message is, you must not thinke of the victory now, but in setting your inward and outward house in order; for thou shalt dye and
not live. See here! But as yesterday, an Enemy was at his gates, threatning to swallow up all: the LORD sent that adversary packing. No sooner delivered from the oppressing Sword, but he is smitten with a disease as with a Sword in his bowels. It is strange, but so it is; That man can thinke of building Tabernacles upon his comforts here below, or upon any worldly thing, whereunto we give the Name of Glory, which hath so many waines and ecclipses, how soone comes a cloud and overshadowes all our glory! sometimes when we are speaking of setting up a Tabernacle, I meane our rest upon the creature, the cloud comes; that we may learne to expect changes here, and of sorrowes too. An Enemy was even now at the Kings gate; no sooner was he removed, but a sicknesse sent unto him, which cut his heart like a Sword in his bowels. This trouble is blowne over, and now it is peace. Alas! mans peace here, is like a sun-shine after raine, trouble as the cloud returnes againe. What is our expectation then? That our houses, our com∣forts will continue? that cannot be; here is no continuance; if we so expect, our expectation is vaine. Blessed is the man, that lookes for continuance there, and there only, where is a City that hath a foundation; that can say, my soule waite thou Psa 12. 5. Psal. 39. 7. only upon GOD: for my expectation is from Him: And now LORD what waite I for? my HOPE is in THEE: I doe not expect any thing can be certaine here, but changes of sorrowes, trialls in this kind, and in that; I waite for af∣flictions, Thou hast said, in the world yee shall have them: But my hope is in Thee, that Thou wilt support me in them; doe me good by them; worke my deliverance out of them, I waite Thy salvation. We proceed to that, which was as a Sword in the Kings bowells; set thy house in order for thou shalt dye and not live. Then we reade which way he turned; what his prayer was, and what his comfort; the sweetest cordiall, that a man can thinke of upon his sick bed, REMEMBER, &c. he wept 2 King. 10. sore (for he had no Sonne, and yet the LORD promised to ver. 3. 3. give a light to David and to his Sonnes for ever:) The LORD 2 Chro. 21. 7. heard the voice of his weeping, gives him a wonderfull signe,
that the LORD would heale him, and that he should goe up to the House of the LORD; so he was wonderfully recovered 2 King 20. 8. (no plague being beyond the skill of this Phisitian) and upon his feet againe, and an Embassadour at his elbow, to congra∣tulate such a mercy. It followes, Hezekiah shewes his trea∣suries ver. 12. unto them, even ALL that was found there; But the Pro∣phet cooles his spirit quickly, saying, all this store (being the spoiles of Senacharibs Camp, who had robbed him the yeare before, repayed all with advantage, and made Heze∣chiah richer upon the suddaine then ever he had beene, which unexpected wealth was a strong temptation to boasting) But I say, the Prophet takes downe his spirit, saying, all this store which thou hast shewen to the Princes of Babylon, shall be carried thither, nothing shall be left, saith the LORD. We may ver. 17. reade what followes; The good King heares all this and more, and submits humbly and thankfully to the will of GOD, saying, good is the word of the LORD; All is good to the good, 2 King. 20. 19. the good LORD so ordering all. But I will set the marke upon this; The LORD gave unto Hezekiah wonderfull signes, and a recovery of health: But Hezekiah rendered not againe according to the benefit done unto 2 Chro. 32. 25▪ him. The reason is given, for his heart was lifted▪up: [If the heart be lifted up with pride, it cannot be lifted up in rendring praises.] Reade on; Therefore there was wrath upon him. [That followes still, when the heart is lifted-up, then is the time when, wrath comes downe.] Came this wrath downe upon the King only? no, for Kings doe not sinne alone, nor are they punished alone; There was wrath upon him, and upon Ju∣dah and Jerusalem. It seemes not so; wrath was not already come upon them, it was to come: True, that which the Lord threatneth is rec∣koned as already done; we may say of it, as we reade concer∣ning the last violl of wrath, that shall come powring downe up∣on the last Enemies of the Church, long since threatned, yet to be executed, and thereof it is said, behold it is come, and it is done, saith the LORD Ezek. 39 8.. The servants of the Lord are moved, and melt more at the Lords threats; then the wicked doe under blowes. If there be but mention of wrath, it is enough,
(for it is our Lords wrath) to humble the righteous man; he will say of it presently, though but denounced, great is the wrath of the LORD that is powred out upon 2 Chro. 34. 11. us. And so King Hezekiah here, he humbled himselfe for the pride of his heart (both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem) so that the wrath of the LORD came not upon them in the dayes of He∣zekiah 2 Chro. 32. 26.. No; he had humbled himselfe; True humiliation turnes away wrath, as here, and instead thereof he had bles∣sings 2 Chro. 32. 26. good store, for he had exceeding much of all pretious ver. 27. things, and substance very much, and hee did great workes, ver. 28. and prospered in all hee did. One thing hee did very foo∣lishly, ver. 29. recorded after all this, which was before, and ver. 30. that was about the Embassadours: but then GOD left him ver. 31. to try him, that hee might know all that was in his heart. [The ablest and strongest Christians must be left a little, else they will trust themselves too much; They must know by their falls how weake they are, else they can∣not know all that is in their hearts, even such thoughts as these, That they and their mountaine can stand all alone, so strong they are: But then they fall, and so they know the vanity of such thoughts, and can correct them.] The rest of his Acts, and his GOOD∣NESSE; Marke that; and his GOODNESSE; The pride of his heart in shewing of the Treasures, that shall be remembred no more, his goodnesse shall; his infirmities all shall be forgotten, as if they had never beene, his GOOD∣NESSE shall never be forgotten; and his Goodnesse. What a good GOD did King Hezekiah serve, He passeth over all, and all shall be forgotten; but his Goodnesse shall still be remembred. Againe, see the portion of those that feare the LORD and His Goodnesse; They live desired, and they dye lamented; and when they are dead, it is in e∣very mans mouth; And their Goodnesse. See also the measures of the wicked, cleane contrary; They live unde∣sired, they dye unlamented; and when they are laid in the grave, if they have so much honour, their Name rots above ground, as their bodies under ground, and it is in e∣very
mans mouth, and their Badnesse, the evill that they wrought! Oh! who would not choose the feare of the LORD, and to walke before Him in truth, That it may be said of him, when he is taken hence; And his goodnesse! All are recorded in the visions of Esaiah; and in the Booke of the Kings. But let me note what I have observed all along these Chronicles; That after many glorious acts of the LORDS Worthies, their slipps and falls are re∣corded almost last of all. Why so? for excellent reasons sure, though I may not hit upon them; I thinke verily this is one; That we may remember our sinnes first and last, with bitternesse of spirit, after a godly sort, and then, being remembred so this once, they shall be remembred no more for ever. I will remember your iniquities no more: but the Good∣nesse shall be remembred to all generations. Death still concludes the Story; It followes, And he slept with his Fathers, and all Judah did him honour at his death, for he honoured all Judah.
THE Repentance of MANASSEH. CHAP. IX. Manasseh does exceeding wickedly, worse then the Heathen; as a Man besides himselfe. At length he is taken in the Thornes, there he comes to himselfe againe; He sinned greatly, and was humbled greatly: This is the more largely discoursed of, That  Chron. 33. the humble inner may not despaire, nor the proud sinner pre∣sume; Manasseh his teares of true Repentance, could not wash-off the guilt of blood from Judah. These things follow orderly in their severall Paragraphs. MAnasseh his Sonne, an older King then his Father was a Man (for hee reighned fifty and five yeares So long the LORD waited to shew mercy and to give re∣pentance; Who would not waite upon Him so long-suffering! in Jerusalem:) began to reigne when he was twelve yeares old Good educa∣tion cannot make the child good, Goodnes being derivi∣tive from Him, Who onely is Good: yet Pa∣rents must at∣tend it as their proper and spe∣ciall charge.; What discerning he had at those yeares, into his Fathers pious car∣riage, and the prosperity that followed him, we cannot cer∣tainely tell; we thinke very little, for this is apparent and upon everlasting record; That never any Son walked more crosse to the Fathers stepps, as contrary as evill is to good; Hell to Heaven▪; Those abominations his Father cast downe, the Son set up; and what his Fathers soule hated, his Son did practise: To passe by all the rest, wherein he did like to the abominations of the Heathen; here he exceeded, ver. 2, 3. burnt his Sons for a sacrifice to the Devill, and filled Jerusalem ver. 6. with innocent blood, from one end to another, (worse then the 2 King. 21. 16.
Heathen) into which channell did streame downe the blood of that reverend and aged Prophet Esaiah, whom he caused to be beate to death with a Fullers club, or to be sawne in sunder with a wooden saw, in the 80 Yeare of his life: The sacred Esa. 1. Scripture indeed is silent here, only it saith, That Prophet lived to see, and feele that Kings tyranny; Other writers, too many to rehearse, and too good to be suspected, affirme it with a loud voice; That, in such a barbarous manner, he put that good Prophet to death. Yet he is reckoned-up in this place, because, when he comes to the businesse, he ordered his Militia according to right reason and rule. Indeed we reade nothing of Manasseh his Militia, before he was taken in the thornes, bound with fetters, and carried to Babilon, and brought ver. 11, 12, 13. againe thence to Jerusalem, for then he knew, that the LORD He was GOD. [See how the sharpe thornes and bryars of affliction, can teach us, when the LORD is pleased to sharpen and sanctifie such goades] But this is the lesson; To admire the height and depth of GODS mercy; He suffers Manasseh to run-up to the height of all heathenish abomina∣tions; to plunge himselfe into a depth of innocent blood; and then, when he was neare the end of his race, the LORD recovers him, fetcheth him from out of that depth, and turnes his heart back againe. We must insist upon this, that we may put the more observation upon it. ¶ 1. The truth of Manasseh his Repentance, is cleared from the sacred Text, not that there are any who doubt of it, but that none may pre∣sume from it. What takes off somewhat from the weight of his sin, and adds to the terrour of an hypocriticall person, who doth one thing, and professeth another: so Manasseh did not doe; and yet his sins are heightned, so as to magnifie free grace. OH the height of GODS merciel He lengthens out Ma∣nassehs day, and brings him into the Thorns towards night, that there he might bethink himselfe of all his abomi∣nations.
That we may admire free-grace, we must make a stand here, and looke upon Manasseh in the Thornes, and what ex∣ceeding mercy he found there: And I speake of it here, that the proud sinner may not presume, nor the humble despaire; for a sinner shall not be condemned, because he is an old sinner, and a great sinner: but because he is an impenitent sinner: And such an one Manasseh was not, when he was in the Thornes. And when he was in affliction he besought the LORD his GOD, and humbled himselfe greatly before the God of his Fa∣thers. But may we thinke this Humiliation to be sound? Yes, we 2 Chro. 33. 12. dare not judge otherwise; nay, this Scripture assureth us, it was sound: True it is, (and therefore I speake of it in this place) when we are in the Thornes, when our sorrows reach unto the heart, when our Month is come, and we are in our Ier. 2. pangs, then there will be pangs of sorrow, whether after a godly sort, or a worldly sorrow unto Death, cannot possibly be discerned by the most discerning spirit, that dwells in flesh, GOD knowes, Who only knowes the hearts of the children of Men; but there are some expressions in the Text, which are full of use to the Penitent and impenitent, both, clearing Ma∣nasseh his Repentance unto us. He besought the LORD his GOD; so a wicked man may doe. He humbled himselfe, so a wicked man may doe also: nay, greatly in mans judgement. Some might be pointed to, who, being in the Thornes, in great Agony of body and spirit both, expecting to make their appearance before the great Throne, have humbled themselves greatly, given as great Testimony of true sorrow, as possibly could be expressed; yet, being delive∣red out of the Thornes were worse then ever before, Therefore, I say, greatly in mans judgment, so a wicked man may do too. But he humbled himselfe GREATLY, before the LORD great∣ly, and as in GODS presence, and by the Testimony of the Spirit, before the Lord condemning, judging, loathing himselfe, accepting his punishment, greatly humbled before the Lord; so a wicked man cannot doe, none but a true Penitent. That againe, which fol∣lowes, he prayed, and GOD was intreated of him. For a temporall Deliverance you will say; but We speke of a soule mercy, of
an eternall redemption: And this me thinks may be concluded also, from the following vvords, Then Manasseh knew that the Lord He was God. All our evils, which are committed, are, as I may say, charged upon this one word, as their originall root, they knew not the Lord: So all our workes of righteousnes upon this word, He knew the Lord; I cannot expresse the full∣nesse of that word, but it containes all: It is the summe of the Apostles Prayer, That the Lord would give the Ephesians the spirit of wisdome and revelation in the KNOWLEDGE of Him [Eph. 1. 17.] In the last place, it do's not appeare, that Manasseh, recove∣red out of the thornes, did returne unto folly, but the contrary will appeare anon, when we shall looke upon him, as a pattern of true Repentance. Now I will take leave, for the instruction of the living, to take so much from the weight of Manassehs sinnes, and to put in so much allowance for it, as, I am confident, the sacred Scrip∣ture will allow me to doe: for GOD forbid I should do more. And all this I shall doe for this great end, to disco∣ver the danger of Hypocrisie, and to magnifie free-grace, Manasseh was an abominable Idolater professedly so; but that was some helpe for him; he did not persecute that way, he himselfe walked-in; nor that Religion he seemed to professe; he was indeed what he seemed to be, such was he, and that I say was some helpe unto him. He offered his sonne to Molech; he did it when he knew not the LORD. The Altars, his good Father threw downe, he set-up; but he did not set them up with his hand, and cry them downe with his mouth. Hee slew that Evangelicall Prophet Esaiah; who ever was the Executioner, or what ever the instru∣ment of his Death, Manasseh slew him: But Manasseh did not call them bloody Rebels, that killed Isaiah, as though they had done it against his mind and will. He shed innocent blood very much, till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to ano∣ther; 2 Kin. 21. 16. But he did not, at that time, seeme to relent at what his hand did, and so water the same City at the same time with teares of fained compassion: I meane by this, he was not an hypocriticall King against whom that severe judgement is de∣nounced,
as against an Hypocriticall Nation, and against the people of GODS wrath. Manasseh was not one manner of Esa. 10. 6. man in shew and profession; and another in deed and in truth. He did doe worse then the Heathen, he was most abominable in all his wayes; But he was what he was, and he walked ac∣cording to his light in his owne wayes, which seemed right in his owne eyes. I thinke verily no man ever went further to∣wards ruine, then Manasseh did, and returned in peace; ne∣ver any plunged himselfe deeper into the gulfe of sinne, and e∣scaped: But this is it I say; we cannot charge him with Hy∣pocrisie. He set himselfe against GOD, he openly and mani∣festly opposed GODS Truth: So an Hypocrite do's not do; he will oppose it, but he will make you shewes and overtures of the contrary. The established Religion, he will seeme to be all for that, and to doe all for it, nothing against it. Paul brea∣thed out threatnings Act 9 1. Act. 16. 11.; he compelled men to blaspheme; He was exceedingly MADD against the righteous, that he was, for he persecuted them even to strange Cities. What was his comfort, 1 Tim. 1. 13. or what helped him? he did it ignorantly, and obtained Mercy. It was so with Luther too, a bloudy persecutour in heart: as all Idolaters are, as he sayes of himselfe, and all that are as he was; Had I bin, said he, at the place where John Hus was burnt, Nemo nostrum, non erat vir sanguinum, si non opere tamen corde. Abhorre∣bam vel ipsum nomen Io▪ Husse Ado{que} Zelab pro Papā, ut ad occidendum Io: Hus ipse serrum & ignem sub∣ministrasse in Lu Galat c. 1. v. 15. 1 Cor. 4 7. d Esa. 35. 8. Act. 17 30. . I would have made the fire a little hotter to have scorched the Heretick: for, I would have brought two Faggots upon my shoulders thether: Why would he have done so? In his blind zeale to Munkery, he would, as all his fellowes would have done, shed blood to their power, he with them would have rejoyced to have seene John Hus fry in the fire. But why doe I mention these excellent servants of the LORD? For excellent reason▪ To magnifie free Grace, That made them DIFFER FROM A∣NOTHER: But here I mention it to evince and cleare this, That Hypocrisie is the DAMNABLE SINNE. A man may be a Malignant Person, he may persecute the good way (wherein the foole cannot erre) and the righteous in that way▪ and may doe it ignorantly: And then see the helpe and the comfort, the time of this ignorance GOD winked at. He saw and would not see, He over-looked it. I doe not plead
for ignorance, that cursed root, that mother of witch-crafts and superstitious devotions. Some thing might have been said for it fourescore yeares agoe, for that ignorance which was in those darke and gloomy dayes, rather that night of superstition and Popery: But not a word for it now in these dayes, where the light is so cleare, and knowledg so abounding: now to be ig∣norant, do's not lessen, do's not extenuate or take-off from, but aggravate the fault; for it is now to stumble in a Sun-shine, and to grope for the way in mid▪Day, as at mid-night. But I say, for a man to doe what he doe's professedly, walke in a way he thinks good in his owne eyes, and to doe it ignorantly, as, for ought I know, Manasseh did, This hath helped very many; Paul, Luther, and so Manasseh, for the time of this ignorance GOD win∣ked at, and he obtained mercy. What? And his sinnes so great! Yes, he was GREATLY humbled, the spirit, sayes so, and adds, BEFORE the LORD; The LORD saw that he abhorred himself, admired free grace, he was GREATLY humbled. But his sin was great? True, But it is said, He knew the LORD, He remembred the LORD, That He is GREAT; and, as he had sinned Neh 4 14. to the utmost, so This Great GOD could save to the utmost. He had gone far indeed, never any man beyond him; yet not so farre, but This Great GOD, whom he knew now, could fetch him back-againe with His out-stretched Arme. Again, his sinne was great, but that was his Father Davids Argument before him, wherefore he did expect pardon; his sinne was great Ps. 25. 11., and GOD is great, and hath layed strength on Him that is Mighty, a great, strong Redeemer, can save to the ut∣most, O LORD pardon mine iniquity, for it is GREAT. The glory of GOD is Great in the salvation of great Sinners: And by putting confidence in Him, Who is Mighty, We lay Glory and Majesty upon Him; for to those words we may pro∣perly Ps. 21. 5. allude; His Glory is great in thy Salvation, honour and Maiesty hast Thou laid upon Him. We are intreated to marke Disc. of Iust. p 519. this, for the houre may come (saith Mr. Hooker) when we shall thinke it a blessed thing to heare, what? That if our sins were the sinnes of Popes and Cardinals (of Manasseh say I)
the bowels of the mercy of GOD are larger. I must reade his following words too, I doe not propose unto you a Pope with the necke of an Emperour under his feet: A Cardinall riding his horse to the bridle in the blood of Saints: But a Pope or Cardinall sorrowfull, penitent, disrobed, stript, not onely of usurped power, but also delivered and recalled from errour. Antichrist converted and lying prostrate at the foot of CHRIST: And shall I thinke that CHRIST will spurn at him? So, I doe not propose unto you Manasseh slay∣ing the innocent: Walking after all the fore-mentioned abo∣minations: But Manasseh in the Thorns, seeking the LORD, humbling himselfe greatly before the LORD; and now be∣hold the LORD hearing his supplications, intreated of him. And ô the riches of Grace, and the freenesse thereof! How exceeding, how admirable, how unexpressible! And this Grace was shewen to Manasseh, that no penitent sinner may despaire; Manasseh and he only went so farre towards Hell, and turned back, that no man might presume. Not sin but impe∣nitency killeth! I thought I could have said something more at this point; but I see it is too high for me, I can say no more of it: But, now unto Him that is able to doe exceeding abundant∣ly, Ephes. 3. 20, 21. above all that we can aske or thinke, Ʋnto Him be glory in the Church by CHRIST JESƲS throughout all ages, world with∣out end. Amen. ¶ 2. Manasseh his Repentance maketh cleare proofe to all Generations following, what Repentance is and true conversion. NOw we returne where we left, and found Manasseh in the Thornes, and graciously delivered thence. There we must observe how he goes on with his Militia, removes that which hinders, do's all that, which will further the same: Now after this he built a wall, &c. And he sooke away the strange ver. 14, 15, 16. gods, &c. And hee repaired the Altar of the LORD, &c.
And this is spoken so fully unto already, that more needs not be said of it here. This rather I would insist upon a little; To thow, ha,  Manasseh was a true patterne of reforming and poster  Kingdome after the right manner; so is he a pat∣terne of  I tnt, one that had truly repented, and hear∣tily turned to the LORD. Repentance is the change of the ind, and of the heart too, and then all is changed: the way also, wherein the impenitent person walked before his conver∣sion, is changed and turned cleane crosse, or as I may say, up∣e downe; which is the reason, that Reformation, where it comes, makes such stirrs and tumults in the world; for it turns the world upside downe. But let that passe, the present time will speake enough to that. To this in hands now, and thus it will appeare by what Manasseh did, after he was recovered out of the thornes; he went cleane crosse to the way now, wherein he walked before: he went a direct way before to ruine himselfe and his Kingdome: Now he goes a direct way, but cleane crosse, to make himselfe strong, and to establish his Kingdom; it shall appeare in all the severall wayes or motions thereunto. But I will make instance in the Jaylor first, where Ast. 16. we shall see how contrary a penitent man walkes to himselfe, and his owne way; He had, by the Commandement of the ver. 22. Magistrates, beat the Apostles, and receiving further charge about them, hee thrust them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stockes. When he was changed by a won∣derfull ver. 14. worke from Heaven upon his heart; see how crosse he is to that he was before, and how crosse he do's to that he did before; he was stout and proud before, now he trembles; his Sword was drawne in a readinesse to kill himselfe; now he ver 29. asked the way, how to live for ever with the LORD: Be∣fore, he made the Apostles stoope to him, for he made their feet fast in the stocks; Now he fell downe before them. Before, hee thrust them into the inner prison; thrust them in roughly e∣nough, for these Jaylors are as cruell, as their Masters, that command them, and into the inner prison; the worst place in the house is fittest for the Apostles, so it was then; how now when the Jaylor is a changed man? Now he brought them out; And when the maine worke was done, which the A∣postles ver 30.
minded more then their stripes, he took them the same houre of the night, and washed their stripes, those sore blowes him∣selfe ver. 31, 32, 33, 34. had given them, and then he set meat before them: The right way of a true Penitent this, for it is clean crosse to the way he walked in before his Repentance. Now see the same crossenesse in Manasseh his way, now he is graciously delivered out of the Thornes. And the more crosse his way is to the way he went in before, the better the way is and more instructing us to discretion. Let us well ob∣serve it, because it will make cleare proofe, what a living mans condition is, whether he be a changed, a reformed man, well postured; I meane, whether he be set now in a sure and safe way of defence in these exceeding fierce and perilous dayes, for if he have truly repented, he needs feare no evill; if his way be turned, he needs not care though the world be turned up∣side down. Manasseh was all for strange gods, his heart went a who∣ring after them, now he takes them away, as those his heart loatheth; He tooke away the strange gods. He had set up Al∣tars, 2 Chron. 33. ver. 15. and worshipped before them; now away they shall with indignation, hee cast them forth out of the City. He set up Altars and graven Images. When? Before he was hum∣bled ver. 19.: As the saying is, If the head-ach went before drunken∣nesse, a man would never be drunke: So had he been humbled before, he had not set-up Altars before his eyes; but now▪ that he is humbled, downe the Altars are tumbled, out they are cast as the filth in the streets, And cast them out of the City. These Idolatrous Altars had defaced and defi∣led the Altar of the LORD, as all false worship defiles true worship. Now he repaires the Altar of the LORD: ver. 16. He had been a stout Rebell; he made himselfe strong against the LORD, maintained enmity and warre against the Al∣mighty, so bold hee was. Now he sacrificeth on his Altars Peace-offerings. He had been a most unthankfull person, he had a good Father, that was a good mercy, a faire exam∣ple before his eyes, many grave instructions from his mouth. He had received a Kingdome from his LORDS hand, and all good things, but he was not a ware; and
then we reade how hee requited the LORD; but now he is changed, He sacrificeth on GODS Altar, Thank of∣ferings, Ps. 50. and so he glorifies the LORD. How? There is but one way to glorifie Him on Earth, in praising of Him, in giving thankes unto Him; so he glorified the LORD: And so it followes, And sacrificed thereon Thank-offerings. He ver 16. had caused Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to erre and to doe worse then the Heathen. What doe's he now, now, ver 9. being a converted man? He commanded Judah to serve the LORD GOD of their Fathers [commanded.] We see now, Repentance is a change of the man, the heart and way. The way of a penitent man is cleane crosse to what it was in the night of his impenitency. It is well called by another name, 1 Kin. 18. 37. conversion; A turning the heart backe againe. A man, in his unconverted estate, goes a way crosse to Heaven; when he is converted his heart is turned backe againe, then he goes cleane crosse to that way he went in before; where he set his backe before, there he sets his face now. So the Jaylor did, so Ma∣nasseh, and so all true Penitents. Wee will make up the conclusion and so end; A man walkes contrary to him∣selfe, now that hee is not himselfe; what hee loved be∣fore, he now hates; what he hated before, he now loves; Ego non sum ego. his delight is now with the excellent upon the Earth; before none were more unpleasing and tiresome to him; before the service of the LORD was a burden, it is now a delight; he snuffed at it, and said, when will the Sabbath be gone; now he thinks the day too short: nay seven dayes not enough, as we heard, he would have seven dayes more; his mind is chan∣ged, and now all is changed, his delights, his recreations, his contentments. New wils now, and new ayms, all is new, and old things are passed away; old sorrow and old joy, they run fresh and new now in the right Channell, so doe all his af∣fections, all to GOD, and for GOD.
¶ 3. Manassehs Repentance kept off wrath from himselfe, but could not keepe it off from the Nation, His corrupt example had leavened the whole Land; Idolatry in a King being like a leaprosie in the head, which presently corrupteth the whole Kingdome. WE reade on now, where this followes; Neverthelesse ver. 17. the people did sacrifice still in the high places, yet unto the LORD their GOD. There was a mixture in their service, much superstition there; Idolatry was so rooted in the King∣dome, that it could not be rooted out, till the Kingdome was rooted out; like a leprosie, it begun in the head Ʋt in corpori∣bus sic in impe∣rio, gravissimus est morbus, quia capite diffundi∣tur. Plin. l. 4. Ep. 22. In morbido ca∣pite nil sanum est: ne{que} ullum omnino mem∣brum officio su sungitur, ubi quod est princi∣pale non constat Sal▪ de Gub. 7. p. 234., thence spreads it selfe through the body. It is of a spreading na∣ture, more spreading then leaven; it leavens a whole Land quickly; because it is so agreeable, so complying with mans corrupt heart. Manasseh made Judah and the inha∣bitants of Jerusalem to erre, and to doe worse thn the Heathen, Ai, that was an easie matter to doe; an easie matter to make men walke in their owne wayes, the way of sinne and death; but to call them back againe, that is a hard worke, nay impossible. A Ruler may goe farre in a wicked way, and then, by a strong hand, bee turned backe againe, to walke cleane crosse to the same way: But the mischiefe he has done by his example in his old way, may spread so farre, that doe, or say what he can, it is past remedy. We might have heard more of Manasseh his goodnesse, of his wayes, prayer and humiliation, but that the writings were lost 2 Chron. 33. 19.: But this is recorded, That Manasseh could not with all his teares, which doubtlesse were abundant, wipe out the filthinesse (for staine is too light a word) of his Idola∣trous example; his miserable seducement; No, that was 1 King 21. 9. such as could not be purged, but by the fier of GODS wrath: for so we reade; Because Manasseh had made Ju∣dah
also to sinne with his Idolls, therefore so and so would the LORD deale with Jerusalem, in such a manner as the very 2 King. 21. 11, 12, 13. hearing of it, would make both the eares to tingle: A Ruler, by his prayer and humiliation, may repaire his own breaches in his owne house, and soule, not those breaches he hath made in a City or Kingdome; he may, by those sanctified meanes, plead forth his own pardon, and save his own soule, but not save a Nation: as his seducement there has beene spreading, and Na∣tionall, so must the humiliation be, of high concernement this; To conclude; if a Ruler, joyning himselfe to Idolls, cannot consider what a breach he makes betwixt GOD and his own soule: Yet, O that he could consider what a breach he makes through his whole Kingdome, a breach like the Sea, which he can never make up againe; and how he hath, by so doing, endangered, nay undone the whole Land, by provoking GOD to stretch over it the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab; and wipe his Cities as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it upside downe. O that a Ruler could consider this; 2 King. 21▪ 13. for just so it was here; Manasseh could not repaire the ruines, that his sinnes had made both in City and Countrey; nor could his good Grandchild (for Amon his Son did evill, as did Manasseh his Father before his conversion) after him; The best King that ever had his Kingdome in this world; he, for whom, the people could not be in extreames, in desi∣ring 2 Chro. 35. 24, 25. too much, or lamenting too much: so desired was his life, and so lamented his death, Josiah by Name; such a King could not repaire those ruines, though he tooke the only way, as his great Grandfather before him; he made a cove∣nant before the LORD, to walke after the LORD, as his 2 Chro. 34. 31, 32. great Grandfather had done; and, this one thing more, hee caused all TO STAND TO IT, and so maintained his Kingdome in a posture of defence all his dayes. But, the sinnes were great, the provocations many, the transgression of the Land heavy upon it, Therefore many were the Princes thereof Pro 28. 2.. Then the man of understanding and knowledge, by whom the State and peace is prolon∣ged,
was taken away: And when that man, a man betimes, for while hee was yet young hee sought the LORD, and 2 Chro. 34. 3. so lived much in a short time, when this man in under∣standing, Josiah was taken away, by the stroake of death, which hee received neare Megiddo, and lingred about him 2 Chro. 35. 22. ver. 23. till hee came to Jerusalem, there brought him to the Se∣pulchers ver. 24. of his Ancestours; when, I say, this King of De∣sires, this so dearely beloved, was taken away from seeing the evill to come, then the cloud of blood powred downe up∣on Judah; Then Judahs Militia fainted, and mouldred away also, and, being in a miserable consumption, as we reade, died: The strong holds fell into the hands of their Enemies, like new ripe figgs into the mouth of the eater. This we must repeat againe, for it is also HIGGAION Selah, a mat∣ter Psal. 9. seriously to be considered on.
THE Reformation of JOSIAH. CHAP. X. Josiah, an excellent King; went very farre in Reforming and po∣sturing his Kingdome; was taken away in the height of this work; housed in his grave, and then the storme fell. GODS wayes equall; Mans unequall. I Have ended the Story of Josiah before I began it, for the dependance it had with that of his Father Amon, and his Grandfather Manasseh; And also because, what hee did in point of Re∣formation, is fully contained and runns paralell with that his great Grandfather did before him: onely some one or two expressions there are of great observation, which I shall observe anon. True it is, and well observed; As Amon his Father succeeded in the sinnes of Manasseh's youth; so Josiah his Grandchild succeeded in the virtues of his age. Joash began well, and ended ill; Ma∣nasseh began ill and ended well; Josiah began his reigne, and ended, never any King better. True it is also, never any did rise to an higher pitch of holinesse, and from a surer bottome, 2 Chron. 34 3. (for he laid the foundation thereof in his young yeares) then Josiah did; and never any more desirous and zealous that way, to carry all with him to the same height; And for this he stands upon everlasting record, to be the best King that ever
was before him, and never the like after him, though we could speake of one, who was a young King, and an old Saint. All this I leave to the Readers perusall, for his Story is plaine; Some things of note I shall take in, in passage, while I shall pleade forth a case with our own hearts, for our better instru∣ction, but not with the LORD, for we are concluded He is Righteous Ier. 12. 1.; His wayes are just and equall; And I would shew the equity thereof in this place, where we have as complea∣ted a Reformation as ever was, and yet as sore judgements executed as we have heard of, and at the very instant time when the Reformation was so compleated, Notwithstanding the LORD turned not from the fiercenesse of His great wrath, 2 King. 23. 26. wherewith His anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations that Manasseh had provoked Him withall: See! here was a King, that had engaged his heart to the whole worke of the LORD; had proceeded very couragiously in it, even to the compleating of the same; yet he was taken away in the height and heate of his worke, when he and his worke was going on to perfection, then he was taken away. Is it not in vaine to serve GOD? what profit is it, &c. Let the wicked Mal. 3 14. man speake it out; let it so be spoken in Gath, and published in the streets of Askelon; as for Israel, they will not say so, but the contrary; It is good to serve the LORD; to worke for Him; to deale couragiously for His cause: In His service is perfect freedome, and it hath an assured recompence of reward. Doubt∣lesse there is a reward for the Righteous, as sure as there is a Psal. 58. 11. GOD that judgeth in the earth. All the faithfull servants of the LORD will say so, for they have found it to be so; And so Josiah found it to be even then; never any King began sooner to seeke after the LORD then he did, for it was his first seeking, while HE WAS YET YOƲNG 2 Chron. 34. 2, and never any King followed-on Hose. 6. 3. better in the way of the LORD, for he declined neither to the right hand nor to the left; And so soone as he felt himselfe strong, (for Amon his Father, and Manasseh his Grandfather had weakened and polluted his Kingdome very much) he began to PƲRGE Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and all the abominations that were SPIED 2 Chro. 34 3. 2 King. 23. 24., (Marke that, it cleares our duty before our
eyes) he sought diligently, he pried narrowly into every cor∣ner, where that abomination might stand, out-facing GODS command, and grievous to His good Spirit, THAT WERE SPIED in the Land of Judah, did josiah put away, that hee might performe the words of the LORD  Kin. 23. 24. He tooke away the Horses given to the Sunne, and burnt the Charets of the ver. 12. Sunne with fier; Nay in a holy indignation marke what he did, he brake the Altars and Images in peeces, made dust of them, strewed them upon the water; he slew the vile Priests upon the Altars, and burnt their bones there, and strewed the ashes upon the graves of them that had sacrificed there; In a word; All that the Idolatrous Kings of Israel had made to provoke the LORD to anger, Josiah tooke away. ver. 24. This is granted you will say, Josiah was stedfast, unmo∣veable, 2 Chro 34. 4, 5 alwayes abounding in the worke of the LORD; But what was his reward? I cannot expresse that, but the part of it, which was in sight, was very greate; he should not see the evill, that was to come 2 Chr. 34. 28. upon his dwelling place, and the inha∣bitants of the same. There was some returne for his goodnesse, he should not see the evill. Treasures of wrath were sowed and sealed up in a bag Iob 14. 17., by his Father and Grand-father: the bag must be opened, and downe the wrath there must be pow∣red, but Josiah should neither feele nor see that tempest; before that storme fell he should be HOUSED, gathered to his Fa∣thers, ver. 28. and to his gave in PEACE. In peace! He was taken 2 Chron 5. 21, . away in warre, as we reade, he would not forbeare from med∣ling with GOD c: He would not hearken to the words of Ne∣cho from the Mouth of GOD. It is true; he had politick respects enough, to ingage him to the warre, (which we examine not) but certaine it was, he did not aske counsell at GODS Mouth, for then his reasons had shrunke-up to no∣thing. But the bag of wrath was full; it must be empited; wrath must come upon Jerusalem; but that could not be, till Josiah was taken thence, and housed in his grave. As it was said of Lets going to Zoar; so of Josiahs going to his grave; wrath must fall, but I cannot doe any thing till thou be come the∣ther Gen. 19. 2.. And thether he was brought, to his grave by an Ar∣row shot from an Enemy, and yet IN PEACE, in perfect
peace, a peace that passeth all understanding; That King, who shall doe as Josiah did, begin as he did, so proceed as he did, in cleansing his heart from Idolls; and, being a King, shall SPYE-OUT through the whole Land, what is offensive there, and shall remove it. This King, dies in PEACE, though in battell, and dashed in peeces there as a snow-ball dashed against the wall; yet in PEACE, because in the peace of a good conscience, which makes a man the merriest feast; when? when his body must goe to feast the wormes. And againe; In PEACE, for it was peace in comparison of that, which was shortly after to follow, when that bag of wrath must be opened, and the fiercenesse thereof must kindle against Jeru∣salem, and Judah must be removed out of GODS sight. In peace, 2 King. 23. 26, 27. with reference unto that time. Now we come to the case, and there if we will spye into it, we may see our owne case. And could not this good King, and his goodnesse keepe off wrath? did the meltings of his owne spirit, the spying-out and removing all abominations, did all this doe no good to the Land! did it but deliver his owne soule? yes doubtlesse; It was a meanes to respite the judgement; to hold-back the wrath. Certainely were it not for these Josiahs, these melting spirits, these that spye-out all abominations, and doe their uttermost for removing of them, were it not, I say for these, our sinnes, our abominations, had found us out before this day, wrath had beene upon us before this time, our blood had beene upon our heads, and our Images had destroyed us before this day. But this is the point, the decree was passed and gone forth, wrath must come. Againe; Innocent blood was shed in abundance, that filled up the mea∣sure apace. That cryes and calls for vengeance; the voice of it will not be stopped till the bag be opened, and wrath be pow∣red downe. Object. Why, but Manasseh shed innocent blood? Answ. True, for we doe verily beleeve, that Kings may doe injustice; Manasseh shed innocent blood; he was an Ido∣later, therefore a Man of blood, and chiefe in the trespasse;
but he had bloody ministers, as bloody as himselfe, and woe unto them both Tum aucto∣rbs male sicr∣rum, tum admi¦nsi. I. in Isa. 2. 10 .. Object. But Manassehs sinne was put away; so might theirs be, who were his ministers in fulfilling his bloody com∣mands. Answ. Grant that, and that was Davids case; the LORD had put away his sinne: and yet see, what wrath fell downe, 1 Sam. 12. 13, and abided upon his house. Sinne may be done away, and yet temporall punishment may be inflicted for mighty and just reason, which may easily be gathered up from that place, and else where. Object. It may be said againe; Manasseh was gone, and his generation with him; why should wrath fall upon the chil∣dren for that the Fathers did? Answ. There is a mighty reason for that also, which will charge and feoff all the righteous blood, shed in Qu. Maries dayes upon us, an impenitent people. Manasseh and his bloo∣dy ministers had shed innocent blood in abundance, and they were gone. The generations following approved their do∣ings. How doth that appeare? Thus; Because it doth not appeare, that the generations after them did ever humble themselves for that blood-shed in their Fathers dayes, any more then we have done for the blood our Fathers shed in Qu. Maries dayes. True it is, Josiahs heart was tender, hee humbled himselfe before GOD when he heard a sound of wrath, Chr. 34 27. and we reade how it fared with him; It is not to be doubted also, but many amongst us have beene and are so humbled too and for the reson above said. But the people were not humbled, they were not tender, their hearts did not melt; there was not a Nationall humiliation, for we know what followed; they were so farre from humbling themselves thereby to turne away wrath, that they transgressed more and more; There was a forsaking in the whole Land; all were revolted, all degrees and estates, and they continued revolting, till there was no remedy, till they had brought So∣dom and Gomorrah into Jerusalem; They had Rulers, but they 2 Chr. 36. 16. Esa. 1. 9. were (not (as) but) Rulers of Sodom; and the people, the peo∣ple r. 10. of Gomorrah.
But that which was the determining sin, and filled up the measure was this, They mocked the Messengers of GOD, and despied His words, and mis-used His Prophets. How long persisted they in so evill a course? Untill the wrath of the 2 Chro. 36. 16. Lord arose against His people. It is cleare; That there was no humiliation, for there was no Reformation, nay, there was a contrary walking still, so approving the sins of their Fathers by committing the very same. Therefore it was fullfilled ac∣cording to the threat, I will cause them to be remooved into all the Kingdomes of the Earth, because of Manasseh the sonne of Hezekiah King of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem: Ier. 15. 4. And so we are come to the end of The Kings Chronicle. And it hath a sad close, very unanswerable to expectation: for the last King we reade off, was the best King that ever was: And the Reformation he made was as compleat and perfect, (as imperious) if the Adversary will have it so, as ever was any so much as upon designe, For he SPIED-out what Israel had made to provoke the LORD to anger, and tooke it away: And yet he could not hinder the saddest effects of GODS displeasure, the violl of wrath from powring downe: Not∣withstanding desolation followed even to astonishment, and an hissing. Josiah could not make up the many breaches in the City of David, which Idolaters had made there. How cor∣rupting, eating and consuming abominable Idolaters are; and what a prevalence there is in a wicked Idolatrous example to destroy, more then is in a good example to make up and heale, has been spoken-off before. This only I will adde to this place, That where sinne is let in like a flood, the storme of GODS Judgements follow after, and falls downe swiftly and heavily upon the hairy scalpes of those, who were instruments to open that sluce or flood-gate: GOD hath set it downe by an ae∣ternall Iussisti Domine & sic est ut omnis inordina∣tu affectus sibi sic paena. c Ier. 8. 17. Decree, that vexation and sinne should be inseperable. Hast thou not procured this unto thy selfe, in that thou hast for∣saken the LORD? Thine owne wickednesse shall correct thee, and thy back-slidings c shall reprove thee, &c.
¶ An Abridgement of the Chronicle. One conclusion drawne from the two Sections, with an use to those that are in Authority, To walke in the good way, after the example. TO make a collection of the whole Chronicle, I have in the former Section and Chapters traced the steps of the bad Kings of Judah, tending in shew to the strengthening them∣selves and their Kingdome; but indeed and in the issue, to the ruine and destruction of all. Their irreligious Policies carried them hopefully-on sometime, but confounded them and broke them to peeces at the last, for they would be wise with their owne counsells and strong in their owne strength, so they roo∣ted-in that, which could not be rooted-out, till even Judah was rooted-out of the Land. So strongly, as one saith, doth the painted vizour of wise proceedings delude even those, that know the fowle face of impety lurking under it: But behold the wretched ends, that have ever followed it, whereof the Kings of Judah first mentioned, were themselves very great examples, and so they are propounded to following generati∣ons, holding forth in their example DEATH and EVILL before Kings and people. But now here is the wonder, that the wicked have not yet learnt, after so many thousand yeares experience, That they worke a deceitfull worke, that they pull downe wrath upon their owne heads, and that the Politicians beaten wayes tend to death. They march-on as furiously now as ever they did: but I forbeare. In the latter Section and fore-going Chapters, I have traced the stepps of the good Kings, and we have found them wal∣king strait-on towards those two great ends, the glory of GOD, and the safety of their Kingdome, carrying all levell thereunto; for their counsell was taken from GODS mouth, and their strength from His right Arme: They SPI∣ED-out what Idolaters had done to provoke the LORD to Anger, and tooke it away. All their care was to make their
Kingdome the LORDS Kingdome; and their Land the Lords Land. I need not adde, And they prospered; but I will adde, So they prospered, as that they were the wonder of the world, and The feare of them fell upon the Nations. And so these hold forth to after Generations, Life, Good, and Bles∣sings. We might wonder here also, how any should forsake this good way, and choose a way of their owne, but the heart is deepe, and the deceit there cannot be bottom'd, and there are depths of Satan, and wee are not ignorant of his wiles, how ready and able he is to seduce, and how willing the heart is to follow, though to destruction; but I forbeare here also. From these two so different wayes, the bad and good Kings have walked in, we will conclude what way must be taken well to Posture a Kingdome, for that is our maine scope of all that is said: And first I will put it down negatively. Not a Magazine of treasures; nor an Arsenall of Armour, nor a Fleet by Sea, nor Forces by Land; nor Towers, Walls, Barrs, none of all this can secure a Kingdome, nor put it into a Posture of Defence; for then Babylon, that great City, had stood it out to this day, which had a mighty River, a wall of water to secure it, and indeed thereby the King was so secured in his safety, That he was drinking wine in bowles, when part of his City was taken; and the Sword in his bowels, be∣fore a I▪ 51. 31. he feared it, for the LORD pleaded His Churches cause; He dried up her Sea, and made her springs dry ver. 36.; then did the Inhabitants of Zion say, The violence done to me and to my flesh, be upon Babylon ver. 35.. And so it was, which tells us also, what shall be in after times, for the LORD will stretch forth His hand upon her, and roule her down from the Rocks, ver. 25. and will make her as a burnt Mountain. The same might be said of populous NO. If a MILITIA could have defended her, she had been defended, for we reade her strength was INFINITE. Yet she was carried away, she went into Captivity: her young children also were dashed in peeces at the top of all the streets, and they cast lots for her ho∣nourable men, and all her great men were bound in chaines. Nahum. 3. 9, 10▪ I must not forget Jerusalem, concerning whose MILI∣TIA we have been speaking all this while, if strength of
Walls, Towers, Gates and Barrs, could have defended Jeru∣salem, she might have bid defiance to her enemies and have mockt at feare. And that was the opinion of all the world at that time touching Jerusalems MILITIA; The Kings of Lam 4. 12. the Earth and all the Inhabitants of the world would not have be∣lieved that the Adversary and Enemy should have entred into the gates of Jerusalem. But make a chaine, saith the LORD (that is) I will judge her, she shall goe into Captivity, for her Ezek 7. 13. Land is full of bloudy crimes, the City is full of violence. So the LORD abhorred His Sanctuary; he gave-up into the hand of the Enemy the walls of her Pallaces; Then her gates sunke into the ground, I know not how to understand the Lam. 2. 9. words, but sure I am the Roman Conquerour acknowledged, That an Almighty hand made way for him, and let him into the City. And the remnant ever since, Zion, I meane, and her inhabitants, are resolved to say now, Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride up∣on Hos. 14. 13. horses. We will not look to forreigne aids, nor to strength of men or horses at home, We will trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. The Lord is good▪ a strong Esa 26. 4. Nahum. 1. 7. hold in the day of trouble, and He knoweth them, that trust in Him. Then it will be said, what need of wals, towers, gates and bars? Yes great need; for though the safety of a City doth not consist in having walls and gates, and bars about it, but in the safeguard of the Almighty, and His shutting in the gates, as He did the doors of the Arke: yet the City will not neglect her walls and gates or leave them open; for this were to tempt GOD, and to forfeit His protection: We must not write Salvation upon any 1 King. 7. 2. visible fortifications, how mighty and strong soever; we must not trust to them. But such is the foolish pride of mans heart, he can glory in his owne strength, and magnifie his own wis∣dome, courage, fore-sight, and forget God the Maker, and giver of all things. Whence it comes to passe, that the stronger he finds himselfe, the more he turns from God, and fals before his e∣nemy, at such a time when he thought it most impossible. The walls then may be too high; the Castles too strong; the people too many for GOD to defend a people, or to give them the vi∣ctory, because of the cursed pride of mans heart, who will as∣cribe salvation to the strength of his Mountaine (which GOD
made so strong) and can quickly weaken, if Man will not look∣up to Him, off from himselfe, and give GOD the Glory. In Him the fatherlesse find mercy, they that put no confidence in the Hos. 14. 3. Arme of flesh. A people then may look to their Militia and use all meanes to fortifie themselves with walls and brazen barrs, but they must have respect to Him, Who strengthneth the barrs of his gates. 1 Kin. 4. 13. Solomon is not blamed for building that stately house of the For∣rest; Ps. 147. 13. the house of Armory for his whole Kingdom. Nor are the people blamed, because in the day of trouble, of treading down and 1 Kin 7. 2. perplexity, they did look to the armour of that house (though they Esa. 22. 5, 8. should have looked to it sooner, and how provided they were of store and provision there:) Nor are they blamed for beholding the breaches of the City, which were many, and looking to all means to stop the same, and to fortifie themselves: All this was considerable, had they done it sooner. But for this they are bla∣med, and stand deeply charged of folly, that they looked to the Armour of the house, and how they might fortifie the wall, and ver. 11. make a ditch; but did not looke unto the Maker thereof, neither had respect to Him, that fashioned it long agoe. So then we may look to our Armories, and to all means of Fortification, but so as we looke stedfastly to the maker thereof; for we can tell now, what the Militia is, not an Arme of flesh, neither Chariots nor horse-men, vain things to save a man: It matters not how high Stantibus mae∣nibus ruentibus, morbus. id▪ Aug. de Civ: l. 1 c. 33. & l. 2. Ep. 16. and towering our walls and ships are; if walls stand and manners fall, a people cannot stand it out long. Walls joyned to walls, and piles upon piles, an hundred walls cannot defend a City, when bloud, rapine, and abominable Idolaters, are within, for then GOD departs from them, and takes away His defence. We must ponder and well weigh these things in our hearts, because it is so hard a matter to beat the heart off from these things, I meane, from putting confidence therein, though whosoever have so done, trusted on the Arme of flesh, Chariots and hors-men are brought downe and fallen, whereas, All they, who have remem∣bred the name of the Lord their God, have risen and stood upright: Ps. 20. for the strength of Israel is not in any outward thing, but in Is∣raels GOD, The saving strength of His right-Hand. First Section Preface. 2. This, I say, for I will not recall that which went before Psa. 68. 17.,
is the Militia of a Kingdome; GOD with His twenty thousand Chariots, even thousands of Angels, the Lord among His people, as 2 Kin. 6. 17. in the Holy place: for He, That is, Israels God, is the God of salva∣tion, and unto this God the LORD belongs the issues from Death. Therefore it was, that all the good Kings and Princes, took this one way to secure then Kingdome; they and their people AS. SOCIATED themselves (that was their next worke after the Abominations were spied out and removed) came up to God, e∣ven to his Termes, joyned themselves in Covenant with Him, therby shrewded themselvs and their people, under the shadow of the Almighty, that His Salvation might be round about them, & their people for Wals and Bulwarks: As this was their designe; so this one way they tooke to bring their designe about (it can∣not be spoken too often) they spied▪out what Idolaters had done to provoke the eyes of the Lord, and all that they removed: then they associated themselvs, came up to GOD to bind themselvs to Him in the bond of a Covenant. This is the old way, which good men have troden, direct and strait forward in a conformity to the rule, and driving-on these great ends; The glory of God and the good of His people. And it is one and the same way, and varieth not; It is the way of the wicked, that has turnings and windings in it, for they, as the crooked Scrpent their leader, and like harm∣full Beasts, do love confusa vestigia: But I say, the way of the righ∣teous is one and the same stra-forward. And it is observable, though it could be no otherwise, That these good Kings, went all one way, minded one thing, carried all levell to one mark: all made the same beginning, the same progresse, attained the same end, Sabbath and Port of their labours, their owne and their Kingdoms peace here, and everlasting Peace in a Kingdome, which has a foundation, and shall never be shaken. A man would wonder now, That this way) so beaten out be∣fore us by the foot-steps of the godly, so direct, so plaine away, wherein it is said, the foole cannot erre (i. e.) he that has ceased from his owne wisdome) a way of pleasantnesse and of peace; a way, which GOD has be strewed all along with blessings; and wherin His foot-steps have dropped fatnes: A wonder I say, that this way should be mistaken. And yet no wonder, when wee consider againe, that (it is said) the foole shall not erre in it, but
the wise-man shall not find it, who is his owne guide and trust∣eth in his owne wisdome. And now we can discerne the reason, whence it comes to passe, That, though there be but one way, one maine and chiefe end (the other but subordinate and secundary;) all the motions to ths and made plaine and direct before us, yet we leave this good way choose rather to walke in ble▪pathes; The reason is, because we will be wise in our own wisdome, and thinke our selvesable enough to order our own steps. And this is of high concernment to the high Court of Parlia∣ment, cled together at first, and kept together till this time (I will make no question of it) for such a time as this Esth. 4. 14., when they have a price put into their hands, never any the like before them, The saying of the King and Kingdom; of high concernement unto them, called now to be Saviours, that as they were at the first but one House, so they would goe all one way, the good way beaten-out plaine and direct before them. I say, and I will insist a little upon it: First, That there is but one House of Parliament: pride and ambition, and I know not what, have made them two, and seperated them, whom God had joyned at the first, and made one, if the Records of time tell true, and I have read what they say. Notwithstan∣ding we allow heartily a distinction in persons and places, though yet, as God hath made them, let them be, and be so called, no longer two, but one House, for so anciently it was. But if there be a distinction in point of office and service, then the scale turnes towards the lower House, for there one man stands for ten thousand, a great engagement to his service. In the upper House (whereto we give as much honour, as man is capable of) They are but Ʋnites, one is but one, like a great letter in the front or beginning of a Patent, which hath many flourishes, and yet but one letter. So as (and to expresse it as well as I can) if there be upper and lower there (as certainly there must be, while there is order in the world) yet is it, but as the upper and low∣er teeth, they stand above the other in a Posture of opposition, Mart. l. 1 Epi∣gram 37. and the upper move not, but doe all equally the same work, and therefore if there be any contention betwixt them, it should be ever the same, I read, was betwixt two brothers, who never
contended, but who should doe each other the best service; It should be said of those two Houses, as one said of his Mother and of his Sister, He had lived with his Mother threescore and seven S nunqa  mater  quā cum  n sime. In vita  Cer in fine Epistolarum ad Attum in fo∣lio 329. yeares, with his Sister not halfe so many, but in all that time, there was never any RECONCILIATION betwixt them, for there was ne∣ver any difference or falling▪out. A noble Concord, becoming none more then a House of Parliament, that as they were once one, so they may continue one still, follow-on in one way, be of one mind and one judgment, for they have but one way, and that is plaine and direct before them; but one manner of proceeding in it; and but one principall ayme (the other is subordinate there∣unto) the glory of God, and the salvation of his people. If we will see the way, the first entrance into it, the progresse in it, the end, and all shut-up together, behold we the way of the good Kings of Judah set before the Nobles and Worthies, to doe thereafter, they associated themselves, came up to God, entred into Covenant, kept thereunto, then they spied-out what Idolaters had done to provoke the eyes of the Lord, and they removed it; and so they made their Land, the Lords Land; and the people, the Lords peo∣ple; and now seeing there is but one way, one method of procee∣ding in it, one aime, and one marke, whereto all is to be carried levell: And all this is so plaine and direct and cleare to the eye, that the foole cannot erre in it, he that has renounced his owne wisdome; I will shut up all in the Apostles prayer; Now we be∣seech 1 Cor. 1. 10. you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speake the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgement. And the Lord fullfill His good promise; I will give Ier. 32. 39. them one heart, and one way, that they may feare Me for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them. Amen. FINIS.
