W775 E701_7 R207091 99866163 166569
THE DECLARATION OF THE States of Holland, concerning the King of Scots; With the chusing of the Duke of York, the Lord Craven, and Maj. Gen. Massey, Captain-Generals, by the English, French, and Dutch; And the Resolution of Vantrump concerning the L. of Newport, and the L. Catz; Together with his Orders and Instructions to all the Court of Admiralties, for the setting forth all shipping fit for service, and each captain and commander to cut his way through the English Fleet. Also, a Diurnal of the Dutch Occurrences; and their making ready all the Sluces. engraving of lion, placed incorrectly LONDON: Printed for Geo. Horton, 1653.
The last LETTERS From the NAVY: SIR, SInce my last of the 8 instant, We are come to an anchor in the Te∣xel, where we ride with great safe∣ty, offending the enemy, and defending our selves; and obstructing the passage of all ships from passing either in or out. We have exchanged many hundreds of great shot, and have allarum'd the whole Coun∣trey,
especially Holland, Zealand, and West-Friez∣land. Whereupon their Land-forces are drawing down towards the Sea-coast to oppose Us, and we are preparing to receive them. Vantrump hath sent Orders and Instructions to all the Court of Admiralties, requiring them forth∣with to man out all ships and vessels whatsoever, that are fit for service; and withall, each Captain to cut his way, and force his passage through the English Fleet. Yet, notwithstanding, we do not in the least hear, that his high and mighty Excellen∣cy, forsooth, hath taken the Sacrament now, as he did in his former Enterprise, which was, To sweep the Narrow-seas of all the English, and to burn, and sink all ships whatsoever, belonging to this Com∣mon-wealth, &c. But divine providence frustrated their implacable Resolutions, and gave us such a mighty Victory against those (who, a few dayes be∣fore, were lifted up with their success in getting out their Fleets for Trade, and bringing their ships loa∣den with Merchandise home in safety, and in their braving it upon our coasts, shooting against our towns and castles in the absence of our fleet) was a most signal, and every way, a most seasonable mer∣cy.
Since which memorable Defeat, the States Ge∣neral have had sundry consultations, touching the setting forth another fleet, and withall declared for the King of Scots Interest, and that his colours should be erected and set up, &c. Bu, truly, to speak, truth, I humbly conceive, the Gentleman has more rational Knowledge and Ingenuity, then to repose the least trust upon such a Rebellious and perfidi∣ous people. Great are their preparations for war throughout all the Netherlands; and exceedingly exasperated are the Royal Party and Nobility; so that sundry Declarations have been dispierced and published, inciting the English, French, and Scots, to a conjun∣ction with the Dutch, which, we hear, is resolved upon, onely one obstacle hangs shrewdly upon the Hinges, in reference to a commander in chief: the French and Walloons declare for the titular Duke of York; but the English and Scots declare for the Lord Craven, and Major General Malsey. What the Result of these Debates will produce, I shal re∣fer you to a more seasonable Opportunity, and re∣main Your assured friend, John Ward,
Another Letter from the Navy, touching their further proceedings against the Hollanders, &c. SIR, THis morning we recived intelligence by a Flemin that came aboard our Admiral, that about 8000 foot have rein∣forced the strong towns of Helversluce, Goree, West-capel, Flushing, Ostent forts, The Ness, Enchusion, Egmont, Limne, Castricum, Brill, Dort, Brou, Delf, Buss, Middleburgh, Domborch, Scagen, Egmont, Breerode, Monster, Asemar.
And sundry other places: They have also placed strong Guards at the most con∣siderable sluces, and are resolv'd, if they can, to let in the sea, and destroy us by water, if we attempt to make our inroad into the Countrey. As for the Dorps which were said to be burned upon the landing of some of our men, I have not seen any Express of credence to confirm it; Onely thus much we have by way of Transcript, that it is ve∣ry certain the common sort of people con∣tinue in a great distraction. The contestati∣on is great betwixt those of the Princes party, assisted by Vantrump, and the Lords of the States General, who now sigh after peace, and fain would have an accommoda∣tion with England; but the Royal family declareth against them, and by way of im∣peachment affirmeth, that during this exi∣gencie of time great hath bin their confede∣racy with the common enemie, in obstru∣cting
the Maritine and Naval Affairs, by perverting many of the Captains, and sub∣verting divers of the souldiers, in an under∣hand way that they should not engage a∣gainst us, and wholy impute the losing of the day to their private negotiations with the English interest: no less then 37 Arti∣cles of Impeachment and high treason are exhibited, printed, and published, against the States General, viz The Lord of Hempstead, Lord Catz, Lord of Newport, And divers others, who are already written with bloudy Characters in the black book of Inquisition. Thus recommending my self unto you, and the rest of our cordial brethren, I humbly subscribe my self, Your most endeared and obliged Servitor, John Williams. FINIS.
