10295 52633225 174027
ARTICLES TO BE ENQVIRED of, in the Diocesse of Norwich In the ordinarie Visitation of the Reue∣rend Father in God, FRANCIS, Lord Bishop of NORVVICH. Anno Domini 1629. ❧ Imprinted at LONDON by IOHN BILL. 1629.
The forme of the Oath to bee ministred vnto the Church-war∣dens and Side-men. YOu shall sweare, that you and euery of you, shall duely consider, and diligently enquire, of all and euery of these Articles giuen you in charge; and that all affection, fauour, hope of re∣ward and gaine, or feare of displeasure, or malice set aside; you shall present all and euery such per∣son, of, or within your Parish, as hath committed any offence, or made any default mentioned in these, or any of these Articles; or which are vehe∣mently suspected or defamed of any such offence or default: wherein you shall deale vprightly and fully; neither presenting, nor sparing to present a∣ny, contrary to trueth; hauing in this action God before your eyes, with an earnest zeale to main∣taine trueth and vertue, and to suppresse vice. So helpe you God, and the holy Contents of this Booke.
ARTICLES TO BE ENQVIRED OF, IN the Diocesse of NORVVICH: ANNO DOM. 1629. Articles concerning Religion and Doctrine.Titul. 1. Hereticall opi∣nions.1 WHether be there any abiding, or resorting, to your Parish, that haue wilfully maintained and de∣fended any heresies, errours, or false opinions, contrary to the faith of Christ and holy Scrip∣ture. Absence from Church.2 Item, Whether doth any in your parish, being 16. yeres of age or vpwards, or others, lodging, or commonly resorting to any house in your Parish, wilfully absent themselues from your Parish Church, Chappell, or Oratorie, vpon Sundayes and Holy-dayes, and other dayes appointed, at Morning and Euening prayers. Or who come late to Church, and depart from Church, before diuine Seruice and Sermon be ended. Or whether be there any that perswade others to forbeare and abstaine comming to Church to heare diuine Seruice, and receiue the holy Communion, ac∣cording to his Maiesties Lawes in that behalfe enacted. Vnlawfull Con∣uenticles,3 Item, Whether be there any in your Parish, that hath beene, or is vehemently suspected to haue beene present at any vnlawfull assem∣blies, conuenticles, or meetings, vnder colour or pretence of any exer∣cise of Religion; or doeth any affirme and maintaine such meeting to be lawfull, contrary to his Maiesties Statutes in that behalfe. Impugners of the Kings Su∣premacie.4 Item, Whether be there any within your Parish, that deny, or
perswade any to deny, withstand, and impugne the Kings Ma∣iesties authority and Supremacie in causes Ecclesiasticall within his Realme. Popish Recu∣.5. Item, Whether be there any abiding, or resorting to your Pa∣rish, that be, or are commonly reputed to bee ill affected in matters of Religion professed in our Church or taken to bee Recusant Papists, refusing to repaire vnto the Church to heare diuine Seruice, and receiue the holy Communion, and being disobedient to his Highnesse Lawes in that behalfe prouided. Or doe any publish, sell, or disperse any superstitious bookes or writings; or other bookes, libells, or writings of any lectuaries touching the Religion, State or Eccle∣siasticall gouernement of this Kingdome of England. Present their names, qualities, and conditions. Doeth any Papist keepe a Schoolemaster in his house, which commeth not to Church as is re∣quired. What is his name, and how long hath he taught there or else where. Articles concerning publike Prayer and Admini∣stration of the Sacraments.Titul. 2. rauing the Booke of Com∣mon prayer, and monies.FIrst, Whether hath any of your Parish spoken or declared any thing, in the derogation, or deprauing of the forme of Gods wor∣ship in the Church of England, and Administration of the Sacraments, Rites, and Ceremonis, set foorth and prescribed in the Booke of com∣mon Prayer by the Kings Maiestie authorised and confirmed. Doe any preach, speake, or declare, that it conteineth any thing which is not agreeable to the holy Scriptures. wading any ister to alter forme of mon prayer.2. Item, Whether hath any in your Parish caused, procured, or maintained any Minister to say any common or publike Prayer, or to administer either of the Sacraments of Baptisme and the Lords Sup∣per otherwise, or in any other manner and forme then is mentioned in the said Booke of Common Prayer. Or whether hath any inter∣rupted, hindred, let, or disturbed the Minister to reade diuine Seruice, and administer the Sacraments, in such manner and forme as is men∣tioned in the said Booke, or interrupted him in his Preachings and Sermons. ruation of orme of sme, and e.3. Item, Whether is the Sacrament of Baptisme rightly and duely administred a cording to the prescript Forme expressed in the booke of Comon Prayer with due obseruation of all Rites and Ce∣remonies
prescribed in the administration of the same, without adding, or altering any part or parcell of any prayers, interrogatories, or not vsing the signe of the Crosse in the administration of the same. Deferring of Baptisme.4 Item, Whether is the administration of the Sacrament of Bap∣tisme deferred longer then the next Sunday or Holiday immediately following the birth of the Childe. Children refused to be baptized, or dying with∣out Baptisme.5 Item, Whether is the Sacrament of Baptisme refused to bee administred to any children borne in or out of wedlocke, their birth being made knowen to the Minister of the parish, and offered vnto him to be baptized, or haue any such children died vnbaptized. Parents of chil∣dren admitted Godfathers.6 Item, Whether bee the Parents of any child to bee baptized, ad∣mitted to be godfathers, and godmothers to the same. Priuate Baptisme.7 Item, Whether haue there any children beene baptized in pri∣uate houses by any Lay person, or midwife, or Popish Priest, or by any other Minister, but vpon vrgent occasion when the child was in danger of death. Baptizing of Pa∣pists children.8 Item, Whether haue the children which haue beene borne to any Popish Recusants, or begotten by them in your parish, beene pub∣likely baptized in your parish Church by your Parson, Vicar, or Cu∣rate; or by whom were they baptized, or where to your knowledge. Receiuing of the Lords Sup∣per thrice a yeere,9 Item, Whether hath the blessed Sacrament of the Lords Sup∣per beene duely and reuerently administred euery moneth, or thrice e∣uery yeere at least, whereof once at Easter, within your Parish Church to euery parishioner being of sixteene yeeres of age, or vp∣wards. Kneeling at the Communion,10 Item, Whether is the said holy Sacrament deliuered vnto, or receiued by any of the Communicants within your Parish, that vnre∣uerently sit or stand, or doe not deuoutly and humbly kneele vpon their knees. Notorious of∣fenders admit∣ted to the Com∣munion.11 Item, Whether hath any of your parish which be openly knowen to liue in notorious sinne without repentance, or excommunicate per∣sons, or Schismatikes, common and notorious deprauers of the Reli∣gion and gouerment of this Realme, without vnfained sorrow showen for their impiety and wickednesse, beene admitted to be partaker of the said holy Communion. Debarring o∣thers without cause.12 Item, Whether hath any of your parish beene debarred from the said holy Communion without iust cause, and without intimation first giuen to the Ordinary, or Bishop of the Dioces: and by whose default.
Articles concerning the Church,Titul. 3. the Ornaments thereof, and the Churches possessions. Bookes and or∣naments in the Church. FIrst, Whether haue you in your Church or Chappell, the whole Bible of the largest volume, and of the last translation, the Booke of common Prayer, lately set foorth by his Maiesties authority, the two bookes of Homilies, and Bishop Iewels Apologie, all well and fairely bound: A Font of stone set vp in the ancient vsuall place: A conuenient and decent communion Table, with a carpet of silke, or some other decent stuffe, continually laid vpon the Table at time of di∣uine Seruice, and a faire linnen cloth at the time of administring the Communion.Abusing of the Communion Table. And whether is the same Table placed conueniently as it ought. And whether is it so vsed in or out of time of diuine Ser∣uice or Sermon, as is not agreeable to the holy vse of it; as by sitting on it, and by throwing hats on it, or writing on it; or is it abused to other prophaner vses. Are the ten Commandements set vpon the east end of your Church, with other sentences of Scripture about. Things apper∣taining to Churches.2 Item, Whether haue you in your said Church or Chappell, a couuenient seat for your Minister to read diuine Seruice in, together with a comely Pulpit set vp in a conuenient place, with a decent cloth or cushion for the same; a comely, large, and fine Surplice, a faire communion Cup, a Flagon of siluer, or pewter, with all other things and ornaments necessary for the celebration of diuine Seruice, and ad∣ministration of the Sacraments: and whether haue you a Chest for almes, with three lockes and keyes, and another Chest for keeping the Bookes and ornaments of the Church,Register bookes. and the Register Booke▪ Haue you a Register Booke in parchment for Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, and is the same kept in all points according to the Canons. And haue you a Table set in your Church of the degrees wherein by law men are prohibited to marry. Reparations of Churches, and parsonage hou∣ses.3 Item, Whether is your Church or Chappel, with the Chauncell thereof, and your Parsonage or Vicarage house, your Parish Almes∣house and Church-house in good reparations; and are they imployed to godly, and their right holy vses: if any bee ruinated and wasted, in whom is the default. Is your Church, Chancell, and Chappell de∣cently and comely kept, aswell within as without, and bee the Seates well maintained, the Steeple and Belles preserued, the Windowes well glazed, or any part of the Church, or Chaun∣cell windowes daubed or closed vp with Board, Lyme, or Stone, the floore kept paued, plaine, and euen, and all things in orderly
and decent sort, without dust,Keeping cleane of Churches. or any thing that may bee either noysome or vnseemely for the house of God, as is prescribed in an Homily to that effect, and the 85 Canon. 4 Item, How often haue you presented vnto the Commissaries, and Officers Court, the want of reparations of your Church, Chancell, Chappell, or your Vicarage and Parsonage houses. What dismission Fees haue you payed to the Register since the last Visitation, the faults being not amended. Fencing and keeping the Churchyard.5 Item, Whether bee your Churchyards well fenced, and kept without abuse; if not, whose default is it: hath any person encroached vpon the ground of the Churchyard. Haue any vsed a place consecrated to holy vse profanely or wickedly: haue any quarrelled, or stricken ano∣ther in Church or Churchyard: haue any anoyed your Churchyard, or the fence thereof, by putting in of cattell, by banging of cloathes, or by laying there any dust, dung, or other filthinesse. Churches va∣cant.6 Item, Whether is your Church full, or vacant of an Incumbent; if vacant, who receiueth the fruits thereof, and who serueth the Cure, and by what authoritie: And whether is it a Parsonage, Vicaridge, or Donatiue, or Appropriation. Concealing of Church goods.7 Item, What legacies haue beene giuen to the vse and benefite of your Church, how they haue beene bestowed: who receiued them, and deteineth them without due imployment. Doeth any detaine or em∣bezel any of the Church goods, or any other gifts giuen to charitable vses. Erecting vp seats and pues.8 Item, Whether is there any execting of pewes, or innouating of seats in your Church by any priuate man of his owne authoritie: and what seats haue beene so built, and by whose procurement, and by what authoritie. Defacing of seemely Orna∣ments.9 Item, Whether hath any in your parish defaced, or caused to bee defaced any monuments or ornaments in your Church. Burying of Po∣pish Recusnts.10 Item, Whether hath any Popish Recusant being lawfully ex∣communicate, beene enterred or buried in your Church or Churchyard, before absolution of that censure and excommunication: if yea, then by whom, and when. Alienation of tithes and pro∣fits of the Church,11 Item, Whether bee not the profits, tithes, and other commo∣dities Ecclesiasticall, impiously and wickedly to the dishonour of Al∣mighty God, and preiudice of the sacred Ministery, conuerted to the vse and benefit of couetous Patrons, and by them receiued and detained, and how long haue they beene so vsed to your knowledge.
A Terrier of Glebelands, and other possessi∣ons of the Church.12 Item, Whether you haue the Terrier of all the Gleab-lands, meadowes, gardens, orchards, houses, stockes, implements, tenements, and portions of Tythes (whether within your Parish or without) be∣longing vnto your parsonage or Vicaridge, taken by the view of honest men in your said Parish. And whether the said Terrier bee laid vp in the Bishops Registry, and in whose hands are any of them now. And if you haue no Terrier already made in parchment, you the Church∣wardens and Sidemen, together with your Parson or Vicar, or in his absence your Curate, are to make diligent enquirie, and present∣ment of the premises, and make, subscribe, and signe the said Terrier, as aforesaid. Articles concerning Ministers,Titul. 4. and Preachers of Gods holy Word. Degrees of Mi∣nisters.FIrst, Whether is your Minister, Parson, Vicar, or Curate, a Gra∣duate in either of the Vniuersities, or no: if yea, then of what de∣gree. Is hee a publike preacher of Gods word, and by whom is hee so licensed. Obseruation of the forme, and time of com∣mon Prayer, and the Sacra∣ments.2 Item, Whether doth your Minister distinctly, and reuerently say Diuine Seruice vpon Sundayes and Holydayes, and other dayes ap∣pointed to bee obserued by the booke of Common Prayer, as Wednes∣dayes, and Fridayes, and the Eues of euery Sunday and Holyday, at fit and vsuall times. And doth your Minister duely obserue the orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed in the said booke of Common Pray∣er, as well inreading all publike Prayers, and the Letany, as also in ad¦ministring the Sacraments, solemnization of Matrimonie, visitation of the sicke, burying the dead, churching of women, and all other like Rites, and Offices of the Church, in like manner and forme, as in the said booke of Common Prayer is enioyned, without any omission or addition of any thing. And doth hee read the booke of the last Canons yeerely. Continuall wearing of the Surplice.3 Item, Whether doth your Minister alwayes, and at euery time both morning and euening, reading Diuine Seruice, and administring the Sacraments, and other Rites of the Church, weare the Surplice according to the Canons, and doth hee neuer omit wearing of the same at such times. Obseruation of Rites.4 Item, Whether doth your Minister bid Holydayes and Fasting dayes, as is appointed. Doth he administer the holy Communion eue∣ry
moneth, or thrice in the yeere at least, whereof once at Easter, to eue∣ry Parishioner: doth he receiue the same himselfe on euery day that he administreth it to others, and vseth hee the words of Institution, accor∣ding to the Booke, without alteration, at euery time that the Bread and Wine is renewed. Doth hee vse and neuer omit the signe of the Crosse in Baptisme, or doth hee euer baptize in any Bason, or other thing but the vsuall Font. Doth he marry without a Ring, or in times prohibi∣ted, or without the Banes thrice published, without a speciall Licence from the Archbishop, or Bishop of the Diocesse, or his Chancellour first had and obtained. Preachers with∣out licence. Reading Homi∣lies when there is no Sermon.5 Item, Whether is your Minister a Preacher licenced or no: If no, whether doth hee take vpon him in his owne Cure or elsewhere to expound any Scripture or matter of doctrine, and doth not keepe him∣selfe onely to the reading of Homilies published by Authoritie: if so, then you are to present the same, the time and place where hee did it. And if hee be licenced, doth hee preach vsually according to the 45. Ca∣non, in his owne Cure, or some other neighbour Church, where no Preacher is: doth hee preach standing, and with his hat off. Or whe∣ther doth he or his Curate vpon euery Sunday when there is no Ser∣mon, reade an Homily, or some part thereof, according as hee ought to doe. Preaching of false doctrine, and new opi∣nions.6 Item, Whether doth your Minister publish in his Sermons, any doctrine which is new and strange, and disagreeing from the word of God, and from the Articles of Christian Faith and Religion agreed on and published An. Dom. 1562. or whether doth hee teach any thing, which hee would haue the people religiously to obserue, and beleeue, but that which is agreeable to the Scriptures, and that which the Ca∣tholike Fathers and ancient Bishops haue gathered out of that doc∣trine, according to the Canon. Names of strange Prea∣chers to bee taken.7 Item, Whether is any Minister admitted to preach in your Church, who doth not before the Churchwardens subscribe his name in your booke for that purpose, the day when he preached, and the name of the Bishop of whom he had licence to preach. And is any one admit∣ted to preach before he hath shewed his licence. Opposition of Preachers in their Sermons.8 Item, Doth any Preacher in your pulpit particularly impugne and confute any doctrine deliuered by other his fellow Preachers, before hee hath acquainted the Bishop of the Diocesse therewith, and receiued order from him what to doe in that case. Praying for his Maiestie, &c.9 Item, Doth your Minister vse alwayes to pray for the Kings Ma∣iestie,
the Queene, Clergie, Councell, &c. giuing them their full titles, as in the Canon is required. Non residence of the Minister.10 Item, Whether is your Minister resident vpon his Benefice, or absent; if absent, by whom is the Cure serued, the fruits receiued. Doth your Minister or Curate serue any more cures then one: if yea, then what other Cure doth he serue, and how farre are they distant. 11 Item,Catechizing. Whether doth hee catechize the youth of his Parish vpon Sundayes or Holydayes before Euening prayer for halfe an houre, or more, in the Catechisme set foorth in the booke of Common prayer: and whether doe all the Parishioners diligently attend his catechi∣sing, and who refuse to send their children and seruants to be catechized by him. Ministers to call for reliefe of the poore, and alms-deeds.12 Item, Doth your Minister carefully looke to the reliefe of the poore, and from time to time call vpon his Parishioners to giue some∣what according to their ability to godly and charitable vses, especially when they make their Wills. 13 Item,Simonie. Whether is your Minister suspected, or knowen to haue obtained his Benefice, or Spirituall promotion by any Simoniacall compact directly or indirectly. emising of Benefices.14 Item, Whether doth your Minister demise the profits of his Be∣nefice to any Lay-man aboue one yeere, and is not resident there, and keepeth no hospitalitie vpon his Benefice being of sufficient value. Conferring with Recusants.15 Item, Whether hath he being learned and sufficient, conferred with the Popish Recusants of his Parish, endeauouring to reclaime them from their errours, and presenting them being obstinate, for their Recusancie. Obseruing of Ro∣gation weeke.16 Item, Doth your Minister in the Rogation dayes goe in per∣ambulation of the circuit of the Parish, saying and vsing the prayers, suffrages, and thankesgiuing to God, appointed by Law, according to his duetie, thanking God for his blessings, and praying for his grace and fauour. Preaching, &c. in priuate hou∣ses.17 Item, Hath your Minister or any other Preacher made any Sermons, administred the Sacraments, or Churched women in any priuate houses, otherwise then is by Law allowed. Curates not li∣censed, and lay∣men doing offi∣ces of a Mini∣ster.18 Item, What Curates or Preachers doe reade prayers, or admi∣nister the Sacraments in your Parish, without lawfull licence from the Bishop of the Diocesse vnder his hand and seale, according to the Canon: or doth any Lay-man, not hauing holy Orders, presume to reade publike prayers in the Church.
Lecturers and Preachers to reade seruice.19 Item, Whether haue you any Preacher or Lecturer in your Pa∣rish, and whether (if any such be) he doth twice at the least euery yeere reade himselfe Diuine Seruice both morning and euening two seueral Sundayes publikely in his Surplice; and also twice in the yeere admi∣nister both Sacraments, with such rites and ceremonies as are prescri∣bed in the booke of Common prayer, according to the 56. Canon. Conuersation of the Minister.20 Item, Whether is your Minister studious in the holy Scrip∣tures, and abstaineth from Mechanicall trades, or labour not be fitting his function, and from apparell vnseemely for his calling, and from ga∣ming, swearing, and drunkennesse, and in frequenting from Innes, Tauernes, and Tipling houses, and sitting and drinking inordinately in the same, or such notorious scandals: or is there any in your Parish,Ministers forsa∣king their cal∣ling. who hauing beene admitted into holy Orders, either Deacon or Mi∣nister, doth relinquish or forsake his calling, and liueth in che course of his life as a Lay man. Ministers reuea∣ling priuate confessions.21 Item, Whether doth your Minister before the seuerall times of the administration of the Lords Supper, admonish and exhort his Pa∣rishioners, if they haue their consciences troubled and disquieted, to re∣sort vnto him, or some other learned Minister, and open his griefe, that hee may receiue such ghostly counsell, and comfort, as his conscience may bee relieued, and by the Minister hee may receiue the benefit of absolution, to the quiet of his conscience, and auoiding of the scruple; And if any man confesse his secret and hidden sinnes being sicke or whole to the Minister, for the vnburthening of his conscience, and receiuing such spirituall consolation, doth or hath the said Minister at any time reuealed and made knowen to any person whatsoeuer, a∣ny crime or offence so committed to his trust and secrecie, contrary to the 113. Canon. Articles concerning Matrimony.Titul. 5, FIrst,Marriage with∣in Leuiticall degrees. Whether there be any in your Parish that haue maried with∣in the degrees of affinitie, or consanguinitie by the Law of God for∣bidden; if any, what be they. Priuate marri∣age, and with∣out consent of Parents.2 Item, Whether haue any beene maried secretly in priuate hou∣ses, or without their parents or gouernours consent signified, being vnder the age of 21. yeeres. Married person liuing apart.3 Item, Whether doe any persons lawfully married, liue asunder vnlawfully, and in whom is the default.
Marriage with∣out banes, and licence.4 Item, Whether any persons, (the Banes being not thrice pub∣lished in the Church,) haue beene married without licence lawfully ob∣tained, who were present at such mariages, and what Minister married them. Persons marri∣ed out of their parishes.5 Item, Whether any persons by licence or without haue beene married in your Parish Church, neither of them at that time dwelling in your Towne. Recusants mar∣riage.6 Item, What Popish Recusants or their children haue been mar∣ried in your Parish, in what sort was that Matrimony solemnized, when and by whom. Bigamy.7 Item, Is there any in your Parish that is voiced, noted, and credi∣bly reported and accused to haue two wiues liuing, or two husbands. Articles concerning the Churchwardens.Titul. 6. Election of Churchwar∣dens.FIrst, whether be the Churchwardens chosen by the Minister and Parishioners, according to the 89. Canon, and whether hath any taken vpon him to be Churchwarden being not so chosen: Or hath a∣ny continued aboue one yeere in his office without a new choise. Churchwardens due accompt.2 Item, Whether haue any Churchwardens retained any of the Church goods, and not made a iust account of what they haue receiued and expended. Churchwardens diligent in the Church.3 Item, Haue they beene and are they diligent in their office, to see decencie kept in the Church, and order in the time of Common prayer, and administration of the Sacraments, and that there be no disturbance,A booke for range Prea∣chers. but sobernesse and quietnesse in the Church. And doe the Church-wardens keepe a booke in your Parish, wherein the name of euery strange Preacher in your Parish is set down; & haue the Church∣wardens suffered any to Preach not shewing or hauing no licence. Articles concerning the Parishioners. FIrst,Titul. 7. Whether doe any in your Parish prophane the Sunday by vnlawfull games,Prophaning the Lords day, drinking, or tippling in the time of Common Prayer, or Sermon; and by working, and doing the ordinary workes of their vocation and trades. impugning the rites and go∣vernment of the Church.2 Item, Is there any in your Parish that doe impugne or speake against the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or the lawfull vse of them; and the gouernement of this Church vnder his Maiestie, by Archbishops, Bishops, and other Ecclesiasticall officers. euerent beha∣viour at Di∣vine seruice,3 Item, Who in your Parish doe come to the Sermon onely, and not to diuine Seruice, and who doe not reuerently behaue themselues
during the time of diuine Seruice, deuoutly kneeling when the gene∣rall Confession of sinnes, the Letany, the ten Commandements, and all Prayers and Collects are read: and vsing all duly and lowly reuerence when the blessed name of the Lord Iesus is mentioned, and standing vp when the Articles of the Beliefe, and the Gospel are read: or who doe couer their heads in the Church, during the whole time of diuine Ser∣uice, vnlesse it bee in case of necessitie, in which case they may weare a nightcap. Or who doe giue themselues to babling, talking, or walking, and are not attentiue to heare the Word read and preached. Leauing their owne Churches to goe to others.4 Item, Is there any of your Parish, hauing a Preacher to their Minister, that doe absent themselues from his Sermons, and resort to other places to heare other Preachers: or doe any in your Parish Communicate, or Baptize their children in any other Parish. Exception a∣gainst the Mi∣nister.5 Item, Is there any in your Parish that refuse to haue their chil∣dren baptized, or themselues to receiue the Communion of your Mini∣ster, taking exception against him: or haue any wiues that refuse to come to Church, according to the Booke of Common Prayer,Churching of women. to giue thankes to God for their safe deliuerance, in a decent habite, as hath beene anciently accustomed. Disgracing of Ministers.6 Item, hath any in your Parish spoken slanderous and reproch∣full words against your Minister, to the scandall of his vocation, or against their marriage or wiues, or against his neighbour, defaming them touching any crime of Ecclesiasticall cognizance. Opening of shops vpon holydayes.7 Item, Whether doe any in your Parish exercise any trade, or labour, buy or sell, or keepe open shops, or set out any wares to bee sold vpon Sundayes and Holy-dayes by themselues, their seruants, or ap∣prentices, or haue otherwise prophaned the said dayes. Keeping holy of 27. March. 5. Nouember.8 Item, Whether is the 27. of March, and the fifth of Nouember kept holy, and thankesgiuing made to God, according to the order set foorth in that behalfe. Adultery, forni∣cation, incest, &c.9 Item, Is there any in your Parish that bee, or are commonly knowne or reputed to be blasphemers of Gods holy Name, drunkards, adulterers, fornicators, incestuous persons, concealers or harbourers of fornicators or adulterers: haue any beene detected of such notorious crimes, and what penance haue they done for the same. Commutation of Penance.10 Item, what corporall punishment for any such offences, haue beene commuted and changed into a pecuniary mulct or sum of money by any Ecclesiasticall Iudge, exercising iurisdiction within this Dio∣cesse, by vertue of any Grant or Commission; or what was the sum of
money by them or any of them so receiued and taken, and to what vses was the same bestowed: or whether vpon such commutations, was the vnfained repentance of the delinquents published in the Church. Persons dying since the 1. of March, 1628.11 Item, What person or persons haue died and departed this mor∣tall life, since the first day of March last past, and whether did they make any last Wills or Testaments, and who were their Executors, or whe∣ther died they intestate, and who hath the Administration of their goods; and what be the names of such deceased, and Executors, and Administrators. Administring of goods without authority.12 Item, Whether haue any in your Parish administred the goods of any person deceased without lawfull authority, and before hee or they haue proued the Will and Testament of the partie deceased, or haue ob∣tained commission from the Ordinary to dispose of the said mooueable goods; or are their any Wills vnprooued, or goods not administred. Excommunicate persons.13 Item, What persons bee excommunicate within your Parish, and for what cause to your knowledge: and whether doe any of them repaire to the church in time of Prayer, vnabsolued. Articles concerning Schoolemasters,Titul. 8. Physitians and Chyrurgions, and Parish Clearkes. Schoolemasters not licenced.FIrst, Is there any Schoolemaster in your Parish, that teacheth publikely or priuately, not licensed by the Ordinarie or the Bishop of the Diocesse. Doth he teach any Papists or Sectaries children, that come not to church.Duetie of all Schoolemasters. And doeth hee instruct all his schollers to learne the shorter Catethisme, by Law established, contained in the Booke of common Prayer. Is hee a graduate, and sufficient to teach. Physitians not licenced.2 Item, What Physician or Chyrurgion is in your Parish vnli∣censed, and being not a Doctor of physicke in either of the Vniuersities, doeth practise physicke. And what ignorant persons haue left their trade, and taken vpon them to professe Physicke, or Chyrurgerie; and who be they that so abuse the people. Parish Clerkes.3 Item, Haue you a fit parish Clarke, aged 20. yeeres at least, of honest life, able to read and write. Are his and the Sextons wages paid without fraud; if not, then whose default is it. By whom is hee chosen: is hee diligent in his office, and seruiceable to the Minister; doeth hee meddle with any thing aboue his office; doeth hee keepe the Church cleane, the doores locked. Is any thing lost and spoyled by his default, and doeth he execute his office duely.
Articles concerning Ecclesiasticall offices.Titul. 9. Excessiue fees.FIrst, Whether bee there any Ecclesiasticall officers, that exercise Ecclesiasticall iurisdiction within this Diocesse, that take and re∣ceiue, or exact any extraordinary and excessiue fees for any cause. Whe∣ther haue your Churchwardens and Questmen, concealed any abuses, or offences punishable in the Ecclesiasticall court; and whether such of∣fences being presented are suppressed and vnpunished. Tables of fees in Courts.2 Item, Whether is there not a table of Fees in euery Court, of the Consistory, Archdeacons, and Commissaries, allowed and subscri∣bed by the Iudge and Register of the court of Consistory Anno Dom. 1597. and the same euery Court day hung vp in some publike place of the Court, and Registry. And whether doth the Register of your courts take more for Willes, and Administrations and other things, then is set downe in that Table. Speeding of Acts without a Notarie.3 Item, Doeth any Ecclesiasticall Iudge speed any act in any cause priuately of himselfe, and not in presence of some publike Nota∣rie, or Actuarie. Abuses in appa∣ritors and Sumners.4 Item, Whether is there any excessiue number of Apparitors and Sumners in this Diocesse: or haue any of them vnder pretence of au∣thoritie cited or summoned any person vnlawfully, or hath taken any reward for the concealing of any offence or sinne, or the auoiding of pu∣nishment of the offenders, and who bee they that haue done so; or doe they take any fees not accustomable. Haue they threatned any to pro∣secute them if they had no reward, and doe they summon any without a Citation first had. Abuses in Eccle∣siasticall offices.5 Item, Hath any Ecclesiasticall Iudge, or Officer, Aduocate, Re∣gister, Procter, Clerkes, or other such ministers any way abused them∣selues in their offices, contrary to the law and Canons in that behalfe prouided. Sincerity and impartialitie in the Inquisitors.6 Item, Lastly, Whether haue you and euery of you, sincerely, vp∣rightly, and without any partiall affection, and concealing, presented and made knowne all and euery the offenders in any of the matters mentioned in the precedent Articles exhibited vnto you, either as they are taken in trueth to be, or by common fame reported. If you know of any other default or crime of Ecclesiasticall cogni∣sance, you are to present the same.
The Ministers of euery Parish may ioyne in presentment with the Churchwardens and Side-men, and if they will not present, then the Ministers themselues (being the persons that should haue the chiefe care for the suppressing of sinne and impietie in their parishes) may present the crimes aforesaid, and such things as shall be thought to require due reformation. Can. 113. There must be seuerall presentments made to euery seuerall Article. FINIS. Hos Articulos sub hisce Titulis in hac visitatione, 1629. proponit inquirendos, FRA: NORVICENSIS.
