A3730A 52612392 179318
An Extract OUT OF A Pastoral LETTER OF THE Bishop of Angers IN FRANCE CONCERNING, A late Miracle done in the Parish called in French, Des Ʋlmes de St. Florent. near to the Town of Saumur, on the second day of June 1668. at what time those of the reformed Church (as they call themselves) held their Sinod in the said Town of Saumur. PARIS, Printed in the Year MDCLXVIII
An Extract out of a Pastoral Letter of the Bi∣shop of Angers in France, concerning a late Miracle done in the Parish called in French Des Ulmes de St. Florent. near to the Town of Saumur, on the second day of June 1668. at what time those of the Reform∣ed Church as they call themselves) held their Synod in the said Town of SAUMUR. The Bishops words are as followeth. THe Curate of that Parish, having in∣formed us, that on the Saturday with∣in the Octave of the Blessed Sacra∣ment,
happened a miraculous Apparition in his Church; and that our Saviour JESƲS CHRIST had visibly manifested himself in the holy Hoste: Wee presently Ordered the Curate of the Town of Saumur to goe to the place, and take exact information of it; which being performed with great prudence and ex∣actness; he having sent us the Depositions of the Curate, and of the Vicair, and of several Parishioners, suitable to the first advice sent us, We Judged it fitting to take our selves the account of the truth of this Miracle from the Mouths of the Witnesses. Wherefore on the 20th. of this Month we went thither with our Promoter; and having celebrated the Masse of
the Holy Ghost, for obtaining light necessary for the clearing of so important a Verity; Wee Visited that same Hoste, which yet remained in the Remonstrance where the apparition was made: And after we had examined most exact∣ly, and were certified that it could not be done by any Artifice, nor by reflection of light; nor by any ordinary means of nature; We heard separately the Curate and the Vicair, and the Parishioners that were nearest to the Altar; as also two Inhabitants of the Town of Saumur, who had met there, and by their Depositions Wee understood, that on the 2d. day of this Month, which was Saturday within the Octave of the Blessed Sacrament, in time of the Salve,
when the Curate sang these words, Verbn n Ca∣ro, Panem Verum, there appeared in the Re∣monstrance, in place of of the Hoste, the form of a Man, his hair falling on his Shoulders, and of a bright-brown colour, his face glittering, his hands crossed, the right hand over the left; his Body vested with a white garment, in forme of an Albe. And that this Apparition lasted more than a quarter of an hour: as well upon the Tabernacle where the Sacrament was expo∣sed, as upon the Alter: after the Curate had ta∣ken it down, to shew it the people nearer at hand. After which, appeared a small cloud a∣bout it, which being soon dissipated, the Hoste appeared in its ordinary shape as it was before this Miracle happened.
This is the Substance of what the Witnesses de∣posed, who all agreed in the same thing; so that there is reason to believe, That the Saviour of the World did visibly manifest himself in this Pa∣rish, which is one of the poorest of the Diocess. The Bishop after a short Pastoral Exhor∣tation, ordained as followeth. THat the same Hoste in which the Appari∣tion was made, shall be preciously kept within the same Church Des Ʋlmes de St. Florent. in a Window, firm and decently ador∣ned, which shall be made for that purpose near the high Alter on the Gospel side; and that yearly on the Saturday within the Octave of the Blessed Sacrament, the Anniversary of this Ap∣parition shall be solemnly celebrated in the said Church. Given under the Hand and Seal of the Bi∣shop of Angers, the 25th. of June, 1668. FINIS.
