A469A R172078 52211641 175375
QUERIES, IN Order to a True Description; And an Account of the Natural Curiositys, and Antiquities BY Mr. ADAIR. 1. INformation is desired about any strange Appearances, that have hap∣pened in the Air, Also what violent Storms of Wind, Rain, Hail, Thunder, and Lightning, have fallen out, with the strange Ef∣fects, they have had, or if any Curious Persons have made Registers of the Weather. 2. If the Rivers, Lakes, and Rivolets, have any thing peculiar to them, what notable Springs there are, and how near the Tops of Mountains, if they Ebb and Flow, or desist from running at certain Seasons, if Medicinal, or of an unusual Taste, Smell, and Colour, or if they Petrify, or Incrustate Wood, Moss, Leaves of Trees, or tinge the Stone, or Earth through which they run: Also, if there be any extraordinary Currents, Flowings, and Ebbings, or Whirle-Pools in the Sea along the Coast. 3. If there be any Sands, Earths, Clays, Marles, &c. Singular for Colour, or other Qualities; And if any uncommon substances have been digged from under, or found above ground. 4. What Cristals, Flints, Stones, Minerals, Oars, &c. have been any where gotten, and also what formed, or figured Stones, as those having the Shapes of Plants, Shells, animals, &c. 5. If there be any Herbs, Grains, Shrubs, or Trees not ordinar, or that have been attended with strange Accidents or Excrescences. 6. If any odd Insects have been observed, where, and when they appeared, their Colour, Shape; and way of Breeding, if noticed. 7. What Curious Fouls are known along the Coast, or in the Country, or have been singular for their Colour, Shape, or way of Living, and if any not Natives frequent there, or have been driven in by Storms. 8. If there be any rare Fishes, or of an unusual bigness, and that either in Lakes, Rivers, or the Sea, also what Shells, or other substances are found along the Shoar. 9. If there be any thing extraordinar about Four Footed Beasts, as Sheep, Cows, Horse, and other animals, and if such or such Grounds occasion peculiar defects and Diseases.
10. If Men or Women have been attended, by any thing not commo and that either at, or before their Birth, in their Lifetime, or at Death, Also there have been, or yet are, any Gaimes, Feasts, Ancient Customes, or sing larity of Language amongst them, or Arts and Sciences not ordinar. 11. Information is also desired, about the old Camps, Forts, Artific Mounts, Cairns, or Heaps of Stones, up and down the Country, and what a counts, or Traditions are about them, and what Beacons, Crosses, Stones  on end, either in order, or out of order, or other Monuments of Antiquity a to be seen. 12. If any Ancient Coins, Urns, Lamps, Instruments, Amulets, Chai Rings, Seals, &c. Have been found, where and in whose custody. 13. What Abbays, Monesterys, Castles, Churches, Chapels, Hos∣tals, Bridges, or other Publick Buildings, have been in the Countr whether Ruined, or yet intire, their name, and by whom founded. 14. If any Inscriptions, Letters, Figures, &c. are to be seen, on Building Crosses, or other Stones. And Lastly, if there be any Manuscripts, or O Writings in any Persons Custody.
