C1610 99887625 183246
A Caveat for Cut-purses. With a warning to all purse-carriers: Shewing the confi∣dence of the first, and the carelesnesse of the last; With necessary admonitions for them both, left the Hangman get the one, and the Begger take the other. To the tune of, Packingtons pound. My masters and friends and good people draw near and look to your purses for that I do say. And though little mony in them you do bear, it cost more to get then to lose in a day: you oft have béen told both the young and the Old, and bidden beware of of the Cut-purse so bold: Then if you take heed not, free me from the curse Who both give you warning, for and the Cut-purse Youth, youth thou hadst better been starvd by thy Nurse Then live to be hang'd for cutting a purse. It hath béen upbraided to men of my Trade, that offtentimes we are the cause of this crime, Alack and for pitty, why would it be said as If they regarded or places or time, Examples have béen Of some that were séen of Westminster hall yea the pleaders between: Then why should the Judges be free from this curse, More then my poor self is for cutting the Purse Youth youth, &c. At Worster, 'tis known well and even in the Iale, a knight of good worship did there shew his fa Against the foule sinners in zeale for to raile, and so lost, ipso facto, his purse in the place: Nay once from the Seat Of judgement so great! a Iudge there did lose a fair purse of Velvet, Oh Lord for thy mercy how wicked or worse Are those that so venture their necks for a purse! Youth youth, &c, At Playes and at Sermons, and at the Sessions, 'tis daily their practice such booty to make, Yea under the Gallows at Executions, they stick not the stare-abouts purses to take, Nay one without grace At a better place at Court and in Christmas, before the Kings fa Alack then for pitty must I bear the curse, That only belong to the cunning Cut-purse Youth youth thou hadst better been starvd by th Then live to be hang'd for cutting a pu.
BVt oh! you vile Nation of Cutpurses all, Relent and repent, and amend and be sound And I now that you ought not by honest mens fall advance your own fortunes to dye above ground. And though you go gay In Silks as you may It is not the highway to Heaven as they say Repent then repent you for better for worse And kiss not the Gallows for cutting a purse Youth youth thou hadst better been starv'd by thy Nurse Then live to be hang'd for cutting a purse. The Players do tell you in Bartholmew Faire what secret consumptions and Rascals you are, For one of their Actors it séems had the fate by some of your Trade to be fléeced of late, Then fall to your prayers You that are way-layers, they're fit to chouse all the world, that can cheat Players For he hath the Art, and no man the worse, Whose cunning can pilfer the pilferers purse. Youth youth &c. The plain Country man that come staring to London if once you come near him he quickly is undone, For when he amazedly gazeth about one treads on his toes and the other puls't out, Then in a strange place Where he knows no face, his mony is gone tis a pittiful case. The Divel of hell in his trade is not worse Then Gilter, and Diver, and Cutter of purse, Youth &c. The poor servant maid wears her purse in her placket A place of quick féelling and yet you can take it, Nor is she aware that you have done the feat Vntill she is going to pay for her meat. Then she cryes and rages Amongst her Baggages, and swears at one thrust she hath lost all her wages For she is ingaged her own to disburse, To make good the breach of the cruel Cut-purse Youth &c. Your eyes and your fingers are nimble of growth. But Dun many times he hath béen nimbler then both Yet you are deceived by many a slut, But the Hang-man is only the Cut-purses cut, It makes you to vex When he bridles your necks and then at the last what becomes of your tricks But when you should pray, you begin for to curse The hand that first shewd you to slash at a purse, Youth, &c. But now to my hearers this Counsel I give, And pray friends remember it as long as you live, Bring out no more cash in purse pocket or wallet, Then one single penny to pay for the Ballet, For Cut-purse doth shrowd Himself in a Cloud, there's many a purse hath been lost in a crowd For he's the most rogue that doth crowd up & curses Who first cryes my Masters beware of your purses. Oh youth thou hadst better been starv'd by thy Nurse Then live to be hanged for cutting a purse. Printed for W. Gilbertson.
