C287 52614547 175782
CALEDONIA'S FAREWELL To the most Honourable JAMES, Earl of PERTH, &c. LORD High CHANCELLOUR; AND WILLIAM, Duke of QUEENSBERRIE, &c. Lord High THESAURER of SCOTLAND, When Called up by the King in March 1685. GO on, My Lords, and prosper: Go, repair To Court; and Kiss the Hands of the TRƲE HEIR Of Fivescore Kings and Ten, Four Diadems, And Kingdoms Three: an Heir, whose Royal Stems From British, Saxon, Danish, Norman Blood; With Scots and Irish, makes His Title good 'Gainst all Seclusion. And whose Entry's blest With an auspicious Peace, and He possest O' th' Thrones of His Ancestors, without stirr From any discontented snarling Curr. An Heir refus'd (but by no Builders) strange, Is now Chief Corner-stone! O happy change, And ne'r a Sword Unsheath'd! Lo, Slighted He, Seems strangely by the Pares, ordain'd to be The Basis of Our Rest: Let those go pry, Who hidden Virtues say, in Numbers ly, What Speaks the The number of an hundreth and eleven, when Ciphered, is but the first Figure in Arithmetick, by position thus thrice repeated (III) and which, by advancing of the middlemost, after this manner disposed III makes, when handsomly in right angles conjoyned, a straight cornered aequilateral Triangle ▵ and such is reckoned to be the first Figure in Geometrie (paralell Lines without some closing Ligament, never being lookt upon as any denominated Figure) and this Triangle is said to be in Architecture, of all adisicial Superstructures, the first truest and firmest Basis whence the Grecians denominated a King . Again, tick me but here the Arith∣metical Figure above-mentioned, and what made just now an hundreth and eleven (III) shall by vertue of the numerical Letter I, thus dwindle down to three (iii) which multiplied by it self, makes 9. and that so multiplied by it self also, gives the quadrat 81. whereunto add its root, the first quadrat 9, and the product is 90. Which being in like manner added to the former hundreth and eleven, there comes forth 201. where casting away the interjected Cypher, the two significant Figures remaining, do by addition re∣turn back to the first Root afore-mentioned 3. (iii) Come then, and compt me from Hengist, by Egbert, to the Conquerour down, and you'll find of Saxon Monarchs, and Kings of England 35. add the three interposed Danish Kings, with all from the Conquerour to His present MAJESTY (which maks 26.) so you have in all, of Saxons, Danes and Normans, 64. for England. Then waft but over with Hendry the Second to Ireland, where you may find of Lords and Kings thereof, before our SOVERAIGN 22. which added to the former 64. swells in all for both England and its Conquered Ireland, to 86, Add again this to the Scots III. you have 197. then state me here our LEIDGE-LORD, who now Reigns, Still one in the Catalogue, aswell of the Saxon, Da∣nish, Norman, and Irish Princes (for all SECLUSION must be now out of Doors) and you cannot miss to make 4. add this to the List of the Princes departed 197. and you have upon a just Calcu∣lation, exactly ad-aequated the former mentioned number of 201. and if you can but in this cryptick way of compting, allow the three ticks to pass for Crowns, see then but, reflect, and consider, by what strange and mysterious Algebra, this our Hundreth and eleventh KING, may be said, and is found to be, , these his three Kingdoms of ENGLAND. IRELAND. SCOTLAND. III. HUNDRETH and ELEVENTH; since HE Stands such from FERGƲS, in the Royal Tree. Consult but Euclid, take the Architect Alongst; try, what One Figure doth direct Those Arts of Kin; see, what supports the All Of the Cementing Trade: You need not call For SPENSE, or others, to unfold the thing; Eye but the Margine, you'll guess such a KING, May (without Book) Teach docile Boys to Speak What's true, and Bearded-men what's Loyal Greek. A Riddle, open'd with a thinking Skill, Might well have made the COMMONS cast their BILL Then, tell this Mighty Monarch; tell, My Lords, In plain, unfeigned, and with hearty Words; That CALEDONIA was His before, But His now more than formerly: She bore Respect for Fergus, and his Race She hopes, Shall (maugre Asaph) flourish still for Propes Of Bliss and Peace to the whole Isle. Tell JAMES, She nourisht Six before of the same Names; And knows that He, a Nursing-father will Prove to His old, kind CALEDONIA still. Tell Him, and tell but Truth, that She Condoles There be wild Rogues, who skulk from Holes to Holes, And call Her Mother; whom She doth disclaim For Bastard-brood: with all who dares defame, Or Him, or  break their Such, and all such, She holds and deems as Foes. But as the fairest Face may have some Wren; So these black Spots, those curs'd unhallowed Men, She hopes Her JAMES, by Your most prudent Care, Will soon wipe off, that She more bright and fair May in His sight appear; since She can tell, That CALEDONIA loves the STƲARTS well. Nay, tell Him all Her Thoughts; tell, what is fit For Him to know of Her: So shall You knit His Love to Her, and Her's to You, which Ty, Of twisted Duty, Love and Loyalty, 'Twixt Him, and You, and Her, shall make a Name, In the long Annalls, of embalming Fame. Since CALEDONIA, can scarce Sing choiser Themes, Then Praises to Your selves, and Blessings to KING JAMES. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most Sacred Majesty, anno DOM. 1685.
