C968 52211922 175491
The Case of R. Gee, Esq Humbly recommended to the Commons of England, assem∣bled in Parliament. IN the last Session of Parliament, there was exhibited a Peti∣tion to the House of Commons, by the Hackney Coach∣men against R. Gee, and other Commissioners for the Regula∣ting of Coaches, complaining against the said R. Gee for several Misdeameanors by him committed, contrary to the Directions of a late Act of Parliament, Entitled, An Act for Licencing and Re∣gulating Hackney Coaches and Stage Coaches, &c. charging the said R. Gee, one of the Commissioners, as follows. 1. For refusing Licences to persons qualified by the Act. 2. For granting Licences to persons not qualified by the Act. 3. For licensing above 700. 4. For exacting more Money than the Law allows. The matter was taken into Consideration, but so intricated, with a Confusion and Contradiction of Witnesses, false Sugge∣stions in the Evidence, and other Irregularities in the manner and order of the Proceeding, that R. Gee addrest himself, by Peti∣tion, to the Honourable House of Commons for Redress, com∣plaining of hard measure (to fall under a Sentence that looks like a Conviction of Perjury, without so much as one Witness upon Oath) and only desiring to be heard upon the matter in Question, the said Petition was tender'd to the House, but other business intervening, it fell to the ground. By this disappointment the Petitioner finds himself, now in a manner forced upon a Second Application to the same Authority, and upon the same Account, not doubting of such Encourage∣ment from the Wisdom and Equity of the House, as shall be found agreeable to Honor and Justice at least if these following Articles, which the said R Gee takes upon himself to make good, may be admitted in proof of his inocency. As under favour for in∣stance. 1. There is a dead man produced for a Witness. 2. A Witness said to be summoned and appear, that was nei∣ther summoned, nor did appear. 3. A Charge exhibited impossible to be true. 4. Witnesses heard ex parte. 5. A Copy of the Defendants Charge promised them, and then forced to an Answer without it. These are some few Exceptions, of many, to save time and trouble; and R. Gee humbly submits himself upon the whole to this Impartial Equity, either to be repair'd in his reputation, if he make good his charge, or to suffer if he does not.
