E1854 52614656 175870
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT FOR Advancing by way of loane, the summe of fourty thousand pounds, for payment of Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX ARMIE. October the 15. 1645. ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Ordi∣nance be forthwith printed and published. Hen. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed by T.W. for Edw. Hsband, Printer to the Honou∣rable House of Commons. 1645.
An Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for advancing by way of Loane, the summe of Fourty thousand pounds, &c. 13. October, 1645. THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, finding the many Battells, Sieges and other service performed by the Army under the Command of Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, and the necessary recrui∣ting and supplying thereof at so great a distance hath occasioned a farre greater expence, then was at first conceived, And also the great Ad∣vantages, which through the blessing of God, the Common-wealth hath received by the unwearied indeavours of the said Army; Doe hold it necessary, that a Considerable summe of Money bee forthwith ad∣vanced for the supply of the said Army, and defraying of the charges incident thereunto, Have Ordained, and doe hereby Ordaine by authority of Parliament, that the summe of forty thousand pounds shall be forthwith advanced by way of Loane for the intents and purposes aforesaid, by, and on such persons of abilitie as shall vo∣luntarily, or by Assessment lend the same on the Securi∣ty, and Termes hereafter expressed. And in regard many persons of Abilitie through disaffection or otherwise have been slow in the like Services tending to the good and preservation of the Publique, It is therefore by the said Lords and Commons Ordained, for the more spee∣dy
and orderly raysing of the said summe of fourty thou∣sand pounds. That the Committee appointed by seve∣rall Acts of Common Counsell for gathering of the Arrears or any seven or more of them shall be a Com∣mittee to Register and take the Subscriptions of all per∣sons that shall voluntarily lend and advance moneys as aforesaid, and to assesse such person or persons as shall not according to their Abilities, voluntarily and pro∣portionably advance the same. And to Assesse such part of the said summe (as shall not bee voluntarily advan∣ced) on such persons of abilitie as they shall thinke fit, the same to be paid by the persons respectively, as shall so lend or pay the same unto Sir John WVollaston, and the rest of the Treasurers at Warre, appointed by the Ordi∣nance of the 29 of March last, at the place of Receipts in Guild-hall London. And be it Ordained by authority aforesaid, That all and every person or persons, being assessed by vertue hereof, and neglecting or refusing to pay the said severall summes so assessed unto the said Treasurers at Warre within ten dayes after notice given, or left at his or their usuall place of aboad, or at the dwelling House or place of aboad of any Partner or Factor of the person or per∣sons so Assessed, inhabiting within, or neere the Citie of London, shall be by vertue of a Warrant from the Committee of Lords and Commons appointed by the said Ordinance of Parliament of the 29 of March last past, who (or any five of them, one thereof being a Peere upon consideration of every such assessment) are hereby authorised to approve, increase, or moderate eve∣ry such assessment, and thereupon to make and give Warrants to such persons as shall be by the Commit∣tee now appointed nominated for that purpose, compel∣led
to pay the same by distresse of the Goods and Chat∣tels of such person or persons so refusing or neglect∣ing to pay the same, which goods so distreyned shall be sold by such persons as the said Committee shall ap∣point for satisfaction of the said Assessment, and the surplusage, if any be, the said Assessment and Charges satisfied, be returned to the party distreyned. And if any person shall neglect, or refuse to pay the sum assessed, untill a Distresse be taken for the same then, that every person or persons so neglecting or refu∣sing as aforesaid, shall pay such reasonable charge for every such distress, removall, or sale of his, her, or their goods as the said Committee (of Lords and Commons, or any five of them one thereof being a Peere) appointed by the Ordinance of the 29 of March 1645. shall allow to be imployed for the better execution of this Ordinance. And if no sufficient Distress can be had, or taken of the goods of the persons that shall be Assesed, by vertue of this present Ordinance, then such person or persons shall be by vertue of a Warrant from the Committee of Lords and Commons as aforesaid who are hereby authorised to grant the same, be committed to safe Cu∣stodie, there to remaine untill such person or persons shall satisfie the said summe assessed upon them by ver∣tue hereof, which money so brought into the Treasurers at Warre shall be issued forth by Warrant from the said Committee of Lords and Commons appointed by Ordinance of the 29 of March aforesaid, except∣ing what shall be by order of the Committee appointed by this present Ordinance deducted for payment of per∣sons imployed in the execution of this Ordinance not exceeding three pence in the pound.
And for the better incouragement and securing of such persons as shall advance the said summe or any part thereof, The Lords and Commons doe hereby Ordaine that such person or persons as shall pay or lend any mo∣ney upon or by vertue of this Ordinance, and pay the same to the Treasurers at warre aforesaid, shall be re∣paid the severall summes which shall be by them ad∣vanced. out of the receipt of the Excize and new Impost, with interest after the rate of eight pound per centum, per annum for so long time as they shall forbeare the same. And the Commissioners of Excize and new Impost for the time being, are hereby authorized and required to pay unto the severall Lenders, their Executors and as∣signes, at the end of sixe months, the interest for so much money as shall be advanced by vertue hereof, and the principall and remainder of the interest thereof after the rate aforesaid, in due course, order and ranke as the same stands charged upon the said Excise and impost, unto the persons that doe advance the same. And the rcceipt of the said Treasurers at Warre or any two of them, one being an Alderman, the other a Commoner, shal interest and intitle every person or per∣sons to whom it shall be given, his or their Executors, Administrators or assignes, into the security and benefit of this present Ordinance with interest aforesaid. And it is further Ordained that no Ordinance nor as∣signement, not past in the said receipt of the Excise be∣fore an Ordinance of the second of September last, for the payment of fifty thousand pounds in course, for the service of the Army under the Command of Sir Tho∣mas Fairfax, shall preceede this Ordinance; But that it shall be paid in its course from that time accordingly
and the aforementioned receipts of the Treasurers at warre, together with the acquittance of the persons ad∣vancing the same, shall be a sufficient warrant and dis∣charge to the Commissioners of Excise and every of them, for payment of the said summes to the severall per∣sons as aforesaid. And it is further Ordained that all Majors, Sheriffs, Constables and Headboroughs and all Officers of the Trayned Bands and Auxiliaries within the said limits, shall be ayding to the said respective Committees, and such as they shall imploy in the execution of this pre∣sent Ordinance. And the said respective Committees shall have pow∣er to impose upon such Officers or persons so neglecting their duties therein, such fine or fines as to them shall seeme meet, not exceeding forty shillings for any one of∣fence, and to cause the same to be leavied by distresse and sale of the goods as aforesaid. And it is further Ordained that all persons acting in pursuance of this Ordinance shall be saved harmeles by authority of Parliament. And that no priviledged places shall be exempted from the said assessment. Provided that such persons as shall make it appeare to the said Committee of Arreares by their Protestation or Oath that he or they are not worth one thousand pounds, shall not be assessed by this Ordinance. Provided alwayes that this Ordinance or any clause therein conteyned shall not extend to any of the Peers of this Realm, or to the Members of the House of Com∣mons, or assistant, attendant or Officer of the House of Peers, or Officer of the House of Commons. H. Elsynge, Cler.Parl.Dom.Com.
Die Martis 2. September, 1645, IT is this day Ordained by the lords and Commons assembled in Par∣liament; that fifty thousand pounds shall bee paid in course for the ser∣vice of the Army under the Com∣mand of Sir Thomas Fairefax, out of the receipts of the Excise, by Ordinance of the eleventh of Sep∣tember, 1643, unto the Treasurers at Warre; and the receipt of any foure of them together with this Ordinance shall bee a sufficient dis∣charge unto the Commissioners of Excize and every of them, for payment of the said fifty thousand pounds, and Interest for the same after the rate of eight pounds Per Cent. for so long time as the same shall be unpaid, before it become due as aforesaid. H. Elsynge, Cler.Parl. D. Com. FINIS
