G523CA R177375 53981524 180234
The Gentlewomans CABINET UNLOCKED. VVherein is Contained, many Excellent Receipts for the Neat Dressing of Divers Sorts of Meats, both Flesh and Fish, with their proper Sauces. ALSO, Directions for the best way of making Pancakes, Fritters, Tansies, Puddings, Custards, Cheese∣cakes; and such like fine Knacks, and other Delicate Dishes, which are most frequently used in Gentlemens Houses. The 7th. Impression, with New Editions. London, Printed by E. C. and are to be Sold by John Williamson at the Bible and Sun on London-bridge 1675.
The Gentlewomans CABINET Unlocked. To make Rice Milk. TAke a Quart of good Milk, two handfuls of Rice-flower, bea∣ten very small, and a quarter of a pound of Sugar, & put them into the Milk; then take the Ylk of an Egg, beat it with a spoonfull or two of Rose-water, then put it into the Milk, and stir all these together, and put it o∣ver a quick fire, kéeping it continually stirring till it be as thick as water pa. To make Fritters. Take nine Eggs, yelks & whites beat them very well, then take half a pint of Sack, a pint of Ale, some Ale Yest; put
these to the Eggs and beat them all toge∣ther, put in some Spice and Salt, and fine Flower: then shred in your Apples, and let them be well tempered, and fry them with Béef-suet, or half Béef and half Hogs-suet dryed out of the Leaf. To make a good Cake. Take half a Peck of Flower, thrée pound of Butter, some Nutmeg, Cloves and Mace, Cinnamon, Ginger, and a pound of Sugar  mingle these well to∣gether with the flower, then take four pound of Currants well washed, picked, and dryed in a warm cloth, a little Ale-Yst, twelve Eggs, a quart of Cream or good Milk warm'd, half a pint of Sack, a quartern of Rose-water, knead it well and let it be very lith, lay it in a warm cloth, and let it lye half an hour against the fire, then make it up with the white of an Egg beaten with a little Butter, Rose-water, and Sugar: put it into the Oven; and let it stand an hour and an half. To Pickle Cucumbers. Take an Earthen Vessel, & lay there∣in first a lay of Salt & Dill, then a lay of Cucumbers, and so till they be all laid: then put in some Cloves and
whole Pepper, and some Fennel-séed, then fill it up with Béer vinegar, and lay a clean board with a Stone upon it, to kéep them in the Pickle and so kéep them close covered: and when the Vi∣negar looks black pour it out and put in fresh. To pickle Broom Buds. Take your Buds before they be yellow on the top, make your Pickle of Vine∣gar and Salt, which you must do by stir∣ring it till the Salt be dissolved, then put in your Buds, and stir them once every day, till they be sunk within the Vine∣gar: And be sure to kéep them close co∣vered. To Pickle Clove Gilliflowers, for, Salleting all the Year. Take your Clove-Gilliflowers, and slip of the leaves, then strow some Su∣gar in the bottom of the Gally-pot (that you to them in) and lay a Laying of Gilliflowers, and then a Laying of Sugar, and so till you have laid them all, then your on as much Clarret∣wine as will cover them, and lay a piece of thin board on them to keep them down, then tye them close, and let them stand a Month in the Sun, and use them
as you have occasion. To make Black Puddings. Take your Blood while it is warm and stir it well, and put some Salt in it, and when it is cold put in your Groats, and let it stand two days, stir it often, then put in your Herbs well shred, as Rosemary-tops, Winter-savory, Pen∣ny-Royal, Time, and Fennel; then make it sort with putting of Cream to it hot, untill the Blood looks pale, then beat some Eggs and mingle it, and sea∣son it with Spices, and put in good store of Béef-suet not minced to small, fill your Skins therewith and boyl them: Or else you may boyl it in a bag, Which you please. To make a Tansie. Take fiftéen yolks of Eggs, and six whites, beat them very well, then put in some Sugar, and a little Sack, and a about a pint of Cream, then beat them again, then put in Tansie, Spinnage, and Primrose-leaves, or the like, chopt as small as possible may be, and bent them all well together, then put it in a Skillet, and set it over the fire, stirring it continually till it be pretty stiff, then put it into a Pan, and Fry it with
swéet Butter: And make Sauce for it with Rose-water, Butter and Sugar. To make Furmentie. Take a quantity of Cream or Milk, as much as you please; put therein Mace, Cinnamon and Nutmeg, set it o∣ver the fire, and let it boyl; then take your Wheat (being first Boyled very tender in Water) and put it into your Cream or Milk, and boyl it well, then beat same yelks of Eggs, with a little cold Milk and fine flower, put them in to thicken it, kéep it stirring that it burns not to the bottom: when it is boyl'd, swée∣ten it with Rose-water and Sugar, To make Stew'd Broth, or Plumb-pottage. Take a Neck of Mutton, or rather a Rump of Béef, let it boyl, and scum your Pot clean, then thicken it with grated Bread, putting in some beaten Spice, and a pound of Currants, two pound of Raisons of the Sun, a pound of Pruins: when it is boyl'd put in a quart of Clarret, and a pint of Sack, and as much Sugar as will sweeten it, and then serve it up. To make a good Baked Pudding. Take grated White-bread and fine Flower, with Eggs, Sugar, and Spice,
then take as much Cream or Milk, as will temper it about the thickness of Pancake-btter: shred your Suet small and put into it: butter your Pan, and bake it: so serve it up: casting Sugar upon it. How to make Paste for a Venison Pasty. Take almost a peck of Flower, knead it with two pound of Butter, and as much Suet, the yelks of eight or ten Eggs, make reasonable lith Past, then roul it out, and lay on Suet: first lay a paper under your Past, then lay on your Venison, close it up, pinch it and wash it with Butter, and bake it: when you draw it out wash it with Butter again. To make a Custard. Take good store of Eggs, put away one quarter of the Whites, beat them well, and then mix them with the thick∣est and swéetest Cream you can get: then season it with Salt, Sugar, Cin∣namon, Cleves and Mace, and a littl Nutmeg then raise your Coffins of goo tough Past, and strew the bottoms ove a good thickness with Currants, an Sugar, then set them in the Oven t
Bake: when they are Baked draw them out, strew Sugar on the tops, and serve them us. To make Puff-paste. Take the fnest wha flower, after it hath béen a little bakd in a Pot in the Oven, and blend it well with Eggs whites and elks altogether, and after the Paste is well knaded▪ role out a part of it as thin as you can, ten spread cold swéet Butter over the same, then upon the same butter role another leaf of Paste as before, and spread that with Butter also, thus role leaf upon lea with Butter betwéen, till it be as thick as you think good: or else make Paste for Venison. Florentine Tart, or what dish you please and so bake it. To make a Pippin Tart. Take Pippins and pare them, then di∣vide them in halfs, and take out the cores clean, then having told the Coffin flat raise up a doxge of an inch high, lay∣ing the Pippins with the hollow sides downwards as close as they will lye, and lay hre and there a Clove, little bits of Cinnamon, then cover all clean over with Sugar, and so cover the
Coffin, and bke it: and when it is baked, heat Rose water and Butter and anoint all the Lid over therewith, and strew good store of Sugar on, and so serve it, in like manner you may make a Codling Tart. To make a Cheese-cake. Take thrée Eggs and beat them very well, and as you beat them, put in as much fine Flower as will make them thick, put in them thrée or four Eggs more, and beat them all together: then take a quart of Cream, and put into it a quarter of a pound of swéet Butter, and set them over the fire, and when it begins to boyl, put in your Eggs and Flower: stir them well, and let it boyl till it be thick, then season it with Salt, Sugar, Cinnamon, and Currants, ane bake it in Paste as you please. To make a Quaking Pudding. Take a pint (and somewhat more) of thick Cream, ten yelks of Eggs, with thrée whites: beat them very well with two Spoonfuls of Rose-water: Then mingle thrée spoonfuls of fine Flower with it, but mingle it so well that there be no lumps in it, put it all together and season it with Salt and Spice, then
take a thick Cloth and butter it well, then put your Pudding therein, and let it boyl for half an hour as fast as you can: take it up, and make your Sauce with Butter and Rose-water and Sugar, and serve it up. To make an Oatmeal Pudding. Take a quart of Oatmeal beaten to Flower, a pint of Cream, four Eggs beaten, a good quantity of Sugar and Nutmeg, a pound of Béef-suet well minced: mingle all these together and so bake it. To make a Sack-Posset. Take a quart of Cream, and boyl it well with Sugar, Mace, and Nutmeg, and take half a pint of Sack, and as much Ale and boyl them well together with some Sugar: and when it hath stood cooling a little while, put your Cream into a Bason to your Sack, then heat a Pewter-dish and cover your Bason with it, and let it stand by the fire two hours are you eat it. To make a Candle. Take what Quantity of Ale you think méet, and set it over the fire, and when it is ready to boyl, scum it well: then cast in large Mace, and take the
yelks of two Eggs for one Mess or Draught, and so  or less according to th qantity of your Ile: bat them very well, and take away the skin of the yelks,  the le boyls put them in, and  continually: and when it hah  a while; swéeten it with Sugar; and if it be to eat, cut two or thrée tosts of  to bread, tst them dry, and put thm to the Caudle, but if it be to drink pu in on To Stew Beef. Take a good Rup of Béef cut from the bones, shred Turneps and Carrets small, with Spinnage and Lettice, put all in a Pan and let it stew four hours with so much Water, and a quart of White-wine as will cover it, some Pepper and Salt: when it is stewed then put in a wine-glass full of good El∣dr Vinegar, and serve it with Sip∣pits. To Boyl a Gammon of Bacon. Water your Gammon of Bacon twenty-four hours, then put it into a déep Kettle with swéet Hay, let it boyl softly fix or seven hours, and then take it up with a Scummer and a Plate, and take off the Skin whole, then stick your
Gammon full of Cloves, and strew on some gross Pepper, then cut your skin like sppits to garnish your Gammon: and when you sere it, stick it with Bay-leaves. To Boyl Brawn. Water yur Brawn twenty-four hours, wash and sye it four or five times, then take it out of the water and lay it on a clean Table, and throw an handful of Salt on ery Colo, then ind them up as ast as you can with Hemp or Bass, an put them in your Kettle, when the Waer boyleth, and the scum aiseth, take it wy: Let it boyl so tenr that yo may ust a straw through it, then let i cool till the next morning, and . To make a White-pot. Take the best and swéest Cream, and boyl it with good store of Sugar and Cinnamon, a little Rose-water: then take it from the fire and put into it clean pickt Rice, but not so much as to make it thick, and let it steep therein till it be cold: then put in the Yelks of six Eggs and two whites, Currants, Nut∣meg and Salt: then put it into the Pan or Pot, as thin as if it were a Custard,
and so bake it, and ser it in the Pot it is baked in, strewing Sugar on the top thereof. To make Mince-Pyes. Take a Leg of Mutton, and cut the best of the flesh from the Bone, and per∣boyl it well: then put to it three pound of the best Mutton▪ Suet, and shred it ve∣ry small, then spread it abroad, and season it with Salt, Cloves, and Mace bea∣ten: then put in great store of Currants and Rysons, a few Dates sliced, and some Orange Peel sliced: then being all well mixed together, put it into your Coffins, and so bake them: and when they are served up, open the Lids and strow good store of Sugar on the top of the Meat, and upon the Lids. In like manner also you may make Minc'd Pyes of Béef, or Veal, only the Béef should not be parboyl▪d, and the Veal will re∣quire twice as much Suet. To make a Warden, or Quince Pye. Take of the fairest and bst War∣dens, or Quinees, and pare them, and core them, cut the sharp ends flat, then boyl them in White-wine and Sugar,
till the Sirrup grews thick: then take the Wardens or Quinces from the Sir∣rup, lay them in a clean Dish & let them cool, then set them into a Coffin of good tough Paste, stick Cleve in the tops with little stcks of Ciunamon and good store of Sugar, then covr it with a Lid, only leave a vent hole thn bake it when you draw it, put the Sirrup (that the Wardens or Quinces were boyl'd in) at the vent hole, shake it well, and melt some Butter with Rose-water, to anoint the Lid, and strew store of Sugar on the top of the Wardens, or Quinces, and the Lid: and so serve it. For Dressing of Fish. Take an  Fih whatsoever, as Pike, Bream, Crp, Barbel, Chu, or such like▪ and draw it, but scale it not: then take out the Liver and Rfuge, and wash you Fish▪ Then take a pottle of fair water, a pretty quantity of White-wine, good store of Salt, Vinegar, and a little bunch of swéet Herbs, and set it on the fire, and as soon as it begins to boyl, put in your Fish, and having boyl'd a little, take it up into a fair Vessel, then put in the Liquor, some Gross Pepper, and Ginger: and when it is
boyl'd wal, put in more Salt, and set it to cool, and then put your Fish into it: and when you serve it up, lay Fennel thereupon. To boyl small Fish. First boyl White-wine and water to∣gether with a bunch of choice Herbs and a little whole Mace: when all is boy∣led well together, put in your Fish, whether Roches, Dances, Gudgeons, Flounders or the like: and as the scum ariseth take it clean of, then put in the sole of a Manchet, a good quantity of swéet Butter, and season it with Pepper, Salt, and Verjuice: so serve it in upon sip∣pits, and adorn the sides of the Dish with Sugar. To make a Broth for any fresh Fish whatso∣ever, whether Pike, Bream, Carp, Bar∣bel, Eel, or the like. You must boyl Water, Verjuice, and Salt, together with a handful of sliced Onions: then you must thicken it with thrée or four spoonfuls of Ile Yest: then put in a good quantity of whole Barbe∣ries, as also pretty store of Currants: when it is boyled enough. Dish up your Fish and pour your Broth upon it, lay∣ing your fruit and Onions uppermost.
To roast a Cows Udder. Take a Cows Vdder, and first boyl it well, then stick it over with Cloves, and when it is cold, spit it and lay it to the fire and apply it well with basting; and when it is well roasted and brown, bread it and draw it from the fire; take some Clarret-wine and grated bread, and set it on a Chaffingdish of Coals, & boyl it till it be thick; then put to it good store of Sugar and Cinnamon: and putting it in a clean Dish, lay the Vdder therein, and trim the sides of the Dish with Su∣gar, and serve it up. To Roast Venison. Take your Venison and Lard it either with Pork or Bacon, and stick it full of Cloves on the outside; then spit it and Roast it by a soaking fire: then take Clarret-wine, Vinegar, grated bread, and some of the Gravey that comes from the Venison, and boyl them well, then season it with Sugar, Cinnamon, Gin∣ger, and Salt? and serve the Veni∣son upon the Sauce when it is e∣nough. To make Sauce for a Roasted Capon. Take Onions; péel and slice them, then boyl them in fair Water, with
Pepper, Salt, and a few White-bread crums, then put into it a spoonful or two of Clarret-wine; ye juice of an Orange, thrée or four slices of Lemon péel shred small: All these mixt together, pour it upon the Capon when 'tis cut up, This Sauce (leave out the Bread) will also serve for a Pheasant. To make Sauce for a Quale, Rail, or any fat big Bird. Mix Clarret-wine and Salt together, with the Gravey of the Bird and a few fine Bread crums; boyl them, and pour it on the Birds when you cut them up. To make Sauce for Pigeons, Stock-Doves, or the like. Mix Butter and Vinegar with Parsly Roasted in their bellies, and shred small: So serve it up with the Pigeons. To make Sauce for Wild Fowle Roasted. The most General Sauce for all ind of Wild Fowl Roasted, as Duck, Mallard, Teale, Snipe, Sheldrake, Plover, Puete, Gulls and such like; is onely Mustard and Vinegar, or Mustard and Verjuce mixt together: or else an Onion, Water, and Pepper:
Some use only Butter melted without any thing else. To make Sauce for Green Geese. Take Sorrel, stampt it, and strain it, and mix the juyce thereof with Sugar, & a few Scalded Gooseberries; and so serve it upon sippets. To make Sauce for a Pig. Take Sage and Roast it in the Belly of the Pg▪ then boyl Verjuyce and But∣ter and Currants together, take and hop the Sage small, and mix the Brains of the Pig with it. To make Sauce for a Turkey. Take Water, and set it over the fire, hen slice good store of Onions, and put nto it, also Pepper and Salt, and good ore of Gravey that comes from the Turkey, and boyl them very well toge∣her, then put to it a few fine crums of rated bread to thicken it, a very little ugar and some Vinegar: and so serve  up with the Turkey. Sauce for Roast Mutton. Some use only Onions sliced in fair Water and Salt? Some use Broom-uds pickled: Some pickled Cucum∣ers: But the best Sauce is Clove-gil∣-flowers preserved in Clarret-Wine.
as before I shewed you. Sauce for Veal. Take all kind of swéet Pot-hearbs, and chop them very small, with the Yelks of two or thrée Eggs; boyl them in Vinegar and Butter, with a few White-bread crums, and good store of Sugar: Then season it with Cinna∣mon, a little Pepper and Salt; and pour it upon the Veal; with some sli∣ces of Oringes and Lemons about the Dish. To make Rice-Puddings. Take half a pound of Rice, and stéep it in new Milk a whole night, and in the morning drain it, and let the Milk drop a∣way, and take a quart of the best, sweetest and thickest Cream, and put the Ric into it, and boyl it a little, then set it to cool an hour or two, and after put in the Yelks of six Eggs, a little Pepper, Cloves, and Mace, Currants, Sugar, & Salt; and having mixt them together put in good store of Béef Suet smal shred, and beat it well; so put it into th Farms or Skins, and boyl them: An serve them up; after a day old. To make Links. Take the largest of your Chins o
Pork, and that is called a List, and shred them small, and mix the Fat and Lean excéeding well together; then take good store of Sage, and shred it very small, and mixt it with the flesh; then give it a good season with Pepper & Salt, Cloves and Mace, then take yt farms or Skins in their whole length, not cut into pieces, as for Puddings: First blow them wll to make the Meat slip, then fill them; which done, divide them with Threds in∣to small Links as you please; then hang them up in the Corner of some Chimny (clean swept) that they may take the air of the fire; and let them dry four or five days ere any be eaten: And when they are served up, let them be fryd, or broy∣led on a Gridiron; or Roasted about a Capon. To make an excellent Sullabub, without Milking under a Cow. Take Sider and good store of Sugar, and a little Nutmeg, stir it well toge∣ther, and put in as much thick Cream as you think will serve, by two or thrée spoonfuls at a time, as hard as you can (as though you Milkt it in) then stir it together excéeding softly once about,
and let it stand two hours (at least be∣fore it be eaten: for the standing makes the Curd. To make a Fool. Take two Quarts of Cream, set it over the fire, and let it boyl: then take the Yelks of twelve Eggs, and beat them very well with Thrée or Four spoonfuls of cold Cream: as the Cream is heating over the fire, take five or six spoonfuls and put to the Eggs, stirring them well together: and when the Cream boyls, strain the Eggs into it, kéeping it stirring continually, that it may not burn to the bottom, and let it boyl a little after the Eggs are in: then take it off and let it stand and cool, then cut some sippits and lay in a dish, and pour Thrée or Four spoonfuls of Sack upon them, setting them to dry: and when they be Dryed, so that they hang to the Dish, swéeten the Cream, and pour it into the Dish softly, that the sippits rise not up: Kéep it till it be cold ere you eat it. To Hash a Calves-head. Take it and half boyl it, then take it and slice it in small pieces: then take swéet Herbs, and shred them small, and
take some Clarret-wine, and the yelks of four Eggs, and set a stewing, and shake it well together. To Hash any cold Meat. Slice your Meat and set it a stewing, and put in swéet-Herbs, some whole Pepper and Cloves; and when you serve it up, put in some Butter and Vinegar. For a Frigacie. Take your Rabbets or Chickens, and cut them in pieces, and break the bones with a Roling pin, and let your Pan be very clean, and take swéet-Butter, and kéep them shaking, and slice a little Le∣mon: and when it is almost ready, put in some Eggs and Cream well beaten, and two or thrée spoonfuls of Rose-water, or Sack, and stir them well together: & when it is ryed enough, serve it up. To make Sauce for boyled Rabbets. Take Onions and boyl them in a cloth and boyl Currants, and beat your Butter and Vinegar very thick: and serve it up. Sauce for boyl'd Chickens. Take Parsly and Sorril scalded and shred, then melt your Butter thick, and mix them together with a little Sugar: and send them up.
Sauce for Calves Feet. Boyl a little Bread and er, and take the Yelks of thrée or four Eggs, and two or thrée spoonfuls of Sack or Clar∣ret, and a little Sugar: beat them toge∣ther, and serve thm up. Sauce for a Boyl'd Leg of Lamb. Take Gooseberries sclded and But∣ter, beat with Vinegar and Sugar, and a little Lemmon and Orange: so send them up. Sauce for Roast Mutton. Take thrée or four Anchodis stwed in Clarret-wine, over a Chaffing-dish of Coals: and as much Gravey as you can save: so serve it up. To make a Chicken Pye. Take your Chickens and season them with Cloves and Mace, & a little Salt, then lay them into your Coffin, and lay some large Mace upon them, and an in∣different quantity of Butter: and leave a a bent hole in the top: so bake it: and against it is bak'd, make a Candle of Muskdine or Sack, byled with Mace and thicked with Eggs, and store of Sugar, and fill it up: and serve it either cold or hot. This is the new Fashion to make a Pigeon Pye. FINIS.
