N588 99884934 182701
A nevv Carroll compyled by a Burgesse of Perth, to besung at Easter next 1641. which is the next great episcopall feast after Christmasse: To be sung to the tune of Gra-mercie good Scot. WHen Jock of broad Scotland went South to complain That, Prelts-& pick-thanks this land had ov'rgane, He came unto Tweed, Heaven favourd him so, The waters soon fell, and so let him go, That without great trouble his foot came to land, Where Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand. Jack bade him beware there were knaves in the way, That would meet him and kill him, at least make a fray. But Jock went on with a bag full of bloes, He had ay two for one, to give to his foes, With a club and a cudgell whom ever he fand; Yet Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand. But Jock being wearie he took him to rest, The winter being cold, where the fire was best. He sent his complaint, to him who commands, It was found to be just, with all his demands. How the prelat and pick-thank had joynd in a band; Yet Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand. They banded to put both the body and saull Of the poore Scot at home in a terrible thrall, By loosing the bands of the Kirk and the State, Comforming to Rome their Imperiall seate, Where beast after beast hath still had command, Yet Jack of fair England hath took Jock by the hand. The Scot had a good and an honourable cause, For still he protested to live by the lawes, And that made his courage both courteous and keene Although that his purse was sober and meane: By begging or stealing he sure could not stand; But Jack of fair England hath took Jock by the hand. Jack told him so long as his cause was so good, He should neither want money, nor fewell, nor food, Un it were clearly oth heard and discust, And prelates and pick-thanks both dung to the dust. Be merrie good Scot, they shall both understand That Jack of fair England hath thee by the hand. When Jock did send home, he wrote it for newes, That England warr'd Ireland in wearing of trewes. For Ireland but weares them on their nether parts, But England on both their heads and their hearts. Let Scotland and Ireland praise God in a band, That Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand. And also he wrote, that made Scots to dance, That England for manners warr'd the kingdome of France For still they were giving, God knowes what they got, Yet they said and they sang, grand mercie good Scot. French manners, an sword, and an idoll we fand, For purity and peace, Jack took Jock by the hand. Now good Scot returne, thy prelates are gone As beasts to their dens; thy pick-thanks each one Are all to the rout, and have quat their cause. Take them home with thy self, and after thy Laws Sit and judge the false traitours that joynd in a band, For Jack of fair England hath thee by the hand. Come heere good Scot as a friend when thou will, Goe camp with thy friends in Ireland thy fill; Keep order at home, serve GOD and thy Prince, Thy Kirk and thy Countery are setled from hence: It shall be proclaim'd through many a land, That Jack of fair England took Jock by the hand. When Jack of fair England hath to do with a man, Let Jock of broad Scotland advertis'd be than. For Jock shall be ready when Jack hath to do, With his club and his cudgell, and his wallet too. Till the whoore be hunted by sea and by land, It's for God and the King, Jack & Jock joineth hand? FINIS.
