s1743 52529269 179017
A PROCLAMATION Discharging Correspondence and Commerce with France. WILLIAM by the Grace of God, King of Great-Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute; Greeting, For∣asmuch as, albeit the Corresponding and keeping Commerce with our Ene∣mies, against whom we are now in a State of War, is Discharged by several Laws and Acts of Parliament under the pain of Treason, and particularly by the eight Act of the third Session of this Our Current Parliament, all our Subjects are expresly Discharged to go to the Kingdom of France, or any of the Dominions subject to the French King, after the first Day of June one thousand six hundred and ninety three years, or being already in the said Kingdom of France, or Countries foresaid to stay or abide therein after the first day of August in the said year, without express Leave from Us, or the Lords of Our Privy Council, under the pain of Treason; yet sundrie of Our Sub∣jects presume to have Commerce, and to Correspond and keep Intelligence with Persons Residing in the said Kingdom of France, now in a State of War with Us, or Dominions thereto belonging, without Authority foresaid: Therefore, and to the effect, Our Subjects may know their Danger in the Premisses, if they shall for hereafter Transgress in manner foresaid; We with Advice of the Lords of Our Privy Council, do strictly Prohibit and Discharge all and every one of Our Subjects within this Our Antient King∣dom to Correspond, keep Intelligence, or have any Commerce whatsomever with the said Kingdom of France, or Persons Residing within the same, or Domi∣nions belonging to the French King, without Authority foresaid, under the Pain of being Punished as Corresponders with Declared Traitours, to the outmost Ri∣gor; Declaring hereby that this shall be without Prejudice of any former Acts made against Treason, or Treasonable Correspondencies, or the Punishment of such as have already incurred the Pains thereof. Our Will Is Herefore, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that incontinent, thir Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat Cros∣ses of the Head-burghs of the several Shires and Stewartries within this Our Kingdom: and there in Our Name and Authority by open Proclamation, make Intimation hereof, that none may pretend Ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Twenty first day of January, and of Our Reign the Seventh year, 1696. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. GILB. ELIOT Cls. Sti. Coneilii. GOD Save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1696.
