S1885 52615084 176112
A PROCLAMATION, For Payment of His Majesties Cess and Excise. JR royal blazon or coat of arms JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great-Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lovits  Macers of Our Privy Council, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, spe∣cially Constitute, Greeting; Whereas, We by Our Royal Proclamation of the Third day of October last past, and by vertue of Our Prerogative-Royal, did Discharge all Personal Exe∣cution of Our Laws against any who comes out to Our Host during their abode therein; And We un∣derstanding, that Our said Royal Favour is so far abused as to be Wrested, to hinder the payment of Our Cess and Excise, to the great Prejudice of Our Affairs; Do therefore Declare, that it was not Our mean∣ing, that the said Immunity should any ways be extended to hinder Execution for Our Cess and Excise, but that notwithstanding thereof, all lyable therefore, in case they fail of due payment, be proceeded a∣gainst personally, or otherways, according to Our Laws and Acts of Parliament; and withall, We hereby Require all and every Concerned in payment of the said publick Burden, to pay in the same to Our Collectors and Receivers, as they would be esteemed dutiful Subjects to Us on the present Occasion, And to the end Our Royal Pleasure in the Premisses may be made known to all Persons concerned, that Obedience may be given accordingly, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Com∣mand, that incontinent these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat-Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Our Kingdom, and there in Our Royal Name and Au∣thority, by open Proclamation, make Publication of the Premisses, that none pretend Ignorance. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Ninth day of November, 1688. and of Our Reign the Fourth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. COL: McKENZIE Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD Save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, Anno Dom. 1688.
