S1813 52612325 179629
A PROCLAMATION, For Adjourning the Parliament to the twenty seventh of March. At Edinburgh, the Fifeteenth day of March, One thousand six hundred ninety years. Whereas His Majesty by His Royal Letter of the date at Kensingtoun the thirteenth day of February One thousand six hundred and ninety years, Au∣thorized and Required the Lords of His Majesties Privy Council, To Issue forth a Proclamation in Their Majesties Names, Continuing the Ad∣journment of this Current Parliament, till the eighteenth day of March instant, and that the Council have in Obedience to His Majesties Commands, and in Their Majesties Names, and by vertue of Their Royal Authority, Declared the said Parliament Current, and continued the Adjournment thereof until the said eighteenth Day of March instant; And His Majesty having signified by His Royal Letter to the Lords of His Privy Council, of the date at Kensingtoun, the twenty eight Day of February last by-past, That divers Considerations now mo∣ved His Majesty to continue the said Adjournment, from the said eighteenth Day of March, to the twenty seventh Day of the said Moneth, Hath Authorized and Required the saids Lords to Issue forth a Proclamation in Their Majesties Names, continuing the Adjournment of the said Parliament, until the twenty seventh Day of the said Moneth of March instant: Therefore Their Majesties High Commissioner, and the Lords of Privy Council, Do in Their Majesties Names, and by Their special Command and Authority, Declare the said Parlia∣ment Current, and continues the Adjournment thereof till the said twenty seventh Day of the said Current Moneth of March; And Do hereby Require and Command, the Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Heraulds, Macers of Privy Council, Pursevants, Messengers at Arms, Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, that incontinent these Presents seen, they pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and remanent Mercat-Crosses of the Head-Burghs of this Kingdom, and there, in Their Majesties Names and Authority foresaid, by open Proclamati∣on, make Intimation of the Continuation of the said Adjournment, from the said eighteenth Day of March instant, to the said twenty seventh Day of the said Moneth of March Current, Cer∣tifying all the Members of Parliament, that the Parliament will then Sitt; and Requiring hereby all the Members thereof to attend that Day at ten a Clock in the forenoon, in the usual way, and at the ordinary place, and upon the accustomed Certifications; for doing of all which, Their Majesties High Commissioner, and the Lords of Privy Council, Commit to them, conjunct∣ly and severally Their Majesties full Power, by these Presents, delivering the same by them, du∣ly Execute, and Indorsed again to the Bearer. Per Actum Dominorum Sti. Concilii. GLIB. ELIOT, Cls. Sti. Concilii. God Save King William and Queen Mary. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, by Order of the Privy Council, 1690.
