S2090A 47012641 174606
THE Scottish Contract OR, A Marriage agreement betwixt wanton Willy and mincing Meggy. All pleasant bumours this will fit, For a merrier song was never mrit. To a delightful Scoth Tune, or I am a silly old man. Now welcome Meggy, my dear, The beauty my senses Charm; Come sit down bonnily here, For Willy means thee no harm: And freely before we part A happy conclusion make, That Willy's poor tender heart No longer for Meggy doe ake, Then let us provide for bedding And all that is bonny and gay, For weele have a joviall Wedding The Piper shall sweetly play. O wanton Willy tis long Since I lay in thy Arms, Thou dost thy Meggy wrong To say that her beauty charms, But if't be thy desire And honestly thou art bent, What ever thou shalt require, Poor Meggy will give content, Then let us provide for bedding, &c. Now Meggy our hearts are knit, And Summer is in the prime: My dear lets dally a bit A little before the time: O Willy we never were wedded Before either Priest or Clark, To part with my Maiden head, I will not for twenty mark: Then let, &c. My hony thou needs not feare, So faithfull I will remain, Then doe not refuse my dear A little to ease my pain: O Willy untill we are wed, I never will yéeld that's & at, I rather will lose my head, Then tell me no more of that. But let us provide for bedding, &c. Dear Meggy my fault forgive, To try thee was my intent, What needs thou at all to grieve, My folly I doe repent; O Willy my onely dear, Had you such a minde to trap, Thy Meggy which is so clear, As baby that sucks the Pap. Then let us provide, &c. Now Meggy we are together, I think it not labor waste, If we do in time consider Our busines how to cast: Dear Willy thou speakest right, And since we are both agreed, Our friends we must all invite, The better that we may speed. Then let us provide for bedding, And all that is bonny and gay, For weele have a joviall wedding, The piper shall merrily play. Then Meggy I hold it fit, The Vicar be our chief guest, That he with his learned wit, The better may grace our Feast: Faith Willy thou art no lyer, A Dinner it is his due, And Saxteen pence his hyre For wedding both me and you. Then let us provide for bedding, And all that is bonny and gay, For weel have a jovial wedding The Piper aloud shall play. Weele not spare for bidding Although we be something poor Weele kéepe such a wedding As never was kept before: Wéele have Joccy my Cozen And Jenny his lass with him, And Lasses that are so trim. Then let us provide, &c. Now Meggy I think it best The Piper be prepar'd, For he must be our guest, Or else our mirth is marr'd; O hony what ere do chance Weele have that Lad so brisk, Then Willy shall see me dance, With many a wanton frisk, Then let us provide for bedding, &c. Then since we are gone so far, That Meggy must be my Bride, I think we had best take care What Uictuals we shall provide; Faith Willy my Lad so free, Thy Meggy can please her guesse, And thou shalt plainly see, How I my dinner will dresse. Then let us provide, &c. First, wéele have lang-cale Pottage, And Puddings of Barley Meale, Salt-Béef and Cabbadge To relist a Coage of Ale; Date Cakes stéep't for Brewis, And Bannacks that are so brwn; Curds and Whay and Sowwings, And liquor the best in Town. Then let us provide, &c. Troth Meggy it were but fit, That we had a shank of Roast, My Willy we want a Suit, And wéele we may spare the cost: But if thy money recruit Against our Wedding day, Go buy a good frieze suit Home spun of Country gray. Then let us provide for bedding, &c. My bonny thou will be glad To see thy Willy so brave, But wehn I am neatly clad, What shall my bonny lasse have, Faith Willy I'le buy twa Coats That shall be spanking new, For Sax and twenty Groats, Weele blended boath with Blew. Then let us provide, &c. A Bridegroome alk to bring, My hony doe not forget, And i'le provide a Ring For Meggy to wear of Ieat: And now adieu to my dear, Next Holiday weéele be Wed, My Willy thou néeds not feare, Thou shalt have a Maiden-head. Then let us provide for bedding And all that is bonny and gay, For weele have a joviall Wedding The Piper shall sweetly play. Finis. London, Printed for Richard Burton at the Horshoe in Smithfield.
