B4884AA R170414 [ocm]64550993 184390
SIR, IN obedience to your Commands, I here send you a short Account of Dr. Hicks's Book, now in the Press at Oxford; The Title of it is, Linguarum veterum Septentrionalium Thesaurus Grammatico-criticus & Archaeolo∣gicus. Accedit de Linguarum veterum Septentrionalium usu Dissertatio: Et Catalogus librorum veterum Septentrionalium, tam eorum qui excusi sunt, quam qui in membranis scripti nondum eduntur, quam fieri licuit, locupletissimus. The Book is Printed in a large Folio, upon very good Paper, and according to its Title, it consists of three Parts, 1. the Grammaticals, which contain iv Grammars: One for the an∣cient Gothick Tongue, as it was spoken in Moesia, above MCCC Years ago. Another of the English-Saxon, which descended from that ancient Gothick Tongue. A third, of the ancient German, or Teutonick Tongue, as it was spoken  DCCCC Years ago, and for which the Emperor Carolus Magnus, the greatest Scholar, as well as Soldier of his time, did not think it below his Imperial Majesty, to make a Grammar with his own Hand. The fourth, is a Grammar of the old Scandian, Cimbrick, or Islandick Language, spoken by our old Masters the Danes, who changed the English-Saxon into a Dialect, which the Author calls, the Dano-Saxonick, or Danish-Saxon Tongue. The two first Grammars are framed into one, because of the near alliance of those two Languages, which much illustrate each other. And this Grammar is in effect, an Account of the Original, and Progress of the English Tongue, from the ancient Gothick, to the English-Saxon, from thence to the Dano-Saxonick, from thence to the Norman-Saxon, or Anglo-Normanick Tongue: Of all these Dialects, the Author gives a clear Account, as also of the English-Saxon Poetry, and of its degenerating into Rime, occasion'd by the corruption of the more pure Eng∣lish-Saxon Tongue. In this Grammar also are very many Saxon Originals translated into Latin, which were never before Printed, with many chargeable Sculptures, of which some may be seen in a Copy of the Book, at Mr. Kebles the Bookseller, at the Turks-head in Fleetstreet. In the other two Grammars are many Curiosities, too numerous to be described here, and in the last of them many Leaves of costly Sculpture, whereof some are to be seen in the foresaid Co∣py of the Book. These Grammars are full of Observations, and Marginal Notes, which not only illustrate the Antiquities of our Saxon Ancesters, but shew the true Causes, and Originals of our own, and all the Languages of the North parts of Europe, as well as of a great part of the French, Italian, and Spanish Tongues. In the second Part, concerning the use of the old Septentrional Languages, are many Discourses of the Saxon Antiquities, in which are many Acts, and Records of their Courts of Judicature, Wills and Testaments; Contracts of Bargain and Sale; Forms of Manumission of their Villanes, or Predial Slaves; Original Charters, never before Printed, the greatest part of which are transla∣ted into Latin, with some Sculptures, and particular Disquisitions; as of the Original of the Court of Chancery; of the manner of making Wills, and the Probat of them among the Saxons; of their Donations, and Conveyances; and a Discourse of the Saxon, and Norman Charters, shew∣ing the difference between them, and how true are to be distinguished from false Charters; with Platforms of Discourses upon many other curious, and useful Subjects, not yet written upon; of which the Author shews none can write well, but those, who are very well skill'd in the old Septentrional Languages. In this Part there will also be a Series of all the Saxon-Coyns in Sculp∣ture, with Explications; with a curious Saxon-Homilie, Preached by a Bishop on a Day of publick Fasting, and Penitence; and an Account of the burial Places of the most famous Saxon Saints, translated into Latin, never before Printed; and a fragment of History in the ancient Scandian Language, written in Runick Characters, but Printed in Runick and common Letters, with a Latin Translation. The Catalogue of the old Septentrional MSS. which makes the third Part, is an Historical, and Comparative Catologue, in which is Printed the beginning, and ending of every MS. that the curious Reader may know whether MSS. which have the same Title, are the same, or dif∣ferent Books. Imperfect MSS. are also noted, as those likewise, whose Leaves are misplaced by the Binder; and if imperfect MSS. of one Place, or Library may be supplied by more perfect Copies in another, that also is noted. Several Sheets of this Catalogue are already Printed in the above-mention'd Copy at Mr Kebles, to which I refer you, and your Friends, who are Lovers of Antiquity. As to your two Questions, How much of this Work is Printed? and, Of how many Sheets it will consist? I answer to the first, That there are almost CXL Sheets Printed off; and the Author thinks it will be a Book of CC, or CCXX Sheets.
The Booksellers, whom the dearness of Paper obligeth to Print no Books, but of quick and common Sale at home, having refused to undertake the Impression of this great Work; the Author hath adventur'd to undertake it himself, upon the encouragement of many Learned Gentlemen, especially among the Learned Clergy, who, in many parts of the Kingdom, have generously contributed towards the Printing thereof. It is hoped, that Learned Gentlemen, and Patrons of Learning of other Ranks and Professions, will likewise contribute to the Im∣pression of it; which, as you may perceive by the short, and I assure you but imperfect Account I have briefly given of it, as well as by the Titles of its Indexes, which follow, will be of great use to the Republick of Learning; and for the Credit and Honour of our County, to have a Book Printed in it, which lays open so many ancient Languages, and illustrates the Laws and Customs of those Countries where they were spoken, and most especially those of our own, and which must bring the Students of the Septentrional Literature in all Nations, to a more easie and advantgeous correspondence in their Studies. I. Index Vocem, quae antea aut non omnino, aut male ae Lexico-graphis, & Glosso-graphis explicatae, a suis originibus derivatae, recte explicantur. II. Index Rerum, speciatim Anglo-Saxonicarum, Dano-Saxonicarum, Normanno-Saxonicarum, Francicarum, & Scano-Gothicarum, quae antea non editae, nunc primum excuduntur. III. Index MSS. quae fere omnia nondum citata, in hoc opore citantur. IV. Index Operum, & Auctorum, & aliorum CL. virorum, qui citantur, & honorifice no∣minantur. V. Index eorum, quae aereis tabellis incisa, tantum non omnia jam primum in hoc opere impri∣muntur. SIR, I am your humble Servant, W. B. Jan. the 22d. 1700.
