C1114BA R173470 [ocm]64551045 184429
The CASE of the Manufacturers of Iron in ENGLAND. Humbly praying, for the following Reasons, that the Duties upon Wrought Iron may be continued. THird of Edward 4. Cap. 4. these following Iron-Wares are prohibited: Stir∣rops, Harness for Saddles, Spurs, Andirons, Gridirons; any manner of Locks, Hammars, Pincers, Fire-Tongs, Dripping-Pans, Harness for Girdles, Knives, Daggers, Wood-Knives, Taylors Shears, Sissars, Razors, Pack-Needles, Chasing-Dishes. 1 Richard 3. Cap. 4. these following Iron-Wares are prohibited: Harness for Gir∣dles, Knives, Hangers, Taylors Shears, Sissars, Andirons, Tongs, Fire-Forks, Grid∣irons, Stock-Locks, Keys, Hinges, Garnets, Spurs, Horse-Harness, Bitts, Stirrops, Buckles, Chains, Chafing-Dishes, Shears, Spitts, Candlesticks, Grates. 5 Eliz. Cap. 7. these following Iron-Wares are prohibited: Rapiers, Daggers, Knives, Hilts, Dagger-Blades, Horse-Harness. Which good Laws put a Damp to the Foreign Workmen, and such Encourage∣ment to the English, that they have brought all the said Goods to such Perfection, that England hath no occasion to Import them, and in many of them we now out∣doe all Parts of Europe. In the second Year of the King, in an Act for Granting their Majesties certain Im∣positions upon all East-India Goods and Manufactures, and several other Goods, &c. they were pleased to lay these following Duties upon Iron-Wares, and Iron wrought.   s. d.   Iron Potts and Kettles 1 3 each. Small Backs for Chimneys 1 2 each. Large Ditto 2 4 each. Iron slit or hammer'd into Rods 5 0 the 112 lb. Frying-Pans 4 0 the 112 lb. Steel 5 6 the 112 lb. Plates single 4 4 the hundred. Ditto double 8 8 the hundred. Harness Plates 1 4 each. All other sorts of Iron-Ware manufactured 5 0 the 112 lb. Which Duties have occasioned a great Perfection in the making the said Goods in England, and the Importation is mightily lessened thereby, which giveth a sew selfish People (that dealt in the said Goods) hopes that it will be a means to take off or lessen the said Duties; but it is hoped that these following Considerations will over-balance what hey can offer to the contrary. I. Although the Importations be lessened for the said Goods; yet they have brought in more Money for these five Years last past, than ever they did in that time, which may appear by the Custom-House-Books. II. That most of the said Goods, although made in England, are made of Fo∣reign Iron, which hath brought in more Customs to the King, than the Complai∣nants are willing to pay for the Custom, when imported in the Manufactury. III. There is several new Works built, and several hundred Families imployed (in making the said Ware) more t han before these Additional Duties were laid. IV. It is but reasonable to believe that former Parliaments had prohibited these Goods, when they prohibited Goods of the same kind, had this Kingdom had Arti∣ficers to make them (as they then had not.) Where but the Manufacturers encouraged by having a Re-payment of the Custom of the Iron, when Exported in the Manufacture, England would be capable to Ex∣port many of the said Goods to the great Enriching of this Kingdom.
