E696A R174970 [ocn]124064175 192259
To all PERSONS that have any Sense of the Reality of VERTUE, In the pursuit of my Design to demonstrate, that the People called QƲAKERS, Deserve more Favour from the Church of England, Than any other sort of Dissenters. I shall here Recite some Passages in the Book of Common-Prayer, to which they Acknowledge, that it is their Duty, and that In CHRIST they have a Power, to Conform themselves in the whole Course of eir Lives. By EDMƲND ELYS. Common Prayer in the General Confession. GRant, O Most Merciful Father—That we may hereafter live a Godly, Righteous, and Sober Life, to the Glory of thy Holy Name. Amen.
On which words John And. has this Reflection: By the Grace of GOD that bringeth Salvation, which hath appeared unto all Men, are we taught and enabled to deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World. Why should any Mock God to Pray so to live, and yet live quite contrary, and reject the Grace of God? Com. Pr. in the Absolution. Wherefore we Beseech him to grant us true Repentance, and his Holy Spirit, that those things may please him which we do at this present, and that the rest of our Life here∣after may be pure, and holy, so that at the last we may come to his eternal joy through Jesus Christ our Lord. Com. Pr. Te Deum Laudamus. Vouchsafe, O Lord, to Keep us this Day without Sin. Com. Pr. 2 Collect. O God, who art the Author of Peace, and Lover of Concord—whose Service is Perfect Freedom. Com. Pr. 3. Collect. Lighten our Darkness we Beseech thee, O LORD. Com. Pr. in the Litany. From all Evil, and Mischief, from the Crafts and Assaults of the Devil, from all Blindness of Heart, from Pride, Vain Glory, and Hypocrisie, from Envy, Hatred, and Ma∣lice, and all Uncharitableness: From Fornication, and all other Deadly Sin, and from all the Deceits of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, Good Lord Deer us. Com. Pr. in the Litany. That it may please thee to bring into the Way of Truth all such as have Erred. Com. Pr. in the Litany. That it may please thee, O LORD, to endue us with thy Holy Spirit to Amend our Lives. Com. Pr. First Sunday in Advent. Almighty GOD, give us Grace, That we may cast
away the Works of Darkness, and put upon us the Armour of Light, now in the Time of this Mortal Life. Com. Pr. Collect on St. Stephen's Day. Grant, O Lord, that in all our Sufferings here upon Earth for the Testimony of thy Truth, we may stedfastly look up to Heaven, and by Faith behold the Glory that shall be revealed, and being filled with the Holy Ghost, may learn to Love, and Bless our Persecutors by the Ensample of this first Martyr St. Stephen, who prayed for his Murderers. Com. Pr. Collect on Innocent's Day. Mortifie, and Kill all Vices in us, and so strengthen us by thy Grace, that by the Innocency of our Lives, &c. we may Glorifie thy Holy Name. Com. Pr. Collect on Circumcision Day. Grant us the true Circumcision of the Spirit, that our Hearts, and all our Members being Mortified from all Worldly, and Carnal Lusts, we may in all things Obey thy blessed Will. Com. Pr. Collect on the First Day of Lent, commonly called Ashwednesday. Create and make in us new and contrite Hearts. Com. Pr. Collect on the 5th Sunday after Easter. Lord Grant that by thy Holy Inspiration we may think those things that be good, and by thy merciful guiding may perform the same. Com. Pr. Collect on the Sunday after Ascension Day. Send to us thy Holy GHOST to Comfort us. Com. Pr. Collect on Whit sunday. GOD, which didst Teach the Hearts of thy faithful People, by sending them the Light of the Holy Ghost, Grant us by the same Spirit to have a Right Judgment in All things. Here (says J. A.) the Light is the Teacher, which we Own, and bear Witness to.
Com. Pr. Collect on St. Andrew's Day. Almighty GOD, Grant unto us all, that we being called by thy Holy WORD, may forthwith give up our selves Obediently to fulfil thy Holy Commandments. Com. Pr. Collect on St. John Baptist's Day. Almighty GOD, make us constantly speak the Truth, boldly rebuke Vice, and patiently suffer for the Truth's sake. I Desire it may be Known to all Persons that Know Me, or shall ever Hear of Me, that the People called QUA∣KERS Concurr with Me in these Sentiments of CHRI∣STIAN Purity, which ATHENAGORAS Testifies to have been the Sentiments of the Primitive CHRISTI∣ANS. Athenag. In Legatione pro Christianis. , &c. Summâ Cautione communican∣dum est Osculum, ut non aliter quàm Pia Salutatio, vel po∣tiùs Adoratio quaedam habeatur: Quaesi vel parum impurâ Cogitatione inquinata fuerit, à Vitâ Aeternâ nos alienet. We Ought to have the greatest Care, and Circumspection, how we impart a Kiss to any one, that it may be no other than a Pious Salutation, or an Act of Religion. If it excites our Thoughts to the least Impurity, it excludes us from Eter∣nal Life. COME LORD JESƲS. FINIS.
