F1241B R177121 [ocm]69648658 184921
By the Commander in Chief of the PARLIAMENTS Forces in IRELAND. WHereas, the Lord in Mercie hath been pleased, to blese the Endevours of his poor unworthy Instruments in this Army, in bringing the work of Mar in this Nation to so hopeful a Period; yet withall considering that every Condition hath us Tempt∣ations, and even outward Peace and Successes attended oft times with the greatest and most dangerous appearing in a Spirit of Carelessness and Negligence, arising much from Inconsiderateness and slighting of Enemies (because but few, and their Condition low) too little minding how God can, and oft doth make poor de∣spised handfuis of the Enemie, prevalent against, or at least vexations to his own Instruments (whom he hath before eminently used) when they are given up to, or acted by the forementioned Spirit of Negligence in the Duties of their Places, and having too evident grounds to fear and beleive, that such an evil Temper is much bro∣ken in upon this Army, since the days that God lessened the number of their Ene∣mies, so as that, that conscientious Care which hath formerly been observed in the keeping close to Duty, is much abated, partly through the Officers absenting themselves too frequently from their respective Commands, or in being too careless and remiss when present with them to execute the Duties of their Charges, whereby the through & effectual prosecution of the Enemie yet remaining is not onely neglected, but some of the Officers themselves become uncapable of giving a due account of the Trust committed to them, As perticularly appears in the supine Carelessness and Negligence of Captain Deyas in the late loss of the Fort of Archeen in the Isle of Arran: For Prevention of which Evils in future, and the sad Consequencies of them; I thought it my Duty with the Advice of a Council of Officers, to Publish this, which I desire and hope, may be in Mer∣cy a Warning to all, both Officers and Souldiers under my Command, who are hereby required diligently to Observe and Execute the ensuing Articles according to their Capacities respectively. (viz.) I. That no Commander in Chief of the Forces in any Precinct, be absent a night out of the said Precinct, un∣less upon Publick Service or business relating to his Charge, without leave from my self or other Superior Officer, upon penalty of loss of Place. II. That no Governor of a Garrison in any Precinct, do leave his Government or Command or be absent a night from his Charge, unless upon Publick Service against an Enemie, or upon necessarie business relating to his Com∣mand, without leave from a General-Officer or the Officer Commanding in Chief in the Precinct, or whom he shall Au∣thorize so to give leave, upon loss of Place. III. That no Inferior Officer whatsoever, be absent without leave, a night from his Charge, upon penalty of Cashiering. IV. That no privat Souldier shall depart a Mise from his Garrison or Colours, without leave from his Officer, upon the penalty provided in the first Article, concerning Duties in Camp and Garrison, Exprest in the Book of Articles. V. That the Commanders of the Forces in their respective Precincts, or such as shall be impowered by them, in giving leave to any under them, do both respect the season of doing it, the Number they give leave unto, and other Circumstances, so as the Publick Work may not suffer thereby; and likewise that the said Commanders do as oft as they can, take a view of the Forces under their Charge, inquiring diligently after their Discharge or Neglects of Du∣tie, and cause such Neglects to be Punished. VI. That a strict Care be always had in the disarming all Irish whatsoever, or others who have been in Arms against the Parliament at their entering into any Garrison, upon penalty of Cashiering the Officer commanding the Guard, who shall be Negligent herein. VII. That the Officer commanding any Guard, do not set forth a Centinel without a Match lighted, except he have a fire lock Musket: And that no Officer be absent from his Guard, nor suffer any Souldier to be off from the Guard, but upon a justifiable Occasion, until they be releived, upon penalty of Cashiering. VIII. That at no time, above the Number of two Irish at once (and those unarmed) be suffered to enter into any Ca∣stle, Fort, or Citidel upon any Occasion whatsoever, without special Order from the Governor, nor the Grate or Door of any Castle, Fort, or Citidel stand open but at the time of passing in and out, upon penalty of Cashiering the Officer commanding the Guard wherein they entered, or such Grate or Door stood open. IX. And lastly, for the due and frequent Exercise of Troops and Companies (whereof there is lately too much Neglect) as also touching defending of Garrisons with Care, and to the utmost extremity, and in all other perticulars requisit for preserving the Discipline of the Army, the Officers are required to observe and put into Execution the Printed Book of Articles, which are to be Published once every Month atleast by the Chief Officer present with every Troop or Company, or upon default thereof, the said Officer shall for the first Offence forfeit one Months Pay, for the second two Months Pay, and for the third be Cashiered. And all Officers whatsoever, who are now absent from their Charges without special Licence, are required to repair unto their respective Commands, within three days after Publication hereof. Dated at DUBLIN, December the 21, 1652. Charles Fleetwood. Printed at DUBLIN, by WILL. BLADEN. Anno Dom. 1652.
