I341J R178606 [ocm]69648700 184950
IRELAND. By the Commissioners of the Parliament of the Common-wealth of ENGLAND for the Affairs of IRELAND. WHereas there hath been of late years a Custom in this Countrey of Passing currant in pay∣ments, all manner of Clipt English Money, and likewise all Spanish Money, (commonly called Ryals or Peices of eight) with many other sorts of forreign Coin and Money, at a far higher Rate than their true and intrinsick Worth, whereby the people have been decei∣ved, the Treasure of the Countrey (through the practice of some ill-minded Persons) both wasted and corrupted, and Trade much prejudiced, The said Commissioners of Parlia∣ment taking the said Grievance into their serious Care and Consideration, and foreseeing many great Evils that will follow, in case the said Custom should continue; Do, for the better preventing thereof, and remedying the said Mischiefs for the future, Order and De∣clare, And it is hereby Ordered and Declared, That it shall and may be lawful for any per∣son or persons whatsoever, to refuse all Clipt English Money in payment, unless tendered and paid to them according to the true value thereof by Weight, and that none may otherwise enforce the acceptance of it. That no sort of Spanish Money commonly known or called by the name of Ryals or Peices of eight, As likewise no Rix Flemmish or cross Dollers, nor any others of that kinde whatsoever, that have usually passed or been taken at the Rate of Five shillings sterling, be henceforth enforced in payment for more then at the Rate of Four shillings six pence sterling each, and the Half and Quarter peices proportionably: Likewise that no Philips Money commonly called Ducatoons, and usually received for six shillings, be henceforth enforced in payment for more than the value of five shillings six pence each, and the Half-Ducatoons proportionably. That no French Money of that sort commonly called Quardèçues shall be en∣forced in payment for above the Value or Rate of one shilling six pence, And that no other sorts of forreign Coin be enfor∣ced in payment for currant Money. And for the better observance of the said Orders, the Commissioners of the Revenue in their respective Precincts in Ireland, are to cause due Publication to be made hereof in all Garrisons and Mercat-Towns within their several and respective Precincts, and the same to be affixed in all convenient publick Places: To the end that all persons may have due Notice thereof. Dated at Kilkennie 5. of November, 1652. Charles Fleetwood. Edm. Ludlow. Miles Corbet. Jo. Jone Ordered by the said Commissioners of Parliament that this Declaration be  Dublin 8. of November, 1652. Signed by ¶ Printed at DUBLIN, by VV
