O987I R235537 [ocm]62369564 188066
To the Right VVorshipful The Heads of the respective Colleges and Halls OF THE University of Oxford. YOU are desired to signifie to your Societies, and remind them, That during the Solemnity now approaching, on the twenty first day of May, All Doctors are to wear their Scarlet Gowns, and that the Convention will begin at three of the clock in the After-noon, after the ringing of the little Bell at St. Maries. You are farther desired to let them know, That the rising Semicircle of the Theater is reserved for Noble-men and Doctors; The Gallery beyond the Doctors, in the Circular part of the Theater, will be the place of Masters. The side Gallery West-ward, is reserved for the Stran∣gers: That East-ward also for Strangers. The Galleries in the Front for Ladies and Gentlewo∣men. The upper Gallery above the Masters, is appointed for Gentlemen-Commoners and Bat∣chelors. Those above the Strangers, for Under-Graduate Scholars of Houses and Commoners. That above the Ladies for the performances of Music. The Area, for Batlers, Servitors, and persons of promiscuous quality, who are not to be admitted till their Royal Highnesses and their Train have seated themselves. The Noblemen and Doctors are desired to meet the Vice-Chancellor in the Apodyterium at three of the Clock, in the Afternoon. The Pro-Procters at one. For preserving of Order, there are beside the Curators of the Theater, appointed several Pro∣ctors of it; who according to the Statute in that behalf, are to take care the public peace be kept undisturb'd; and that all persons be plac'd in their aforesaid Stations, for whose assistance there are assigned severall Officers and Door-keepers, to be subservient to them, and execute their Commands. It is strictly required during the time of this Solemnity, All persons do appear in their Gowns and Caps: and particularly, all Under-graduates, and Batchelors of Arts, comport themselves with that sobriety and modesty, as may tend to the reputation and honor of the University, up∣on pain of being put in the Black Book, and otherwise proceeded against, as the exigence of their faults shall require. Withal it is required, That no person below the condition of a Gentleman or Fellow-Com∣moner, shall presume to wear a silk Cap; and that none pretend to a place beyond that which really belongs to him. And it is farther ordered, That no Scholar resident in the University of what Condition soe∣ver, shall be admitted into the Theater, who is not in his Gown and Cap. The Names of the Curators and Proctors for this following Solemnity. CƲRATORS John Lord Bishop of Oxford. In the absence of Sr Christopher Wren, Dr. Marshal Rector of Lincoln. PROCTORS. Mr. Pullen of Magd. Hall. Mr. Bagshaw of Magd. Coll. Mr. Warner of New Coll. Mr. Millinton of Brasen-nose Coll. Mr. Duke of Corpus Christi. Mr. Breach of Christ Church. Mr. Connant of Mert. Coll. Mr. Lancaster of Queens Coll. Mr. Thornton of Wadham Coll. Mr. Almont of Trin. Coll. Mr. Edwards of Jesus Coll. Mr. Geare of Exeter Coll. Mr. Farrow of Lin. Coll. Mr. Tod of University Coll. Mr. Hunt of Pembrok Coll. Mr. Haly of All Souls. Mr. Edwards of St. Johns. Mr. Heicroft of Baliol Coll. Mr. Desmaster of Oriel Coll. Mr. Hinton of Newinne Hall. Mr. Say of Hart Hall. Mr. Cary of St. Mary Hall. Mr. Knight of Albane Hall.
