S232 R183147 [ocm]80923528 191986
The Sad and Dreadfull Accident OF THE BURNING OF A Rich Turkey Ship BY LIGHTNING, IN THE ROAD of GRAVESEND: On Thursday the 23d. of June, 1687. AS the Season for some months past has been extraordi∣nary, beyond the Memory of Man, for the Vio∣lence of the Winds, so the Element of Fire has pro∣duced so prodigious effect on the Watry Region, as to shew Mankind which of the Elements has predominancy o∣ver the other, making the demonstration on a floating World in the River of Thames, which the following account will shew the particulars, viz.
That the Honourable the TURKEY-COMPANY, having (with no less Diligence then great Expence,) fitted forth divers Ships this Season for the Ottoman-Trade; which as to the Glory as well as profit of the Nation, Exports the English Manufacture of Cloath, &c. and having Freighted the Ship Palestine, of about 140 Tonns, Captain Sammon Commander; with near 300 Bayls of Cloath and other Merchantdise, and Bound her to the Port of Scandaroone, the extreamest part of the Streights: She this Week Tyded down the River to the Road of Gravesend, the usual stoppage for their clearing out from the Custom-House; and having received her Dockets for her Discharge, design'd to set forwards on her Voyage as on Saturday the 25th. Instant; but behold the Providence of the Almighty, to disappoint many times with unusual methods what Man directs, sent a dread∣full Fiery-Messenger to lay an Imbargo on her Voyage. For on Thursday the 23d. of this instant June, between the hours of 7 and 8 at Night the Heavens were over-cast, and on a sudden, by the Eastward, a mighty flash of Lightning broke through the Sky, followed by a great Clap of Thun∣der, and a shower of Rain, and as it were, a Fire-ball, fastne'd or lodged among the Sails and Shrouds of the Ship Palestine a∣foresaid, and inflamed with that impetuosity, that it caught hold of the Rigging thereof, which being new Tarred, in a wonderful swift manner run down to the Deck or Hull of the Ship with such Fury, that the Marriners were not able to withstand the Flames, some leaping into the River to save their Lives, which so furiously fastned upon the Ship, being new Pitched and Rozen'd, that the Industry of Man, tho' they had all the assistance possible from other Ships in the Road, could not quench or extinguish the least part of her, untill she burnt to the Waters Edge, whereby all her Cargo, (there being 300 Bayls of Rich Cloth, and other rich Marchandize aboard her, was intirely lost, the Dam∣mage of the whole being computed to the value of 20000 l. or upwards; The account of which we have received in a Letter from the same place, as also, had it confirmed by the Merchants on the Exchange, who have also received the bad Tidings thereof. FINIS.
