18507.256 S118672 99853879 177414
Iune 23. Numb. 29. THE CONTINVATION OF OVR FORRAINE Avisoes, since the 16. of this present. The continuance of the troubles at Constantinople. The differences in Polonia, about the choyce of a new King. The Articles between the Ki of Sweden and the Duke of Bavaria. A Letter of the French Kings, relating the troubles be∣twixt his Majestie and the Duke of Loraine. Some Low-Country passages about the present state of the Warres there. The Rendition of Prague to the Empero  ondi∣tions. Some late passages of the King of Sweden in varia. Also, The pursuite of the Spanish by the Swedish in the Palatinate. LONDON. Printed for Nathaniel Butter and Nicolas Bourne. 1632.
The Continuation of our Weekely NEWES. From Constantinople the 10. of Aprill 1632. THe Lord Paul Strasburg, Embassador from the King of Sweden, to the Prince of Tran∣silvania, yesterday arrived here. The said Embassador did refuse to be received pub∣likely with pomp and state, after the com∣mon custome and manner of entertaining of such persons. The reason was, because he had left a great number of his followers in Transilvania. I suppose that the end of his comming into these parts, was concerning the Princesse; who is sister to the King of Swe∣dens Queene, and Bethlem Gabors widow. And furthermore, to condescend to the request and desire of the Prince of Tran∣silvania. The boisterous humors of the military sort, and especially the Spahies; cannot as yet be pacified, nor the differences al∣layd. They commit many insolencies, without any respect to Magistrates, superiors, or great ones Nay not so much as bearing respect to the great Turke himselfe, much lesse to the Ʋisiers. Their insolent pride is come to that height, that there is no other hope left but onely the ruine of the whole Turkish Empire, or at leastwise of their persons. The Astrologians haue prognosticated a terrible bloud-shedding in this Citie, and all matters indeede doe seeme to dispose themselues and bend to such a woefull effect. I doe palpably perceiue that our State is farre more dangerous, than the same was even at the depo∣sing & killing of Sultan Osman. The Emperor or great Turke and all his Ministers and Councell, are without councell and
at their wits end. Yesterday the Zebesies (those are they that governe and keepe the Munition and Ordnance) did massacre publikely one of their Survasies or Captaines: and which is most strange, even at that time when the Turkes doe keepe their Ramedan, or fasting moneth; at which time they doe v∣sually abhorre and abstaine from all manner of wicked inso∣lencies, especially from bloud-shedding. It is to be feared, that after their Bairam, a fearefull bloudy tragedie will fol∣low. The Lord of mercy, preserue and keepe vs, and all inno∣cent ones, from their cruell and bloudy intentions. From Dantzich the 4. of May, 1632. Those of Polonia haue so long disputed of the succession of their King, that at the last they haue found a reason of resol∣ving the succession by his death. The said Kings death befell at Warsaw on the 29th day of Aprill last, he dyed of an Apo∣plexie, which indeede he was strucke withall sixe dayes be∣fore. His death fell out very vnseasonably: for Polonia being now envelopped & fallen into warres with Muscovia, which certainly will cause the States of that Kingdome to hasten the choice of a new King; which election is deferred vntill the second Sunday after Whitsuntyde. In the meane while the Arch-bishop of Guesnen governes the whole Kingdome for the time being. Among the chiefest Competitors for this Crowne, the King of Sweden is by all men supposed to be the most likely: next to him the Prince Ʋladslaus, eldest sonne to the late deceased King; then the Prince Casimirus hi bro∣ther by the Fathers side, and the Arch-duke Leopoldus. But be∣cause the last of these is not esteemed fortunate and successe∣full in his designes of Warre, the Election is rather ascribed to the strength & power of the first, or favour of the second. The rather because their States haue recalled him from the great charge which was laid vpon him, being Generall of the Armie against the Muscovites, as soone as ever they percei∣ved his Father drawing to an end, they having established and sent into his roome, the Prince Razevill. From Madrid the 25th. of May, 1632. Wee doe heare that the King of Spaine receiues but small
content at Barcelone. They are a very head-strong people, very hardly to be perswaded. The Deputies haue alreadie had some bickering with Count Olivarez, who being entred into discourse with them vpon some matter belonging to the Voyage; they perceiving that he spake of moneyes, answered him, that they would account with the King himselfe, and not with him. The Infant Carles hath taken possession of the charge of Generalissimo of the Seas, which was provided for him sixe moneths agoe. The Ceremony was, that he went to Sea some ten leagues, with some Gallyes and Gallions, and then came backe and made his entry into Barcelonia, in state and qualitie of Generalissimo. Vnto this great Charge was that given also vnto him, of being Vicar Generall of the King, which great place doth subject vnto him, all the Viceroyes and Governors of that Countrey. Lately there was almost raised a great tumult at Lisbon, be∣twixt the Souldiers of the Garrison and the Inhabitants of that Citie. Which troublesome Difference, Don Fredericke de Toledo could no otherwise appease, but by the imprisoning of some of the Souldiers. Although the hurt and wrong done, was not very great. But the insolencies of those people will encrease, if they be not timely suppressed. It is said that here the Deputies are accorded and agreed to yeeld vnto the King two millions and an halfe; in case and on condition, that he will be pleased to recall the new imposition vpon Salt. But the King before he will condescend vnto that, he will presse them to maintaine 30000. foote, and 6000. horse. Brussels the 12. of Iune. I promised you at your last departure to giue you notice of the particular passages of these parts; which I will now accordingly performe, beginning from the day that the Hol∣landers invanded this Land. Vpon Wednesday being the second of Iune, the Prince of Orange came into that part of Gilderland, which was subject to the King of Spaine: and dividing his Armie, laid siege both vnto Ʋenlo and Rure∣mond: and because he might the easier winne the people to
yeeld vp those Townes without effusion of blood; he sent vn∣to them conditions of peace, consisting of 18. Articles, which were so easie and favourable in their behalfes, as their owne hearts could desire. Amongst which Articles one was; That they should enjoy free exercise of Religion, without any di∣minution of such rents, as appertained to the Clergie; or mo∣lestation of those Religious Orders which were within those Townes. The Citizens having thoroughly considered vpon these points, and finding the number of their Souldiers not sufficient to withstand any violent assault; thought best to accept of them. Wherevpon, those of Venlo delivered vp their Towne vnto the Prince of Orange, vpon Friday Iune 4. and those of Rure∣mond, the Sunday following. It is said, that at the celebration of the Sacrament, the Prince gaue order vpon paine of death, that the Souldiers should not molest nor deride the Catholiks in the time of their publike Procession. This is a thing which gaue the people no small contentment: and which will not a little advance the Hollanders in their after conquests, if they continue firme in this resolution. Wee haue newes, that Graue Ernest of Nassau, was slaine before Ruremond with a Musket-shot, as he was alighting off his horse. The Prince of Orange having placed strong Guards in the aforesaid Townes; continued on his march forwards, & hath since taken in a strong Castle, with two other walld Townes and (as it is reported) is now come before Maestricht, where Graue Iohn de Nassau is readie to entertaine them with Canon-shot, having lodged the last weeke 4000. men within the Towne, for the better securing of the place. It is said, that the Spanish Forces are hasting out of the Pa∣latinate, and that the people of Leige doe refuse their passage thorough their Countrey, because of certaine wrongs they haue lately received by the Spaniards. As for Graue Henrie Vanden Berg, he hath retired himselfe vnto the Citie of Leige since the losse of his government; for all the Dutchie of Gel∣derland
is now conquered by the Hollanders, the Towne of Gelders onely excepted. Whilst these things were thus in acting, the Hollanders (who for more surety fished with two hookes) put in exe∣cution an other enterprise of no lesse important considerati∣on. For vpon Munday last (being the seventh of this moneth) they came vp the River of Antwerp with a great Fleete of ships, boates, and pontous, and disbarking their men about tn of the clocke in the night, not farre from a Fort called in Dutch, Creutz-Sconce, or Crosse Sconce; before it was mor∣ning they had so well intrenched themselues, that so soone that the day appeared, they mounted their Canon, and be∣gan to batter the Fort; continuing the batterie all the day fol∣lowing, (in which time they made two violent assaults, though both times repulsed) and vpon Wednesday, the Souldiers of the Fort (finding no succour comming, and their Captaine being slaine) delivered it to the Hollanders by ac∣cord, who now are in possession of it. Some two houres after the deliverie of this place, Don Cr∣los de Coloma (having no notice thereof) marched out of Antwerpe with some six thousand men of foote, and certaine Troupes of horse, with eight Canon to succour it: but finding at his approach that the Fort was taken, hee bestowed some shot of Artillerie against it, and after hee had skirmished a while with the Enemy, seeing no hope (as then) to dislodge them, he made his retreat, giving order to the Cavallery to march over the water into Flaunders. Thus haue you heard what hath passed in this Countrey within the space of eight dayes, all these disasters haue befal∣len this Land through want of Souldiers to defend it. There was about some two moneths since a goodly Armie, ready at a dayes warning, to march into the field, but it was dispersed, part being sent to the reconquest of the Palatinate, others to the succour of the Emperor, and a third part into Lorraine, in Monsieurs (the French Kings Brother) behalfe. All I can adde to this former discourse is, that there is a generall feare
possessing the hearts of the Inhabitants, as if they were al∣ready in the Enemies clutches. We doe heare that some two dayes since the Cardinall de Cueua ranne hazard to be slaine, as he was getting into his Coach, by a drunken Burger, who assaulted and reviled him. From Metz the 6. of Iune. 1632. Concerning the affayres betweene the King of Sweden and the Duke of Bavaria we haue as yet received no other cer∣taintie, but onely that the said Duke is yet considering of the Articles which were mediated by the French King, and prof∣fered by the King of Sweden, which were these that fol∣low. 1. That the said Duke of Bavaria should depart from, and renounce and breake off from the League with the House of Austria. 2. That he should so dispose of his Troupes and Comp∣nyes, and entertaine the same, that they should not assist nor encrease the Emperours forces, nor the King of Spaines, nor those of the Catholike League. 3. That he should giue and permit the King of Swedens Forces a free passage thorough his Countryes: and for assu∣rance thereof, giue some strong place into their keeping, as, namely, that of Ingelstadt, or the like. 4. That he should contribute a certaine summe of monyes toward the maintenance of his Warre. 5. That all places shall be restored mutually that haue been taken from the one or the other, during these troubles in Germany. Which Articles indeede are very favourable and tolerable, and able to accommodate all. Neither can they any way seeme harsh to any one who shall consider the Countrey of the same Duke now lying open as a prey vnto the King of Swedens Armie. And that at this present he hath no revenues at all.
A Copie of a Letter written from the field-Armie of the King of Sweden, neere vnto Altzeybrugh dated the 5. of Iune. Whereas our Army two dayes agoe did march toward the Armie of the Enemie, and assault the same, not farre from a Cloister neer vnto Steynbach in a Valley. We with our Ca∣non haue continued playing vpon the enemy, & many of our Troupes haue skirmished with some of theirs. But the Ene∣my perceiving, that we were stronger then he supposed, hee retyred at his leisure, and sent before him all his baggage and the most part of his Ordnance, and his foot-forces after them and with his Cavallery and some Companies of foot, which were left behind, kept vs in action, to the end that his bag∣gage and Ordnance might be ensured and conveyed. In this his retreat our Forces did follow the Enemy close at their heeles: and moreover two of the Rhyne-Graues companies of Horse encountered with foure Spanish Troupes, and rou∣ted them vtterly, insomuch that they fled into a wood, where they were pursued by our Troupes. But by reason that the foot-forces of the Enemy shot so furiously vpon them, they were constrained to retyre in some disorder. Wherevpon 4. other Companies of the Regiment of Hornech were com∣manded to succour those two retyring Troupes: But they without expecting the approach of them resumed the retreat and so fell vpon part of the Front of their Armie, that they caused such a confusion amongst the wagons with baggage, that they were compelled to retyre for shelter to Altzey. The Enemy durst not so much as follow our retyring Troupes, nor the other 4. Companies of Hornechs Regiment, but con∣tinually seemed to flye from our advancing Army. In fine the Enemy left behind them 40. Wagons with baggage and pro∣vision, and three Cornets. And by the high-wayes where they passed, doe lie dad many Spanish Souldiers and horses which were cut off with our Canon which made a very great slaughter amongst them.
From Lan the 9. of June, The French King parting from Amiens on the second of this Moneth went that night to Corbie, where the Cardinall Duke of Richilieu fell distempered of a feauer, which made him to lye still two dayes, but with so happy a successe, that being let bloud twice during that time, hee recouered his health. On the third day his Maiesty went from Corbie, and dined at Chaune, where the Duke that is Gouernor of Amient for∣got nothing in his wonted magnificence, to acknowledge the pleasing continuation of the great fauours hee receiues from the King his gracious Master, who that night went to Nesle. The Queen came the very same day to sup at Chaune, and from thence to lye at Han. The fourth, both the King and Queene came to La Frere. The fifth, the Cardinall Duke of Richilieu parting from Corbie, where he left the Marquise De Seurdis to command, where the Marquise the Saint Chaumont did before, & from thence he came at night to Chaune, where hee was very well receiued, being accompanied by the Cardinals De la Valette, De Lyon, and the Marshall de Shomberg. The sixth, the said Lords dined there, and with them also the Popes Nuncio, the Count Dronin Embassador of Sauoy, the Signior Mazarin sent thither from the Pope, and the Marquise De Ʋille sent from Lorraine: All which came after from thence to lye at Magny, a house of pleasure belonging to the Duke De Chaune: The next Morning they went to La Frere, The seuenth, the King and Queene parted from thence, and came that night to Laon. The eight, the Cardinall Duke came thither also from La Frere, and met with his Maiesty, who parted this 9. of Iune from hence for Rheyns, taking his way by our Lady de Liesse, Our Army being commanded by the Marshals de la Force and Deffiat, & consisting of twenty thousand foote and four thousand horse, is lately entred into the Countrey of Trier, where they expect fiue Regiments of foote, and 1500, hor∣ses
more, there they doe obserue what the Duke Delbuf and Don Cordoua intend to doe. From the Swedish Campe the 14. of June. The Lord Chancellor Oxenstern hauing receiued aduertise∣ment, that the Spanish Army (both horse and foote) comman∣ded by the Count of Embden, and Don Philippe de Silua did intend to part and march from Spire towards the Mosel, and there the said Army, carrying along fiue peeces of Ordnance did breake vp on the 21. of May, old stile. Hee presently tooke resolution to follow & march likewise with the Swe∣dish forces hee had in those parts, and vpon any occasion to offer battell vnto the enemy. And therefore on the 23. of May hee parted with Palatino Christian from Mentz, and marched that day towards Altzem, there they lodged their Army in the field before the Towne. The next morning ad∣vise being brought that the Spanish Army did lodge but two leagues from thence at a market Towne called Gelheym, they would by no means neglect that occasion, but presently resol∣ued to march directly thither, & to assault the enemy. To wch end the Rhine-graue with some forces went before, and the rest of the Army did presently follow. Assoone as the Spa∣niards heard and saw our forces comming, hee dispatched a∣way all his baggage, and in a valley which makes a reasonable large plaine field and lyeth before a wood, hee put the whole Army in battle-array. The Rhine-graue (who, as it is well knowne, doth feare no number) encouraging his troupes, suddenly and couragiously charged the said Army, and set so violently on the same, that he put them into a confusion and disorder, the whole Army retyring and sauing it selfe in the sayd wood, and leauing to the Rhine graue three Cornets and a great many of souldiers slaine behind, being still followed both by the Swedish horse and the foot also, who in the meane time was come to the feast, though somewhat late, by reason of the many hils they had to passe the night thē comming on, gaue leasure to the Spaniards to thinke vpon their safety, and to march away, and the Swedish tooke vp their lodgings also neere, and in the sayd wood. The Spanish Army hauing got∣ten
sufficient notice of the arriuall of their enemies Army, & hauing no minde to fight, vnder the couert of the night mar∣ched forward: and on the 25. (which was the next day) the Swedish Army began againe to march likewise. But although the Swedish Cauallery did now and then ouertake some Spa∣niards and slue them, yet the Spanish Army got ground of them, by the aduantage of the hils, to shun their danger and to saue themselues. Howsoeuer, we did still follow them as farre as Latereck, so that the sayd Spanish Army was neuer at rest, being forced to march day and night: Therefore seeing our resolution, & that wee came still vpon their heeles, they at last tooke ano∣ther resolution, and to make their journey somewhat easier, they burnt most part of their carriage and baggage vpon the way, and left a great part thereof (which they hoped to saue and carry with them) afterwards behind. And the prisoners (whereof wee tooke a great number) doe assure vs, that the said Spanish Generals did neuer thinke the Swedes would dare to follow them: but afterwards, when they found the con∣trary, their hopes were in a continuall feare and discontent. And so the continuall marching, troubles, want of leasure of victuals, and of rest, and our often falling vpon some of their troupes, they haue suffered very great losse both in their baggage, and people, so that they haue little to boast off, what they haue gotten in that afflicted Country: the lower Pala∣tinate. At Lautereck the Swedish forces were suffered to rest and refresh themselues. And from hence backe againe to the very place of our first meeting, the wayes lye strewed full of dead bodies, Spaniards, Italians, Walones and others, where∣of besides such as were slaine, many died of wearinesse and lnesse.
From Bonne the 15. of Iune. Walstein (otherwise Duke of Fridland) is now againe vp∣on the Scaffold to act a part in our German Tragedy; and for a beginning hee hath taken againe Prague vpon composi∣tion, the Saxon forces that lay in the same being sent and conuoyed to Leutmeritz where the Elector of Saxon his Ar∣my is. The King of Sweden is suddenly parted from Augsburg towards Memmingen, it is thought hee intends to find out and beat Generall Ossa, if this hee will tarry for him, and haue the honour to come to handy blowes with such a vi∣ctorious and glorious King. The sayd Ossa hath taken Bibe∣rach, a place of no strength. Meane while there is a good Army in Bauaria to wayte on that Duke if it shall need. The Duke of Wirtemberg, hauing beene with the King of Sweden at Augsburg, doth now make some leauies. There is a Secretary of the said King sent to Strasburg, but the Magistrates there seemes still to bee desirous to remaine neutrall, that at the last they may be swallowed vp by him that shall be victorious. From Lipsich the 27. of Iune, stil. vet. Another Letter from Lypsich write thus. Our Duke of Saxonyes Garrison in Prague vpon the approach of the Jm∣periall Army capitulated, and vpon termes rendred the Ci∣ty. The sayd Garrison went to the Dukes Army at Lt-meritz, Loutmeritz, wee goe on sleepily, I dare write no more.
The Copie of a Letter written by the French King to the Duke of Montbazon Peere and great Hunter of France, Governour and Lieutenant Generall for the the Ile of France, translated out of the French printed Copie. Cousin: AS my care and scope hath ee been, to procure rest and safety to my Subiects, never having eglected (as ll men know) any occasion, nor spared any paines, but expo∣sed mine owne person in ll parts where I could any way ad∣vance and promote the publike Pece and tranqility and di∣rect all things to the ese and comfort of my people: So on the other side, I cannot receive any greater, or more sensible displeasure, than to find that that which I have hitherto done with so good an intention hath not beene able to produce the effect, which I so earnestly desire. And that which vex∣eth me yet more is, that this mischiefe is occasioned even from those who are obliged unto me, for many considerati∣ons, to contribute by all meanes possible, unto my content∣ons, to contribute by all meanes possible, unto my content∣ment, and the good of my Estate. There is no man ignorant of the faire and loving carriage which I have shewed unto my Brother the Duke of Orleans and his followers, and that knowes not likewise, how ill they have requited it, and the ill designes which my sayd Brother by theyr pernicious advice, hath made appeare these last five or sixe yeares upon all occasions; and then when he hath seene me imployed in affaires, as important as necessary, as well within as without my Kingdome. Against which, being desirous to provide by those courses that are most fit to impeach them, I thought I had the last yeare taken from him one of the most powerfull meanes of troubling the state, in separating from his interest, the Duke of Loraine, who di∣vers times before, had furthered his departure out of my Kingdome: at which time I did shew an extraordinary fa∣vour
to the said Duke, in contenting my selfe with his faith∣full promises, and the consignement of one of his places. Whereas, being as I was in his Country, and having there a powerfull Army, I could then have easily deprived him of all the places he had, seeing that then he wanted forces to defend them, and this I was not onely unwilling to doe my selfe, but I can boldly affirme, that I hindred others that had thn the power and will to have done it. In consequence of this favour having understood that the sayd Duke instead of a religious performance of his faith and word (whereto I had sufficiently obliged him) continued his first Intelligences, I have omitted no course within my power that might divert him from them, but have beene so farre from gayning ought thereby; but on the contrary, the sayd Duke not content to hold on his former practises against my Estate, but hath sollicited and incouraged all those, whom he held capable of his ill resolutions, even to the sending of di∣vers Messages unto the Emperour, for the altering of his good intentions, and soliciting the Spaniard to furnish my Brother, to bandy against me, who am his King and Sove∣raigne, as he himselfe meant to have done on his part. To this effect, he hath increased the number of his souldi∣ers, and made divers extraordinary levyes, seducing even those of mine owne Army without giving me any satisfacti∣on for the same. And the better to attaine his ends, he hath fortified and furnished his Places, without any other cause, than the ill will he hath borne unto this Estate. And moreo∣ouer, hath redoubled his cunning plots and practises, I avow that I could hardly have beleeved, that the Duke had borne me so much ill will, had not divers Letters written by his Father and Sister alighted into my hands, which Letters not onely import, that he was ready to assist my Brother with his Armes, but moreover invited him seriously to consider how he may gaine my Crowne which they say in expresse termes cannot chuse but quickly fall into his hands. The which being joyned with divers other particular In∣tlligences, which I have; among others; some which I
have gotten out of divers Letters written by the Lord Pay-Laurens, unto the Princesse Pfaltsburg, wherby he doth assure her of certaine dessignes of very great importance, which he sayes will prove infallable. I could doe no lesse than set my selfe in a course of defence against so much ill will whereof to my great griefe, I am most certainly informed. I did beleeve, that having provided for the safety of some places where mine enemies might have layd theyr founda∣tion (as you have understood by my former Letters) and that I being so powerfully armed, and consequently in such a State, as they might very well judge that all their enterprises would not possibly take effect; they would have left theyr ill affectioned intentions, and particularly above the rest, the sayd Duke of Loraine unto whom I did mke knowne, that my forces were in Germany, to prevent the ruine of the Ele∣ctor of Triers, and to protect the Catholike Religion and E∣lectors Catholike, as indeed I would have done the yeare before, had not these wicked devices and evill practices hin∣dred and prevented me. But when I see my selfe thus quite frustrated of all my hopes, and seeing that it is so farre un∣likely that I am able to divert the sayd Duke from all his un∣just designes, that to the contrary (which was a maine meanes to draw me from that good intention which I had to prevent the ruine of mine Allye, the sayd Elector, and so likewise the ruine of all other Catholike Electors, by the same way which I had proposed for the former) to the breach of the Treaty of Vic. wch did oblige him to have no correspondencie with my Brother, he did entice him to come with armes & forces into my Dominions, where he was no sooner entred, but he began to make open warre and hostility, cutting in peeces and de∣feating a whole Company of Carabins, which the Marshall Deffiat caused to passe thorough without any suspicion; not∣withstanding the sayd Duke was obliged to yeeld free pas∣sage to my troupes and forces. Whence you see it followed, that my Brother entred with a strong armed hand into my Kingdome. All these reasons afore mentioned, have constrained me to
fall into his Dominions and jurisdiction, to make him sensi∣ble of my indignation, and feele the punishment of his wicked infidelity, and to support the welfare of my Realme and by these troubles of his Dominions, to present the euill intended against mine. I haue beene very willing to acquaint you with all the a∣foresayd passages, to the end that you might make all my loving and faithfull Subjects of France; within the bounds and limits of your charge, partakers thereof. I am perswa∣ded they will have the same hope which I have concerning the successe of our Army, that by the Grace and assistance of the Almighty the same shall be no lesse happie than in these former yeares, since the cause is so just and necessary. Iust, in as much as this warre of mine is caused not onely by a Prince who hath neglected no meanes for the troubling of State, with the breach of his faith and word; but moreover a Prince who being my Vassall, by reason of some part of his estate, hath voluntarily plunged himselfe into a notorious Fe∣lony. Againe, I say necessary, because if I should not prevent by force of Armes the evils plotted against my State, I should at last find a heape of troubles overwhelming the same. Of which State and Kingdome of mine, I doe so desire the rest and tranquillity, and entire conservation; that I protest the greatest displeasure which I feele in this world is, that I am not able to effect that designe which I have ever intended for the tranquillity of the same, and to comfort and make my Subjects happie with a long and durable Peace, which by Gods assistance I doe promise to bring to passe. I beseech him (my Cousin) to have you into his Sacred protection. Written at Sancte Menehoud the 17. day of Iune, 1632. LOWIS, De Lomenie. This Copie was printed in the French Tongue with per∣mission and signed, MOREAV. Le Tellir. FINIS.
