R364a l.r.305.a.7.[2] R227681 99887460 190408
To the Right Honourable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament Assembled. The humble Proposal of Lewis Rawlins, Whether the Restraining of Retailers of Beer and Ale within the Kingdome of England and Dominion of Wales from Brewing, may not only prove profitable to the Crown, but be expedient; upon due considerati∣on of subsequent Reasons. 1. BEcause it will supply his Majesties Exchequer in present with three hundred thousand pounds of lawful money or thereabouts; without the least trouble o the King, or Kingdome, to which Sum the present Farmers of the Excise can make no claim. II. It will advance his Majesties Annual Revenue in the Excise of Beer and Ale for the fu∣ture, and that considerably. III. It will save his Majestie near 30000 per annum, which hath hitherto been dis∣bursed out of that part of his Revenues in contracting the number of Officers which at∣tend that duty. IV. It will obviate that general Fraud which is practised by these brewing Retailers, to the detriment of his Majestie some thousands yearly. V. Hereby the common Brewer will receive encouragement from his encrease of Trade. VI. No damage can hereby accrue to the Farmers of the Excise, for they still enjoy their contract: The consumption of Beer and Ale will not be lessened by reducing the Brew∣ing only of such Exciseable Liquors to the common Brewer, whilst the Victuallers, In∣holders and the like, retail as great quantities as formerly, which in short, is but for Country Retailers to conform to the Example of the City of London. This Proposition may perhaps be excepted against by the Commissioners of the Excise, whose andor in the Kings business is hardly justified by the ensuing Narrative. The Propounder L.R. Gager in the year 1573. did exhibit as many Informations in the Excise office against W.C. a common Brewer in London, as the forfeitures thereupon amoun∣ted to above 2000 l. some of those were heard by the Commissioners, and W.C. the offen∣der thereupon comdemned in the sum of 340 l. or thereabouts. The Prosecutor continued solliciting the Commissiioners by Petitions, and otherwise during the space of six Moneths, to hear and determine the remaining Propositions, upon which, the said W.C. (if Justice had accordingly been done) must as inevitably have been pronounced guilty, as he was upon those which were tryed. Whilest Justice was thus delayed. W.C. makes his Address to Sir William Bucknall and other Farmers of the Excise, and with the payment of 200 l. or such like sum to them con∣tracts to purchase his peace, and excuse his crime. At this Contract Robert Huntingdon and Richard Kingdon Esquirs, two of the Com∣missioners connive, and from that day hitherto, the prosecutor could not by any means be admitted to make good the charge against the said W.C. a practise infinitely tending to the prejudice of the Kings interest, and contrary to the Act of Parliament in that case made and provided, which gives one moyety of the Fines to the Informer, whereof the Infor∣mer L.R. hath not as yet received one penny. Hereupon the Prosecutor being in effect denyed Justice by the Commissioners, humbly acquaints his Majesty by Petition with his greivance, who gratiously referred the exami∣nation of the matter to the present Lord High Treasurer, of which so soon as the afore∣named Comissioners had notice, they and the Farmers without any other cause dismissed the said L.R. out of his office of Gager, of which injury the Propounder justly com∣plains, and prays upon the whole matter Redress, as the wisedom of Parliament shall judge meet.
