R500A 816.m.13[145] R225246 99885974 186343
REASONS for Passing the Turky Companies Bill, to discou∣rage the great Importations of Thrown Silk. THat this Company Exporting Annually to the value of Three or Four hundred Thousand pounds in Cloth, Tinn, Lead and the Manufactures of this Kingdom, cannot make Returns, but Three quarters at least must be in Raw Silk; which being Thrown in England, gives a quarter part of its value to the Poor, who are generally the Wives and Children of Seamen employed abroad; and that by this Throwing (upon a modest computation) there are not less than an Hundred Thousand Poor, that use to get their Livelihoods; every pound, according to its quality giving Two Shillings Six Pence, if coarse; and Three Shillings and Six Pence, if fine, to the Throwster. That they have not complained, until now that the Importations of Thrown Silk are augmented to double the former quantities, and brought fitted for all uses, insomuch that the Throwsters (as is found upon examination) have not half their usual imployment; and the Raw Silk of Turkey lyes by disesteemed. And if this be not consumed, we cannot Ex∣port the Woollen Manufactures. We are very unwilling to Impose any charge upon our Neighbours, and only desire so gentle an Imposition as may incourage our own poor, with∣out regard to private interest; for otherwise, it is well known that no Nation can Throw Silk cheaper and better then in Turkey, and if we be necesitated to bring it in Thrown from thence, we humbly submit to consideration, how great a loss it must be to this Nation, and consequently be the utter ruine of the Mystery of Throwing. And whereas we are told that only Italian Silk can answer for some uses, We could be glad such an expedient night be sound, as to exempt that sort, but since all Laws regard the Major, we hope that inconveniency cannot be great, considering the very small Consumption in that respect, That sort be∣ing only from Bologna, which consumes little of our Manufactures, and is only bought with ready Money; and if 20 d. upon a pound be added upon Thrown Silk from Italy (which will make 20 yards of Wrought Silks) it will not be 2 per C. charge to the Weaver in his Fabrick, whereas it is above 25 per C. (if brought in Thrown) loss to the Thowster and the Nation: and if one sort of Thrown Silk be permitted free, all sorts of Thrown will enter under that denomination. That the Act of Navigation hath prevented the Dutch from bringing in Raw Silk, as not being of the growth of their Countrey, but by Throwing it in Hol∣land they Import it as their own Manufacture, and so gain from 2 s. 6d. to 3 s. 6 d. per l. to their own poor; which would be much more for the advan∣tage of this Nation, that it were brought in Raw. Wherefore we humbly desire to be restrained our selves from bringing Thrown Silk from Turkey, and that all Silk of the growth of Turkey, India, or any part of Asia, brought in hither Thrownd from any place whatsoever, may be charged with 4 s. per l. And now we hope we cannot be Judged partial to our own Trade, but propose the Nations Interest, since we desire but 20 d. per l. upon Italian Silk and yet are willing to have Thrown Silk from Turkey, charged with 4 s. per l. for the Encouragement and Advantage of the poor of this Nation.
