R1085 816.m.1[91] R225409 99886103 185928
The Report of the Committee of the Army upon a Reference from His HIGHNESS, in a Case depending between Francis Farrington Plaintiff, and VVilliam Cham∣berlaine Defendant. At the COMMITTEE for the ARMY, May 18. 1656. IN pursuance of a Reference from His Highness the Lord Protector of the 3d of January 1655. whereby the Petition of William Chamberlaine of London Merchant (relating to a difference between him the said Chamber∣laine and one Francis Farrington) is referred to this Committee, with direction to call for the Parties and exa∣mine Witnesses concerning the Particulars mentioned in the said Petition, and compose the matters in difference, or otherwise certifie the same to his Highness with their opinion. Wee do humbly certifie, That having appointed a day for Hearing of the said Difference and given notice thereof to the Parties concerned) Chamberlaine personally appeared before us; but Farrington only by his Counsel, and craved a Copie of the Petition and Reference, and time to put in an Answer; which was granted, and a week's time given for bringing in the same, (which accordingly was brought in) and another day was appointed for both Parties to bee present, in order to a full Hearing of the matter in Controversie, and examination of the Witnesses to bee produced on each side: On which day of Hear∣ing, Chamberlaine with his Partie appeared, but not Farrington, nor any on his behalf. Whereupon this Committee proceeded to the perusal of several Affidavits taken before a Master of the Chancery (and now remaining with this Committee); by which it ap∣pear's, That the said Farrington is guiltie of several notorious and gross Cheats and Abuses in the counterfeiting and forging of several Debenters or Publick-Faith-Bills to a considerable value, and passing som of them upon purchase of Lands at -hous For which Cheats and Forgeries notice was given to the Parlament by one Colonel John Jackson, and a Warrant issued under the hand of the Speaker for the apprehending of him; upon which hee secretly conveyed himself to the Barbadoes under anoth Name. And upon Articles exhibited to the then Council of State by one Ioseph Briggs, a Warrant was issued forth for the ap∣prehending and taking into custodie the said Farrington, who was thereupon brought over into England, and remained here a Pri∣soner for som time. The said Farrington upon a pretence that th'aforesaid Warrants were procured and the said Informations and Articles exhibited by the Petitioner William Chamberlaine, caused the said Chamberlaine to bee arrested upon two several Acti∣ons of thirtie thousand Pounds each, at the publick Exchange, whereupon hee was forced to give special Bail; And hee the said Farrington became non-suited in both his said Actions. In defent of which the said Chamberlaine hath expended at the least three hundred Pounds, besides loss of time, and great discredit to him in the way of his Calling, as appear's by the said Chamberlaine's Affidavit taken also before a Master of the Chancery. And there beeing several other particulars wherein the dishonest and abusive Deportment of the said Farrington (and som that adhere to him) in the prosecution of his malicious and ungrounded pretences a∣gainst the said Chamberlaine appear's (which would bee too tedious to relate). Wee do humbly take leav upon the whole, to certi∣fie, That by what hath now appeared before us, and what wee have seen by former Informations exhibited against him to the for∣mer Committee for the Army, and by what som of us have discovered of him upon other occasions, Wee do finde the said Far∣rington guilty of such notorious Cheats and Forgeries, that (wee humbly conceiv) hee deserv's the severest punishment that can bee inflicted upon a Person for Crimes of that nature; hee beeing at this present (as wee are informed) in Custodie with the Serjeant at Arms for som Acts of Forgerie, exceeding prejudicial to the Publick. And in regard the said Chamberlaine hath been so injuriously and causlesly arrested and prosecuted by him the said Farrington, (and lyable still to bee farther troubled, unless relieved by Your Highness), Wee do take leav farther humbly to offer as our Opi∣nion, That the said Chamberlaine ought to bee repaired by the said Farrington for the dammage hee hath susteined by his vexatious Suits; And that the said Farrington ought to bee made utterly uncapable of ever troubling him the said Chamberlaine or any other upon such causless and groundless pretences: Whi is humbly submitted to His Highness Consideration. John Clerke, Rich. Lucy, Jo. Hildesley, Ger. Benet. This is a true Copie of the Original, examined by Roz. Bowes.
