11049 99838076 2434
¶ A Panoplie of Epistles, Or, a looking Glasse for the vnlearned. Conteyning a perfecte platt∣forme of inditing letters of all sorts, to persons of al estates and degrées, as well our superiours, as also our equalls and infe∣riours: vsed of the best and the eloquen∣test Rhetoricians that haue liued in all ages, and haue beene fa∣mous in that fa∣cultie. ¶ Gathered and translated out of La∣tine into English, by Abra∣ham Flemming. Armat spina rosas, mella tegunt apes. Imprinted at London, for Ralph Newberie, dwelling in Flete∣strete a litle aboue the great Conduite. Anno à Umgineo partu 1576.
¶ A Catalogue of such Authours, as haue written in this Panoplie of epistles: with the number of the page where they are mencioned. A. ANacharsis Scythieus, 203. Anaximenes Milesi∣us. 205 Archytas Tarentinus. 207 Antigon{us} Macedonicus▪ 209 Alexander Macedo. 216 Aristoteles Stagirites▪ 217 Apollonius Tyanaeus. 219 Agesilaus Lacedaemonius 222. Arcesilaus Prytannaeus. 208 C. Chilo Lacedaemonius. 199 Cleobulus Lindius. 201 Cato Vticensis. 220 Cyrus Persicus. 233 Chr. Hegendorphinus. 381 Chr. Longolius. 403 Caius Plinius Nouocomen∣sis. 241 Conradus Celtis. 391 D. Darius Persicus. 213 Diogenes Cynicus. 293 Dionysius Antiochenus. 301 D. Erasmus Roterodamus. 337. E. Epimenides Cretensis. 204 Epicurus Atheniensis 229 Epistoliographus Anony∣mus. 232 G. Georgius Macropedius. 359 Gualterus Haddonus. 413 H. Heraclitus Ephesius. 214 Hippocrates Cous. 265 I. Isocrates Atheniensis. 154 Ioan. Rauisius Textor. 349 Ioan. Ludouicus viues. 397 L. Lucianus Dialogographus. 229
Libanius Sophista. 305 Lucius Anneus Seneca▪ 307 M. Marcus Tullius Cicero. 1. 2. 3 &c. Menecrates Syracusanus. 231 Marcus Brutus. 61 N. Nucilli Laconia▪ 237 P. Pisistratus Atheniensis. 198 Pittacus Mitylenaeus 200 Periander Corinthus. 201 Pherecydes Syrius 204 Pythagoras Samius. 211 Plato Atheniensis. 212 Philostratus Tyanaeus. 232 Philippus Macedo. 215 Peregrinus Anonymus. 217 Panaetius Rhodius. 218 Phalaris Agrigentinus. 296 Paulus Manutius. 314 R. Rogerus Aschamus. 428 S. Solon Salaminius. 191 Socrates Atheniensi▪ 18 Synesius Pentapoli tanus▪ 301 T. Thales Milesius. 19 Thrasibulus Atheniensis. 201 Z. Zeno Citicus. 210
¶ In Abrahami Flemingi Londin. epistolarum Panoplian, Th. Sp. Ebor. Octastichon. Quisquis in vmbrosis Musarum militat oris, Huc veniat, capiat spicula, scuta manu. Siuè velit gladiis duro certâre duello, Eminus aut hastis, hîc via tuta satis. Nā liberiste nouus scribētib. arma ministrat, In quo est & laeuis, ferreus atquè stylus: Utilis ergo tibi si miscellanea lexis Haec fuerit, dicas, docte Fleminge Vale.
TO THE RIGHT VVOR∣shipful, syr VVilliam Cordell knight, Maister of the Queenes Maiesties Rolles &c. health, wealth, and happi∣nesse euerlasting. PAssing of late (right worshipfull) thorough many a peece of land, pleasaunt in view and profitable▪ in vse, it was my happie chance to haue entrance into a goodly Gardene plott, which as it was large and of an exceding great compasse, so was t beautified with flowers of all sortes, both delightsome to the eye; in considertion of their variable colours: and comfor∣table to the nose, in respecte of their excellent sweetenesse. And no muaile though this Garden plott were so goodly and so great: for, as in number they were (in manner) infi∣nite, which had recourse thereunto▪ so the The names of those cun∣ning Garde∣ners, which did sett and sowe these flowers, are conteined in a Catalogue in the begin∣ning of this booke not vn ceslarie to b vnderstoo▪ multitude of cunning and skilfull Gardeners, (whose most luckie handes owed the singular feedes, of which these fine flowers tooke roote in the ground, sproūg & spread with leaues and blos∣soms of glorious hewe) was innumerable. After I had sett my foote within the fenes of this riche and coastly Garden, (passing for pleasantnesse, & excelling for largenesse, all the Gardens that are to be seene in this our age, albeit the heades of people were neuer so inentiue and curious, & their hands at no tme so artificiall and ▪) I sawe a footepathe
before mee, not verie plaine to perceiue, because it was not much vsed and troden, yet not so ouergrowne with greene grasse, but that it might easily enough be seene: then pau∣sing a space, as being in doubt to goe forward, considering the greatnesse of the Garden, the manifold corners, the croo∣ked turnings, and the compassing arbours of the same, least by presuming to farre▪ I should loose my selfe, as it were in a Labyrinthe: and museing thus in minde, as burthened with vncertaintie, what were most auaylable for me to attempt, a soudeine cogitation concerning the present vse and benefite of this pleasant plott, ouercame me as it were with inchant∣mentes, insomuch that I, feeling in mee selfe no abilitie to withstand so forceable an assault, as one amased, leasurly be∣gan to foote it forward: anon, haueing gone a litle ground, mine eyes were fead with most delectable appearaunces, & my nostrells with most comfortable sauours, so that there began to kindle in mee a certaine affection of ioy and glad∣nesse, and therewithal sprang, to the increase of my courage, a Hope ma∣keth men har ie and ventu∣ous. hope of good happ after to insue: whereuppon I waxed venturous, and like a confident fellowe amended my pase, persuading my selfe, that in so heauenly a paradise there was no daunger, and alwayes as I did proceede, so new and fresh delights, were plentifully offered. Then, hauing called home my wandering witts, I weighed the worthines of the soile, which lay open and manifest in sight, and falling into an vn measurable loue & liking of the same, for my further solace I walked too and fro, taking a viewe of the goodly woorke which was there to be seene, & marking the great choice of flowers, as wel for their kinds, as also their colours: whiles I was thus occupied, a soudeine desire bred in mee, to take a tryal of those delights (though not of all, yet at least, of some, that my labour & my longing might not be frustrate) which were before and round about mee on euery side: in this de∣sire there was such efficacie and force, that I was not able to resist the woorking of the same: whereuppon (for I percei∣ued the nature of it, and sawe wherewith it was to bee sa∣tisfied,) I buckled my selfe to a newe kinde of buisinesse.
For, Pleasant ob∣iectes can not but comfo and delight the sense▪ whereas before, the sense of seeing was delighted, and th sense of smelling comforted, now the sense of feeling be∣ginnes to put in execution his office: and thus pleasure vp∣on pleasure most plentifully is reaped. For, that whereon at first I fixed myne eye, and the sweetenesse whereof pierced into my nose, the same I am nowe bold to touch, to handle, to gather, and to beare away. Among many and sundrie sortes of flowres therefor, (the very woorst of all beeing of great vertue and value) such as in my fancie, bare the bra∣uest hewe and gallantest glosse, I gathered with a certaine greedinesse, esteeming highly of the opportunitie of the time, which was then presently ministred, and fearing least another should take my labour out of my hande: whiche caused me with so much the more speed (though hast, as the olde prouerb sayth, makes waste) to finish that which I had begunne. And  (right worshipfull) these fewe flowers, which I haue pickt and chosen from among many, (yea, myllians I may say, and not amisse) according to my homely handling (for where knowledge hath but a certain infancie, and where experience is very yong, what Art cā be shewed, what cunning can be declared?) I haue tyed vp together in a Garland, with course thred, for want of fine silke, placing each flower in suche order, as my skill gaue me leaue: and the same grosly bounde vp together, with their naturall stalkes and leaues, euen as they were hastily gathered out of outlandish gardens, (for, the most part of these flowers, and if I sayde in manner al, I were not to be accused of an vntruh, grewe in forreigne countries: as in A particular rehearsall of a fewe goodly countries, wherein these flowers grewe and prospered Macdonia, in Athens, in Miletum, in Thessala, in Tarentum, in Siclie, in Venice, in Padua in Rome, in , in Louane, and diuers other fruitfull soiles within the compasse of heauen: from farre were they fet, and therefore the more deintie.) I  to your person, confes∣sing, that in consideration of the gatherers vnskilfulnesse, it is nothing agreeable to your singular worthinesse: but yet in respect of the excellencie of the thing it selfe (for beeing examined and weighed with aduisement, it deserueth high∣ly to bee had in estimation) beeing simply considered, it is
most worthy of acceptation▪ Wherfore, if it shall pléase you  a fauorable countenance, to receiue my pore present, which I acknowledge to be rusticall, but yet not deseruing refusall: (for in former ages of our auncients, the Goddes them selues, and the Goddesses also most gratious, Plinie in pro log. lib. 1. Sta∣tius lib. 1. Syl∣uar. and di∣uers other. Of mylke, of meale▪ and crop of countrie ground▪ Of peares, of plummes, of uts and other frute, Of purpledgrapes on vines that did abound, Of oen cakes, when simple folke made sute, Of little things right well they did repte: And frankincese of clownes required not, But wel in woorth tooke what was to be got.) I shall see sufficient occasion of ioyfulnesse minstred to my heart: and my hands shal be the more readie and quick, to gather such another, and in hope of like luck in curteous acceptance, to be circumspect and aduised in seeing it besto∣wed. Thus hauing ben ouertedious▪ I cōmit your worship to the protection of that God, whose feate is heauen▪ & whose footstoole is the earth, beseeching him of his gratious goodnesse, to crowne you and yours with al maner of blisfull bene∣fites. Your worships at com∣maundement and ser∣uice. Abraham Flemming.
To the learned and vnlear∣ned Reader. LOe, learned Reader, whose minde is beautified with the amiable iuelles of knowledge, and iudgement, to thee I present this Panoplie of Epistles, to reade for thy recreation, and peruse at thy pleasure: for I am taught by experience of my selfe, that the tediousnesse of studio, is to be assuaged with some intermingling of delight. To the vnlearned I doe likewise offer it, as sufficient furniture to arme and enable them against ignoraunce, the aduersarie and sworne enimie of vnderstanding: so that, from the communicating of this necessarie labour, a double benefite doth spring: namely, plea∣sure and profite: pleasure to the learned, whome if I had not made partakers of the same, I had shewed my selfe imurious: and profite to the vnlearned▪ to whome if I had denied the fruite of this my trauèll, they might well thinke and take me to be hatefull and enui∣ous▪ Beeing carefull therefore of the one, and not negligent of the other, I am well content, that the commoditie of my labour, (which the learned lead by integritie and vprightnesse of iudgement, can but allowe▪ and the vnlearned, by cause on the vse thereof, dpen∣deth the increase of their knowledge, must needes commend: for that which is honest and also pleasant, who is so mad as to mislike: and that thing from whence profite proceedeth, who is so witlesse as to contemne?) should be common. Per∣suading my selfe therefore indifferenly of both, I will touche in breuitie, the benefites that issue from this booke. As it is not for a naked and vnarmed souldier▪ to encoūter his enimie being harnessed at all pointes, and to the proofe prouided, except his intent be, wilful∣ly to incurre daunger of violence: so it is not for any mn, to tye the vse of his penne, to the vanities of his owne imagination, which com∣monly be preposterous & carelesse in keeping order; vnlesse his mea∣ning be▪ of set purpose, to repe reprehension for his securitie and neg∣ligence▪
Hee therefore that is to play the part of a warriour, ought with his force and valliauntnesse, to ioyne substantiall furniture, that the seruice of his naturall abilities, and the vse of his instru∣mentall powers, may concurre and goe together, making him the more venturous to withstand his enimies assault, and fuller of force also to giue him the discomfiture. So he in like manner, (that I may rather shew my selfe a Mecurialist, then a Martialist: for I haue not to deale with war, nor yet with warlike weapons, otherwise then by way of application.) that loueth orderly to indite, & plausi∣bly to occupie his penne, in deuising and disposing as well both meete matter, as also fit wordes, in any kinde of letter, (for of letters Exhortato∣rie, Accusato∣rie, Interceso rie, Commen∣datorie, Excu∣atorie, Con∣gratulatorie, Responsorie, Consolatorie, Criminatorie, Nunciatorie, Lamentatorie, Mandatorie, Laudatorie, Conuictorie, Obiurgatorie Interrogatori, Dehortatorie, &c. reade Li∣ Sophi∣it, De episto∣larum charac∣teribus. there be sundrie sortes) must make meanes and prouision, for him selfe in this case, that those wantes and imperfections of Art & cunning may be supplied. To such a one I giue counsel to passe & repasse, to view & reuiew, to take down and put on, to exercise and vse, such weapons as he shall finde in this our Panoplie or house of furniture, & he shall feele him selfe in shor space, fenced and strengthened to the purpose, against ignoraunce that ougly monster of many heades, an enimie to order, and a friend to confusion. For, there shall be no kinde of letter, but in framing the same, thou shalt (though the gifts of na∣ture, wherewith thou art indued, be but weake and slender) haue knowledge, cunning, iudgement, and experience suffi∣cient: be the person to whō thou writest neuer so princely, neuer so learned, neuer so woorthy, neuer so noble, neuer so friendly, neuer so frowarde, neuer so gentle, neuer so angrie, neuer so vertuous, neuer so wicked, neuer so prudent, neuer so witlesse, neuer so heauie, neuer so ioyfull: finally, be his qualities of this kinde or that kinde, what so euer. So that, as the Physician, to heale many and sundrie maladies, wherewith his weake patients are infected, vseth many and sundrie sortes of medi∣cines: in like manner, to write formally to persons diuers in degree, thou haste here ready to serue thy turne, many presidents and exam∣ples, not broched in the seller of myne owne braine, but drawne out of the most pure and cleare founteines of the finest and eloquentest Rhetoricians, that haue liued and flourished in all ages, euen from the verie first, that wonne fame by that noble facultie, to the laste
whose names for the same cause, shall neuer weare out of memorie. What should I say more: The varietie of methode in this Panoplie of Epistles. wilt thou write grauely, wilt thou write wisely, wilt thou write sweetely, wilt thou write smoothly, wilt thou write harshly, wilt thou write darkly, wilt thou write gladly, wilt thou write sadly, wilt thou write largely, wilt thou write briefly, wilt thou write lo∣uingly, wilt thou write angerly? wilt thou complaine, wilt thou accuse, wilt thou rebuke, wilt thou commend, wilt thou threaten, wilt thou pardon, wilt thou displease, wilt thou reconcile, wilt thou commaunde, wilt thou intreate? what so euer thou art disposed to do by letter, eyther to thy friend, or to thine enimie, thou hast this Panoplie to guide thy head in deuising, and thy penne in disposing. To con∣clude, many, and (in manner) innumerable are the benefites which this booke bringeth, which we wish no lesse profita∣ble to thee the Reader, then it was pleasaunt to me the gatherer & translator. Fare you well. Thine for thy benefite. Abraham Flemming.
THE EXTRACT OF certaine selected Epistles, out of M. T. Cicero, the most famous Rhetorician and eloquent Orator among the auncient Romanes. Cicero to Messinio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He signifieth to his friend Messinius, that he is desirous to see him, and ex∣horteth him to mitigate and assuage the heauinesse and bitternesse of his troublesome times, with the communicating of letters, and with the comfortable remembrance of a good conscience. MOst acceptable were your letters: which gaue me to vn∣derstand no lesse thē I presup∣posed, before you applyed your pen to the practise of inditing: namely, yt you were inflamed with a maruellous desire to sée me: which singular courtesse of yours I can not but well ac∣cept, yet so notwithstanding, that you imagin the same scant counteruailable with the kindnesse, where with for your sake I am affected. For so do I wish al things to chance vnto me, as I professe my selfe touched, or rather stinged with a desire to be in your presence. For, at what time the nūber of honest men, good citizens, Honestie, ple santnesse, and loue▪ are the causes of kynd nesse, and the special allure∣ments, why we couet to be to gether. pleasant companions, and such indéede as loed me, and made of me great account, was not small: yet among so many, there was not one, with whom I would   spende my time, then with you, and very fewe with whom I wish to be so willingly. As for this time wher∣in we now liue, for so much as some of our acquaintance are swallowed vp with the sworde, some scattered in varietie of
soiles, and othersome haue altered the former disposition of their will: one dayes space, spent in your societie, ministreth to my minde larger delightsomnesse, then all the time which I waste with many of them, among whom necessitie cōstrai∣neth me to make continuance. I would not haue you con∣ceiue this opinion, that solitarinesse, or a wandering life in a vast wildernesse, or an vnfrequented abiding, is vnto me more pleasant and comfortale, (which I may not vse by any meanes) than the conference & communiation, which I haue with Of Caesars acquaintance. sundry Gentlemē, that haue vsual resort to my house, one or twaine at the vttermost excepted. Wherfore I refuse not to run to that refuge of succour, which (in my iudgement) you ought to imbrace, namely intercourse of friendly Epi∣stles, and also an assurance of both our consciences. For I am the man, as you may lightly coniecture, and without curious canuassing gather, that haue at no time, attēpted any thing, more for my priuate commoditie, then for the furtherance of my friends, and profite of my citizens, at whose estate and condition, if He meaneth Pompeius. he had not enuied, and maliciously repined, to∣wards whom your affection was neuer inclined, (for I was your beloued) both he him selfe had béene fortunate and hap∣pie, and all other giuen to vertue and goodnesse. Such a man am I, as doe both wishe and will, that the violence of none haue force so farre to preuaile, as henest ease and tranquilli∣tie power to ouer come, and when as I perceiued, that the selfe same Caesars ar∣mie. armie which I most mistrusted, was of greater abilitie, then the mutuall consent of suche good Gentlemen, whome I (by myne owne procurement) assembled, then thought I thus in my mynde, that it could not be much pre∣iudiciall and hurtfull to conclude Yea, though the condition wee scant honest. peace vpon any condition whatsoeuer, so that safetie might be obteined, and daunger auoyded, then to encounter him vpon confidence of sufficient force, to whome in strength and fortitude I am inferiour. But of these matters, and of other circumstances, we shall talke shortly face to face without interruption. There is nothing which sticketh so fast in my cogitation, as the state of the affaires in Caesar tooke one part, Sci∣pio another, and uba the king. Africa, the expectation whereof keepe me
in Rome, for nowe (as it should séeme) the matter lies a blée∣ding, and is brought into a very narrowe point of perill, and surely I thinke that in some respect it toucheth me, although howe much or howe little, out of question I am ignorant: neuerthelesse, whatsoeuer is reported vnto me from thence, I knowe the counsels of my friendes and welwillers are in a readinesse. For nowe the mattr is growne towardes such hassarde, that, although in their two causes which are at de∣aunce and dealing of blowes in battell, great difference consisteth, yet small oddes is there in their He suppo∣seth that both their victories will smell of crueltie. victories, ex∣cept I be farre and wide deceiued. But to discouer a plaine truth, my mynde, which in matters of difficultie and doubt∣fulnesse was not a little inféebled, in fearefull daungers, and terrible desperation is mightily cōfirmed: & your last letters haue affoorded to the same, further establishment: whiche conteined a testimonie of your valiauntnesse, in suffering in∣iuries with a couragious stomache: besides that, sithence your singular humanitie & gentlenesse, was to your preser∣mēt, and your letters also a meanes for your aduantage, I féele my selfe thereby somewhat assisted. For I wil write no vntruth, I tooke you to be a man f a soft nature, and a milde spirite, as we are all for the most part, that haue lead our liues in a frée and a fortunate common wealth: Howbeit, as we inioyed When the common wealth was glorious. prosperitie, and the floure of felicitie with mode∣ration▪ so nowe also, in this aduersitie, and In that wee are  to Caesar. declining of fortunes fauour from vs, ought we to sustaine all perplexi∣ties with patience: to the intent that in most mayne mis∣chiefes, we might nde this good remedie, not onely to contemne and despise, but also to desire and long after death, which we ought not to feare although we  not  with blessedness, For he is of opnion, tht our mydes or soules are immortall: which he pro∣ i his booke of old age so intitu∣led. ▪ i    of the senses, and leauet the  rustrate  . This tran∣quillitie, ease and ietnesse▪  you hase and pssesse, if you loue me in déde, if your friendsip e feruent▪ &  kindnesse not controulable▪ yea plant this▪ persuasion in your minde, That nothing (blame and offence ▪  you haue neuer éene  vnto, an  ▪
Can chaunce in the life of any man wherein horror is har∣boured, or feare intertaind. I wil come and visite you short∣ly, if I may sée time conuenient: if any thing fall out in suche sort, that an alteration of our counselles must insue, I will certifie you without delay. Sée that you remaine so desirous to sée me, that you remoue not from the place where you be, sithence you are weake and crase, before you aske mine ad∣uisement by your letters, what my will is to haue you doe in that behalf. I would that you should loue me stil, as you now do no lesse, and as I wish that your health be carefully consi∣dered, so I woulde not be well pleased, if in tranquillitie and quietnesse your minde should not be established. Fare you well. Cicero to P. Lentulo. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle is altogether consolatorie or comfortable: for he miistreth consolation to Lentulus by comparison of his owne times and trou∣bles, when he being in banishment fo a seaon, recouered notwith∣standing the benefite of his countrie, and the possession of his dignitie. The occasion why the Epistle is so shor, was, for that Pollio went to Lentlus of set purpose, to make report vnto him of all thinges by word of mouth. OF all things done here, Of the coū∣trie Asinia. Pollio (who was not only pre∣sent, but also had the ordering and disposing of them) shal sufficiently giue you to vnderstand. As for my selfe, the con∣fidence and hope which I conceiue in your matters and bus∣nesse, comforteth me a midde the maine seas of my sorrowes and heauinesse▪ bycause▪ I suspect it is like to come to passe, that by the procurement of   counses, mens ma∣liciousnesse shal be infeebled and weakned, as also by the be∣nefite of that happie day of restitution, not only the thoughts of Whose vn∣faithfulnesse we haue in great suspicion traitours sha be preuented, ut the cogitations and pur∣poses of your aduersaries shall quite be dissolued: Secondly, the remembrunee of mine owne When he was forced to forake his ountrie. troublesome times, offer vnto me som consolation: a represetation o image whero
ée in your present estate. For although your worship and countenaunce in a matter of lesse importance be blemished, then my health, saetie, and life indungered: yet there is such a liuely likenesse and resemblance, that I hope you will iudge me pardonable, if I feare not those things, which your owne self haue alwayes supposed not to be feared at all. But spare not to shewe your selfe the man, whome (from tender yeares) I tooke you to be. Beléeue me th, howe much the iniurious dealing of peruersse people shall be increased, so much the worthynesse and dignitie of your person shall be in∣larged. As for me, For in time of necessitie, true frendship is more effec∣tuall. looke what dutie & seruice is requirea∣ble of a friende to a friende, on my part shall be precisely perfourme▪ I will not deceiue your hope. Fare you well. Cicero to Ualerio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle is tempered with iesting and pleasantnesse. One thing therin is serious, namely where hee giueth thankes to Len∣tulus, to whose gouernement Cilicia was committed: lastly, it conteineth certaine duti of familiaritie towardes the same Va∣lerius. FOr Hee is plea∣santly dispo∣sed, calling him Lawier, not as though he were one in deede, but as though he gaue him the name for affec tions sake. why should I not salute you by the name of a Law∣yer? I know no cause to the contrarie: Especially sithence in these dayes and as the course of the world nowe is, bolde∣nesse may be vsed for wisedome, impudencie taken for pru∣dence. I haue thanked Lentulus by my letters in your name, and that with diligence. But I would wishe you to looke for no more letters from vs: but rather to take paines to come and sée vs your friendes, and there to make your aboade, where you may growe in worship and estimation, rather then to continue where you are, séeming solitarie wise: albe∣it some which haue béene with you, report you to be proude and hautie arted, bycause you vouchsafe not to answere your clients: and partly spightfull in speache, bycause you answere vnhappily. But nowe Valerius, my desire is to be
pleasaunt with you in person: wherefore, doe what you can to come vnto vs: and as for Apulia your natiue countrie, come not at it: that we may be glad of your safe comming hither. For if you goe into Apulia, when you come there, you shall knowe Alluding to the basenesse of his petigre, as though he were maruel∣lous destitute of alliaunce & acquintance. as many of your friendes and kinsfolke, as did Whom nei∣ther man, wo∣mā, nor child knewe but his dog alone. Vlysses, at the ending of his long peregrination and wearisome voyage. Fare you well. Cicero to Curio. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle hath foure members, or portions. In the first Cicero being accused of Curio for his seldome writing, excuseth him self by the commemoration of his duetie. In the second, he disco∣uereth the griefe of his mynde conceiued through the absence of Curio, and his ioy on the otherside, for Curio his worship. In the thirde is contained an admonition to the deseruing of praise, and to the imbracing of vertue. In the fourth, hee commendeth to Curio the estate of his olde age, being fiftie sixe yeares olde when he wrote this letter. ALthough I am grieued, that for negligence sake you haue me in suspicion: An excuse with a testi∣monie of his beneuolence. yet my duetie to be accused of you, did not so muche moue me to be sorie, as the selfe same to be re∣quired, did incourage me to be merrie: especially, sithence I am not guiltie of that offence whiche is layde to my charge▪ And assuredly, in that you acknowledge a desire of my let∣ters, therein you declare your selfe, not onely an approued friende vnto me, but also do testifie the swéetenesse of your loue. There hath none escaped the carrying of my letters, whome I might vnderstande to trauell towards you: For wo is lesse slouthfull, and more He sayd not more diligent but more quicke and speedie, to the intēt he might rather excuse thē commend him selfe. Epi. . Lib. 5. quicke and spéedie to write to his friende then I? As for you, I haue hearde not passing twise, or thrise at the vttermost from you, and when you write, you write very sparingly and shortly: wherefore if you giue vniust iudgement vpon me, why may not I also condemne you in the same offence: and if you séeme loath
that I shoulde so doe, then is it your duetie to be more cour∣teous and vpright towards me. But concerning letters, let this suffice: for I mistrust not, but that I shall serue you to your owne contentation with often writing, conditionally, that my labour therein employed, be rather regarded, then refused, accepted then despised. The second part of the E∣pistle. I am not a litle grieued for your long absence from vs, by the meanes whereof I suf∣fer this inconuenience, that I laboure in the lacke of your most swéete and delightsome acquaintance: and yet I can not but reioyce, for that you haue obtained and wonne (as it were) the maisterie in all thinges, with great worship and renoune, and that fortune assenteth to my desires in all your affaires, suites & businesse. The thirde part or portiō So great is the expectation of your iudgement & wisdome, that I dout not to request & ear∣nestly beséeche you, to returne to vs in such sort confirmed in mind & established, y• the expectation which you in the minds of most men haue kindled, may accordingly be mainteined & nourished: He commen deth and ex∣horteth toge∣ther, bycause exhortation shuld be rem∣pered with cō mendation. Epi. 12. Li. 15. And bycause no stormes of forgetfulnesse, no empestes of vnthankfulnesse, shall be able to drenche the re∣membraunce of your duetifull desartes towardes me: I praye you heartily, to repose this in your memorie, that to what prosperitie and dignitie fortune shall aduaunce you,* The fourth part or mem∣ber. you shoulde neuer haue had the abilitie to aspire there vnto, but that in your childhoode you did lay a listening eare to my faythfull counselles, and shewed your selfe conformable and applyaunt to my most louing aduertisements. Wherfore, such ought your duetie to be towardes vs, and such your af∣fection, that myne For he wa foure and fif∣tie yeares old when he  this letter. olde age still increasing, and dayly drou∣ping, may be harboured in the hauen of your friendship, and nde comfort in the goodnesse of your youth. Fare you well.
M. T. Cicero to Curio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee exhorteth Curio to seeke after praise, fearing, least whiles ciuil warres did spring, hee would decline from the seruice which hee did owe to the common wealth, and take part and confederacie with traiterous citizens. YOu are not ignoraunt Curio, that of letters there are Three kynd of Epistles or letters. sundry sortes, but of all other none so certaine as that one, whiche moueth vs to inuent matters necessarie, that thereby we might certifie suche as be absent, of that whiche they ought to kowe, eyther pertaining to vs, or to them. Such kinde of letters it is néedlesse to looke for at my hands, sithence you haue as well writers, as reporters, of your do∣mesticall and priuate businesse. As for my matters, I haue nothing newe whereof to giue you intelligence. Beside this, there are two other kinde of letters, which exhibite vnto me no small delectation, the one is familiar and pleasant: the other is weightie and earnest: of which twaine whether it best behoueth me to frame my style vnto, and apply my pen, I am altogether ignorant. Should I vse dalliance in indi∣ting; and pleasantnesse in writing vnto you? Now certeinly I thinke him to be no citizen who setteth his mind vpon toy∣ing Bycause of the ciuil wars and contenti∣ons. in these tumultuous times. Should I write some∣what vnto you grauely, and disclose some matter of weight? what thing can there be, whereof Cicero can certifie his Cu∣rio more seriously, then of cases concerning the common wealth? and in this kinde of letters is my cause conuersant, and so conuersant, that I would not willingly communicate with you, those thinges whiche at this present occupie my mynde. For in so doing I should busie my braine, in matters more hatefull then healthfull. Wherefore, bycause there remaineth vnto me no argument wherevpon to write, I wil vse that litle clause or petit sentence, which of custome I am wont, and I will not be behinde hand to incourage you to the desire and loue of renoune: for you haue a sore aduersarie,
and the hope which is alreadie had on your behalfe, excéedeth the boundes of all beliefe: which hope and expectation, you may satisfie, and easily ouercome by the meanes of one thing, namely, if you be certeinly resolued in this point, that ear∣nest labour muste be susteined, and no paines auoyded, in Mening the morall vertues wherewith we win credite to our selues, and commoditie to the state of our countrie. those thinges principally which purchase passing prayse, both with Prince and people, the glory and fame whereof you haue singularly and throughly loued. Much more would I write tending to this same purpose, but that I am persua∣ded, that of your owne accorde you haue stomach sufficient in this point, and haue your mynde no lesse inflamed to de∣serue dignitie, then I am ready to put it into your memorie: and this, whatsoeuer it be, litle or much, that I haue touched in my letter, I haue not done, to the intent to kindle your courage the more in this case, but to the ende I might sende you an assuraunce of my loue, and a gage of my hartie good∣will. Fare you well. M. T. Cicero to Curio. THE ARGVMENT. He comforteth Curio mourning for the death of his father, and pro∣miseth that he will be vnto him in place of a second father. I Haue lost a speciall witnesse of my great loue towardes you, your father I meane, a man of singular vertue and no∣blenesse: who, by the benefite of his owne praises, and by the meanes of you his true and naturall sonne, had excelled the fortune of all men whatsoeuer, had it béene his good lucke to haue had life prolonged, till such time as he might haue séene you, his valliant sonne, after your returne from the Ouer the which he had peremptoric gouernment, and iudiciall authoritie. pro∣uince, before he gaue his last farewell to the world. But though he be gone, yet I rest in hope, that our friendship is not frustrate of witnesse sufficient. The Gods giue you good of your patrimonie and inheritaunce. I am yours, and thinke that you are no lesse loued and thought vpon, then
you were of your father naturall, whiles he lyued. Fare you well. Cicero to Curio. THE ARGVMENT. He reioyceth for Curio his sake, both bycause he was not present at Rome, where many thinges were committed to the preiudie and dammage of the common wealth, and bycause he is in suche a place, where his well doing may winne him worship. For ende, he counselleth Curio to take charge of the common wealth. HOwe these matters of weight goe, I dare not let you vn∣derstande by letter, although, in what place soeuer you abide, as I haue already written vnto you in times past, you are subiect to the selfe same danger of By translati∣tion, for ha∣zard of life & goods, aphrase very vsuall. shipracke: yet it re∣ioyceth my heart that you are absent, eyther bycause you sée not these things which we sée: or else, bycause your praise is placed in a loftie & famous seate, namely in the open sight, as well of Citizens as of others your fellowes: the report wher∣of hath sounded in our eares, not by tunes of tongs doubtfull and variable, but by one voice of all men most certaine, and perceiuable. Of one thing I am ignorant, whether I should reioyce or be afraid for your sake, bycause the expectation and looking for your returne is maruellous: not that I am a∣fraide for any doubt of your vertue, that it should not be coū∣teruailable with the opinion of men: but certainly, for that at your comming, you shall not be able to remedie that which is amisse: all things are so tossed, turmoyled, troubled, topsie turuey turned, and in a manner vtterly spoyled. But I wote not whether I may well commit these matters to writing. Wherefore, looke more largely otherwise to vnderstande the rest. But as touching your owne person, whether you tra∣uell in hope or in despaire of the common wealth: Ciceroes ac∣customed clause to Cu∣rio. for whose nature he well knewe: ouer him was hee careful, lest he should be dā∣nified. Studie, deuise, prouide those things, which in a worthy man and a good citizen, ought neuer to be wanting, that laboureth with tooth and naile to succor the afflicted state of the weale publique: and, before it be quite ouerwhelmed with the
waues of lamentable times, and outrageous manners of mis∣chiefous men, to restore it to the former beautie, auncient li∣bertie, worship and dignitie. Fare you well. Cicero to Curio. THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth highly Titus Annius Milo, labouring for the Con∣sulship and to the intent he might obteine that which he defireth, omitteth no one circumstance nor other, which in a commenda∣torie letter may be required. YOur comming to Italie The first wordes detect the desire of the Petitioner was not then hearde of, when I sent Sextus Villius, Miloes friend vnto you with these my letters: Howbeit, when there was an ynkling, that it wold not be long er you came, and that it was perfectly kno∣wen, that you were iourneying out of Where Cu∣rio was in of∣fice of the Quaestor. Asia toward Rome: the weightinesse of the matter was suche, that we thought these letters could not come too soone to your handes, when we greatly wished, and gladly willed, that they might be con∣ueyed vnto you with all spéede possible. An insinua∣tion, or close entrance, to his petition. If (friend Curio) my desarts towardes you were such, as they are more com∣mended of you, then considered of me, I would, if I had any great petition to make, trie what I could obtaine, if Marke his modestie. shame∣fastnesse were not my hinderance. For, to a shamefast felow, it is grieuous and troublesome, to craue some great thing of him, of whome he thinketh him selfe by duetie Priuie com∣mending of his merites. well to haue deserued, least the thing which he craueth, might seme to be In requiring is dutie, in de∣fireing is de∣sart. required, rather then desired, and to be counted a re∣compence and not a benefite. But bycause your merites towardes me are manifest vnto all men, and in the straū ge∣nesse of my doleful dayes, appeared, not onely in their bright∣nesse, but also in their greatnesse: and séeing It is the proper∣tie of a gentle and courteous nature, to affoorde much vnto him, to whome much is due: I doubted not to craue that of you by letter, whiche of all thinges is to me the greatest,
and most necessarie. Neyther doe I feare any vnabilitie in bearing the burthen of your innumerable benefites, si∣thence chiefly I am of this confidence, Frō hope of making recō∣pence. that there is no fa∣uour nor good turne so great, whiche my mynde cannot con∣ceiue in taking, or in exchaunging of courtesie and making a∣mendes, adorne, & beautifie. I, my studies, al my labour, care, trauell, diligence: for end, all my mynde haue I founded, fastened, and fired vpon Milo his Consulship, wherin I haue determined, not onely to séeke for the commoditie of the office in his behalfe, but also as I ought, for the due praise of pietie. And surely, I thinke no man at any time hath béene so care∣full of his health and wealth, as I haue béene of his renoune and honour: in the which I haue béene resolued, my self and all myne to consist. I knowe that you, being but one man, can, if you will, be to him such a furtheraunce and helpe, as ouer & beside the same we néed demaund nothing. We haue al these adiuments and helpes: the loue of good men, obteined through his behauiour in the protectourship of the people, for our cause, as I hope you vnderstand: the desire of the cōmons and multiude, by reason of his Wherevpon Milo spent three whole patrimonies or inheritan∣ces. large giftes and presentes, and the liberal disposition of his nature: the fauour and good will of the honourable youth of this citie, and of diuers Gen∣tlemen, who haue giuen him their consentes: finally, our suf∣fragation, or consenting voices, though lesse auailable, yet not disalowable, but iustly For the friendly vsage which he hath shewed vnto me. deserued, and therefore peraduen∣ture worthy acceptation. A guide we must néedes haue, and of a gouernour we can not be destitute, yea one certaine ru∣ler, & high officer must be made, in these stormes & blustering tempests which I haue discouered. From the person of Cu∣rio. And if one man among al yt rest, may be desired & wished, to this roome of authoritie, vndoubtedly, we shoulde not picke out one, whome with you we might account comparable. Wherefore, if you can con∣ceiue this opinion of me, that I am not a man vnmindfull of my friende, that I am disposed to courtesie and goodnesse, if there were none other cause of such conceit, then that I lay to my helping hand so earnestly, for Milo his furtherance, fi∣nally, if you are of this iudgement, that such benefites as you
haue bestowed on me, are not frustrate and cast away: then let me desire thus much of your gentlenesse, that you would stande my friend in this matter whereof I am carefull, that you would employ your trauel and paine for my commenda∣tion, or to tell a flat truth, in manner, my life and preseruati∣on. As for T. Annius, thus muche I promise in his behalfe, that no man in the world toward you shall shewe more hu∣manitie, more grauitie, more constancie, more beneuolence and goodwill, if it would please you to vouchsafe him your fa∣uour. And as for my selfe, my worthinesse, honour, dignitie, and renowne, shall by your meanes so much be inlarged, as I must (perforce) acknowledge you to be the very same my benefactour, in the procurement of my praise, that wast sometime the pawne and protectour of When you spared no pai∣nes in resto∣ring me to my natiue coun∣trie. my life. But that I am assured, that it is not vnknowne to you, how seriously and earnestly I labour in this petition of Milo, and that therein not only great paines, but also some resistance and striuing is required, I would haue written vnto you more at length: And now I cōmit to your patronage the whole mat∣ter and the cause, and mine own person I commend to your courteste. And take this one clause for a conclusion, that if I may obteine at your handes the summe of my supplicati∣on, Milo shall not be so much bound vnto you for your high∣nesse, as I wil be your déepe debter for your goodnes. For the safegarde of mine owne life was not to me so precious, and déere, wherein he shewed him selfe a principall fauourer, as my thankfulnesse shall be pleasant and delectable, in making iust recompence, where vnto I shall be drawne by your onely & alone friendship, as in hope I am persuaded. Fare you well. Cicero to Coelio Rufo. THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth Fabius for fiue things: namely, for his honestie, his lear∣ning, his wit, his sobernesse, and his friendship. I Am well acquainted with Marcus Fabius, a Honestie & learning are linked toge∣ther, to giue vs to note that vnlearned ho∣nestie, or vn ho nest learning are not much cōmendable. very honest man, and passing well learned: I vse him familiarly, and
I loue him Pleasantly spoken in the praise of Coe∣lius, for the no table qualities of his mynde. excéedingly, both for the worthynesse of his wit, and also for the excellencie of his learning, and besides these for the singularitie of his sobernesse and maruellous modestie: my request vnto you, is, that you woulde so take charge of his matter as if it were mine. I knowe you are no table patrones. These wor∣des import some matter of efficacie. He must be a manqueller that meaneth to commit his lyfe to your supportation, and the canuassing of his cause to your defence. But in this man no excuse is seruiceable, for I will take none. You shall set all thinges a∣side, if you loue me indéede, sithence my friend Fabius is wil∣ling to vse your aduise and help. I am in great expectation of the state of * things at Rome, and my desire to vnderstand of them is vehement and earnest: and first of all I would glad∣ly knowe howe it fareth with you: For we haue heard no newes now this long time, bycause of the sharpnesse of the winter. Fare you well. Cicero to Appio Pulchro. THE ARGVMENT. Dolabella accused Appius, and at the selfe same time had married Cice∣roes daughter. Cicero goeth about to proue that he was ignoraunt of that which his friendes had done in that case, and gathereth many rea∣sons to the same purpose. WHen worde was brought to vs of the temeritie & rash∣nesse of them whiche Somewhat a more milde speach then if he had said, ac cused you. molested you, and sought your disquietnesse, although the hearing of such newes at the first put me beside all patience, and kindled my choler, bycause nothing in the world could chaunce so much against my opi∣nion and mynde: yet notwithstanding, so soone as I gathe∣red my wits together, and felt my selfe better appeased, the faultes layde to your charge séemed vnto me not so heynous and hatefull, but that they might be tollerable, bycause the hope which I had in you and yours, was excéeding great: and many things came to my remembrance, why I shuld thinke this your trouble an inlarging rather of your For in aduer sitie doth ver∣tue and pro∣wesse most flourish. honour, then a blemishe to your person. But one thing I was very muche
grieued and displeased withal, that the triumphe which most iustly you did deserue, was so wrongfully wrested from you, by the counsell and consent of a company your spitefull eni∣mies: which if you so estéeme, as I haue alwayes thought it should be set by, you shall shew the example of a wise man: and to the griefe and hartburning of your aduersaries shall most iustly triumphe as an excellent conquerour in déede. For I manifestly perceiue thus much, that not your man∣hoode and substance only, but your wisedome and discretion also, are most necessarie and expedient, to make your enimies repent their vnaduised and ouer rash dealing. As for me, I protest before all the Gods, not to be wanting eyther in pro∣mise or in performance, in any thing concerning your That there may come none to Rome, to giue euidence a∣gainst you. dig∣nitie, (for so had I rather say, then for you safetie) in this pro∣uince, which sometime was in your gouernment, and I wyll in your behalfe, supply the part of an aduocate, by speaking: of a neighbour & friend by labouring: of a man well thought of in all cities, by authoritie and countenaunce, and of a ma∣gistrate or ruler, by my For then al my frendly of fices and du∣ties shal seme the more forceable, by reason of my noble name, and title im∣periall. grauitie and counsell. All that may be, commaund and looke for at my handes: my diligence in discharging the dutifulnesse of a friend, shall be answerable to your expectatiō and thinking. Q. Seruilius deliuered vnto me from you a very short letter, which not wtstanding séemed vnto me too long by many lines: for I thought iniurie done vnto me, therein to be required, wherin my will neuer wan∣ted to do you pleasure. I would not the time had chaunced, wherein you should trie, what account I make of you, howe much I set by Pompeius, which one ode mā among al other I moste of all estéeme, and howe dearely I loue Brutus: although in our continuall acquaintance, and dayly familia∣ritie, you perceiued somwhat, and as you shall hereafter vn∣derstande and trie further: But bycause it is chaunced, if a∣ny thing be ouerslipped and lightly escaped on my parte, let it seeme to you an offence wilfully committed, and a re∣proch to mine owne person willingly procured, & so I will ac∣knowlege it. Cicero his Embaslad our. . Epistola. 4 Pontinus, whose intertainmēt with you, was tēpered o singular truth & entesie, of which your ountie to
him warde I am a witnesse, shewēth him selfe maruellous mindfull of you, and hideth not his goodwill, which duetie de∣maundeth, and al for your furtherance and commoditie: who taking ship to sayle from That he might do what hee coulde, to stay the com∣ming of any to Rome, to witnesse a∣gainst you. Ephesus to Laodicea, and vnder∣standing that his worde and presence might make much for the maintenance of your matter, returned to Rome, that by his meanes, there might no euidence be giuen against you in the citie. And surely, sithence I sée the helps and assistance which you are like to haue, not onely auailable, but also in∣numerable, I can not doubt, but that this carefulnesse and courteous regard in your behalfe, is like to redound to your greater worship. If you bring to passe that Censors, that is, officers for the reformation of maners be made and ordeined, and if your behauiour and vsage in the same office be such, as it ought to be, and as you are of abilitie to perfourme: I sée none other likelyhoode, but that you shall in time be a great stay & safegard, not to your self only, but to all yours, whiles the worlde indureth. Of this haue a speciall care, and set to the vttermost of your might, that we prolong no time: that when we haue satisfied your minde here by our diligence, we may also giue a triall there to you of our beneuolence. The thinges which you writte vnto me, touching the loue and affection of all men, and al orders towards you, they He vseth the like wordes to Plancus. Epi. 1. Lib. 10. moue me not to any admiration, but yet to heare so wel of you, fil∣leth me with ioy and delectation: and the selfe same thinges whereof you giue me intelligence in your letters, haue my friendes also written vnto me, as witnesses of your well do∣ing. I am replenished therefore with seas of pleasure, as wel for that those things are exhibited and giuen vnto you (with whom mine acquaintance and familiaritie is not only great, but also This he ad∣ded, to the end he might seme not to haue loued him only for com∣modities sake. swéete) whiche are due and requisite, and also for that our fantasies and goodwils towarde valiant and paine∣full men continue as yet in the citie, by a vniuersall consent almost, and there remaine: which vnto my selfe is a pension alwayes of my paines, and the rewarde of my susteined la∣bours. I can not but much maruell how it commeth to passe, that that * yong man, (whose life and safetie, I haue defen∣dedDolabella.
with excéeding & earnest labour, from two seueral iudge∣mentes.) should so rashly ouershoot himselfe, vtterly to forget And one whome hee knew to loue you excee∣dingly. the good patrone, preseruer, and defender of al his possessiōs, goodes, estate, & condition, in taking vpon him so carelesse and fruitelesse a labour, to incurre and runne in hazard of your ill wil and displeasure, you being a man furnished with all ma∣ner of safegardes, and beautified with all ornaments of de∣cencie: but he contrariwise (to tell my minde briefly) hauing nothing: He made boaste that that accusati∣on was main∣teined by Ci∣cero, because at the same time he mar∣ried his daugh ter. Whose fonde talke and childishe communication, was reported vnto me long since in writing, by our familiar friend M. Coelius: and whereof also you your selfe haue sent me word by letter. As for me, I had rather cut off all old ac∣quaintance with him, who hath purchased your anger, then to séeke after newe friendship. Neither would I haue you call the loue and affection whiche I beare you, into question, for thereof you ought not to stand in doubt, sithence the same is not vnknown to any in the Prouince, nor vntestified in the citie of Rome. Neuerthelesse, so farre as I gather by the substance of your letters, a certaine kinde of suspicion is sig∣nified, and a doubt also secretly mencioned: in the disscussing wherof another time shalbe more conuenient, as well to rea∣son with you too and fro in this behalfe, as also to purge and discharge my self in this case. For, where and in what place haue I béene an hinderaunce to any embassage, to the intent that it might not passe to Rome for the augmentation and inlargement of your praise and honour? Or if I had hated you with a professed spite, and a manifest enuie, wherein could I shewe the fruites of suche: a mischéefe, lesse to your harme and annoiaunce? Or if the enuie wherein I boyled a∣gainst you were secret and priuie, wherin could I haue shew ed my selfe a more open and sworne aduersarie? And if so be any discredit, and want of honestie, had béen equal or sembla∣ble to theirs, which sprinckle vs with these blottes of blame, yet vndoubtedly, It is the point of folly to shew a will to hurte him, whom thou canst not for thy hart by any meanes, annoy. I would not haue swarued so farre wide from wisedome and discretion, either in hidden hate to prac∣tise open quarelling, or to bewray the inclination and prone∣nesse of my hart, to do him harme, whom to annoy is beyond
my reache and abilitie. I remember certaine came to mée, and saide, that the costes and expences whiche were appoin∣ted for the embassadours, were too large, and greater then they ought, wherein I vsed, not so muche the Very witti∣ly spoken, be∣cause he regar deth friend∣ship when hee cōmaundeth: and hath an cie to the law when hee va∣lueth. libertie of com∣maunding, as I did the equitie of valuation, estéeming them as narrowly as I might, to the tenure and meaning of that lawe, named Lex Cornelia, in that respect prouiding. Wher∣in, that I made no delayes, or long tariance, the seuerall ac∣countes of the Cities are able to giue in euidence, whiche are of sufficient authoritie to proue, howe muche and howe litle, each particular Citie alloweth, of their Embassadours to be receiued. But with what lyes and false rumors haue light headed men ouerburthened you? that the expences are not onely inhaunced and racked, but also redemaunded & ta∣kē away, by their factours that be already gone, & that to be the occasion, that diuers others are restrained. I woulde ex∣postulat and debate the matter with you, but that as I haue protested in my former letters, I had rather at this time say somewhat in mine owne purgation, then against you to com∣mence any accusation: which counsell in déede I like the bot∣ter. And therefore, concerning you in that you haue credit o suche reportes, I will say nothing: but touching myself, why you ought not to haue beléeued such rumors, I wil say some∣thing, whiche shalbe litle. For if so be you take mée for the same man, whom I thought you were persuaded mée to be, I meane n honest man, well worthie of that knowledge, lear∣ning, and exercises, whereunto from my childehoode I haue béen addicted: if you take me for a man of a valiant harte, and not of the weakest iudgement & aduise, in matters of grea∣test weight: then ought you to denie that any From his owne person. vnfaithfulnes, fraude, or deceitfulnesse lieth lrking in our friendship: yea, & that more is, you must in no wise graunt that it sauoureth of any thing, wherein is any balenesse, vilenesse, or simplenesse. But if by the law of your lust, you account me a craftie, close, & counterfect felow, what is there that can lesse touch so No∣ble a nature, then either to haue the good will of From the person of Ap pius. a moste ho∣nourable man in contempt: or to séeke the empairing & stay∣ning
of his estimation and renoune in the Prouince, whose praise hath béene proclaimed and defended in the citie: or to shewe a minde disposed to mischéefe against him, who is not within the precinct of our power to indammage: or to choose that thing to be a testimonie of dishonest dealing, whiche to the discouering of hatred is moste manifest, and to the wor∣king of any wrong or inconuenience lest forceable? From the signe of an vn thankefull minde. More ouer, what cause was there, whereby my stomache should so swel against you, that the malice of my minde should be im∣mitigable, sithence I was infourmed of my brother, that you were not mine aduersarie, no not at suche time as necessitie required, you should not haue béene my fréend? And when either of vs, were moued with desire to be reconciled, and to haue our former familiaritie restored: what thing attempted you with mée, when you were in office of the Consulshippe, From his constancie. whereunto you would haue mée giue mine assent, or ioyne mine assistance, but it hath had answerable successe? What thing did you commaund me to do, when I folowed Going to∣ward the pro∣uince. you from Puteolis, in ye accomplishment wherof, my diligence was not counteruailable with your expectation? And if so be, that bée the token and marke whereby to knowe a craftie, and Forelike fellowe, to turne all thinges to his owne aduaun∣tage and commoditie: From that whiche is pro∣fitable. What was vnto mée more profita∣ble, what more conuenient for my benefite, then the acquain∣tance and society of a man most noble and honourable, whose substance, wealth, wisedome, children, Specially Pompeius, & Brutus. kinred, and fréendes, may be to my person a singular ornament, and a souereigne safegarde? To all whiche circumstances, I haue had a due consideration, in séeking to obtaine your fauour, not with fraude, deceipt & subtilty, but with wisdome, sobernesse, & ho∣nestie. From sem∣blance of de∣sires & other circumstances What should I say of those bondes & chaines, wher∣with I am tyed fast, and as it were fettered, to my greate contentation, howe great are they and of what efficacie? Sē∣blaunce and likenesse of affections, pleasantnesse and swéet∣nesse of familiaritie, delectation and ioyfulnesse of life, felow∣ship & comunication, mutuall sending of louing letters: All whiche are domesticall, and touche our priuate persons.
From the opinion of the people. What should I say of that whiche is popular and com∣mune in the mindes of the multitude? The notable recon∣ciliation of vs twaine, and falling againe into familiaritie: wherein offence cannot be committed through ignorance and want of aduisement, without suspicion of vnfaithfulnes: our fellowship in the honourable and reuerend office of y• He meaneth the Augurship wherein they were both Ge rents at one time. priest∣hoode, in whiche function of religion and ceremonies, it was not onely directly opposite and against the prescript of lawes, instituted by our auncestours, to violate, infringe, and vntie the knottes of fréendship: but it was also prohibited and pre∣cisely forbidden, that none should be admitted to that vocati∣on, whose harte fostered enuie, and grudged against any par∣ticular person of the same order: all whiche to pretermit and ouerskip, because they are not onely manifolde, but also vehe∣ment, who euer had any man in suche estimation and counte∣nance? who (I say) might, or ought, more to haue made of any man, then I did of From the person of Cneius Pom∣peius. C. Pompeius? For, if so be that merites preuail, if desarts are of any force, then I am of this opinion, that by him my countrie, my children, my safetie, my honour, and my selfe was restored to my selfe. If pleasauntnesse of acquaintance, and swéetnesse of familiaritie are of power: what friendship was there at any time, more harty & sincere, betwirt any two hauing borne the office of Consulles in our citie? if any significations and presidentes of loue and courte∣sie are forceable: what hath he not giuen mée in charge? In what hath not he taken trial of my credite? what hath he not communicated with mée, as his trustie partener? Whom would he rather haue then mée, to stirre in his behalfe in the Senate and counsell house, Specially at the warre had against king Mithridates. when he himselfe was not pre∣sent? with what thinges, hath not hée béene willing to a∣dorne and aduaunce mée moste largely? For end, with what facilitie, and quietnesse of minde, did he forbeare mée, when I was in plea in the common place, in the defence of Milo, and yet interrupting and withstanding your procéedinges? what prouidence and fore wisedome did he vse, that no one Because it was suspected that Milo kil∣led Clodius by the coun∣sell of Cicero. sparckle of enuie breaking out from the flame of that time (you wot when) shoulde so muche as once touche mée, when
he thought it not much to supporte mée with his counsell, to maintaine mée by his authoritie, and to protect mée with his weapon? In which dayes, vndoubtedly, such was his graui∣tie, sobernesse, courage, and valiaunt hart, that he would not giue credite to the report of any Phrygian, of any Lycaoni was a peece of Ciceroes do∣minion. Lycaoni∣an, as you did in your Embassadours, but set light by the in∣formations of those men which bare best and iolliest counte∣naunce, if their reports séemed to sauour of ill will and ma∣lice. And for somuch as this mans sonne married your daugh∣ter, besides which knitting o affinitie, and coupling of kin∣red, feing that C. Pompeius beareth you such hartie good∣will, and in you coceiueth great delight, as I am not igno∣raunt: how ought I to be affected towards you, & with what flames of kindnes ought my heart to be kindled? specially, si∣thens hée sent letters vnto mée, the contentes whereof were of such qualitie, that although I had béene your sworne and professed foe, as I am your most déere and faithful friend, yet must I néedes haue béene appeased, and haue framed my wil to the contentation of him, whose merits haue my seruice at comaundement. But hereof thus farre: for that runneth peraduenture, more at large, which is already written, then was necessarie and requisite. Now vnderstand you, what I haue In the Pro∣uince, which thinges dooe pertaine to the purgation of Appius, whom Dola∣bella accused. attempted and also finished. Wherein wée wil labou still, more for your aduauncemente, then for your detri∣ment. For (as I hope) wée shal heare that you shalbe Censor shortly: the office and authoritie of which magistrate, I can none otherwise beléeue, will be better considered off on your behalfe (as it requireth a most valiaunt minde, and singular counsel) more diligently, and more circumspectly, then these matters which wée haue in hand touching your person. Fare you well. Sulpicius to Cicero. THE ARGVMENT. When Caesar made warre in Spaine against Pompeius complices: Tul∣lia, Ciceroes daughter died in childbearth when shee was diuorced
from Dolabella, whereuppon Sulpicius sendeth a consolatori Epi∣stle, or a comfortable letter to Cicero▪ gathering argumentes and reasons as many as he may, to assuage his heuinesse. AFter His begin∣ning is order∣ly and incor∣rigible. For who so is not sorie for the miserie of his friend, is not to be counted a friend: and therefore his consolation can be of no force. the death of your daughter was reported vnto me: I toke it so grieuously (as in déede I ought) & was stoung with such sorrowe of hart, that I thought in her departure a common calamitie to consist: and if I had béene present with you there, at her death, I doubt not but to haue giuen you a testimonie, and an assured declaration of my sharpe concei∣ued sorrowe. And although this kinde of comfort is rather miserable, then deleable, sowre and vnswéete, then tempe∣red with pleasauntnesse, because they that minister this pre∣paratiue to you, are your néere friends and familiar compa∣nions, and so partakers of your pensifenes in equal proporti∣on, that without streames of teares they cannot discharge such a duetie, in so much as they had more néede of others consolation, then themselues, being sorowfull, to presume to comfort the perplexed: yet notwithstanding, I haue deter∣mined at this present, to write vnto you briefly, such thinges as offered them selues to my remēbrance: not that I presup∣pose you to be ignoraunt, what in this case should be accōpli∣shed: but because you being now peraduēture ouer whelmed with heauinesse, are not so circumspect as you haue béene ac∣customed. The origi∣nal of his com fort is deriued fròm the state of the time. Why should that your inward gréese so consume and waste your personne? Consider, I pray you consider, in what order fortune hath dealt with vs: that by her fumish∣nesse & terrible thunderings, we are spoiled & left vtterly na∣ked of those things, which with men are in no lesse price and estimation then children, our natiue countrie I meane, how thinke you? our honestie, our dignitie, and al the honours de∣pending vppon our prouinciall estate. This mischiefe and in∣conuenience being precisely pondered, I am in doubte, whe∣ther a more forceable thing can chaunce to ingender pensife∣nes, and to moue a mans minde to lamentable mourning. And should not hée, whose heart is (as it were) hardened with these greater and more vehement casualties, iudge all other
sufferable, and with lesse sorrowe to bée sustained? You will not be so vnwise, I thinke, to be waile Seing many which are wounded and slaine in warre perishe & die in forrow and paine, her cōdition, if you fal into this consideration (as of necessitie you must, and as I mée selfe doe, many and oftentimes) that they are in no ill case, in these dayes specially replenished with tumults, vp∣rores, insurrections, * whose lot and luck it is to make an er∣chaunge of life accompanied with disquietnesse, for a death deliuered from all vexation, & fortified with perpetual peace, rest, and tranquillitie. What was there in Tullia your daughter, which might greatly kindle in her a wil and desire to haue life lengthened, in this time burthened with trou∣bles? what hope? what confidence? what thing of port & coun∣tenaunce? that shee being contracted and married to some noble youngman, might runne the race of her age in his ple saunt partenership? You may, I thinke, and it is lawfull for you, in mine opinion, without suspicion of preiudice, to choose and elect, out of the noble and honourable youth of Rome, one young man of whom you doe well like and allowe, to make him Therefore it should seeme that Dolabel∣la & she were diuorced. your sonne in lawe, and to his tuition and gouernment to commit your smal children and orphans, your owne selfe being in safetie. Would you wish that she might liue, and fill the citie by the benefit of procreation, not vsing the company of man? Would you desire, I say, to haue her bring foorth sonnes and daughters, whom shée might behold in their flou∣rishing yeares, and reioyce? who might possesse their inheri∣taunce diuided vnto them of their father, and therewith liue like gentlemen and gentlewomen? who might As by the lawes it was prouided. In lib. de leg. it is manifest, orderly arise to feates and offices of honour in the common wealth, and in their friends affaires might vse their liberalitie? What of all these thinges is there, which was not taken away, before it was fully giuen? But it is a miserable thinge for a man to lose his children: y• losse of them, no doubt, is miserable, if to suffer open bondage were not much more wretched. Shall I tell you, what put mée in great comfort, when time was? vndoubtedly I will, vppon condition, that the selfe same things might mitigate & weaken your heuinesse▪ As I came oute of Asia, and directed my saile from Aegina towardes
Megara, I beganne to take a viewe of the countries rounde about mée. Behinde mée was Aegina, before mée was Me∣gara, on my right hand was Pyraeus, and on my left Corin∣thus: An argumēt A Maiori ad Minus. For if so be that de∣solatiō be the end of popu∣lous cities, no meruaile though death be the ende of mortal men. which cities were sometime famous and honourable, but now being battered and sacked, lye ruinous and waste. Then thought I with mée selfe: Wée sillie soules, take the matter too too heauily, when any of our acquaintance dyeth, or is slaine, whose life (peraduēture) was but short: and héere how many multitudes of men haue béene murthered? how many townes destroyed, how many faire buildinges ouer∣throwne. Wilt thou, Seruius, stay thée selfe, and imprint this in thy memorie: Hominem te esse natum? That by bearth thou art but a mortal man? And belieue me (friend Cicero) in thus thinking, I was sufficiently confirmed. The same thing al∣so, if you please, hange before you as it were a loking glasse: at one time, An argumēt deriued from comparison. so many noble men perished: Moreouer, thus much was diminished from the state of the empyre: finally, al prouinces and places of guard were shaken: and yet in the losse of one womans life, are you so disqueted? who if she had now escaped her dismall daye: yet, doubtlesse, shée had not béene excused, for within a fewe yeares her life would haue ended, From that which cannot otherwise come to passe. because Homo nata est, By bearth she was but a wo∣man. Wherefore withdraw your museing minde from these matters, and turne your studie rather vnto that, which ma∣keth for the renowne of your person: persuade your self that From the person of Tul lia. she liued as long as néede required, and that her vttermost houre passed ouer head: that her continuaunce was in the cō∣mō wealth: that shée saw you, her good father, in the office o the Praetorship: y• shée was wedded As to Piso, Cassipedes & Dolabella. to proper young gentle∣men of good place and calling: that she enioyed in a maner, al the benefites that might be obteined: & that, when the weale publique fainted, her life also fayled. What is there nowe remaining, whereof either you, or shée might meritoriously powre out your complaintes against the iniurious dealing of Fortune? But to draw to an ende: I would not haue you forget that you are Cicero, and hat you e the selfe same man, which was wont to giue preptes vnto othrs, and to
aist them with your holsome counsell: and not to follow the example of Naughtie Physiians, who professe, and vaunt, that they haue vnderstanding and abilitie enoughe, to cure the diseases of their patientes, but to heale their owne mala∣dies, and to salue vpp their owne sores, they wante wit and cunning: but rather applie to your owne person, y• preceptes which you giue vnto others, and as you would rule other mens minds, so sée y• your owne be gouerned. Nullus dolor est, quem non longinquitas temporis minuat, atque molliat. The same wordes are to be founde in the 28. epistle of the seuenth booke. There is no sorrowe and anguishe so deadly, but continuaunce of time may assuage the bitternes therof, and consume the cor∣siue eating of the same. But for you to awaite the comming of that time, in hope to vse the aduauntage which it affoor∣deth, From the o∣pinion & con ceie of man. redoundeth to your discommendation: when as your wisedome and knowledge are remedies auailable, to cut off the course of suche an infecting canckar. And admit, there were sense and perseueraunce in the dead ghostes, yet thus much dare I affirme, that the loue which shée oweth vnto you, and the reuernce which shée hath of her friends, would so restraine her will, and bridle her desire, that shée An argumēt drawne from the will of his dead daugh∣ter. would vtterly dissallow of this your doing, and in no wise consent, that you should so bitterly lament her death. Denie not this to your daughter deceassed: withstand not the wills of your friends, who are touched with a mutual compassion and suf∣feraunce of your sorrowe: and graunt thus much to your naturall countrie▪ that in what thing soeuer your counsell and assistaunce are néedefull, you be not wanting. For end, because wée are fallen into this fortune, that oure seruice must not bee slacke in this matter, Because the hart of euery true gentle∣man, ought to be much more moued with the miserie of the common wealth, then with the death of his chil∣dren. I wishe you, not to giue occasion vnto other ths to thinke, that so much the death of your daughter is lamented, as the troubles of the common∣wealth, and other mens  are bewailed. To write more touching this point, I begin to blush, and am ashamed, least I should séeme to distrust of your wisedome. Where∣fore one  more dded, I will end my letter. Wée haue séene you sometimes in flourishing fortune, commendablye dispoed, nd thereby able to purchase the price of praise and
noblenes: Euen so, bend the powers of your spirite, and he force of your mind, that in this blustering blast of aduersi∣tie, wée may haue some triall of your constancie: and let not the death of your daughter, lay a heuier burdn of griefe vp∣pon you, then behooueth: least among all other An argumēt frō the praise of Cicero. vertues, which in you shine and glister, this one be dasht and blemi∣shed. As for mée selfe, when I vnderstand that your minde is somwhat quieted, what is done here with vs, and in what state the Achaia. prouince is, at this present, I wil giue you know∣ledge. Fare you well. Cicero to Sulpicio. THE ARGVMENT. Hee aunswereth to the consolatorie letter of S. Sulpicius, saying that his sorrowe, after hee had perused the epistle, was somewhat afsua∣ged, but yet adding this, that hee hath more causes to be heuie and sad▪ then any man beside assaulted with the like calamitie. I Wish, friend Seruius, as you write, it had béene your luck to be present with mée, in my most heauie and grieuous chaunce. For what a propp and tay you had béene to mée, both by comforting mée, and also by like lamonting with me, I am well inourmed: because I had no sooner perused the summe of your letter, but I fealt mée selfe some what reied∣ed. For you did write those thinges, which could staunche the streames of my teares: and to quenche mine anguishe, you did discouer the passions of your owne heart. Seruius your sonne, gaue euident demonstrations of all friendly ser∣uice and courtesie, which might séeme pertinent and agrée∣able to this my infortunate time, both that his good will to∣wards mée, wherein hée was not wanting, might bee mani∣fest: and also, that you therein, for my sake, might participate much pleasure: whose courteous and friendly dueties, exhi∣bited with such humanitie, were (I must néedes say) poulde∣red with For in mise∣rie, what place is left for plea sauntnes. pleasauntnesse, but yet for al that neuer skarse ac∣ceptable.
Your words and phras of speach doe reuiue my fainting heart, ouerburthened with heauinesse: your suffe∣ring of my sorrowe for companies sake, doeth woorke the same effecte: and your authoritie and countenaunce giueth mée, against care, great incouragement: For I suppose it a beastly part, not to abide the brunte of my chaunce, in such sorte, as you (a man of excellent wisedome and iudgment) thinke it to be susteined. But yet my sorrowes sometimes rush vppon me, with such forceable and violent power, that I am beaten downe and kept vnder, and therfore skant able to make resistence: because I perceiue those consolations to forsake me quite, which, with others tossed in semblable tem pestes of aduersitie, remaine vndiminished. For Quintus Fabius. Maximus, who loste his sonne hauing borne the office of a Consul, and counted, when he was aliue▪ a man of great wor thines, in matters of policie, and of singular renowne in feates of cheualrie. Besides him, Lucius A Emilius. Paulus, who in se∣uen dayes space lost two sonnes, and your Who desē∣ded of the Sul picia familie. Gallus, and M. Cato, who also lost his sonne, a man of profound knowledge, and incomparable vertue: they all liued in those dayes and times, wherein their noblenesse and authoritie which they a∣spired vnto, in the commonwealth, quite quenched their ca∣lamitie, with preseruatiue receiptes of comforte. As for me (miserable man) after I had suffered shipwrack of all the Coūtenance Worship▪ Ho∣nour, &c. Epi∣stola. 5. lib. 4. or∣naments whereof you make a recapitulation or rehearsall, and saw me self spoiled of that which was my maintenance, and amid all these miseries, hauing but one onely comforte, wherupon to stay as on the anchor of my succour, yet is it my euill and accursed lck, to be robbed of the same too, and thus is infortunate Cicero depriued of al delight. And what hath the losse of this my last ioy procured? A collection of such cause as made Cice∣ro sorrowfull, declaring that he is not to be reprehended, for being gre∣ued with that, which of rig∣hte & reason ought to bee lamented, Hath it not hindered mée from furthering the suites of my friendes? Hath it not made, mee forget mine attendaunce vppon the weale pub∣lique? Hath it not made mee haue no will nor stomache to pleade in the common place? Hath it not made me, not onely glad to absent mée selfe from the courte of causes, but also ful loath to éeholde the same? and what hath it not done?
I thought no lesse, then at length I founde true, that all the profites of my paines, al the commodities of my labours and offices, were vanished: But, when I called thinges to the touchstone of triall, and examined my luck with other men hard chaunce: when I found that my fortune was common, as wel with you, as diuers other whom I know: and after I had tormented mée selfe, with the continuall cogitations of my calamities, and beganne to conforme and frame mée to prouoked patience: then I espied an harborough whéether to flée for succour, and I sawe a conuenient hauen where to lye at anhor: namely▪ your wordes and communication set downe in liuely letter, the swéetenesse whereof chased away all my cares, and draue all my sorrowes into perpetual exile and banishment. And yet, euen nowe, so grieuou is this stroke, and so sore hath this blowe brused, that the woundes which I suffered long agoe, and which haue béene Because time assuageth e∣uines. Epist. 5. libro quarti. By whiche al∣legoricall ph∣rase of speach, hee meaneth his olde sor∣rowes, whiche were renewed before they were quite for gotten. healed vp and couered ouer with skinne, beginne a resh to ware rawe and gréene: For I cannot, as I did then, flée from the  publique, for succour, to my priuate house, which intertai∣ned mée in my heauinesse: so nowe, runne from my priuat house, for comfort to the weale publique, in my miserie, that I might refreshe my cracte ribbes in her bountie and good∣nesse. Wherore▪ I am absent both from the common place, & also from mine owne house: beause, that neither the griefe, which I féele for the cōmon wealthes sake, can be comforted by y• benefite of mine house: nor the sorrow which I sustaine for my house, can be cured by the assistaunce of the common welth: for which causes, I desire y• more earnestly to sée you, and to haue some conference with you. Nothing can so mi∣igate an assuage my heauinesse, as the méeting of vs, twoe old acquainted friends, & interlacing of talke and cōmunica∣tion. I was in hope of your comming (for so it was tould me) y• you intended to be with me shortly. I wish you here so) ma ny cōsiderations, & principally for this one, that we may del∣berate before hand, betwene our selues, how this time shold be bestowed, which is wholy to be applied to y• plasure and wil of He meaneth Caesr. one particular person, in wisedome not obscure, and
in liberalitle famous, and as I perceie and persuade my selfe, not vnmindful of me, and very At suche time as his sonne tooke Caesars part against Pom∣pei. friendly to you. Which being as it is, great deliberation is required, what order we may best vse, not that any thing shuld be done or attempted, ut that in his graunt and goodnesse we may be acquieted. Fare you well. Cicero to Marcello. THE ARGVMENT. He persuadeth Marcellus to abandon al counsel of exile and banish∣ment, and to returne into his countrie: that Caesar is not against it: that his brother desireth it: that the common wealth looketh for it: that the state of his owne houshold and familie standeth in great neede of it. ALthough I vnderstand, such to be the coūsel & aduisement whiche you haue vsed, that I dare not be so presumptu∣us, as to pronoūce it worthy reprehēsion: but I must néedes séeme to varrie and differ from the same, bycause such is my iudgement touching your wisdome, that I count not my coū∣sel in respect of yours, deseruing prefermêt: yet notwithstan∣ding, the auncientnesse of our friendship, and your great good∣will towardes me, whereof I haue knowledge and experi∣ence from your childhoode, admonisheth me to write those things vnto you, which (in mine opinion) for your safetie were profitable, and to your worthynesse in no point disagréeable. The begin∣ning of his persuasion is deriued from the proofe of Marcellus his vsage in the office of a good Citizen, wherein wan∣ted no per∣fourmance. &c. I remember very well, that you are the man, which beha∣ued your selfe in the office of your Consulship, no lesse honou∣rably, then vertuously, long before you sawe the sparckles of these enormities and maine mischiefes kindling: and this per∣ceiued I also, that as well the counsel taken for making ci∣uil warres, and the hoast of Pompius, and that kynde of martiall preparation, was of you dissolued, and besides that in so litle hope, that it was excéedingly doubted: in whiche mynd, I thinke, you remember I was in like maner. Wher∣fore you tooke occasion not to be much present at the making
of such matches: and I did what I might to be alwaies ab∣sent. For we did not fight with those weapons, where whih we might He vseth the same wor∣des in Epi. 1. lib. 6. haue preuailed, namely, with counsel, authoritie, countenance, and the goodnesse of our cause, which in vs were of greater force: but with armes and sides, wherin we were not the stronger: we were therefore ouercome, or, if dignitie can not be conquered, yet notwithstanding muche empaired, weakened, and wounded. In whiche, your counsell and in∣tent can not but be vniuersally commended, because that, to∣gether with the hope and expectation of ouercomming, you did also bridle all desire of fighting, and did declare your selfe to be both a wise man, and also a good Citizen: a wiseman in that you were vnwilling to intermedle when Ciuil con∣tentions were a springing: and a good Citizen, in that you were as lothe to prosecute suche perilous matters to the vt∣termost. As for those men, to whom this your counsel séemed vnsauourie, and therefore vnworthie the folowing, I sée they are diuided into two kindes: for either they begin to renewe battell, and these men haue taken their way into To Iuba the King. Africa: or els (as wée) haue cōmitted themselues to him, whose luck it is to be conquerour. Your counsell is to neither of thes In that thou wilt neither renue warre, nor returne to Rome: but re∣maine in ex∣ile. twaine inclined, but as a meane seperated by it selfe, suppo∣sing the one to be a signification, peraduenture of a cowardly minde, and the other an argument of a malapert companion. I confesse, that your counsell and determination, is iudged of most men, (and if I said of all men, I should not speake a∣misse) to proceede from singular wisdome, and from a minde established vpon the foundation of magnanimitie, and y• sure groūd worke of valiantnes: but this your consideration & pur pose, (except I leane beside my cushing,) hath in it a certaine measure & meaning, sithence I suppose, y• to the obteining, & repossessing of all your For the de∣speration of the whiche he did choose to be in banish∣ment. renoune and substance, nothing, be∣side will, in you was wanting. For so I vnderstoode, that no∣thing else offered doubtes to the minde of him, Alluding to Caesar. whose power and preeminence is vniuersall, but that he suspected suche to be your securitie, that you would thinke your restitution to be no benefite: wherof what I iudge, it booteth not to declare,
sithence it is apparant, what I my self haue done, whom you may at this present, vse for an example. But if you are fully resolued, to liue rather in perpetuall absence, then to sée that which in no wise you would: From that which is ne∣cessarie. yet this ought to be fixed and setled in your cogitation, that in what plotte of land so euer your body abide, you are not exempted from his dominion, but subiect to the power of him, to whome by flight you deny subiection and allegiance: who of his singular clemencie and goodnes, though he should suffer you, now destitute of coūtry, & frustrate of possessions, to liue as you list in peace & quiet∣nes: So that his exile is nei∣ther honest nor safe. yet ought you of dutie, to make this your cōtinual me∣ditation, what a godly thing it is for you to lead your life ra∣ther at Rome in your owne house, then to be abroade in Mi∣tylene, or in Rhodes. But for so muche as the power of him, to whom we exhibit dutie and reuerence, is so farre dilated & stretched, that it conteineth the compasse of the whole world: were not you better allow of this election, to liue at home wt∣in the limits of your owne lande, voide of perill and daunger, then in forreigne and straunge places, to sustaine vile annoi∣ance? As for mine owne selfe, The wordes of a most cou∣ragious harted man: and bet∣ter to bee fol∣lowed then to be spoken. Though I should suffer ter∣rible death, yet had I rather abide the smarte thereof, within the walles of my natiue soile, then in places of great distance, where I am not known. And of this opiniō are From com∣mon: consent. al they which loue you & tender your worship, of whō there is a multitude innumerable, whose good harts & wel wishing you haue wun by your excellent vertues, & purchased by the glistering mir∣rour of your Noblenes. We From that which is pro∣fitable and commodious. also your friends, haue a regard to y• condition of your familie, & domesticall affairs, which we will in no case should so run to ruine & docay, as to grow past remodie. For, althogh it can take no such iniurie, as may al∣wai last, & neuer be cut off from cōtinuāce: (because neither he who hath supremacie in the cōmon wealth, nor the cōmon wealth it self, wold sée suche a villanie cōmitted▪) yet I wold not y• your good & possessions shold lie open to the clawes of the gréedie spoilers: & who they be that I terme by y• name, I am not so timorous and white liuerd, but I dare sende you woord in writing, howit, I thinke it néedless▪ For in that
matter, I am assured, you canne not be ignorant. And in this behalfe, the manifolde cares of one peculiar person, and his continual teares, (Caius Marcellus, I meane, your very good Brother) make intercession, next vnto whome are wée im∣mediatly, in thought and in sorowe, but in the partes of sup∣pliantes somewhat more slacke then e, because we can not haue accesse vnto you, sithens wee our selues are destitute of an aduocate. So muche fauour can we finde, as men van∣quished may: and as for counsell, aduice, and labour other∣wise, to dooe Marcellus pleasure, we will not be wnting. That set light by Mar∣cellus his re∣tune. The rest of yours admitte vs not into their companie: as for vs we are prouided at all assaies, in all cases whatsoeuer. Fare you well. Cicero to Marcello. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle was also indited and written▪ to the same end and pur∣pose, that Marcellus night be persuaded to returne to his own Countrie. TO admonishe you, I dare not because of your notable wis∣dome: nor to incourage you, because of your valiant sto∣mache: and by no meanes to comfort you, because you are not feareful. For if suche be your sufferance and patience, in these your perplexities, as by report I haue receiued, I ought rather for your Which in aduersitie ap∣peareth more glorious. vertue sake, to shewe my selfe ioyful, the to serue you wt solace, in your case sad & sorowfull. But if these foule mischéefs, which haue almoste, broken the necke of the Common wealth, so stinge you that you faincte: my witt is not so fruitful, nor my penne so spéedy, to raise you vp againe with swéete consolations, sithence to be mine owne physici∣an in semblable maladies, I haue none abilitie.  remai∣neth therfore, that I shewe and trie my selfe the man whom I am taken to be, & y• my assistance be so present in althings, whiche either you or yours shal desire, that bothe you & they may conceiue this opinion of mée, that I am yours, not ,
for you, to do what I can, but to presume somewhat further beyonde the boundes of mine owne seruice and power. Note this artificial form of admonitiō, to the end hee might auyde all offence on his own part. Yet notwithstanding, be you in this point resolued, that that wherein I haue giuen you aduertisement, or discouered myne owne priuate iudgement, had issue from a heartie good will, whereof to shewe a signification. I was constrained to vse no longer silence: wishing that you would doe as I doe, namely, sticke stedfastly in this persuasion, that if there be any common wealth at all, you ought of duetie to bée there resident (by the consent and voyce of all men) a reall Prince in actuall gouernement, in necessitie giuing place vnto time: But if there be no common wealth, yet for all that, this to be a most méete and conueent roome to har∣bour the For where there is no cō∣mon wealth, there is exile and banish∣ment. banished. For if we followe libertie, and forsake seruitude, what place is there in all the world, not subiect to the regiment and power of this Rome the Ladie & Em∣prese of the world. citie? But if any other place whatsoeuer, like you for the benefite of libertie, yet pon∣der thus much more, that no place for such a purpose is more swéete and comfortable, then your priuate dwelling, and pe∣culiar abyding. And beléeue me (Marcellus) This is ad∣ded, to put Marcellus in hope of the re couering of his former dignitie and reputation. he in whose dominion and possession, all things are lodged, is not gone so farre beyond all humanitie, but that he fauoureth and fur∣thereth worthy wittes: and as for the nobilitie, and honour due to men for their merites, no man therof hath more con∣sideration: sithence to the vttermost of his abilitie, he procu∣reth, and according to the state of the cause, laboureth, that such things should be recompenced with great estimation. But I haue let my pen run at randon more then I was pur∣posed. I drawe backward therfore, to that one point of con∣solation, that with yours, if in déede they be The. 11. Epi∣stle of the. 4. booke decla∣reth the mea∣ning of this place. yours, I will continue yours: if not, yet will I neuerthelesse, at al assaies so stand your approued friende, that all duties incident and payable to our vneigned loue and auncient acquaintaunce, shall exquisitely and throughly be discharged. Fare you well.
Cicero to M. Marcello. THE ARGVMENT. He dealeth with him by order of persuasion to returne into his own countrie, and draweth his reasons from sundrie circumstances ve∣rie artificially: which reasons of his, are verie forceable to make him yeald to the foresaide matter in question. ALthough I gaue to Quinto Mucio, not many dayes ago, a letter written somewhat at large, to be deliuered to your owne hands, wherein I discouered my iudgement, how you ought to be affected in your owne case, and what for to doe were most conuenient, in my thinking: yet, when The∣ophilus, your fréeman, was prouiding to take his iourney vnto you, and I sufficiently perceiuing his faithfulnesse, and beneuolence towardes you, would in no wise, let him passe without any letter. Wherefore, I thinking it not imperti∣nent to your present estate, aduertise you nowe as I haue done heretofore, not to neglect your owne commoditie, but to wil and to do your best, in that common welth (howsoeuer it be inclined) to be conuersant, from the which you are now absent. You shal (peraduenture) sée many things which glad∣ly you would not, but yet not more then you do dayly heare. Furthermore, it is not for you to be moued with the sense of the sight only, for so much as you heare the very same things with your eares, which are séene with your eyes, Thes words are opened & made plaine, in the first E∣pistle. Li. 6. in a marginall note. wherein greater force appeareth to consist. But peraduenture, your feare and suspicion créepeth somewhat further, least you should say somewhat which you meane not, or else doe that whiche you can not like. In these restraintes lift vp your eares to my iudgement. First, To yeelde to time, that is, Epistola. 50. Lib. 21. ad At∣cum. Not to struggle with necessitie, is alwayes counted a point of wisedome. Besides that, The matter is otherwise, as the case nowe standeth. It is not lawful, perhaps, to speake what you thinke: but lawfull (no doubt) to be still and si∣lent: for all thinges are at the commaundement of one, who
followeth the counsel and aduise, not of his friendes, but of him selfe: which thing would not come to passe much other∣wise, if the raynes of the common wealth were committed and gyuen in charge vnto Meaning Pompeius. him, whose part we haue ta∣ken. Thinke we, that he who in time of warre ad battell, when he sawe the perill of vs all, lincked and laced to the daunger of hym selfe, woulde not vse the counsell of Scipio, D∣mitius, and di uers other. some men both prudent and politique: that he will in tryumphe and victorie take more vpon him, then he hath, in matters of small affiaunce, lesse assurance, and greater vncertaintie? and that he, who regarded not the benefite of your aduise, being leauened with singular wisedome, when you were in the office and place of an honourable Consul: nor allowed the counsell of your brother, bearing the office of the Consul∣ship, by your authoritie: that he will now, hauing al things in his subiection and possession, desire our opinions? Omnia sunt misera in bellis ciuilibus: In ciuil commotions all thinges are miserable: which to be true, our auncestours haue, not seldome times fealt: but By reason of Sylla and his complices. this our present age also, hath of∣tentimes tasted: and nothing is more miserable, then the victorie it selfe: which, although it fall to the lot of the bet∣ter, yet it maketh them the more ferce, and violent: that, notwithstanding they be not so inclined by nature, yet to be such they are constrained by necessitie. He excuseth Caesar. For the Uictor or Conquerour, must doe many thinges to the expectation and contentment of them, by whose helpe he obteined the victo∣rie, yea against his owne will. Did not you as well as I, sée what crueltie was like to insue that victorie? and woulde you for all that, euen then, be destitute of the companie of your countrie, least your eyes should (peraduenture) beholde those thinges, which your will an in no wise be wonne vn∣to? No, you will say: for I my selfe woulde defende myne owne interest, and kéepe my ignitie and worthinesse vn∣blemished. But it is a speciall point of your vertue and pui∣saunce, to reckon your owne state among things of least esti∣mation, and to be touched with a more vehement care of the common wealthes preseruation.
Finally, what is y• end of your determinatiō and meaning? for as yet your deede is commended: and your In that he li ued   and safetie. state also, as the case standeth, is not dispraised: your déede, bicause you did followe the beginning of Battell necessarily, and yet did reuoke your selfe from cōtinuing to the end, not vnaduisedly: your state, bicause you possesse peace & quietnesse, and suffer no defection of your renoune, nor ecclipse of dignitie. And now ought no place to sauour more sweetly in your nose, then your natural contrie: neither is it your part to empaire & cut short your loue towards it, bicause it is growen out of fauor and is waxen deformed, but rather to be touched with the greater compassion, and to pitie her present perplexities: be∣sides that to gratifie and recreate her, hedged in with heaui∣nes, and not to absent your selfe, because you woulde not sée her in this miserie: for shée is depriued of As Pompei∣us, Cato, Do∣mitius, Scipio, Bibulus, Len∣tulus, Appius, al which were Cosuls: except Cato, who was Praetor. many Noble men, and excellent personages, so that the want of you also doth a∣grauate her griefe, For end, if it was the poynt of a stoute and manful minde, not as suppliant to yelde to the Conque∣rour, take héede, that it be not the part of a proude and hau∣tie hart to contemne and set light by his liberalitie: and if it be the point of a wise man, to be loh to lacke the libertie of his lande, surely it is the part of a flintie fellowe and a hard head, not to be in loue with such a benefit: and if you can not inioy the common wealth, yet thinke that it is double follie to neglect priuate profite. The summe of all, is this: if the life whiche at this time you leade, liketh you so well, that you doe so loue it, as that you are loth to leaue it, & that it is more cōuenent & fit for you, then otherwise: Wherevpon not to thinke, is the pointe not of a wise∣man. yet let your cogitations and studies be conuersaunt herein, that it is lesse sfe and more daungerous. Great is the lawlesse laying on of the sword and warlike weapon: but in foreigne places is more impudence to offende, and lesse shamefastnesse and ho∣nestie to doe violence. So déere and precious is your safetie and life vnto me, that I am equally matched with your bro∣ther Marcellus, or at least, to tell the trueth, as neare to him as may be. It is your part to haue regard of To thinke at all things are in the po∣wer of Caesar. these tumultu∣ous times, to cast an eye towardes your owne health, and fi∣nally
of your life and landes to haue good consideration. Fare you well. Marcellus to Cicero. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He signifieth of his returne into his countrie, being throughly mo∣ued with the counsell and countenance of Cicero. WEll may you thinke, that your Som may do more with vs by coūtenāce and authoritie then our bro∣ther or kinse∣man by lou and counsell. countenance and au∣thoritie preuailed muche with me, as well in all mat∣ters, as principally & chiefly in this. When as C. Marcellus my brother, whose loue and goodwil towards me, was excée∣ding great, did not only giue me coūsel, but besought me with earnest letters: he could not winne me to subscribe to his de∣sire, nor perceiue me persuaded in that point, before that your letters had made a gap and entraunce vnto me, the ra∣ther to vse the soundnesse of your counsell▪ Concerning his returne graunted of Caesar. Howe the mat∣ter goeth, and what hath béene done in my behalfe, your let∣ters giue sufficient knowledge. Your reioycing for my sake, although I could not but best allow thereof, bycause it sprin∣geth from the cleare fountaine of a well disposed mynde: yet is it so much the more swéete, pleasaunt, and acceptable, as I haue growne to the vnderstanding of this, that in my great want of well willers, scarsitie of friendes, and olde acquain∣tance, who tender my person and possessions, sincerely, you haue shewed your selfe most desireous of my safegarde, and not squemish or deintie of your singular beneuolence. As for other things, I make such account of them, as I might well be without them, and with a good will lacke them, except the times and dayes were not as they are: But this benefite of friendship, I hold in such value and estimation, that I am ful ly persuaded, No man is able to liue eyther in sower aduersi∣tie or in swete prosperitie, if good men be coy of their coun∣sell, and friendes spaing of their comfort: in the considera∣tion where of my heart reioyeth. And that you may like∣wise vnderstand, that you haue beene  to a man not
vnthankfull, I will doe what I can to requite your courte∣sie. Fare you well. Sulpicius to Cicero. THE ARGVMENT. Hee declareth certaine circumstances touching Marcellus, who was slaine of Magius, and signifieth his seruices of humanitie to∣wardes the deade body exhibited. ALthough I am assured, that the newes which I bring can not be very pleasaunt in your hearing, nor delectable in your conceiuing: yet notwithstanding, bycause Chaunce and Nature haue power and rule in good men, I thought it requisite and necessarie (howsoeuer the case standeth) to giue you intelligence. Upon the tenth of the Calendes of Iune, when I had sailed from Epidaurus, to Piraeus, there I founde Marcellus In the Con∣sulship. our fellow in office, with whom I had commu∣nication and conference, and bestowed al that day in his com∣panie. The next day following, when I was departing and taking my leaue of him, of intent & purpose to go frō Athens into Boeotia, and so to passe through the residue of my For Sulpici∣us was L. Pre∣sident ouer A∣chaia. iuris∣diction: he, as I was in formed by his owne mouth, was pre∣paring passage by ship aboue Malea towarde Italie. The next day after, when I was determined to iourney from Athens, about ten of the clock at night, Posthumius, a familiar friend to Marcellus, came vnto me, and tolde me heauie tydings: namely, that M. Marcellus our fellow in office, after supper time, was sore smitē of P. Magius Chilo, one of his acqain∣tance, with a dagger, and that he had two woundes, the one in his stomach, the other in his head, hard by one of his eares: and yet notwithstanding, that there was some hope of possi∣bilitie to liue. And that Ad Atticum pist. 10. li. 13. Magius also herevpon murthe∣red him selfe: which tragicall chaunces moued Marcellus, being towardes his ende, to sende vnto me, that I might haue vnderstanding what had happened, with request in like
manner, that I would procure him a Surgeon. I prouided one, and without urther procraination and delay, we went to Marcellus early in the morning, so soone as the day starre appeared. And being not farre from Piraeus, Acidmus ser∣uant met me with certain letters and writings, wherin was noted, that Marcellus a litle before day, was departed. Thus a noble & an honorble man was murthered by the handes of a varlot & a villanous beast: It was his hard lucke & curssed chaunce, whome his enimies, for his worthynesse and ver∣tues sake, greatly spared, to finde a friende, whose daggers dinte wrought his dolefull death. Howbeit I stayed not my self vpon this certificate, but forward went I to his pauilion or tent, and comming thether, I found two of his frée mē, and also of his seruaunts a fews. The rest ran away for feare, as they sayde, Bycause it was death to those seruants in that they defended not their master and Lord. bycause their Lorde and Maister was slaine before his owne tent. I was constrained to lay him in mine owne horse litire, wherein I my selfe came ryding, and cau∣sed him to be carried back againe into the citie, where I pro∣cured as much pompe and solemnitie at his funerall, as I was able to make at Athens. I could (by no meanes) obtaine thus much of the Atheniens, that he might be interred with∣in the walles of the citie: for to their denyall they added a reason, bycause the state of their religion was an At Rome also the same was forbiddē. impedi∣ment in that case, and would graunt no tolleration: & that it neuer was permitted to any man, time out of mind. But yet thus much curtesi did they shew, y• in what famous place of exercise soeuer we wold, his interrement shuld not be with∣stoode nor hindered, vpon which permission we presumed, and chose out y• Where Pla∣to sometime flourished. Academie, where we burned y• corpes to ashes, and after that found suche fauour at the handes of the Athe∣niens, that they repined not at expences, but erected in the self same place, a tumbe or monumēt of Marble stone, in his sempiternall remembrance. So discharged we all the duties which we might, to him whom fellowship in office, & friend∣ship in course of life, made déere vnto vs, both whiles he was liuing, & also when he was dead. Fare you well. Dated at Athens, the day before the Calends of Iune.
Cicero to his wife Terentia. THE ARGVMENT. He sheweth what was the cause of his troubles, and how he was dis∣butthened: and sayth somwhat touching his nauigation or voy∣age to Pompeius. I This letter was written at what time L∣tulus and Mar cellus were Consuls. Am disburthened and eased of many cares and troubles, which made you a wofull woman, as I vnderstoode, and I was very sorie for the same. And what was the cause of my heauinesse, I perceiued the next day after that I departed from you. At night I cast vp much chler, after the eiection whereof, I felt such a refection, that one God or other seemed as a Physician, to haue ministred some wholsome & seasona∣ble medicine to me their poore patient, to which God (as you are accustomed) make some satisfaction, not superstitiously, but religiously, I meane, to Apollo & Aesculapius. I hope we haue a sound & a swift He meaneth the ship wher∣in he made his voyage to Pō∣eius. ship to sayle in, & to make spéedy pas∣sage, into which so soone as I was entered, I tooke penne and ynke and indited this letter: hereafter I purpose to write many Epistles to our familiar friendes, and olde acquain∣taunce: wherein I will make oft mention of you, wife Te∣rentia, and of our daughter Tulliola, with no lesse diligence, then kyndnesse commending you vnto them, (I trust) for your commoditie. I would counsell you to be couragious and stoute hearted, but that I knowe your valiauntnesse and magnanimitie to be such, as no mans therwith may be coun∣ted comparable. And yet suche to be the state of many mat∣ters, I mistrust not, that both you may continue where you are, now very commodiously: and that I shall hereafter fight for the safetie of the weale publique and others with me of the same fellowship, right puisauntly. It is my will and de∣sire, that you regard your owne health: and if it like you, you may remoue your housholde to such townes as be furthest from those, where souldiers be incamped. Arpinas grounde will serue your turne very well, if victuals waxe deare and scant. Cicero hath him most heartily commended vnto you. Fare well a thousand times. Dated the. 7. of the Ides of Iune.
Cicero to his wife Terentia, Tulliola his daughter, and Cicero his sonne. THE ARGVMENT. This letter is not onely lamentably indited, but also faintingly in∣uented. The argument and meaning thereof is manifolde, and consisteth of variable circumstaunces, bycause he maketh answere to sundrie pointes and articles conteined in the letters of his wife Terentia. I Confesse I may write more ofte then I doe, although I* This was written, when Piso, and Ga∣binius were Consuls. spare my pen, and write in suche srt as if I had little lea∣sure: and what reason moueth me to sende you letters so sel∣dome, I suppose you can not be ignoraunt: bycause that, as all times are vnto me miserable, and still replenished with recourse of fresh calamities: so when I addresse my style vn∣to you, or when I peruse the epistles sent from you vnto me, I fall into such seas of anguishe, that the very teares trickle downe my chéekes: yea, in such sort do I sighe and lament, that I can indure no longer, to suffer further torment. I would I had béene lesse longing after life, and more groning after the grae: then (vndoutedly) had we not séene such mis∣chiefs, nor béene subiect to such tempestes of troubles. How∣beit, if ortune haue reserued vs to any hope and confidence of future profite and commoditie, hereafter to be gathered, then are we so much the  deceiued. But if these stormes be continuall, and so vnchaungeable, that no calme is like to fllow: then I woulde I might looke you in the face, (my life and my ioy) and I would I might dye within the comforta∣ble claspings of your imbracing armes: sithence, neyther the Gods eternall, whome you haue worshipped with sinceritie and perfect deuotion, are pirced with pitie to consider our desarts: nor yet men, whose safetie I neuer refused to pro∣cure, are moued with consideration to recompence our me∣rites. We were at Brundisium with M. Lenius Flaccus, the space of xiij. dayes, a very good man and a friendly, and such a
one, as for my sake, put his owne life, landes, and goodes, in desperate hazarde: not fearing the penaltie of a The lawe of Clodius, whi∣che commaū∣ded that none should bee so hardy & bold, as to receiue Cicero neare their house, within the cō∣passe of foure myles. &c. most in∣iurious lawe, in such seruile sort, that it should be an impe∣diment, whereby to restraine him from exhibiting dueties of humanitie to his friende, and courteous intertainment to such whome he fauoured. I woulde we were once able to make him amendes: we thanke him dayly, but that is no sufficient acquittaunce. We passed from Brundisium the fifth of the Calendes of Maie, and so tooke our voyage to Cy∣zicus by Macedonia. O miserable man, O tormented tra∣ueller: what shoulde I desire of you, poore woman, wasted in bodie, and consumed in mynde: to come and visite me? may I not desire so much? may I not see you? then, alas, muste I lacke you? nowe sure so I thinke: Then must I doe as I may. If there be any hope of our returne, doe what you can to confirme and to further it. But if there be none, as I suspect and feare, then are we vndone, and past hope of good spéede. Howbeit, doe what you can to come to me, and then be sure of this, that if I haue your companie, I wyll not thinke my selfe in despaire and past recouerie. But for our daughter Tulliola, what order shall we take? I referre that to your discretion: for I can in that case giue no coun∣sell. Neuerthelesse, howe so euer the case standeth, regarde must be had, that her miserie be mitigated, her marriage not neglected, and her good name and fame well mainteined. And what shall Cicero my sonne doe? I am content that he lodge in my bosome, and be alwayes present within the com∣passe of myne imbracing body. More then I haue alreadie written, I can not comprehende: heauinesse hindereth, sor∣rowe will not suffer, care intercepteth, present griefe in no wise permitteth. Howe it fareth with you, I wote not, whether you possesse something, or (whereof I am sore a∣fraide) whether you are spoyled and turned out of all things. I trauell in confidence, that Piso, as you write, will conti∣nue our friende and fauourer. Touching suche of our fa∣milie, whome I haue made frée and set at libertie, there re∣mayneth no matter wherewith you should be moued. As
for those which abide with you, your promise was, that your dealing shoulde measure their deseruing. Orpheus remay∣neth still in seruice, and persisteth in his dutie: the rest are not so officious and attendaunt. The condition of the o∣ther seruaunts is such, that if wée bée quite dispossessed, they inioy fréedome and libertie, if they may obtaine it If by the meanes and procurement of Clodius they were not withstoode. with∣out contradiction or deniall. And if wée bée not disheri∣ted, but kéepe our owne without diminution or empayring, that their seruice be at our cōmandement, a very few excep∣ted. Howbeit, these are to be thought things of lesse weight, and tending to small purpose. Whereas you exhort me, to haue a good heart, and such a mynde, as the foggie and moyst mystes of miseries, may not infect and putrifie: and more∣ouer minister hope and confidence of restitution to my for∣mer worshippe and dignitie, with recouering of my sore shaken safetie: I wishe with all my heart, suche to bée the hope whiche you exhibite, that in hoping, I may not, as one vnhappie, hope amisse. Nowe, for my selfe (miserable man) when shall I receiue any letters from you? what messin∣ger shall conuey them hether, and deliuer them to my hand? I had looked for them at Brundisium, but that the mariners woulde needes away, as loth to bée hindered by any tyde or tempest. It remaineth (my Terentia) that you mainteine your self, as you are not vnable. Honest hath ben our former life, and our dayes alreadie spent haue flourished in prospe∣ritie: our offence hath not put vs to this trouble and vexa∣tion, but our vertue is the cause of this our sharpe affliction. There is nothing amisse, An argumēt of a minde ful of perturbati∣ons and trou∣blesome cogi∣tations. but that wée lost not lyfe and all, with the rest of the ornamentes of our renowne. But if the lengthening of lyfe, in consideration of our posteritie and ofspring, bée supposed more acceptable, then with the depri∣uation of honour, to suffer deathes incontroulable assault, and so to putrifie in the graue: then are we not discontent, but yéelde very gladly, to abide other bitter bruntes and shrewde skyrmishes of aduersitie: albeit in , they are importable and not to bée suffered. I sent Clodius Phi∣letraeus backe agayne, bycause his eyes were diseased.
Sallustius with his dutifulnesse is a friend to hope. Cennius is a great fauourer of vs, and such a one in déede, in whom I sée such confidence of heartie goodwill remayning, that I am persuaded he will neuer fayle you, if he may further you. Sia sayd he would sée me, but he is gone from Brundisium. Be careful of your owne health, and let this thought be alwayes resident in your mind. An argumēt of his loue to wards his wife Terentia. That I suffer not such smarting tor∣ments in consideration of mine own calamitie: as I fele dead ly pangs in respect of your miserie. Terentia, my most faith∣full, trustie, and louing wife: Tulliola, my most déere and best beloued daughter: Cicero, the surplusage of my hope, and pledge of all my ioy: Fare you well. The day before the Calends of May. From Brundisium. Cicero to Caesar. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth Apollonius, sometime seruant to P. Crassus, to win him creadit with Caesar, then incamped in Spaine, and armed a∣gainst the confederates of Pompeius. MY loue and liking of This Crassus was slaine of the Parthians, with his fa∣ther M. Cras∣sus. P. Crassus, a young man of excée∣ding noblenesse, hath béen no lesse faithful then feruent: in whome, whiles he was but in the floure of his age, I re∣posed such hope as kindled my comfort: and beganne also to conceiue of him as well as heart could thinke, vpon sundrie circumstances which offered them selues to my iudgement. With this Crassus sometime was Apollonius in seruice, of whome, whiles his maister liued, I made great account, and might in no wise disallow of his doings: for he was very cir∣cumspect & studious in his masters businesse, & a mā maruel∣lous moete to serue his turne at al assayes: for y• which cause Crassus loued him accordingly. And now, since y• dth of Cras∣sus, this mā, by occasion, being moued to my remembraunce, séemeth to me not vnworthy of fauour, & to deserue y• inheri∣tāce of a rend, bicause his opiniō was alway occupied in this
point, y• to such whom he loued, he would exhibite reuerence: & dutie without dissimulation, to such as him wel liked. This Appolonius comming ouer vnto me at Cilicia, did affoorde me such seruice, that in many thinges I might not misse the necessarie vse of his assisting hande, nor be destitute of his wisedome, counsel and prouidence: and the self same man, as I thinke, withdrew not his will or might from you, at suche time as it was welcome, aduenturing to compasse as muche as his abilitie coulde permit, in the Alexandrine battell. Whiche seruice of his, ministring this hope vnto his heart, that your opinion concerning his person, and behauiour, would be no lesse commendable then oures▪ he determined with him selfe, to prepare direct passage * vnto you princi∣pally into Spaine, to the attempting also of which voyage, myne aduise was not wanting, for his further incourage∣ment. To whome I would not haue applyed so plausible a style, in depainting out his praise, but that I was persuaded, that with you it shoulde loose none authoritie: Howbeit, I prayse him not, to this purpose, as though he had not deser∣ud commendation, sithence you can not be ignoraunt, that he was a seruitour vnder you in time of warre, when his merites were manifest: and one at your commaundement, as you knowe, if you call Crassus to For Crassus was Embassa∣dour to Fraū∣ce at the ap∣pointment of Caesar. memorie. And if he were disposed to craue commendation, and were addicted to heare the trumpe of mens tongues sounde his prayse, I per∣ceiue whole multitudes applyaunt in that behalfe. As for the testimonie of myne owne priuate iudgement, whereof he accounted, not slenderly, and which I am assured of, shal pre∣uaile thoroughly, I haue most willingly declared. I dare ve∣rifie, that the man is learned, and that he hath desired and de lighted in the best exercises of studie, which good inclination hath not sprong in him of late, but growne in him of long con tinuance, euer since he was a boy. For he lodged in my house, with Diodotus the Stoicall Philosopher, a man (in my iudgement,) very profound, and déepely experimented in matters of naturall secrecie, and other pointes of wisedome and grauitie: with whome hee did kéepe companie, not for
a fashion, but of a will, to waxe learned, and expert in that whereof he was ignoraunt: and being nowe inflamed with the admiration of your martiall exploites, and other serious affaires, is very desireous, to reduce them in a Chronicle, and to write them in the Gréeke tong, as a monument of your im mortall memorie. I doubt not but he is able to comprehend as much as he pretendeth, and that he can bring his enter∣prise, in that case, to perfection. He lacketh no learning: he lackes not experience: it is not long, since he was conuer∣sant in the like kinde of knowledge and practise: very earnest is he, to satisfie the eternitie of your puisance, and by his pen to decypher your praises in perpetuall recordes: Now haue you a witnesse and testimonial of mine opinion touching Ap∣pollonius: of whom, I trust, you will according to the singu∣laritie of your discretion, conceiue certaine iudgement: and therafter giue him a taste of your courtesie: And yet againe, I commend him vnto you, whereof I made a former denial, protesting, that in what respect soeuer it shall please you to be his fauourer and furtherer, I my self shal account it wor∣thy double acceptation. Fare you well. Cicero to Caesar. THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth a yong man named Praeciliu, whose father was a verie great friend to Caesar. I Am bound of humilitie, to cōmend vnto you soly and alone, the sonne of Note the causes from whence this commendati∣on is deriued. your very friend, my familiar companion: the sonne (I say) of an excellent man, and one to whome (for his modestie, and ciuil behauiour) I beare speciall affection, and can not but recompence him with the like proportion of good∣will, as he sheweth and performeth towardes me. Besides that, by sundry instructions of trial, and infallible experience, I vnderstande, and therefore the more boldly affirme, that his father was a singular friend vnto me. This same is he▪
which sometime derided me, and other whiles rebuked me, bycause I was not conformable (being so honourably inui∣ted of yur own person) to ioyne with you, as your adherent.Hom. Od.  60. Yet, though he sought to proue me, His counsel could not moue me. For I heard our Nobles and Péeres making this excla∣mation and saying:Hom. Od. A.  & . 21. & . 209. Be stout and strong, with valliant hart In Martiall field shewe what thou art, That thy successours may thee praise, As duskish cloudes do darken dayes. Yea, they stay not there, but goe about to set me all in a light flame, notwithstanding I was kindled before, and thus they talke vnto me: . 241. If die thou doest, then die not like a clowne: But with thine end, ioyne glorie and renowne: Attempt some worthie act, and noble deede: Thy fame then shal they sound that thee succeede. But these persuasions are of small force to moue me, as you may perceiue: wherefore, leauing the loftie and vaun∣ting style of Homer, I will frame my selfe to the perfour∣maunce of Euripides his true and vndoubted precepts. I can not like that prudent man,This vearse cited by Cice∣ro, is not to bee founde in Euripides. Which for him selfe no wisedome can. Which verse of the Poet, that good olde father Praecilius notably commendeth, and sayth, that such a one doth sée, , behind and before, meaning that, as he is not ignorant of things past, so of things present and to come, he is not vnskilfull: and such a one sayth he:
Il. 2. 57. & A. 27. May counted be right excellent, In vniuersall gouernement. But to leaue my digression, and to occupie my pen in that which I first attempted: you shall shewe vnto me, a princi∣pall point of courtesie, and discouer your beneuolence aboun∣dantly towardes me, if your humanitie and gentle inclinati∣on, which is sngular, may be exhibited to this youngman, of whom I haue made mention: and that it shal further please you, to performe the summe of my suite, and by your meanes to aduaunce him to the scope of my commendation: which (I hope) you will no lesse accomplish, for the further dignitie of the race of the Praecillians: then I haue béene appliaunt to instill this supplication into your remēbrance, that they me∣ritoriously may reape the benefite of your gratious fauour. Thus haue I vsed a Because of the interlace∣ing of greeke Poems. new and straūge forme of writing, and discrepant from my vsuall methode of inditing letters, to the intent that you might the better vnderstand, howe these my words, haue not discoursed vpon a vulgar and common kynd of commendation. Fare you well. Lentulus to Cicero. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He maketh a commemoration of such feates as he had done: accu∣seth the Rhodians vpon occasion: and addeth a rehearsall of his desartes towardes the common wealth. After that I had some companie, and a litle conferrence, with our friende Brutus, and perceiued apparantly, that in his comming to Asia, there was more delay then maturi∣tie and spéede: I addressed my returne backe againe into A∣sia, that I might gathr vp the gleanings of my labours, and sende money to Rome, as soone as possibly I might: In the meane season I came to knowledge of Dolabelaes  in Lycia, being in number aboue a hundred ships, prepared fo
the readie assistance of his armi: prided by  of purpose, that if he were Cassinius be∣ing there resi∣dent as goue nou.  of the confince  he reposed in Syria, he might presently  shipping and pas∣sing with expedition into Itali, might ioyne him self with the Anthonies, and fortifie, with his ayde; the rest of those tu∣multuous villaines. In the feare wherof I trauelling with great thought, and in such great doubt, as I am not disposed to expresse, set all mine owne affaires and matters of impor∣tance at cinque and sie, and endeuoured myselfe with the companie of fewer and lesser shippes, to saile towards them: which presumption of mine ad growne to perfection and ful effect, and by my mean as ad quite éene dispatched, if the Rhodians had not procured  inderaunce: , notwith∣standing their impediments, prouided for my inderaunce, a great part of them, though not the whole , was discom∣fited, and put to flight. At the cōming of vs not only the soul∣dirs, but also the captaines, and presidentes of the armie, were moued with such amazing of mynde, an stonishment of heart, that hauing no stomache to enter conflict and skyr∣, betooke them to , for their present remedie. As for their shippes of burthen, we tooke them, euery vessell: and nowe haue I obteined The discom fiture of his aduersaries & enimies. that, whiche did not only offer vnto me occasion of doutfulnesse, but troubled me also with much feare, so that the matter being brought to this stay, Dolabe∣la is not able to passe through into Italie with his , nor with his partakers and , to make you more and harder worke, wherein to  oupied. The Rhodians, howe desperately they behaue themseles, as well towards vs, as also towards the common wlth, you may vnderstand by y letters which I sent abroad publiquely and openly. And cer∣tainly, I was more pinching and sparing in my riting con∣cerning them, then I found thē furious, & more like , then ruled with aduisement. I woulde net haue you moued with admiration, for that I haue written somewhat shortly. Wonderful is their outrage. As for mine own priuate iniu∣ries, against them I made patience a preseruatiue: their euil disposed minde for the safetie of our ide, their gréednesse to
For if I might dispatche the ollection of all the money whihe I am o sende vnto Rome, my next request should be for a uccessour in my plate. Nowe, that whiche I haue giuen to Cassius, that whiche we haue lost by the death of Trbonius, by the light credite of Dolabella, and y the deceitfull dealing of them, whiche: kept not . ither perfourmed promise vnto me, nor yet to the common wealth, it is my meaning to recouer and obtaine: whiche otherwise can not be accompulished, except▪ I might haue longer space graunted of adiding: and that my re∣quest ma be subscribed vnto, I desire you, that your   may o a furtherce. I  m selfe, so well to haue deserued of the  , that I ought not to looke after the benefite and commoditie of this Pro∣uince, but to be in as great expetation of recompence, as ei∣ther Cassius or Butus, not onely for the fellowship in When we gaue Caesar his deathes woundes. that fact, and  taking in that perilous enterprise, but also  our good     , and for the  of our  For, was  the first that wrought the dissolution and breaking of Anthies lawes? was not I  first that  ouer Dolabellaes troupe of horsemen to the common wealth, and deliuered the same to Cassius? was not I the first, that for the safetie of , had the aduaun∣tage of choice, for the sppression of that most michiefous and detestable ? It  I, and  but I▪ that succoured Cassiu with souldiers, and ioyned Syria to the common wealth. For if I had not mainteined Cassius with so much money, & ministred uch present helpes & o spéedie ∣cours as I did h had neuer had the  is   for his hart, to set one oote forward into Syria And now also no lesse inconueniences were like to grow to the weale publike, by the means of Dolabella, then there did (smtime) by y• pro∣curemēt of Anthonie. Al which sores I haue  vp with apt plasters, yea, euen I haue wrought their full perfection, I, (I say) who wa both a cōpaniō, & a familiar friend to Do∣labella, & a néere kinsman to Anthonie▪ by Bicause they laboured to Caesar in Len∣ulus behalfe, and obteined their suite. whose mediation & ▪ procurement, this prouince fell to my charge & authoritie.
But . Louing my natiue coūtrie with more tendernesse, I was at defiance with all my friendes, and haue denounced battell a∣gainst mine affinitie. And although I perceiue, the profites which hereby I haue gotten to be but small, in comparison: yet am I not in doubt or despaire, neyther in lothsomnesse of labour, as ouerwearied and cloyed with such a busie charge, but am as ready and as venturous as euer I was, not only in the loue of libertie, but also in tempestes of dangers. How∣beit, if by the procurement of the Senate, and of each other notable personage, we may attaine some due and deserued honour: oure authoritie shall be inlarged with the rest, and our abilitie to profite the common wealth shal be increa∣sed. I could not sée your sonne, when I came to Brutus, by∣cause he was remoued and gone to kéepe his winter, with a troupe of horsemen. But that he is so affected towards the weale publique, both for your sake, and his owne, and princi∣pally for mine, I haue cause to reioyce: for he is to me in stead of a brother, as your true sonne, and worthy of such a father. Fare you well. Dated the. iiij. of the Calends of Iune. At Perga. Cicero to Lucceio. THE ARGVMENT. Hee desireth Lucceius the Historiographer, to make a seuerall vo∣lume of his owne exploits, martiall feates, and deedes that he had done: which worke might seeme of more worthinesse. PUrposing and attempting, at what time I was in your companie, to conferre about the same matter whereof I write at this present, and perceiuing my selfe restrained and still drawne backe with somewhat a rusticall kynd of shame∣fastnesse: I haue nowe declared all, being absent, and there∣fore supported with the more boldnesse: for letters doe not blus. I am inflamed with an incredible desire, not (as I take
it) deseruing reprehension, to haue our name made famous by your pen, and with your workes to win euerlasting wor∣thynesse. Which thing, although you tell me often, that you intended to accomplishe and fulfill: yet I pray you dispence with my much haste, and suppose my spéedinesse in this point pardonable. For your order and style of writing, notwith∣standing it was alwayes of me maruellous vehemently and earnestly desiered: yet hath itA commen∣dation, for the getting of goodwill. quite ouercome myne opini∣on, & hath set me in such a fire, y• I couet & craue with all cele∣ritie & spéede, our deedes & aduentures to be registred in your immortal monunients. For, not only the cōmemoration & re∣hearsal of succession, haleth me into a certaine hope of perpe∣tual renoune, but also y• earnest desire wherewith I féele my self al kindled: y• we may inioy whiles we be aliue, to our full expectation, either the absolute authoritie & credite of your testimonie, or else the signification of your beneuolence, or els the swéetnesse and pleasantnesse of your flourishing inuenti∣on & excellent wit. Neyther was I ignorant, at what time I was writing these circumstaunces, with what heauie bur∣thens (of suche thinges, I meane, as I had taken in hande, and prsuatly determined) I was pressed. But bycause I did sée, and also vnderstande, that the Historie of theOf the war called bellum sociale: when they whiche were in coun∣tenāce, taking in despight that thei were thrust out of the citie, toke vp weapon & armour. Italian warre, and the ciuil commotion, by you was almost finished, and that your penne had painted many leaues of paper, in the description of those tumultes and insurrections: and for that you your selfe, reported vnto me, that you would begin to declare suche matters as remained: I woulde in no wise hinder my solfe, but gaue you warning of my will, that you might deliberate and take aduisement, whether you thought it more conuenient to ioyne such cases and discourses as con∣cerned vs, with the residue that by your industrie is already compassed: or (as many of the Greeke writers haue done, as for example, Calisthenēs vpon the Troian battel, Tymeus of King Pyrrhus, Polybius of the Numantine war, al which, haue diuided those foughten fieldes and fierce conflictes, from the bodies of their continued Histories) seperate thatMening the coniuration of Catiline. ciuil conspiracie. from those battels and incounters had with our forreigne enimies. It is not muche auailable for
our cōmendation: yet for the making of the more haste, it is much material, to touch me & my doings (I meane,) wherin I would haue you to cut off al expectation of circumstaunces touching place, and foorthwith giue onset to the very cause, and the time. And if your mynde be occupied inOf the ciuil cōmotion on ly, & of no mā but me alone, by whom the rage of that sedition was both assuaged & suppressed. one argu∣mēt, & in one person, I perceiue already, with what plentie of matter, beautie of words, & swéetnesse of style, all things are like to be accomplished. I am not ignorant, how greatly these my speaches smell of shamelesnesse, first in laying vpon your shoulders a burthē of such weight (for your priuate businesse may be a meanes of flat denial) & secondly, in desiering you so to adorne & aduaunce me, yt among al men I may become fa∣mous. What if al yt I haue done séeme vnto you, not méete to be so popularly praysed? yet remember, that He which once runneth once out of the rayles of shamefastnesse, may thro∣ughly continue impudent. Wherfore my request vnto you, is, that you would vse a more vehemente & patheticall order in this discourse of my déedes, then peraduenture you wyll thinke vpon: and in your description, spare not to set light by theWhich al∣low nothing disagreable vnto truth. limited lawes of an Historie: And account not that fauour, as a trifle to be contemned, if it shal cōmend me vnto you with the more vehemence, déeme it not I say ridiculous, sithence you haue written thereof in a certaine treatise very swéetly & pleasantly, & declared y• it wrought no lesse affectiō in you, thē pleasure somtime did in Hercules, of whom Xeno∣phon maketh relatiō in his memorables: despise not that fa∣uour & grace: & as for our loue, let it haue such libertie, that it may get more largely then truth iudgeth worthy graūt. And if we may get you to take paines in this matter, it will proue (I am absolutely persuaded) a work worthy of such a writer, wherin his abilitie is made manifest, & a testimonie left of his abundant knowledge. Concerning ye beginning of y• coniura∣tion & tumult, vntill y• time of ourFrom exile or banishmēt he meaneth. returne, a smal volume, as I think, wil serue: wherin you may intermedle, both with the ripping vp of ciuil cōmutations & chaunges, either in the explication of causes which gaue originall to nouelties, or els in y• remedies of inconueniences: & also in reprehending suche things, as you shal iudge prostable, & in matters wherof you
haue no misliking, alledge sundry reasons for their further authoritie and comprobation. Besides that, if (as your accu∣stomed order hath beene) you shal thinke it necessarie and re∣quisite, to set things out amply and largely, then can you not doe amisse, if you shall describeHee noteth Pompeius & others, of whō contrarie to faith, honestie and friendship he was betrai∣ed, that hee might gratifie Clodius. the false, faithlesse, malici∣ous, and trayterous dealing of many against vs. Moreouer, the sundry chaunces and chaunges, wherevnto I haue béene subiect, will minister vnto you much matter wherein to be conuersant, and sufficient argument wherein to be occupied, all be sprinckled and tempered with a certaine kinde of plea∣santnesse, and varietie, whiche may be allurementes to the myndes of men, in reading to vse deliberation, and delayes of delight. For nothing is more meete to recreate the Reader, then the varieties of times, and the alterations of Fortune, which, although in cōsideratiō of experience they are not to be desiered: yet, in respect of perusing and reading, they are to be imbraced. For in the quiet remembrance of sorrowes escaped, consisteth muche pleasure: and to such as in their owne person haue susteined no trouble, but taken a viewe of other mens chaunces without sorrowe, the conceit of pitie breedeth much delectation: For whiche of vs, entring into the consideration of captaine Epaminondas, lying vpon his deathes wound at Mantinea, is not touched with a certaineCompassiō and pitie for his death: de∣lectation and plesure for his puisaunce. Ac∣ilius Pro∣bus, Iustine, & Strabo, haue all written of him very nota bly. cōpassion, tempered with swéetenesse? who then commaū∣ded the speare to be pluckt out of his flesh, when to a questi∣on by him propounded, this answere was deliuered, that his target remayned safe, and was not in his enimies possession: that euen in the anguishe of his mortall wound, he ended the course of his yeres, with no lesse contentation, then commen∣dation: and as his death was of him most willingly imbra∣ced, so were his merites perpetually praysed. Whose desire in reding Themistocles flight is not kindled, and in scanning his returne not lightned? For the very order it self of Chro∣nicles, and Histories, haue in them some force to continue a register of my doings, both in peace and warre. But of an excellent man oftentimes, the manifold and variable chaun∣ces moue much admiration, expectation, pleasure, sorrowe,
hope, feare, &c.: and if all things be concluded with a notable ende, then is the minde replenished with pleasure of moste sweete and delectable reading, which benefite shall redound much more answerable vnto my desire, if hereof due regarde be taken, that you make a seuerall volume, seperated from your other writings, wherein is comprehended, a perpetuall Historie of many things, if (I say) you diuide this from that, as it were a play, enterlude, or repensentation of our chaun∣ces and aduentures.The reason why he ter∣meth it by the name of Play or Enterlude. For it conteineth sundry actes, practi∣ses, shewes, and gestures, as well of our counselles and at∣temptes, as of our troublesome times, and dayes very com∣bersome. I do not make flatterie, and smoth phrase of speach, the instrument whereby to créepe into your fauour, sithence my meaning is manifest in this, that my will dependeth chiefly vpon the aduancment procéeding from your labours, and the obteining of your report by pen and paper, to make me famous. For you are not the man, that is ignoraunt of his own estate, no more suspecting such to be his aduersaries as haue him not in admiration, then thinking those parasites and clawebackes, which crowne him with commendation. Neyther am I wide from wit, and voide of iudgement, or rather so madde and phantasticall, to desire his assistaunce for my preferment, to the purchasing of perpetuall honour, who, whiles he is so occupied, winneth not to him self, by the noblenesse of his learning, euerlasting renoune. For that great Alexander was not carried away with a blinde affec∣tion, when he would haue none paint out the portraiture of his bodie, but Apelles, and none to make his image in metal, saue Licippus: but reason and iudgement bred that conceit in his minde, bycause he thought, that they being most excel∣lent and incomparable artificers, should not only in the disco∣uerie of their skill make him glorious, but them selues also passing famous. And those forenamed workmen of singular worthinesse, made such persons, by their pictures and sculp∣tures most liuely proportioned, so far frō being strange, that they were well knowne to such as neuer sawe them: which thing, although they had not by cūning compassed: yet should
their noblenesse haue béene no whit the more darkned. Ney∣ther is the renoune of that Spartane or Lacedaemonian Age∣silaus, of lesse porte and account, for that hée suffered not the lineaments of his body to be drawne in colours, nor the fourme and measure of his members to be made in metall: then the fame and name of those, that were moste desierous both wayes to be popular. For that smal pamphlet of Xeno∣phon, penned in the prayse of the same king, is of such suffi∣ciencie, that it surpasseth all the pictures shadowed with the painters pencill, and all images of the caruer or grauer smo∣thed and fined with his chosen instruments. And surely this shall séeme to me a thing of great excellencie, both to the de∣lectation of my mynde, and also to the remembraunce of my dignitie, if I may be described by your pen, then portraied by their skil, or set out in the volumes of any other whatsoeuer: not only, for that you should in setting me out, giue a note of your rare wit and profound knowledge: as Timaeus did, in the behalfe of Timoleon: and Herodotus for the aduaunce∣ment of Themistocles: but bycause you by your authoritie and countenaunce, being a man of great acceptation, and in causes of weight very well knowne to the common wealth, may procure me the more renoune: that I do not only heare that sound of puisance and dexteritie, that blast I say of honor & high worship, which Alexander when he entred into Sige∣um, did say that Homer ascribed to Achilles: but that I may possesse and inioy that pension of prayse, which hath issue, not only from the testimonie of a man ofIt is not e∣nough to doe notable feats, but an excel∣lent writer is requisite also to record thē. great knowledge, lear∣ning, and grauitie, but also of honour, noblenesse, and autho∣ritie. For Hector, whom the Poet Naeuius introduceth in his poesies, hath a plausible sentence, reioycing aboue measure, not only in that he was praised: but he addeth this clause as a necessarie supplement, bycause he was praysed of a man deseruing prayse. And if so be that, lucke lay a blocke in the way, that my request is in hassarde of hinderance (sithence it is no reason nor conscience, that you shoulde disapoint me in any thing wherein I desire your furtherance) I shal be con∣strained peraduēture, to attēpt that which many very scorn∣fully
and disdainfully doe reprhend: namely, I will write of my selfe, and sound the trumpet of mine owne merites: yet in such sort, that I varie not from the president and example of many noble and honorable personages. But to be conuer∣sant in this kinde of style and methode, is (as you knowe)The eauses which put him backe from writing in his cōmendation. a vice: and therfore such as be the registrers & writers of their owne actes, aduentures, and counsels, must of necessitie so temper their pen, that they breake not out of the banckes of modestie, nor shew themselnes, in their doing, shamelesse and impudent: a parcialitie therfore in this point is to be folowed, which honest natures in no wise do neglect: who when they see in them selues occasion of deserued prayse, are so far from amplifying their owne merites, that they vse a sparing me∣thode: and when they perceiue on the other side, iust cause of reprehension, are so farre from séeking their owne blame and rebuke, that they drowne all in the seas of silence. More∣ouer, it commeth to passe, that when men write their owne doings, the smaller credite doe they win, the lesse beliefe, the lele opinion of desart, small authoritie, and as little admira∣tion: in so much that many make this obiection by way of re∣prehension, and say, that more modestie remaineth in the mindes of the crers at common games of actiuitie, who af∣ter they haue set crownes of triumphe vpon the heads of the conquerours, and proclamed their names with a loude voice in the hearing of a solemne assembly, and when they of dutie ought semblably to be crowned, before y• breaking p of tose plaes & departing of the people, to the intent that they suld not seeme to challenge victorie by their owne priuate voices, another cōmeth forth & taketh vpō hin the execution of that office▪ These syrts & sands we wish to auoide, & auoide, to our abiliti, if you will stand satisfactorie to my request, which y• you wold accomplish to my tter , we desire & be∣séech ou most earnstly▪ And, last peraduenture, you should muse in your mind, why we are so iportune at this present to craue y• of you in such earnest order & multitude of words, which you haue oftentimes promised to fulfil, (I meane y• re∣gistring of our nmultuous times & daūgerous chaunces, wc
circumstaunces not impertinent to that purpose:) I praye you be contented with this answere, that the hote desire of making haste, whereof I made mencion in the front of my letter, setteth me on a fire,Note his vn reasonable ar∣rogancie and proude dispo∣sition of mind but followe it not. bycause we are in loue with no∣thing in the world so much, as that the people of all landes and regions, might, by the immortall monuments of your learned bookes, attaine to the knowledge of vs, by the com∣memoration of our déedes, whiles we are yet aliue, and that we may taste the swéetenesse and ioy o that our litle glory, and yong springing honour, before we be deade. Concerning these matters, I would wishe you to write vnto me, if it be not too painefull and troublesome vnto you, what you are de∣termined to doe. For if you will take it in hande, and mynde no lesse thē you haue oftentimes sayd, then will I gather ab∣bridgements of all such things, as in that case be necessarie: But if you vse procrastination, and driue me off with delayes till another time. I will conferre with you face to face, and let penne and paper lye a sléepe. In the meane while, finishe that whiche you haue begunne: so shall you loue vs. Fare you well. Cicero to Lucceio. TH ARGVMENT. He signifieth how auailable the comfortable letter of Lucceiu was▪ to assuage the sorrowe and anguishe which tormented him, for the afflicted state of the common wealth. ALthough the consolation of your letter, coulde not but be acceptable vnto me, for therin is disclosed your great be∣neuolence and goodwill, lincked with the like prudence and wisedome: yet there was a further commoditi then that, whiche likewise I obteined: Namelie, the knowledge o your magnanimitie and courage, in the contempt of thinges transitorie, and your armed mynd against variable Fortune: whiche commendation, I iudge to belong to wisedome prin∣cipally, Not to stay vponany other foundation, neyther by
external casualties to fal into dubitation eyther to liue in fe∣icitie, or in miserie. In the consideraton whereof I was earnestly conursant, (Note for our example how many wordes he bringeth to gether to beautifie his Meaphore or translation. for it had taken déepe roote and sure ground in my remembraunce) yet not withstanding, the vio∣lence of tempesous stormes did so shake it, and the cluste∣ring togeter of  did so batter and beate it, that it was much impaired, and in manner . Nowe I sée and feele their present assstaunce, as well in your former ltters, as in this your last Eistle, which I perceiue to haue wrought effectually. Wherefore, these wordes are often to be repeaed, and not only to be tolde with a naked significati∣on, but also to be ver ed with a sad declaration, that nothing was more welcome to me, then your letter of comfort. To the ingendering of which passion and inward motion, as wel those circumstaunces, which with no lesse pleasantnesse of style, then with plentie of argumentes, you haue gathered, are auailable: as also the valliantnesse, constancte, and sober∣nesse of your person, then which nothing can be more beh∣ment and patheticall. Which not to indeuour to follow, is a fault, in my indgement, most foule: and a filthy offence. Wherefore, in this one respect, suppose me more valliaunt, then your selfe the maister of courage: bycause you séeme vn∣to me to haue some hope and confidence, that these thinges will decline from worsse to better: For these hurlie burlies with age of weapons, and those other liklyhoodes: besides that, the reasons in that discourse by you collected, forbad me vtterly to despaire of the common wealth. Wherefore, in that you are valliauntly minded, there is the lesse wonder, for so muche as you liue in expectation: and yet to conceiue any sparckle of hope, it is a thing whereat we may marull. For what is there that is not so shakē, that it séemeth to run to ruine, and vtterly to come to nought? Marke and beholde en this side, that side, nd rounde about, the members of the common wealth, which none knoweth so well as you, ne vn∣derstandeth with such perfection: and belieue me, you shall not finde so much as one that is not maimed, brused, , and much inféebled: which I would prosecute with my pen,
and amply describe, if I had a more certaine viewe of them then you haue, or were able to make a commemoration and rehearsall of them without horror and heauinesse: although as you admonishe me, and giue me comfortable counsell, all anguishe is to be reiected. Therefore will we dispose our selues to suffer with out sorrowe, ourHe meaneth (as it may bee thought) the death of his daughter Tul hola. domesticall and priuate misfortunes, and the preposterous chances of the cō∣mon wealth, with more magnanimitie and constancie of mynde, then you your selfe shall be able, although you giue me prècepts in this respect to imitate. For the consolation wher vpon you stay your selfe, is (as your letter doth signifie) a shadowe of some hope: as for vs, we meane to be stedfast, couragious, and established, yea in verie desperation, when hope is harbourlesse where vnto you, not withstanding, draw vs by your admonitions, and by your preceptes indeuour to persuade vs. For you rip vp the most pleasant and delecta∣ble remembrance of ourBicause we haue alwayes thought wel of the common wealth, which remembrance of well doing is not vnplea∣sant. conscience, and of suche things as we (you being the ring leader and principal author) attemp∣ted and performed. For we did no lesse vndoubtedly, in the behalfe of our countrie, then of dutie was demaundable, and might boldly be required: howbeit for all that, more I may say to you, then any mans mynde is vrged to accomplishe. You shall pardon me speaking any thing in myne owne ad∣uauncement. For with the cogitation and consideration of what thinges, you would disburthen vs of heauinesse, by the remembrance and thinking vpon the same seriously, we féele our selues emptied of much pensiuenesse. Wherfore, not to neglect your admonitions, or to accoūt your precepts contēp∣tible, I wil withdraw me selfe from al molestations and per∣plexities, so far forth as mine abilitie shal giue me leaue: and I will frame my mynde, and addresse my studie vntoMening the studie of Phi∣losophie, wher vnto he appli∣ed hym selfe most, after the cōmon welth was so misera bly afflicted. those thinges, where with prosperitie is beautified, and aduersitie mitigated: and with you shall my continuance be so long, as both our age and our health will permit. And although we be hindered from comming together, to inioy bodily presence, and reall companie, yet not withstanding, the coniunction of our mindes, and knitting of both our hearts together, shal be
of such efficacie and force, that we will reape such benefite, each of vs by and through the self same studies, that we shal persuade our selues to be so familiar, as if we were neuer a sunder. Fare you well. Lucceius to Cicero. THE ARGVMENT. Hee demaundeth the occasion of Cicero his so long absence from the citie: and giueth him counsell to withdrawe his mynde from sorrowe. If you are in health, it is well: I am in health, according to my custome, and yet somewhat worsse for all that, then I haue béene wont. I sought about oftentimes to the intent I might see you, & was moued with no smal admiration, that you were not at Rome, after your departing from me: which offereth vnto me, at this instant, no lesse occasion of musing. I knowe not of certaintie, what thing should restraine and kéepe you fromMening tho citic of Rome hence. If solitarinesse and liuing alone be your delectation, when you write, and continue to be none o∣therwise occupied then you hane béene accustomed: I am glad, and I do not mislike of your meaning: for then this no∣thing can be more pleasant, not onely in these times both miserable and lamentable, but also at other seasons of quiet∣nesse and tranquilitie: especially, eyther to your ouer weari∣ed heart, which braeth after intermission and rest from bu∣sie and great matters▪ or your learned and prudent mynde, which freely deliuereth some thing, at all times, which vnto other appeareh delectable, and maketh your owne person honourable. But on the contrarie part, if you lye grouing in gricfe, and lament with teares as a prisoner to pensiuenesse, whiche fashion you vsed when you were here abiding: I am sorie, bicause you are grieued, and I can not reioyce except you were merrie. Yet I cannot but accuse your effeminacie and womanlike disposition, if you giue vs leaue frankly to vtter what we thinke. Will not you; hauing so eleare and sharpe a sight in the contemplation of thinges hid and secret, view & beholde that which is sensible and manifest? will you knowe this, that you consume and waste your selfe with con∣tinuall
complaints, and all to no purpose▪ will you not vnder∣stand that your sorrowes are doubled, which your wisedome requireth to haue somewhat assuaged? And if by persuading we preuaile not, but sée our labour lost, we be take vs to pray∣ing, and vse wayes of intreatance, beséeching you, that if you wil do any thing in the world for our sake, shake off this yoke of anguishe, cast away sorrowe, and returne, either to liue with vs among all your acquaintance,Either liue among vs, as you wer wont or at least liue merily alone. in our common con∣uersation: or else in solitarinesse to your priuate contentati∣on. My desire is not to dull you, if I can not delight you: but I woulde gladly driue you from your purpose, least therein you continue: for so much as these two contrarie effects tor∣ment me mightily: in the one of which, I wish, that of you my wil be regarded, or else in the other that you be not offended. Fare you well. Cicero to Lucceio. THE ARGVMENT. He answereth to Lucceius demasiding the cause of his absence from Rome, and she weth sundrie reasons why he is so grieued, and why he is loth to leade his life in the citie. ALl your loue is aarant and manifest vnto me by your last letters which you sent me, and neuer a part or parcel thereof left vnoiscouered: which as vnto me it is not strange and vnknowne, so it is swéete and acceptable, I should say pleasaunt and delectable, but that I may neuer recouer that worde againe, sithence I haue lost it for euer;Not somuch for the losse of the cōmon wealth, as ey∣ther for the slaughter and death of his friendes, or els for their ab∣sence in for∣reigne places, for some be∣came hard har ted that they might not re∣turne into their countrie which was quite spoiled of libertie. not for that one occasion which you haue in suspicion, and coniecture, and wherin, (though your wordes be mylde, gentle, friendly, and fauourable,) yet in deede you accuse me sharply: but rather, bycause those remedies whiche ought to heale my launced fleshe, and to drawe a skinne ouer my wound, are to be coun∣ted no remedies. For what shall I say? should I flée for, suc∣cour to my friends? howe many be there of them? we haue
had of them, almost in euery corner: but now some are dead, othersome are fledde, and so hardened, I know not by what meanes, that they care not for their conntrie. Faine would I leade my life with you, it is the thing which I chiefly de∣sire: olde acquaintaunce, vnfeined loue, hartie goodwill, sem∣blable behauiour, & equalitie in studies will haue it so. What thing is wanting in our friendship? may wée liue together? I know no cause certainly that should be the impediment: But vndoubtedly hetherto wée haue bene in sunder, though wee were neighbours in Tusculano, and Puteolano. For what should I say? can wee be together in the citie? where, for so much as place of plea is common, fellowship is not re∣quired: But this our age, I wot not by what eill chaunce, is fallen into such stormie & tempestuous times, that when w ought most of all to haue ourished, euen th, aas, to be aliue, wée were throughly amed. For  uge might reine to mée, after I  stript naked of all mine orna∣mentsThe death of his daughter moueth him to write in this complay∣ning order. and pleasures both priuate and ▪ onely y• let∣ter and epistles which passed daily too and fro my hands: for what els (alas)  I do? And yet they, wherin I thought my comfort to haue consisted, I canot tel how  after what sort▪  now to shut mée out of the castle of consolation, and as it were bitterlyBecause as they hate fil∣thy thinges & vndecent: so they esteeme seruitude most vil. vppaide me, because I cōtinue in that life; in the which there is nothing else to be hoped for, but a piti∣lesse prolonging of a time most miserable. And you meruaile not a litle, as you say, in that I absent mée selfe from that ci∣tie, wherein mine owne house doeth not delight mée, wherin I haue the state of thefe times in great detestation, persons and places in contempt, court and counsell in no coūtenance: finally, what do I not abhore? Wherefore, my vse of letters is such, wherin I impart euery portion of time, not that thy are a perpetuall plaster vnto mée to salue vpp mine incu∣rable sores, but that by them I obtaine a litle forgetfulnes of my sorrowes. And if it had béene ours gratious fortune, to haue brought that to effect, where of neither you nor I did so much as once thinke, by reason of the daily terrors and fea∣res wherewith we were molested:After the Pharsalian cō flict. For by and by after returned Ci∣cero into Ita∣lie. wée had béene alwayes
together, and neuer in sunder, neither should I haue had oc∣asion to be offended at your prosperitie: nor yet you to bée so disquieted at my heauinesse. Which thing (mutual socie∣tie and  I meane) let vs, to the vttermost of our a∣bilitie, eneuour to attaine. For what is there, then that, more  for vs, more méete, and cnuenient. It shall not bée long therefore er I sée you. Fare you well. Cicero to Titio. THE ARGVMENT. He comforteth his friend▪ taking the death of his children gricuously. ALthough I among all men am most vnméete to minister consolation vnto you, The com∣unicating & partakinge of sorrow, is a cō solation. For both of them were touched with the com∣mon wealthes miseries, and Titius also be sides had cause of priuate sor rowe. for that the griefe which I concei∣ued by your heuinesse was so great, that I mée selfe stoode▪ in  of a comforter: yet not withstanding, forsomuch as my sorrow was not so néere the bnckes of bitter lamenation and mourning, as yours: I thought it a point of faithfull friendship, and a tken of singular , not to kéepe silence ouer long in this your anguish, but to send you s succour, and sma consolation, which nght ease you a litle of the burthen of your care, if it did not altogether ealt ou o your griee. The consolation, which I giue you is   mon, and so common is it, that, me thinkes we ough to hau it alwayes in our vtteraūce, and neuer to let it ip out of our memories, It is extreme follie not to be ruled by an vniuersal law. That wee be not vnmindefull of our mortall condition, that wee are bredd and borne vnder the rule of that lawe, which hath appointed the liues of all men to the sufferance of fortunes woūding weapons & that w ought no to kicke vpp the heele, as repining to liue in that state, wherunto by birth we were ordeined▪ neither to take those chaunces, which can be preuented by no policie, nor coūsel, too heuily: Because ma∣ny as well as hee haue lost their children. but by calling the miffortunes of many other men to our remēbraunce, learne & vnderstand, that whatso∣euer falleth vpon vs▪ is not new and straunge, but hath hap∣pened oftentimes before. Howbeit, neither these, nor thos cōsolations whatsoeuer, wherwith wisemē hold themselue well contented, and which are not onely committed to me∣morie, but written also in bookes the longer to cōtinue, ought
not to séeme so preualent and effectuall, as the veri Which is most lamenta ble, in somuch that a wise mā can finde no pleasure in hi life. state it selfe of our citie, and the great vnquietnesse of these accursed dayes▪ insomuch that I must néedes pronounce them most happie and fortunate, which neuer begat children, and them lesse wretched  misrable, which haue lost them in these times of tumults & roubles: the if they had lost th in the flourishing estate of a good cōmon wealth, or when thre had As thoughe there had be no common  welth t  time. bene any comon wealth at all. And if your affection be force∣able▪ or if the  ▪ thining of your matters make you to moure ▪   uppose that al your sorow cāno with such cilitie be  bu hat  sparkles wil remaine. But if that thin moe yo, which i an argument of natural loue that you  the miseries of them which hauè made an exchange of life wt death: to make no word o that which I haue oftētimes nead, & not  , what hare can there be in death? which if it  not seselesse▪ might much rather be   then ▪  like wise so eéemed▪ and though it lack sens  thought a nimie to life, yet ought not y• to be accomptd iserie; which is not fealt, suffered, nor perceiued: & thus much more▪ with∣out waueing▪ dare I ffirme and approue, so eat t be the  which , and  to fll ppon the cōmonwelth, that whosoeuer frō them is , y• man in mine opinion, is neuer a whit . F, what place is left now for enestie? where logeth goodnes▪ who intertay∣neth vertue▪ in what hauen lie honest exercises at anchor? where are ood arts & sciences haboured? nay▪ is not librtie dispossessed, and safetie spoled of her inheritance▪ I haue not (of trueth I sweare) heard of any youth, or childe, dying this yeare most perillous & satal, which semeth not to mée in high fauour with the eternal gods, in that they were set frée from the fetters of these afflictions, & let loose out of y• prison of this vnluckie lif. Wherfore if this cogitation may be vtterly roo∣ted out of your minde, For somuch as theyare not vtterly depri∣ued of this light and life, but that they haue escaped the miseriesof these daunge∣rous dayes. that they whō you haue entirely lo∣ued, sustaine annoyaunce: then you shal perceiue, the grea∣test parte of your heauinesse diminished, and your hearte more flexible to bée recomforted. For that simple care
béene induced, i I had perceiued that those things which you sustained, were so farre from being of you dissalowed, that they were wel liked off and approued. But when I conside∣red, what your meaning was, then I supposed, that you sawe verie wisely what you were able to compasse. Now y• state of all thinges is otherwise, your iudgement is at libertie, you are appointed to the office of a Consul, in your best and bra∣uest age, in the pearle and floure of your eloquence, A reason of the necessiic of the time. and at such a time, as the common wealth laboureth in extreme skarsitie of such men as you are. Now therfore (I beséech you by the Gods immortall) applie your whoale studie, care, and indeuour, in the attempting and accomplishin of that thing, which may puchase to your name singular dignitie, and also incōparable glorie: & surely there is no more but one course of wel gouerning the common wealth, which leadeth the di∣rect path to honour and noblenesse, at this time specially, the weale pulique hauing béen so sore assaulted, afflicted, shakē, battered, beaten and brused, by the space of so many yeares. Thus much I was vrged of méere goodwill to signifie vnto you by my letters, not that I would séeme to make you in∣sufficient of counsel, and therfore to stand in néede of my pre∣ceptes & admonitions, but to giue a testimonial of my harti goodwil towards you, wherwt I am inflamed. Out of those bookes wher∣in precepts are giuen for the attainment of renowne. For I knowe this, that out of what springs I haue drawne my water, out o y• selfe same also, haue you largely tasted. Wherfore to vse a measure, thus much I thought requisite to let you vnder stand, y• I might rather declare vnto you the certaintie of my beneuolence, then make a vaine showe of my wisedom & ex∣perience. In the meane season, whatsoeuer dependeth vppon your worthinesse and honour, I wil haue a regard thereunto with no lesse singularitie and precisenes, then with careful∣nes and discretion. Fare you well. Plancus to Cicero. THE AROVMENT. He thanketh Cicero, for his good exhoration tending to the desire of true renowne: and promiseth that he wil be wholie in the power of the common wealth.
MOst acceptable was the letter that you sent mée, which, as I vnderstād, you indited vpon certaine cōference had with Furnius. As for mine owne person, I bring an excuse o the time past, that I heard nothing of your iourney, & as litle of your returne, before I was certified by your owne letter. For I persuade mée selfe in this wise, that I can pretermit no maner of uetie, though it be with the least, but the same wil redoūd to my great blame & sore discredit. Wherfore to defend & maintaine amiliaritie betweene vs, among many specialties, I find some of great efficatie, as the acquaintance which you haue had with my auncestours, y• affection which you exhibited vnto mée in my childhood▪ & the loue which you haue towards me▪ both professed & confirmed. Wherfore (my Cicero) so farre forth as my yeares & your age shall suffer, be certainly persuaded, that you are he only, & none besides you, in reuerencing of whō, I haue determined to vse no lesse sin∣ceritie & obedience, then a sonne should afford to his father. Al your counsels, as they are seasoned with precise wisedome & excellent iudgmēt (both which in you do flourish) so are they tempered with fidelitie, truth, & faithfulnes, I iudge of your mind as I iudge of mine owne, & by mincowne I measure yours. which I mea∣sure and examine, as it were by weight, by mine owne cōsci∣ence. Wherfore, if I should thinke otherwise (vndoubtedly) your admnition might cōtroule me: or if I did cal it in dubi∣tation, your warning would inforce me to follow y• which sée∣med smply best in your opiniō. What is there now that can pull men wrong way? whatsoeuer cōmendable ornaments, and things garnished wt goodnes, are residēt in me, either be∣stowed through fortunes benefite, or obteined by mine owne labour & diligence, although you for affeions sake, stéeme them of greater value, yet not wtstanding, in ye iudgmēt of my most enimie, they are set at such a high price of praise, that nothing séemeth desireable, saue the iewel Which per∣aduenture I had not, thogh I did many notable thin∣ges, when Cae sar was in roome of r∣giment. of honest report. Be resolued in minde, and in thought thus established, that what I can encounter by power, foresée by counsell, procure by authoritie, al and euery portion thereof shalbe referred to the profite of the commonwealth. Your meaning is mani∣fest vnto mée, and as for your admonitions, they shalbe the
rule of my doings▪ neither will I at any time so farre ouer∣shoote mée selfe, that any thing of mée attempted, shal deserue reprehension. I am in expectation of all thinges, as desirous to know what is done in Where D. Brutus as L. president. Gallia prouince, as also to vnder∣stand the state of By the newe Consul, who entred into of fice in the K. of Ianuarie. such matters as haue béene in hand this moneth of Ianuarie in the Citie. In the meane season, very great is my care which I suffer, where I doe remaine, least these countries and people, amonge the faultes of others, should suppose our harmes their occasion. To be briefe, if my successe be such, as I deserue: then certainly, I will satisfie the mindes, both of you, whom I wishe specially to content, and of all good men, least I make their affiaunce frustrate. Regard your health, & loue mée as I loue you. Fare you wel. Cicero to Planco. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. In this Epistle hee pricketh Plancus forward with the spurres of praise, not onely to take vppon him▪ the charge of the common wealth, but also the defence and preseruation of the same. I Receyued two seuerall letters from you, tendinge to one effect, which was a manifest argument of your dilligence. For I perceiued, that you were touched with a certaine de∣sire, to haue your letters, which I long looked for, deliuered to my hands. Out of which, after I had perused them, I rea∣ped double commoditie and vauntage, very hard for mée in conference to decide by iudgement: whether I should thinke your loue towards my person, or your true hart to the body of the common wealth, of greater accompte and estimation. The loue and affection of oure countrie, in my iudgement, is the greatest without exception, but yet not withstanding, the knitting together of our wills conteyneth more It is true: but yet not more loue. for our countrie in that respect is preferred be fore oure pa∣rents and our children, ergo much more before oure friendes. swéetnesse: wherefore the commemoration of that beneuolence, and re∣uerence, which you exhiited vnto mée as vnto a father, euen from your young yeares, and the rehearsall of such thinges
as serued to a semblable purpose, increased in my hart incre∣dible delectation. Againe, the declaring of your mind and stu∣die to the commonwealths aduauntage, which you haue al∣readie conceiued, and hereafter meane also to sée continued, appeared vnto me passing pleasaunt. And so much the grea∣ter was this delight, how much the néerer it approched to the aboue recited circumstances. Wherefore, my Plancus, I doe not onely exhort but also beséech you, as I haue done in that my letter, whereunto you sent mée an answeare, that with all your heart, wil, and desre, with al your body, strēgth and courage, you regard the estate of the weale publique. There is nothing in the world, whereby your commoditi may be more inlarged, your glorie amplifed, and praise pub∣lished. Neither is any thing of such excellencie in the world vniuersall, or of equal worthinesse, then for a man to behaue himselfe in such order, as that hee may deserue well of the common wealth. For, such is your singular courtesie, and such is your wisedome, that I am not restrained to vtter vn∣to you with libertie of speache, whatsoeuer I thincke neces∣sarie. Fortune hath so fauoured and furthered you, that the passage to verie great things, hath béen opened wyde to you. And though the attainement of such countenaunce, Bese it seemeth that by the fauour of Caesar you obteined that which you haue gotten. with∣out the assistaunce of vertue, were impossible: yet notwith∣standing, what soeuer you haue aspired vnto, y• same is refer∣red, for the most part, to the goodnes of Fortune, and ascribed to the state of time. What benefite soeuer the common∣wealth receiueth through you, in these troublesome seasons, and hard world, it shall whoalie and solie redounde to your owne dignitie, and be reputed proper to your owne person. The hatred of al Citizens, (those villans onely, of whom you wott, excepted) is incredible against Anthonie. In you is great conidence reposed, and on your armie no smal expecta∣tion dependeth. Now take héede in any case, for the honour of all the Gods, that you loos no time for Which you are like to win by taking vp∣pon you to de fend the com∣mon wealth in daunger. your owne ad∣auncement and renowne. I counsell you as a sonne, I fa∣uour you as mée selfe, and I exhort you, in our countries be∣halfe, as a very friend. Fare you well.
Cicero to Planco. THE ARGVMENT. Hee commendeth Plancus for his readines and willing hart in succo∣ring the common wealth: and incourageth him to hope for most ample and honourable rewards frō the Senate for his labour: wher∣in he promiseth to take diligent paines himself, and exhorteth him, that as he hath begonne notably, so hee would procede and conti∣nue manfully. ALthough I vnderstand by y• mouth of Furnius, what your will was concerning the common wealth, and what was your counsell: yet notwithstanding, after I had viewed and examined your letters, the matter lay more open and ma∣nifest to my iudgemēt, so that I was throughly instructed in your meaning. Wherefore, although the whoale state of the common wealth standeth or falleth in one conflicte or battell, which, as I supposed, was Not onely decreed vpon, but cōcluded and finished. Liu. lib. 28. decided vppon, when you were reading this letter: yet notwithstanding, the verie reporte of your wil and toward minde, was so blased abroad, that ther∣by you atchieued great cōmendation. If we had had a For both the Consuls were gone out to fighte with Antho∣nie, and ther∣fore were ab∣sent from the Citie. Con∣sul at Rome, it should haue béene declared and testified to your speciall praise and worthinesse, by the assent of the Se∣nate, how approueable your enterprises were, & how accep∣table your preparation. The time of which thing is not only not paste, but is scarcely come, in mine opinion. For end, That seemeth vnto mee to bee true and not counterfect ho∣nour, which is bestowed and employed vppon noble men, not for hope of preferment hereafter, but for present merits and desertes past. Wherfore, let there be any cōmon wealth at all, wherein honour may haue power and abilitie to flou∣rish, and trust mée, it shalbe your lot and lucke, to be aduaun∣ced to the best, the chiefest, and the greatest. And, That ho∣nour (to say trueth) may of right be reputed honour, which is not a For Plancus had but giuen a signification of his will: to the intēt, that if he had bene aduaunced to honour, or re∣ceiued any in∣igne of wor∣thiuese, it might seem vnto him an allurement or prouocation to shew prof of his prowes, rather then a reward for a∣ny not able deede by him perfourmed. temporall reward for further incouragement, but a perpetuall recompence of vertue and honestie▪ Wherfore (my Plancus) lay too all the might you can make, to purchas
praise, and to winne worship: support your natiue countrie: be an assistant to your fellowe in ofice: and refuse not to con∣sent to ye incredible conspiracie of al nations: in so doing, you shall both know and trie that I am a furtherer of your coun∣sells, a auourer of your dignitie, an assured friend in all as∣sayes, and a most faithfull companion. For vnto those cau∣ses wherewith we are lincked in loue one to another, as wel in respect of courtesies, as in consideration For we haue knowne one another of a long continu∣ance. Epist. 22 lib. 10. of auncientnes∣ses, the tender affection wherewith wée are inflamed, is cou∣pled: and that is it, my Plancus, which hath wrought this ef∣fect in mée, that I make more accompt of your life, then I do of mine owne. Fare you wel. The 4. of the Calends of April. Cicero to Trebonio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He is sorie, for that he was not accessarie and partener of the conspira∣cie against Caesars maiestie: because Anthonie suruiuing, doeth what hee can to worke the mischiefe and detriment of the common wealth: finally, hee declareth with what a desire of recouering hi libertie hee is touched. HOw desirous, and how faine would I, that you had bid∣den mée as a guest, to those delicates and iunckets in the Ides of Marche: Anthonie had not the beene lefte a∣liue. Epist. 12. lib. 10. we would haue had no fragments or bro∣ken scraps left. But now it is fallen out vnluckily, and wee haue sore a doe about those reliques, that the good which you did in the behalfe of the common wealth, hath in it some oc∣casion of complaint. Because that from you, being so worthie a man, the benefite did procéede that Meaning Anthonie, to whom it was a benefite to liue. this great contagion & pestilence to the weale publique, remaineth stil vndestroyed: in somuch that otherwhiles, I féele mée selfe so disquieted, and of patience dispossessed, that (a thing skarsely beseeming my person, and not altogether tollerable) I am somewhat angrie with you. For you haue lefte a greater burthen of busines for mée (being but one) to beare, then to all the ret, mée selfe onely excepted. For so soone as the Senate might
assemble, and sitte in consultation, after that When hee went to Brun∣disiū, to bring with him the Macedonian power, to the Citie. villanous de∣parting of Anthonie, I returned to mie old accustomed de∣termination, which you and your father also, an earnest and industrious Citizen, alwayes talked off, and hartily loued. For at what time, the Tribunes of the people, had procured a conuocation of the Senate, the 13. of the Kalends of Ianua∣rie, and caused another matter to be called in question, I im∣braced the common wealth, and claspt it whoalie in my boo∣some, yea I behaued mée self couragiously: and as for the Se∣nate, whom I perceiued in manner fainting and wearie, I reuoked them to their auncient vertue, and former custome: howbeit, not so much with the force of my witt, as with th valliauntnesse of my hart and stoutnesse of minde. This day, my indeuour, my painefulnes, and my buie styrring too and fro, hath ministred to the common wealth, the first fruits of hope concerning the recouerie of libertie. Neither haue I o∣mitted any time, after, either in being mindefull of the weale publique, or in labouring and doing what I mighte for the benefte of the same. All which premisses touchinge the affaires of the Citie, and other matters besides whatsoe∣uer, I would let you vnderstand by mine owne letters, but that I am in opinion, that you are otherwise certified and in∣formed: although my For he could neuer be quiet by the meanes of Anthonie. busines be so weightie & importune, that I can obteine but little leasure: neuerthelesse you can not but come to the knowledge of all things, by reason of the recourse of other mens letters: that which you heare of mée, shalbe but litle, a few matters I meane to communicate vn∣to you, which shalbe comprised in a shorte summarie. Wée haue a valliaunte Senate, as for those which haue béene in∣signed with the office of the Cnsulship, some of them are ti∣morous and feareful, othersome malicious and euil minded. Wée are greatly indamaged by y• osse of Who died: eade the 9. Philippie. Seruius: L. Caesar is in a very good opinion: But, because Anthonie is his vnc∣kle on the mothers side, hée is not ouersharpe and earnest, to giue sentence against him. Our Consuls are men of great grauitie & excellencie: D. Brutus behaueth himselfe honoura∣blie: Caesar, Being but ninetene yea∣res of age. Vel leius in his 2. lib. & Tacit, lib. 13. the proper youth, is sngularly disposed: in
whom I sée good grounds of comfortable hope, for that which remayneth: thus much be you well assured off, and through∣ly certied, that if he with all celeritie and spéedie préparati∣on, Of his owne priuate coun∣sel, and proper expēces. Phi∣lippic. 3. had not taken vp, enrolled, and mustd an armie of tried souldiours, being such in déede as were not to be instru∣cted in the feates and conueyaunces of battell: and if two le∣gions of Anthonies hoaste, had not left him, and assembled themselues, to the others authoritie, wherby terrour & feare were as bridles to restraine him in his rigorous vsage: In his re∣turne from Brundisiū, epi. 25. lib. 12. & Philippic. 3. hée would haue let nothing escape him, though neuer so mischie∣ous, though neuer so cruel, bloudie, and sauage. These mat∣ters, notwithstanding you were infourmed of them before, as I thinke no lesse, I was not vnwilling to make more ma∣nifest, and to lay wider open to your vnderstanding. Other thinges there be, whereof I will write vnto you more large∣ly, when I haue obtined more leysure. Fare you well. Cicero to Terentia his wife, Tulliola his daughter, and Cicero his sonne. ¶ THE ARGVENT. Hee excuseth the breuitie of his writing, commendeth the duetifulnes of Piso his sonne in lawe towards him, bewaileth the state of Teren∣tia, and willeth her to regard her owne health. THinke This letter was made whē Piso and Ga∣binius were Consuls. not that I write longer letters to one or other, except they write largely vnto mée, whereuppon I must néedes lengthen my lines, and vse woords more liberally. A∣gaine, I haue nothing whereof I should write: and if I had, yet, as this present time and occasion chaunceth, nothing is done of mée with more hardnesse. As for writing vnto thée, Terentia, and to our daughter Tulliola, Alas, I cannot do it without abundaunce of teares. For I sée that you are most miserable women, and my will alwayes was to behold yo happie and forunate: which thinge I was bound, of duetie, to sée accomplished, and had brought it to perfection, if wée
had not béene so timorous and fainthearted. The merits and desertes of Piso my sonne in lawe, challenge singular loue in my behalfe, to whom I cannot choose but shew much kindenesse, whom I haue aduertised, as I might, in your ∣halfe by my letter, and hartily thanked, as in déede I ought▪ You haue good affiaunce▪ as I vnderstand, in the newe Tri∣bunes of the people lately created: that will be for your fur∣ther confirmation, if Pompeius his wil be inclined according ly: But as for Crassus, I feare him notwithstāding. I sée that al things are done of youwith courage and kindnesse neither do I greatly marueile: howbeit I am to lament your chaūc and ouerthwart luck, which in déede is such, that my calami∣ties séeme nothing so many in comparison of your great mi∣series. For P. Valerius a man full of courtesie, and appliaunt to doe his friend a pleasure, wrote vnto mée, that which I could not read without vnmeasurable wéepinge▪ For that is the mening of these words, a Vestae ad Ta∣bulā Valeriā: by the iudge∣ment of a lear ned man now liueing▪ whose authoritie is grounded vp∣pon certaine monumentes to bee seene yet, in Italie. how you were ledde from court to courte, from magistrate to magi∣strate, from officer to officer, from lawe to lawe. Alas, my lyfe, alas my ioy and onely delight, that thou shouldest suffer such vexation, that we (I say) my swéete wife Terentia, from whom, al were wont as from a fountaine, to fette their ayde and succour, should be thus imprisoned inperplexities of nē∣sifenes, and swallowed vppe in surgeinge seas of sorrowe. Concerning that which you write of our house, that is to say, of oure plaine plot lying in the citie: Thus much I saye by way of resolution, that then I shal thinke me selfe restoared▪ when that is recouered. But (las) these thinges are not in our owne hands. It gréeueth me also, that whatsoeuer costes and charges are required, thou must e are a portion there∣of, although thou béest brought to extreme miserie, and fée∣lest lacke and losse, procured by spightfull spoilers. And if so be, that the matter may be finished and dispatched, all things shall fall into our possession. But if the selfe same fortune forment vs still without immutation, which at this instant doth afflict vs, will you bée so vnwise, as to castaway the re∣mayner of that which you haue; considering your present ad∣uersitie?
I pray thée hartily, my life, let them that maye best, stande to expences, if they bée so pleased: and haue a consideration of pour Yet did Te∣rentia liue a∣boue a hun∣dred yeares as Plinic repor∣teth. 7. lib. cap. 48. owne health, which is much infée∣bled, if you loue mée your Cicero. For you are both day and night before mine eyes, and continually represented to my cogitation. I sée thou refusest no kinde of labour, but offerest thée selfe to the susteyning of all whatsoeuer. I sée nothing lacking in thée. Wherefore, to the intente that wée maye ob∣taine that, wheruppon your hope is fixed, and your paines al∣so employed, neglect not your owne health. I know not vnto whom I should write, except to them onely, who visite mee with their letters: or else, to such as you name in your E∣pistles, when occasion is ministred. Further then I am, I meane not to trauell, because where I am, doeth not discon∣tent you: h weit my desire is▪ that you write often, speci∣lly▪ if in that whereof wée hope, any asuraunce be graun∣ Farewell my ioyes, farewell. Dated at Thessalonica, the third of the Nones of October. Caecina to Cicero. ¶THE ARGVMENT. First hee intreateth of his booke, which ee made vpon Caesar: and af∣ter menion thereof sufficiently made, hee desireth Cicero to bee a mediatou vnto Caesar, that hee maye obtaine leaue and libertie to returne. IN that This booke was written in the praise of Caesar, as the other (wherof hee confesseth himselfe to haue felte the smarte) was written to his contume lie & reproch. my booke was somewhat longe before it came to your handes, ascribe it, (I pay you) to oure timorous∣nesse and feare: and bée moued also with compassion of the time presente. Your sonne (as I hearde) was not in quiet mind, (and good reason whie) if it had béene published and made common abroade: forsomuch as it is not so pre∣cisely pondered, nor so aduisedly regarded, with what dis∣position of minde it was written and compiled: as how it
is taken and receiued, least that thing be a cause of my fur∣ther annoyaunce: who as yet féele the smart and punishment of my former inuention and phrase of inditing: wherein I haue such lucke and destinie, as no man besides. For where∣as a faulte in writing is dashed out with a race of the penne, and penaltie of foolishnes is an euill report: mine offence and errour is rewarded wt banishment, and exile is my correctiō: the summe of whose trespasse is this, because I being armed, gaue language to mine aduersarie, much missliked. There is neuer a one of vs, in mine opinion, but would wishe the vic∣torie to chaunce to his owne side: yea, and that more is, whē they were sacrificing to the Gods, and busie in holie ceremo∣ies, would euen then powre out their ptitions, that Caesar, with al possible spéede, might take y• ouerthrow. And whoso∣euer did not meditate and thinke vpon this, happie is hée, and in all pointes most fortunate. If Meaning Caelar. hée know this, and therein be persuaded, why should hée take stomache and  against him, that wrote a thing against his will, seing tht hée hath vouchsafed to pardon and forgiue all such as made supplication to the Gods, and exhibited vnto them much ve∣eration, against the ife and afegard of his person. But to make returne thither, where I begonne: this was the occa∣son of my conceiued feare. I wrote of you (by my credite and honestie) sparingly, and timorously, not as taking cou∣rage and hart at grasse, but as renouncing and forsaking mée selfe. What man is ignoraunt that this method and order of inditing or writinge, should be frée and liberall, vehement and patheticall, loftie and hystoricall? That is supposed a loose kinde of writing, to talke of any man vnreuerently, for therein is leudnesse discouered: and that is tangled, when a man speaketh all to his own praise and popularitie, for then will followe suspicio of arrogancie. That is the frée and iberall kinde of writing, to sounde another mannes com∣mendation, from the which to withdrawe and diminishe ne∣uer so itle, it is to be imputed to infrmitie and weakenee: or else, to bee ascribed to enuie and maliciousnesse. And  cannot tell, whether my laboure will séeme acceptable
vnto you, and approuable in your iudgement. For that whi∣che I was not able to comprehend and performe, I thought good, first not to touche, secondly to be parciall of my pen, and to do that I did, not ouer largely. Howbeit In that part of his booke wherein hee doth cōmend Cicero. I stayed vp my selfe as well as I might: many things I impaired: many thinges I omitted: and many thinges were not so muche as once mencioned. As therfore it is seene in the climing steps and staues of long ladders, if some be takē away, some cut off and broken, other some left loose and vnfastened, it is made an instrument of falling downe, rather then of going vp: euen so, a desire of writing, encountered with many misfor∣tunes, & as it were torne to tatters with a thousand tempests of troubles, what thing can it affoorde, either in hearing de∣lectable, or in iudgement probable? When I came to the noble name of Caesar, all my ioyntes quaked, and I trembled sore for feare, not for any terrour of punishment, Bycause he was doubtfull howe Caesar would take his doings, wel or yll. but for the vncertaintie of his opinion: for I am not so wel acquain∣ted with him, that I should knowe his whole disposition. In what wauering is my mynde, suppose you, in what a maze of mistrust is my conscience, when it reasoneth with it selfe in this forme and order? This will Caesar allowe: This word offereth cause of suspicion: what if I change it? But I dout in so doing I shall set downe a worsse. Go to then, do I praise any? is that an offence? admit it be so taken, what if he wil not allowe the commendation. Or, he wri∣teth to mee with weapon in hande: Or, hee writethe like a warri∣our fiercely to his onimie. He detesteth the style and order of writing of his enimie, armed to resist his power: what then will he doe to him that is vanquished, ouercome, and as yet not restored? My fearefulnesse also I féele aug∣mented, whn I fall in consideration of you, who in your O∣ratour vse circumspection and cautions for your priuate supportance by Brutus, and séeke a fellowe for your excusa∣tion. Which thing, for so much as the patrone and defender of al m in al cases, vouchsaeth to do: what ought I, your an∣cient client, to thinke in such a case of my selfe? In this re∣proh  of , and this torment of blinde suspicion,  many things are written to the coniecture of a contrarie sens, and not ater the interpretation of his
iudgement, albeit he follow an oblique and crooked opinion, howe hard a matter it is for the writer to frame him selfe to a contentation, we are not ignorant, and you also, whom ex∣cellencie of wit hath both armed and abled, haue notable e∣perieuce. Howbeit, I sayde thus much to my sonne, tha be might reade ouer the booke▪ vnto you, and so bring it away a∣gaine, or else deliuer it to your selfe vpon this condition, that you made promise to adde therevnto your corrections, that is, if you would translate this and that, and make it all otherwise. As touching our voyage into Asia▪ although we felt the burthen of necessitie prssing downe our shoulders, yet haue we done according to your commaundement. And nowe, wherevnto should I exhort you for my sake? you sée the time is come, wherein somwhat must be decréed & conclu∣ded vpon in our behalfe. There remaineth nothing, my Cice∣ro, why you shoulde labour in expectation of my sonne: he is but a springall, his vehement affection wherein he now tra∣uelleth, his yong yeares wherein he is entered, and the feare wherewith he is molested, are suche hinderaces vnto his mynde, that he can not excogitate and deuise all things to the vttermost. So that the weight of the whole matter, must néedes rest vpon your owne necke: all my affiaunce is fixed on you. Such is your wisdome, prudence, and experiēce, that you know of a certaintie, with what things Caesar is pacified contented, and pleased. So that from your prouidence all things must procéede, and haue their issue, and by your discre∣tien they must be accomplished: for otherwise there remai∣neth no remedie. Much may you do with his owne person so great is his fauour: and very muche can you obteine of his friends, so good is your credite: and to thi ne thing shall you ioyne performance, if you could be thus persuaded, that in re∣quest resteth duetie, (although it e a great matter and of much weight) and that the case, wherin your ayde is craued, is your owne: except, peraduenture, I put you to this paine, either by too much foolishnesse in this my For such as be in miserie may scarse vse such boldnes. miserie, or else by too much shamelesnesse in our Bicause olde acquaintance presumeth ve∣y fae. auncient friendship. But the custome of your life is such, that it excuseth both my supposed
presumption. For, sthence your vse hath alwayes béene, to set light by your labour in your friendes behalfe and furthe∣raunce: nowe they are, not in hope onely that you will doe the like, but charge you also with a commaundement. Con∣cerning the booke which my sonne shall giue you, my request vnto you, is, that it may not be published: or that you wold so correct it, that I thereby be not indaungered. Fare you well. Cicero to Thoranio. THE ARGVMENT. To comfort Thoranius, he gathereth arguments from circumstaun∣ces past, and setteth him selfe downe for a president or patterne to bee followed. ALthough, at the writing of this letter, the ende of this most miserable battell séemed to approche, or that some∣what therein was done and alreadie dispatched: yet not∣withstanding, I called to my remembraunce, that onely you among the rest, in so huge an hoaste, gaue me your assent, and I againe with you was not at disagréement: and that we twaine alone did behode and sée, what mischiefe and in∣conuenience was in that warre, in the which, peace being ex∣cluded and dipossessed of place, the victorie it selfe woulde proue most bytter and cruell: which, if you had béene conque∣red, had wrought your vtter destruction, or if you had tri∣umphed, had brought you Bicause of the malape arrogancie of Pompeius his complices. in slaueishe subiection. Where∣fore I, whome men, both of courage and wisedome, reported to be When I pre∣ferred most wrongfull peace, before most rightful warre. timorous and fearefull, Domitus I meane and Len∣tulus, (I was so indéede: fearing least those thinges shoulde chaunce▪ which afterwardes came to passe) am nothing so af∣fected, but rather couragious, and readie furnished against all manner of misfortunes. When any thing appeared vn∣to me in possibilitie of preuention and auoydance, then it grieued me at the heart, if it were neglected. But nowe, that all thinges are turned vpside downe, sithence counsell coulde not preuayle, one refuge yet remaineth, that is, pa∣tiently to suffer what so euer lucke allotteth: principally
for this cause, sithence of all things whatsoeuer, death i the conclusion: and of this I am fully persuaded in conscience, that so long as I might, I tendered the dignitie of the commō wealth, and when that suffered shipwracke, my will wanted not to prouide for the safetie of the same. Thus much haue I written, not to giue euidence of my selfe: but that you, who in mynde, heart, wil, consent, and iudgement, are al one with me, should none otherwise conceiue. For it is the most soue∣reigne comfort in the world, that a man call to memorie his vpright and iust conscience, notwithstanding the successe of things be not answerable. And I would to God, that time might once chaunce, wherein we might sée and inioy one or o∣ther state of a weale publique, and that we twaine might méete and conferre of our diers distresses, which euen then we susteined, whē we were thought faintharted, bicause we did prognosticate and foretell that the self same things which are come to passe, should chaunce in tract of time. As for you, and yours whatsoeuer, I assure you of this, that there is no∣thing whereof you shoulde stande in feare, otherwise then chaunceth to the whole body of the common wealth. And as for me, so thinke of me, and so take me, that to the vttermost of my might, I am your present friend, both for the safetie of your selfe, and your children, withall my hart. Fare you well. Cicero to Domitio. THE ARGVMENT. Hee desiereth Domitius lamenting the death of his riendes, to haue consideration of his owne estate, sithence the common wealth is not vnsatisfied. MY will was not withdrawne from writing vnto you, af∣ter your comming into Italie, bycause I receiued no letters from you, but bycause I my selfe being destitute of al things, had nothing left whereof to make you promise ney∣ther was I able in such lacke of counsell to deale with you by way of persuasion, nor yet to minister vnto you  of
comfort, in so great and manifold e miseries. Although these things are neuer a whit the better, but so muche the worsse that they are méere desperate: yet had I rather that my let∣ters should stande voyde and waste, then not to write at all. If I did vnderstand that you tooke vpon you a greater charge in the behalfe of the common wealth, then you are able to cō∣passe and perfourme: yet notwithstanding, I would counsel you by all the circumstances that I might, to that condition of liuing which should be offered and allotted. As thogh the battel fought at Pharsalia wer his whole port and coū∣tenance by the wil of fortune But séeing you make that the scope and ende of your good determina∣tion, and valliaunt attempt, whiche Fortune her selfe hath appointed to be the limittes and boundes of all our labours and enterprises: I request you, I desire you, I praye you, and heartily beséech you for our olde familiarities sake, and aun∣cient acquaintance, and for the great good will which I beare you, and you likewise me in equal proportion and measure of faithfull friendship, that you wil not neglect the saegarde o your own life, which we wishe to be prolonged for our com∣fort, the ioy of your parents, your wife, and all yours whoso∣euer, to whom you are at this present, & alwayes haue bene, best beloued: let your mynde be touched with due considera∣tion towards your owne health, and the health of all such as depend vpon you, taking you for their supporter, and princi∣pall proppe of their preseruation. Use the benefite of those things, at this instant, which you haue learned in times past, and wherein you haue, from your yong yeares, bene trayned and instructed, by men of singular knowledge, learning, wis∣dome and iudgement: which also you haue imprinted in the tables of your remembrance, and ingrauen in the plates of your déep vnderstanding. For end, satisfie the desires of those your special riends, whom entier loue hath lincked, and ma∣ny old testimonies of courtesies haue knit close vnto you, For we can not chose but be greued: ne∣uerthelesse we can ouercome our griefe by valliantnese. if not with a willing and toward, yet with a couragious heart, and a stout stomach. As for my selfe, I wot not what I may doe, or rather I perceiue hat I can not  mch: nenerthe∣lesse, thus farre will I  in promise, that whatsoeuer I   , and conuenient, both for your safetie,
and also for your dignitie, shal be labored in, wt as much care∣fulnesse and diligence on my behalfe, as euer you employed in the furtherance of my matters. Of this my wil, leaning wholy vpon you, I haue made report to your mother, a nota∣ble Gentlewoman (no dout) & such a one as loueth you excée∣dingly. If you write vnto me touching any thing▪ I wil ther∣in bestow mine indeuour: as I shal know it best agréeable to your desire: and thoughe you write but little: yet notwith∣standing, whatsoeuer in mine opinion shall be necessarie and expedient for you, my trauell therein shall not be neglected, nor my diligence denied. Fare you well. Cicero to Cassio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. In this Epistle he inueyeth against Anthonie, and his confederates. YOur friende Anthonie, kindleth coles offurious outrage continually, and maketh no intermission. First he hath caused this title to be written in the standing image which he hath set in y• Oratorie pulpit. PARENTI OPTIME MERITO. To the best deseruing father of his countrie: so that you are not only iudged manquellers, but also murtherers of your affinitie: what say I, that you are so iudged? nay rather that we are so termed: For that madde beast auoucheth, that I was the Prince and ringleader of that your noble and com∣mendable déede. Brutus and Cassius did not commu∣nicate their counsel in kil lig Caesar, with Cicero. Plutarch. I would to God my fortune had béene so happie: then had not he béene so combersome vnto vs. But it was your déede, ful of manhood and prówesse: in which, for so muche as it is past, I woulde I were able to giue you any counsell. But. I can not deuise, what I may doe for myselfe. For, what other remedie doth remaine, but that force fight against force▪ and violence struggle with violence? Thi is the purpose and meaning of them all, in generall: not to stay, till they haue procured the slaughter of Caesar. Wherfore▪ he being brought into a solemne assembly and conuent by A Tribune of the people, who wa after wardes slaine of Octauian. Ca∣nutiús, before the sixte day of the Nones of October, de∣parted away very cowardly and filthily: howbeit e vttered
those things, cōcerning the defenders and preseruers of their countrie, which should haue béene applyed to traytours and rebels of the common wealth. And touching me, he spake not very doubtfully, when he saide, that whatsoeuer you had at∣tempted, or Canutus put in practise, issued altogether from my counsell and procurement. Now by this little crop, iudge you of the whole lumpe, & how they are intended in other ca∣ses, suppose you by this cirumstāce, in y• they spoyled & rob∣bed your embasador of his purueyance. What, thinke you, is their meaning, when they venture so farre? and spare not to set a broche such an enterprise? To be carried to a sworne e∣nimie: O extreame miserie. We could not abide to haue a Lord rule ouer vs, and we are in subiection to a fellowe ser∣uant. Howbeit, hope resteth in your Of tentimes testified, but specially a∣gainst the Pa thians. puisaunce and noble∣nesse, euen now, wherof I trauell in affection, rather then in confidence. But where be your souldiers? As touching that which remaineth, I would haue you conferre wt your owne conscience, and not to séeke so muche after the knowledge of our sayings. Fare you well. Cicero to Trebatio. THE ARGVMENT. He seemeth to commend Trebatius, a a wise man, whiles he did a∣uoyde the inconueniences of warre. But in deede he noteth him for a timorous coward. Somewhat he writeth of Octauius, & of Trebatius his riches, and hautinesse, pleasantly IN the conclusion of the tragedie, called THE TROYAN HORSE, you know this sentence is vsurped, Sero sapiunt, Wise with had I wist. But you, old suersbée Bycause your desire is to medle with war in no case, wherein you shewe your self a wisemā. are not wise too late. First I haue to signifie vnto you, that I receiued your letters, which sauoured somwhat of madnesse, and also of fol∣lie. Furthermore, in that you shew not your selfe very desie∣rous to sée Britannie, I reproue not your wisdome. And now me thinkes, you are at ease in your Inne, and therefore you passe not how litle you be combred. To be circumspect and wise in all respectes, is a well whetted weapon. I I vsed to suppe often abroade, I woulde neuer be out of the company o Cne. Octauius, youre familiar , vnto whome,
when he hath bidden me as a guest to take part of his chéere, I haue cast out this language, He noteth the basenesse of the man. I pray, Syr, who are you? but (by my fayth and honestie) to speake in good sadnesse. The man is verie pleasant and honest. I would you had brought him away with you. Let me be fully certified what you do, and whether it be your determination to come to Itali this Winter, or no. Balbus infourmd me of a certaintie, that you were like to proue very riche and wealthy. But whither his meaning was after the Romane manner, or after the Stoicall sort Or, that may vse and enioye the ple sures and pro∣fites of heauē and . (who hold opinion that he is wel monied & ful of substance, that enioyeth the benefits of heauen and earth) hereafter I shall haue triall. Such as come hether, from the place where you abide, accuse you of pride and hautinesse, bi∣cause you will not vouchsafe to make them answere that craue your counsell. Neuerthelesse, you haue occasion to be glad. For it is commonly knowne among all men, that there is not a more cunning and skilfull lawyer then you in Sama∣robrina. Fare you well. Cicero to Cornificio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He excuseth him selfe for seldome writing▪ commendeth the p∣dence, wisedome, grauitie, and sobernesse of Cornificius: accuseth the present state of the common wealth, with a purgation in Cae∣sars behalfe. TO that whiche was the last point and conclusion in your Epistle, I answere firste, and make it the beginning of my letter. For I haue marked and obserued, that you great Rhetoricians and famous Oratours, vsurpe the same order otherwhiles. You require my letters, which I neuer failed to send, whēsoeuer I was informed of any that made passage that way. In that I gather by the scope of your letters, that you wil not attempt, nor determine vpon any thing of a cer∣taintie, before you had vnderstanding, howe farre foorth that felow (I wot not what he is) Caerilius Bassus wold presume:
my hope and confidence inclined that way, by reason of your policie which put me in comfort, & the grauitie of your style in writing, which discharged me of despaire. My earnest re∣quest vnto you, is, that you would write as often as may be, to the intent that I may be resolued what you doe, & what o∣ther do, and also what you are purposed hereafter to take in hand. And, although I was sorie at my hart for your depar∣ting from me: yet notwithstanding I restored my selfe with consolation at the same instant, both bicause I thought thus in my mind: He shal go where he shal be at peace, quietnesse, rest & tranquillitie, & shal be deliuered from matters of great importance, which desire present attendaunce: albeit the con∣trarie chaunced, in both respects. For there, where you be, war & tumult   here where I am, peace began to flou∣rish, but such a kinde of peace, wherin if you had ben conuer∣sant, many things would not haue ben to your liking, & yet the selfe same wherewith Caesar him selfe, is not well plea∣sed. But suche be the endes of ciuil warres and commotions, that those things only, which the conquerour wold, are not accomplished: but that their desirs also, by whose helpe the victorie was obteined, must be satisfied. I am so confirmed in minde, &, as it were, so hardned, that I was wel contented to be a beholder of Plancus But sa whom Cae∣sar restored. Plancus, & a hearer of Laberius & Publius their poesies in Caesars shewes & pageants. Knowe you thus much, that I stand in néede of nothing so much, as I do of one with whom I may haue familiar cōmunication, and learned laughter: & you shal be the man, if you come quickly, which that you do, I thinke for me profitable, and for your selfe not incommodious. Fare you well. Cicero to Culleolo. THE ARGVMENT. He giueth thanks in his owne & Pompeius name, for the great c∣tesie shewed to , and commendeth him vpon occasion. WHatsoeuer you haue done in L. Lucceius his behalfe, I would haue you wel assured, is done to the comoditie
and furtheraunce of a well disposed person, and suche a one whome insolence can not make vnthankfull: yea, that which you haue done I my self account worthy acceptation and re∣course of dutie: besides that, Pompeius, so often as he setteth eye on me, (which is not seldome) giueth you singular than∣kes. Thus much more also I adde, wherof, I am certain you will conceiue principal pleasure, that by your benignitie and friendly vsage towards Lucceius, I felt my selfe very ioyful∣ly affected. Nowe to that which remaineth, although I mi∣strust not, but you will continue in the selfe same your accu∣stomed liberalitie, at this time for your owne constanie, as heretofore for my sake: yet notwithstanding, mine earnest request vnto you, is, that what so euer you haue shewed in the beginning, and haue also indeuoured to procéede, you would employ your wil and labour, that to the end if may be augmēted, increased, & inlarged. Which if you doe, both Luc ceius & Pompeius shall wel accept your courtesse, & you shall leaue with them a principal pledg of your merits, thus much I auouch and do able. Touching the common wealth, of these matters, and our meaning, I wrote vnto you diligently, a fewe dayes agone, and those letters deliuered I to your ser∣uants. Fare you well. Cicero to Ampio Balbo. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He signifieth in writing, with what re he is touched, towardes the safetie of Ampius being in exile and banishment: whome he comforteth, and commaundeth to rest in hope. COncerning It is peraduē ture the same A. Bal. to whō he writeth in the 3. Epi. li. 1. & 13. Epi. li. 6. the care which I conceiue for your preser∣uation and safegard, the letters of diuers of your friends haue giuen you information: whome I haue satisfied to the vttermost, as I am well assured. Neither do I giue ground vnto them, as though there were imperfections in my frend∣shippe, albeit their beneuolence towardes you be singular,
that therefore they are more desierous of your safetie and welfare then I. But they must, of necessitie, giue place vn∣to me, as one more able to doe you a pleasure, at this present then they. Whiche thing I haue not neglected to doe in your behalfe, neyther will I fayle to be your furtherer, and I haue done so alreadie, in a matter of great importaunce, hauing a regarde to lay the foundation and groundworke of your safetie and life. Sée that you be of good courage, and of a valliaunt spirite, making due account of my helpe and as∣sistance in all things whatsoeuer. The day before the Nones of Iulie. Fare you well. Cicero to Torquato. THE ARGVMENT. He comforteth Torquatus, who stacke to Pompeius his side, in this, bicause he was not at Rome: and ministeth vnto him some hope of returne. ALthoughe He comfor∣teth him by the common condition of all men. such be the present troubls and turmoyles, that nothing is left in iust square, but euery man repen∣teth him of his state and condition: & that there is none which had not rather be any where else, then where he now is resi∣dent and abiding: yet doubt not I, but that to a good and an honest man, it would be most wretched and lamentable to be in Rome, at this present▪ For, though in what place soeuer a man remaine, the sorrowe and griefe is al one which spring∣eth from the ruine and ouerthrowe of thinges Touching a mans owne selfe, and his natiue contry. priuate and publique: yet doe the eyes, in beholding desolate disorder and confusson, kindle the more anguishe, whiche sée and viewe those thinges, that others heare by reporte, in so muche that they can not, for their liues, but suffer the bloudie butcherie of miserable cogitations. Wherefore, al∣though you sustaine the sting of man a vehement desire, as it is needefull : yet would I haue you to exonerate and vn∣loade your mynde of that sorrowe, wherewith I heare▪ you
are most consumed, that is, bycause you are absent from the citie of Rome. For although you are touched with an earnest affection to sée your friends & your goods: yet, those thinges, which so ardently you require, continue in their owne state: neyther could they waxe better if you were present, neither in perill to be worsse, nowe that you are absent. You ought not, whē your mind is occupied in the  of you priuate matters, to craue ome seuerall and singular condi∣tion of countenaunce, or refuse to take part of that fortune which is common to many. And as for your owne person▪ my Torquatus, such ought your thoughtes and cogitations to be, that desperation ingender no impediment, nor timorousness any hinderance to your consultations and purposes. For nei∣ther he, which shewed him self against you more vniust and iniurious, then your dignitie deserued, hath giuen you a∣ny great signes and tokens of a spirit not appeased: neither is he fully resolued touching your safetie, of whom safetie by petition is desired. And for so muche as, The euent, successe, and end of war, is vncertaine: the victory on the ▪From the person of Cae∣sar. one side, so farre as I sée, can not be to your preiudice and annoyance, bi∣cause it inclineth not to the destruction of any: & From the person of . as for the victory on the other de, I am certainly persuaded, you your self haue not mistrusted nor eared. It remayneth, that one thing among all the rest, much molest and vexe you, which I count a kinde of consolation, and that is the hassare o the whole common wealth, against which oule mischiefe and in∣conueniēce, although many learned men make many words, I feare me no soueeine emedie can be found, saue that only and alone, which is so great, as there i in mens minds forti∣tude and courage, & in their handes valliantnesse & strength. For i so be that, To thinke well, and do no worsse, be mean sufficient to attaine a blessed life, then is it a false and wrong full speach (in mine opinion and fantase) to say, that such a man is miserable, whom conscience for his wise  and vertuou purposes, stdfastly suppor. Neyther dyd wée (a I thinke) being ledde with the re∣wardes o victorie, leaue our countey in tynie paste, our
children, kindred, ad all that we were worth: But A good man doth nothing vpon hope, but followeth his duetie. a cer∣taine duetie o , petie, reuerence, and loe, due and payable to the weale pblique, and not imprtinent to or dignitie and : whose myndes were not so rob∣bed of reason, and subiect to madnesse, when we did as we did, but the eent of the victorie was manifest vnto vs. Wherefore, if that be come to passe, whithe we counte likely for to chaunce, at the very entraunce into our cause: we ught not to be faintharted nowe and fall into diffidence, as though som thing which we thought impossible to be done had appened. Let vs therefore be of that persuasion and iudgement, which reason prescribeth, and trueth deciphereth that Whatsoeuer we attempt in the course of our life, blame may be auoyded: which if we doe want, we may suffer all mutations and chaunges, incident to this mortalitie, with patience and moderation. This talke of mine is vttered to this ende, that we may fixe our heartes vppon this firme foundation of comfort, that Vertue is of sufficient abilitie to beare vp her selfe, when all things else runne to ruine, perish, and come to nought. But if there be any state wherin is communitie, you shall not want it, Torquatus, whatsoeuer it be. As I was penning this letter vnto you, I remembred how you were wont to accuse my In Pompeius his cause. desperate dealing, or ra∣ther my wauering and mistrusting mynde, whome you vn∣dertooke to harten with your countenaunce, and with your athoritie to incourage. At whiche time vndoubtedly, I did not so much mislike our cause, as I disalwed ur ounsell. For I perceiued that we were wise too late, in makg resi∣stance against that power, When we▪ made an  to Cae∣sar of Gallia or the space of fiue whole yeares. whiche we long befor had con∣firmed. And then I added moreouer, that in defnce of pen right, and suppssing ofwrong, we tooke vs to the speare, the shielde, & the sword, a for our counsels and authoritis they lay still vntouched.  did I prophese vpn those thin∣ges which came to passe, when I sayde they wolde chaunce in time: But I did eare, leaste that should come to passe, wherein was muche likelyhoode, and whiche I sawe verie hutfull and daungerous, if it grewe to perfection: specilly,
if I might Of Caesar victorie. promise that, with certaintie to fall out herea∣ter, which hath some assured successe, if in that behale pro∣mise might be made. For in those thinges did we most excell and preuaile, which in open field are not broached, nor vsed: as for warre and weapons, we were farre inferiour in force, and also muche weaker. But let your mynde be of the same disposition, I beséeche▪ you, and take vnto you the like coura∣gious stomache, as you thought it behoued me to testife in time of necessitie. These thinges haue I written to that end and purpose, bycause your friende Philargyrus reported vnto me your whole estate, not omitting any circumstaunce, with a most faythfull and honest heart, as I supposed, when I was inquisitiue to knowe your condition: adding moreouer, that you are wont sometimes, to be in subiection to vehe∣ment passions, and to shewe your selfe racked with wonder∣ull carefulnesse: whiche you ought not to doe, nor yet so much as once to mistrust and dout, for that your Mning that in time to come, hee was in likelyhood to come to gret dignitie and promotiō haruest is in hope hereafter, in one common wealth or other: Or else, if the state of the weale publique be so sore assaulted, that it sustaine, nt onely ruine temporall, but also vtter suppressi∣on: yet despaire not you, eyther of your state present, or o that which is to come: for your miseries shall not surmount the miseries of the rest, but euen as they are afflicted: so shall you be molested. As for this time of perilous tu∣multe, wherein we liue, the inconueniences whereof con∣sume the courage of vs all, as it were a running cancker, and kéepeth our myndes in wauering suspension, you must su∣fer without heart griefe, at least, with griefe not drowned in extremitie, but seasoned with moderation and indifferencie: bicause your conuersation and course of life, is in that Athens Epi. lib. 6. citie, where Ladie Reason was not onely borne and begotten, but also fed and fostered: and a measurable trade of lyfe, in like manner, mainteined. Besides that, you haue Gouernour of Achaia. Epi. 4. lib. 4. &. Epi. 6. lib. 6. Ser. Slpicius for your comforter, whome you haue alwayes tendered with equall proportion of kyndnesse, a your owne selfe, whose good will is in a readinesse, and whose wisedome neuer vn∣prepared, to instill swéete droppes of consolation, into your
heart wouded with anguishe: whose authoritie if we had not disanulled, nor reied his Fo he gaue vs counsell in no wise to in∣termedle with ciuil warre. Epi. 4. lib. 4. aduisement, we had béen ra∣ther in power of the gracious scepter, then vnder force of the rauening sworde: in the dominion of For in time of peace, the Romanes cō∣monly dyd weare gounes a long gownd magi∣strate, then in subiction to the viory of an harnssed war∣riour. But these things haue béene told with more tedious∣nesse, then peraduenture  rquired. I haue no friende in all the worlde, t whome I owe more seruice and duetie of courtesie, then vnto your person: And as for those Gentlemen, to whose goodnesse I am no lesse in debt, then you doe vndersande, the mischiefous chaunce of this blou∣die warre, hath deuoured them all, and by that meanes am I quite dispossessed. As for my present estate, Namely, in no authoritie or estimation. what I am, and of what account at this time. I am not ignoraunt. But For so much as there is no man o ourged with calamities, that may not attempt somwhat in his owne ehalf, and take tryall to the vttermost; i hi mynde be inlined and proane to nothing else but vnto that whiche he hath in hande: I would haue you make ful reckoning of al my counsel, of all my labor, of all my loue, & what so euer else is incident to ho∣nestie and faythfulnesse, not to be yours onely, but your chil∣dren also, at Or, to bee owing as due debt▪ and de∣maundable: bicause hee hath made pro mise▪ to Tor∣quatus to doe something for im and hi. commaundement and seruice. Fare you well. Cicero to Metello. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He being in exill and banishment▪ craueth the good will helpe and assistance of Meellus, bearing at the same tme the office of th honourable Conship. THE letters o my brother , and of T Pom∣ ponius my verie friende,  vnto me suche▪ greate boundant hope, and plentifull confidnce, that no less ay
concerning me now in erile, then assistance in your P. Lentulus who was ear∣nest with the Senate for Ci∣ceroqs restitu∣tion. fellow officer séemed to consist. Wherefore putting off all procrasti∣nation and delayes, I sent my letters vnto you, whereby, as my hard fortune and vnhappie lucke required, I haue both acknowledged the dutie of one not vnthankfull, and hae, in consideration of the residue of the time, presumed to craue your friendly furtheraunce. After this, not only the letters of my good and louing fauourers, but the report of diuers passingers, whose iourney lay through these quarters, sig∣nified vnto me, your constant mynde and vnchaungeable affection. Whiche thing wrought in me such a conceit, and bred suche an imagination in my heart, that I durst not be so bolde, as to molest and trouble you with my néede∣lesse Epistles. And nowe Quinctus my brother, sent me the summe of that Oration tempered with Bicause Me∣llus was his aduersarie be∣fore. muche myldnesse, and maruellous clemencie, which you in my behalfe made in the audience of the Senate with great solemnitie, and he ex∣emplified, that I might not be ignorant: in perufing wherof, I felt such inwarde motions, and passions of spirite, that I could not, but of méere compulsion, write somwhat to so good a Gentleman: and I desire you earnestly, and beséeche you humbly, so farre foorth as your will may suffer, that you would rather tender my life and the safetie of your frientes, then withstand and resist me, to please the arrogant crueltie of Meaning such as did ayde Clodiu: for in the: 4. booke Ad At∣ticum, and the 3. Epistle, this Metellus is called the bro ther of Publi∣us Clodius, who was eni∣mie to Ciro person. You haue vanquished and quite suppressed the rage of your own anger & conceiued hatred, for the benefite of the weale publique: and will you be drawne by other mens maliciousnesse, to bend and fortifie your power, to the annoyance of the common wealth? Now, if, of your clemencie and goodnesse, you will vouchsafe me your supportation and assistance, I protest vnfainedly, and promise religiously, that I will be wholy in your iurisdiction & at commandement. But if it be not permitted nor thought lawfull, that eyther a The Consul P. Lentulus, most willing to see to Cice∣ro his safetie. magistrate rescue me, the Senate succor me, or the people  ,  of that  which hath ouer come me and the cōmon wealth I wish you to be circumspect and well aduised▪ least when you woulde
so he that might haue béene preserued, shall be sequstred from that commoditie. Fare you well. Cicero to Antonio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee chargeth Anthonie with dissolutenesse in duetie: casteth in his dish the ingratitude of his nature, and commendeth vnto him a certaine Gentleman named Atticus. ALthough my determination was, It is maruel that he would write to such a gouernour whose vsage in the pro∣uince wher he ruled wa sa∣ultie & blame worthy: as Dio, Obse∣quens, in Epi∣tome Liuiana report. not only to vse an in∣termission of writing, but also to stay my pen vtterly frō initing letters vnto your highnesse, (commendatorie Epi∣stles excepted:) not bicause I knewe of certaintie, that they were of force and vertue sufficient with your person: but least I shoulde offer suspicion to them, at whose request I I refused not to write, somewhat to be derogated from our familiatie, and  wonted acquaintance to be dimini∣shed. Howbeit, whē T. Pomponius, one that is not ignorant of mine affection towardes you, and of my dutifulnesse per∣fectly insirueted, bearing you heartie goodwil, and not enuy∣ing vs, prepared his iourney to the place of your abiding, I thought it necessarie to write somwhat, He signifi∣eth that hee wrote against his will. specially, for that I perceiued Pomponius woulde not otherwise be answered. If the courtesie which I exact of you, were beyond all credit, and the recourse of benefites whiche I demaund did excéede, yet ought no man to wonder as though I were importune, nor fall into admiration as though I were impudent. For what is there whiche tendet, eyther For store & plentie of mat ter, this place is to be confer ted with that whiche is set downe Epi. 8. lib. 5. to your profite, For store & plentie of mat ter, this place is to be confer ted with that whiche is set downe Epi. 8. lib. 5. to your honour, and For store & plentie of mat ter, this place is to be confer ted with that whiche is set downe Epi. 8. lib. 5. to your rendune, that hath not had issue from the liberall and franke disposition of my nature? all which thinges notwithstanding, haue procured me so small aduauntage, that you are the man whiche haue made me no recompence: your self are an approuable witnesse. Contrari∣wise, that from you towardes me something hath proceeded, I haue, by the reportes of many, indeede reced: for that I
haue had trial and experience, I dare not seeme so presump∣tious, as boldly to affirme, least (peraduenture) I should vpbraide you with that Of an vn∣thankfull fel∣low, or a beast vworthy of any benefite. vncourteous terme, which you are wont, as the voyce goeth, to dse in my discredite without de∣sart. But touching those things which are reported vnto me, I had rather you shoulde vnderstand them at the mouth of Pomponius, to whom they were troublesome in semblable measure and proportion: then attaine the knowledge of thē by the meanes of my letters. Concerning mine owne mynd, with what singular courtesie, and especiall dutie, it hath ben towards you inclined: as wel the honourable Senate, as al∣so the people of Rome can giue suffient testimonie: and as for your owne person, you may consider with your selfe thus much▪ that with me you haue bin in great credite, and accep∣tation: for which my humanitie and gentlenesse, how déepe a debter you are vnto me, I refuse not the iudgement of o∣ther men, to take true trial. Whatsoeuer I haue attempted in times past, to do you good, & for your benefit also accompli∣shed, I was drawn and allured ther vnto through the liberal disposition of my wil, & afterwards by my constancie, & vna∣riablenesse: But as for those matters which The iudge∣ment whiche proceeded a∣gainst Antho∣nie, M. Coelius being his ac∣cuer: in the which iudge∣ment, Cicero defended An∣thonie. remaine, they desire, beléeue me, my furtherāce the more earnestly, greater grauitie, & no litle labour. Which I am content to sustaine and take vpō me to the vttermost of my power; if I may pr∣ceiue that my trauell is not fruitlesse, nor my good will fru∣strate: But if ingratitude be the pension of my beneuolence, and securitie the recompence of my courtesie, I wil not wade so farre in follie, that you for my gentlenesse account me no better then mad and lunatike, what I meane, & what maner of matter I make  of so , you may vnderstand of Pomponius: whom I do so commnd vnto your highnesse, that, although I mistrust not your goodnesse to his furtherāce by all meanes , yet not withstanding, I presume vpon you with one petition, y• if there remaine in your mynde any marke or token, of my loue towards your person, you would expresse y• same in Pomponius behalf: then which you n do nothing vnto me more acceptable. Fare you well.
Bithynicus to Cicero. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He maketh a secrete way and entrance to his petition and request, by calling to remembraunce the mutuall loue which was betweene him and Cicero: the sme of his request is, that hee would put his friendship in practise to defende him whiles hee is absent, for so much as there is no doubt, but what so euer he doth, is in hop to be considered and recompenced. IF the causes of our friendship were not manifold, & groun∣ded vpon iustice, and conscience, I would make a rehearsal of the first beginnings, and (as I may say) the séedes or blos∣somes of the same, from our progenitours & parents. Which thing they ought to attempt, in my thinking, that haue had an eye to the acquaintance and familiaritie of their fathers, but haue not sealed the same with the signets of their owne courtebus behauiour, and liberall disposition, in friendly du∣ulnesse. Wherefore, I will holde my selfe satisfied with our priuate friendship, and therein shewe that I am well contented: vpon hope and affiance whereof, I presume to be your petitioner, and the summe of my request is this, that in myne absence, it would please you to be my present tutor and deender, in all cases, states, suites, and controuersies depen∣ding vpon necessitie, if you are of opinion, that no part or portion of your welwilling and well doing to me, should lye The latine worde is ap∣plyed to such as haue the fal ling sicknesse, who are sayde (whiles they are in their a∣gonie and pas sion) to be nei ther aliue nor deade. fainting betwéene life and death, that is, neyther forgotten nor vnremembred. Fare you well. Cicero to Bithynico. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He declareth with what a feruent desire of leading his life with Bithy nico, hee is inflamed and kindled: and professeth that he loueth him as dearely as one friende can loue another, with all sinceri∣tie and perfectnesse.
I Desire This letter was sent to Q. Pompei us Bthy nicus of whom Tul lie maketh menciō in his booke of no∣table and fa∣mous orators he was named Bithynicus, of Bithynia a place which he subdued, after the re∣port of Festus for many considerations, that yet at the length the common wealth might be restored to tranquillitie, and set frée from all tumultes and cruell insurrections: yea for this I wish to se that gratious time, trust my words, that I may be the more earnest to challenge interest in your promise, which in your letters vnto me directed, is eppessed. For the contentes and argument of your Epistle, is, that if thinges might growe to that issue, you woulde leade your life in my companie. Moste acceptable vnto me, is the honest inclination of your will, and your doings differ not from the kinde of acquaintaunce, nor yet seeme to be at disagréement with your fathers iudgement and opinion (who was a man of great countenaunce and reputation) concerning me. For let this be the groundworke and absolute building of your hope, that in greatnesse of Which you haue receiued of Caesars friends and assistants. benefites, they, which at times preuailed, or may yet beare away the best, are nearer vn∣to you then I: but in friendship, goodwill, and mutuall loue, no man my match or equall. Wherefore, as well the memo∣rie of our acquaintance and societie, in you remaining, to me is most acceptable: and the towardnesse of your will to in∣large and establish the same, very approuable. Fare you wel. Cicero to Pompeio. THE ARGVMENT. In this Epistle is contained an expostulation or reasoning▪ why Pom peius did not so much as vochsafe to sende him a gratulatorie letter, that is, an Epistle of thankes, sithence the weightinese of suche a matter as the beating downe of Catilines conspiracie, de∣serued some duetie. IF you and your armie be in health, it is well. The pleasure which I, together with al y• rest, did reape The ware against Mi∣thridates be∣ing finished. in reading your letters, that you sent openly to be knowne, was incredible, & excéeding all beliefe. For therein you declared so great hope of ease and quietnesse, as I promised to all men, vpon confi∣dence of your priuate person, the onely procurement of my
bolde presumption. But thus muche vnderstande you: your olde aduersaries, nowe your newe friendes, are not only ve∣hemently astonished with your epistle, but being quite spoy∣led of the great affiance wherevnto they trusted, are vtterly discomforted. Concerning that letter, which was directed and sent vnto me, although therein but a bare argument and a naked signification of your will towardes me was com∣prehended: yet notwithstanding, that it was pleasaunt and delectable vnto me, I woulde not haue you ignoraunt. For euerie man doth, of custome, reioyce in nothing so much, as in the certaine and assured knowledge of his friendly ser∣uice, and dutifull pointes of courtesie. So my conscience, in that respect, ministreth vnto me plentifull delectation. Which benefites, Hee doth quip Pompei∣us as vnmind∣full of a bene∣fite receiued. if they be not an one time or other, satis∣fied with semblable recourse of seruice, and mutual humani∣tie, I am well contented, that further tokens of friendly v∣sage, in me lye still at quiet. Of this one thing I doubt not, but that, if For Cicero made an Ora∣tion pro Lege Manilia, con∣cerning the putting of him in charge with the Mithrida∣ticall warre. those thinges which I haue attempted, to doe you good, had purchased but indifferent curtesie on your part the cōmon welth wold soone set vs in attonement, & establish mutuall good will betwéene vs both. But least it shoulde not be manifest vnto you, what I desire to be done in your letters I will write openly and plainely, as, both my nature mo∣ueth, and our friendship craueth. Such things haue I com∣passed, & brought to perfection, as deserue, (partly for our fa∣miliarities sake, and partly for the common wealthes cause) some courteous and thankful point of dutie, in writing to be testified: which I imagine to haue béene of you pretermitted, through a certaine feare to offend, least you might be thought to doe contrarie to the mynde of As Crassus or Caesar, who thought that the conspirers were not to be killed. one man or other. But be you hereof well persuaded, that whatsoeuer we haue done for the safetie and preseruation of the weale publique, the same, by the iudgement of the world vniuersall is allowed, and by common testimonie approued: whiche, at your com∣ming Namelie, to the famous ci∣tie of Rome. hether, you shall vnderstāde, in such order to haue ben wrought, not only with much wisedome, but also with great courage and stoutnesse of stomach, that with you, a muche
greater friend thē was For Scipio Africanus, and  were  friendes. Africanus: I, not much inferiour to For Scipio Africanus, and  were  friendes. Lelius, shall gladly be knit and vnited, as well in affaires touching the common wealth, as also in faithfull loue and sound friendship. Fare you well. Cicero to Furfano. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle is not brought into so notable an abridgement, as it ser ueth for a perfect patterne or example of commendation. SO great was mine acquaintance and familiaritie with A. Caecina, that betwéene two friendes, greater could not be established. From the auncientnesse of friendship. For we vsed the companie of his father very much, a man of singular noblenesse, & speciall valliauntnesse. And I haue so loued Caecina. him from his childhoode, From the causes of frend ship. both for the great hope of honestie which in his nature appeared, and his excellent eloquence: and also for that he hath ben conuersant with me a great portion of his time, as well in exercises of friendly behauiour, as also From sem∣blance of de∣sires and stu∣dies. in desires, studies, & dispositions common to vs both, that I would not wish to leade my lyfe with any man From mutu all good will. more familiarly and louingly. How necessa∣rie it is therefore, that I sée to his safetie, and haue a regards to the protection and défence of his credite, in what things so euer, to the vttermost of mine abilitie, you may, by the sum of this letter, be resolued. It remaineth, that From the cause of com∣mendation. when I haue attained the knowledge of this by many circumstances, how your minde is affected, touching the estate of good men and vertuously disposed, and also what your meaning and intent is, concerning the calamities of the common wealth, that I request nothing at your handes, but that through the com∣mendation of my letters, your will may leane and incline as much to Caecina (which of your owne accorde without admo∣nition or constraint you are appliaunt to doe) for his furthe∣rāce, as I am assured how much you make of me your frend at commaundement. Then this I estéeme nothing more pre∣cious, on your part to be performed. Fare you well.
Cicero to Lepido. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He rebuketh Lepidus with much myldness, bicause he being ador∣ned and aduaunced to great honour by the consent of the Senate, neglected the duetie of giuing thankes for the same. Moreouer he exhorteth him, not to medle nor make with concluding peace betweene good citizens and mischiefous Antonie. AS the singular beneuolence, and perfect loue, whiche I beare you, kindled a great care in me for your honoura∣ble aduauncement, and noble titles of dignitie: so I am of∣fended at your dissolutenesse, in that you haue not, for suche worthy benefites, shewed your self thankful to so curteous a Senate: sithence, frō that order sprang your préeminence. I am right glad, & can not but reioice, that you are deerous to procute peace betwéene the citizens: which peace if you sepe∣rate from seruitude, and so bring to passe that it smell not of bondage, and slauish subiection, the common welth shal reape profite, and your renoune shall increase by your trauel. But if this peace be like to restore a Marcus An∣tonius, who in the warre at Mutina, was dispossessed. desperate and mercilesse villane to the possession of a mightie dominion: then vnder∣stand you▪ that all men are of this opinion and mynde, to pre∣fer deth before such a seruitude. Wherfore your doings shal be leuened with more wisedome, in my iudgement, if you in∣termedle not with such a mischiefous Against this peace he is marullous earnest in his Philippicis. peace making, which neither the Senate alloweth, nor the people well like off, nor any honest man doth commend. But these things shal be dis∣couered vnto you by other mens report▪ or else my letters shall certifie you of the same. In the meane space, accor∣ding to the measure of your knowledge, and proportion of your policie, attempt nothing, but that whiche can not be a∣mended. See to it, and Fare you well.
Cicero to Torquato. THE ARGVMENT. His minde and will was to comfort Torquatus, but bicause he wan∣teth matter to kindle consolation, he layth that the medicine a∣gainst sorrowe and heauiesse, ought to bee a good and guilt∣lesle conscience. IN my former letters I haue béene somewhat large, not so muche for necessitie, as for beneuolence: this prouoked me, that did not moue me: Neither stoode your In suffering aduersiti with manhoode. vertue in néede of our incouragement and supportance: Neither was myne estate and condition suche, that I should offer seruice of com∣fort and consolation to another, being succourlesse my self, & therfore must I vse so much the more shortnesse at this pre∣sent. For whether I néeded not vse many words then or no, I sée no more cause why I should be long nowe: or whether I thought it necessarie then, to let my lines rūne in number & length: yet that which I write now is sufficient, specially, séeing I haue no newes wherof to let you vnderstād. For al∣though one report or other sounded in our eares continually, touchingWhich are don in Spaine those things which I suppose are not from you cō∣cealed and kept in secrete: yet that is the summe, that is the end, scope, & marke of all, which I perceiue with my mind as manifestly, as we sée thē with our eyes externally. Neyther do I sée further in any circumstaunce then you, I am well as∣sured. For although, no man can gesse and coniecture, what endIn the fou∣ghten fielde at Pharsalia. the skirmish, or rather the conflict, is like to haue: yet notwithstanding, I sée both the ende of the battell, and, (if that be in doubt, yet this is most certaine, for so much as one of the twaine must preuaile of necessitie) Nmelie bloudy & cru ell. Epi. . &. 14 lib. 6. what manner of victorie this or that is like to proue: which when I view and sée, I perceiue such to be the state therof, that no mischiefe is in likelyhood to happen hereafter, if that may chaunce before, which is suspected and feared. For so to liue, as life seemeth lothsome, is a torment most miserable: and to be discharged
from feare by death, no wise man will terme wretchednesse: no not in him which is happie & fortunate. But in that Athens, whiche canne blase abroade wthe more bewtie of wor des & braue∣nesse of spea∣che, the wor∣thinesse of your persone, then I canne paincte out with the flo∣wers of mine Elloquence. ci∣tie is your abiding, wherein the very walles may séeme able enough to vtter these things, nay many more, and of greater excellencie. Thus much I warrant you of, my life for youres (though slender he the comfort which procéedeth from other mens miseries) that you are no whit now in the greater dan ger, then any of them which went their way frō war, or tar∣ried still by it, some resisting, & some again fearing him which ouercame. But this consolation is of no such efficacie, as that which I hope is of you vsurped, ánd óf me not vnfrequented. For I will not vexe and molest my mynde, so long as I lie, in any respect, since I knowe my selfe frée from ffence: and if I die, my care can not be great, in so much as I shall be de∣priued of all sense and féeling. But he carryeth He taketh vpō him wast & needele labour. Owles to Athens, which  his penne, in such pointes as to you are familiar. You, yours, and what so euer els toucheth you, are looked vnto of me with dayly diligence, and with speciall carefulnesse: neither will thy Cicero shew him selfe dissolute, whiles life indureth. Fare you well. Cicero to Oppio. ¶THE ARGVMENT. Being prepared to make a voyage into Graecia, hee committeth the charge and tuition of his whole estate to Oppius, prefixing an enumeration or rehearsall of such benefites as he had receiued. DOubting much in mynde, as our friende Whome he had certified oftentimes by letter of his determined voyage. Atticus doth knowe, of my whole purpose and preparation of this voy∣age, bycause many things offered them selues to my memo∣rie, whereby I was drawne into varietie of opinions, as vn∣certaine what to attempt: your counsell séemed vnto me a great supportation, to disburthen my mynde of suche a , and your iudgement most necessarie to confirme my wauering will. For your aduise by letter giuen, was most
manifest, wherein appeared, what you thought in this case: and Atticus also, made report vnto me of your wordes tou∣ching the same. I haue alwayes thought and accounted you, to be a man indued with excéeding He that gi∣ueth connsell must be wise and true. great wisdome, in mini∣string counsell, and adorned with that inestimable Iuell of faythfulnesse in giuing aduise: wherof I haue had principall experience, when I had recourse to your prudence, at suche time as ciuil cōmotions began to sparkle & kindle, as earnest to be instructed, what you supposed most profitable for me to take in hand, whether I were best to go to Pompeius, or tar∣rie stil in Italie. Your counsel in this case, was, that I should vse such prouidence, and deliberation in dealing, that my dig∣nitie, wherof I ought to haue a speciall consideration, might not be empaired, blemished, and stayned. Wherevpon I vn∣derstood your meaning, and haue, not only your fayth and ho∣nestie in admiration, but your religious and vpright dealing in gining counsell, in singular reuerence: bycause, when you perceiued the will of your Caius Cae∣sar, whome he followed in the ciuil war. most entier and best beloued friend leaning another way, yet did you not so much regard his meaning, as you made account of my profite. Mine affec∣tion hath inclined vnto you, long before this time present: and I am not ignorant of your kindnesse towardes me, alwayes testified by apparaunt tekens, both in mine absence when I was in horrible ieopardie: and also towardes mine, as I doe well remember, whome you defended, suoured, and main∣teined. Furthermore, after my returne, and repairing home, how familiarly you lead your life in my companie, and what I haue both thought concerning your goodnesse, and blased abroade touching your worship, all men, that marke and consider well of these matters, are able with their voy∣ces of agréement, to confirme our witnesse. You thou∣ght me your constant and faithful frend▪ although I  tooke part with Pompei∣us, and you stacke to Cae∣sars side. Your iudgement was grounded vpon great grauitie and singular assuraunce, which you gaue in commēdation of my faithfulnesse, and ad∣uauncement of my constancie, yea it séemed, that the persua∣sions wherwith you were moued, to rie my credite, were of speciall certaintie, sithence after the death and ouerthrowe of Caesar, you doubted not to commit your selfe wholy into our
friendship. Which opinion of yours, or rather iudgement, if I do not establishe with al beneuolence, courtesie, and duti∣fulnesse, I wil thinke my selfe no man, but a monster: As for you, frend Oppius, continue your kindnesse, and let your loue be inlarged, (although I write these words, rather for Reade the 17. Epi. of the 12. lib. a fa∣shion, then that I presume to giue you instructions) and take the tuition of all things that belong vnto me: which least you shoulde not incompasse with knowledge, I haue committed them to the credite of Atticus. And to conclude with mine owne selfe, looke for letters of more length, & fuller of lines, when I haue obteined a little leasure. Be carefull of your health, then which you can do nothing vnto me, your friende, more acceptable. Fare you well. Cicero to Matio. THE ARGVMENT. Matius made his complaint against Cicero, who charged and accu∣sed him to be an aduersarie to libertie. Cicero laboureth in his owne purgation, and that any such thing was of him committed, maketh flat denyall. IAm Cicero cal∣leth the selfe same Matius, a most lerned man, in his. 1 Epi. 7. lib. not yet sufficiently resolued, whether our Trebatius, a man full of courtesie, and one that loueth vs both excée∣dingly, ministred vnto me more molestation and trouble, then delectation and pleasure. For, when I came to my manour at Tusculanum, somwhat late in the euening, the next daye immediately following, early in the morning, his body being scare in perfect health and soundnesse, he repaired vnto me: whome after I had rebuked, bicause he spared not his sickly body, he vttered these wordes, that there was nothing in all the world wherof he was more deserous, then to viewe my countenance, and to enioy my companie. Herevpon commu∣nication árose, and I demaunded of him, what newes? then did he recite vnto me your complaint in order: wherevnto before I make answere in the purgation of myne owne per∣son, it shall not be a misse, nor impertinent to our present purpose, to make a preamble of certaine necessarie circum∣staunces. So farre foorth as I am of abilitie, to call thinges past to remembrance, there is no friend more neare vnto me,
then you, in consideration of An argumēt drawne from antiquitie or auncientnesse. auncientnesse. But in aunci∣entnesse there is somewhat common with the multitude, whiche from loue is exempted. I bare you good will, on the selfe same day wherein I first knewe you, and that your good An rgumēt from mutuall good will. will with a certaine recourse of kindnesse vnto me confyr∣med, was not weake, is manifest to my iudgement. Moreo∣uer, your departing from vs, whiche was so much the more grieuous and lesse tollerable, as it was tyed to diuturnitie & continuance, our Bicause they hunted after honors wher∣in ther is emu lation and hartgrudge. ambitious disposition, y• dissimilitude of our life, & our maners wherein was no likenesse, would in no wise permit and suffer, that our wils and hearts should be lincked with lasting conuersation, and accustomed companie. Neuer∣thelesse, I vnderstood the inclination of your nature, and per∣ceiued wher vnto your minde was addicted touching my per∣son, many yeres before the ciuil tumults and vproares were a flote, whē Caesar was resident and abiding in Fraunce. For, that An argumēt from benefits & good deeds which vnto me in your opinion was maruellous pro∣fitable, and to Caesars highnesse not incommodious, you did your indeour to accomplishe, that he might loue me, that he might haue me in some reputation, that he, I say, might ac∣count me among the number of his fauourers. Many things I pretermit, & swallow vp, as it were, in streames of silence, which were vttered by voyce, & written with pen too & fro as An argumēt from famila∣ritie. familiar as might be wished. For things of greater weight followed. Againe, in the beginning of the ciuil war, when you directed your iourney towards Brundisiū, intending to go to Caesar, you disdained not to come & visite me Some ferme place or ma∣nour of his owne, whether Matius curte∣ously came to see him. in Formiano. To call in questiō first of al, how highly ought I to estéeme of this point of curtesie, being ehibited in those perilous times, & daungerous dayes. Besides that, thinke you that I can so lightly forget your counsel, your cōference, & your gentlenes, the sweetnesse wherof I haue tasted, & reaped the aduantage of your singular benefits? at the putting in proe and practise of which premisses, Trebatius, as I remember, was present. I haue imprinted the summe of your letters in my memo∣rie, which you sent vnto me, when I met Caesar, In Some large common, be∣like, so named Agro▪ as I thinke, Trebulano.
Shortly after insued by succession of time, that season of the yeare, wherin I addressed my selfe to passe a voyage to Pom∣peius, vnto which enterprise I was eyther by shame compel∣led, or by the right of dutie inforced, or else by the state of my fortune constrained. What courteous point of a friendly Gentleman, what will to my weale whiles I was absent, or loue towardes myne which were with you present, was at any time wanting or to séeke, when it should be vsed. Fur∣thermore, I and al mine haue rested in this iudgement An argumēt from constan∣cie and vnua∣riablenesse. con∣cerning you, that vnto me you are a faithfull friende, and to them, in no respect, a foe. I came to Brundisium: thinke you that I am so obliuious, blockishe, and forgetfull, as not to remember, in what celeritie and post haste you came ri∣ding from Tarento to see me, so soone as you heard of myne arriuall? what fashion of sitting by at the same time you v∣sed, what communication you ministred, and howe you esta∣blished my hart harrowed with heauinesse, in the feare of af∣flictions and miseries, the smart whereof, one with another, indifferently suffered? After many alterations of times, it came to passe yet at the length, that as lucke had alotted, our méeting was at Rome: what wanted in our frindshippe that ought to be required? In maters of great moment, and affaires of wonderfull weight, I ranne to your counsel as to a sanctuarie of succur, that by your aduise I might be in∣structed, in what order to vse and behaue my selfe towardes the maiestie of Caesar. As for all other points of friendly due∣tifulnesse, what man hath inioyed them in such ample priui∣lege, (Caesar besides me excepted) in that you vouched safe to come often to my manour, and refused not to spende many houres, in protracting and lengthening communication tem∣pered with all pleasantnesse, that might be possible? Beyond the things aboue mencioned, you were the cause efficient, if you haue not forgotten, (for by your meanes I was vrged) that I wrote these , philosophicall discourses. After The ciuil hurlie burie and battell fi∣nished & e∣ded. the returne of Caesars maiestie, of what thing were you more carefull, then that I might growe and increase to ripenesse of familiaritie with Caesars highnesse? whiche as
you attempted louingly, so you perfourmed it luckily. To what purpose pertaineth this prolonged preamble, wherin I nt to haue vsed breuitie? bycause I am in no small ad∣miration, that you, to whome all these thinges ought to be knowne, should be so credulous and light of beliefe, as to be persuaded of me, as of an offender in those points, which are at defiance and battell bidding with our friendship. For, be∣sides all the circumstaunces whereof I haue made a repeti∣tion, being very euident, playne, and apparaunt, I haue sun∣drie other particularities, and speciall thinges, manifolde in déede, but yet not so manifest, which I am not able in words to comprehend, nor to dliuer to your capacitie by mine vtte∣rance. Whatsoeuer is in you, or belonging to you, is so farre fom ming▪ any , that in them I plant my chiefest pleasure. But principlly and aboue al other ornaments and possessions of inestimable value, both the singular faithful∣nesse where with your friendship is sealed, your counsell, gra∣uitie, , vnuariablenesse, and noble nature also ight with pleasantnesse, humanitie and gentlenesse, your éete letters leuened with loue, delight me excéedingly. Wherfore I will nowe plucke off this plaister, lay the wounde wide o∣pen, and returne to your complaints. His answere of purgation to the inten∣ted complaint of Matius. First I answere this: I gaue no credite, neither was I brought to beleue that you yealded your consenting voyce to the law wherof you wte: Beside that, if I had beléeued so muche, I would haue consi∣dered, that you would neuer haue so done, without some ne∣cessarie cause and iust prouocation. He turneth a discommodi∣tie to commē tion. Suche is your dignitie, such is your renoune, that whatsoeuer you attempt and goe about, it is noted, marked, & obserued: On the other side, the maliciousnesse of men is so ripe & cankared, that some things be far worsse reported, thē they were by you practised. These things if you refuse to heare & to ponder, I am to séek what o say in mine owne defence. For certainly, if any thing sonde in mine eares effensiuely spoken in the dispraise of your per∣son, I am no lesse earnest to maintaine your quarell, gainst your enimies: then you haue ben wont to protect me, from the iniurious dealing of mine aduersaries. But to  fur∣ther
of dfence I say this, that it is diuided into two sortes: For some things there be Epi. 10. li. 10 which of custome I shake off with a manifest negation, as for example, in this suffrage or voyce of consent: other some which I will confesse and vphold, to be done of you, with no lesse religion and godlinesse, then with humanitie and gentlenesse, as in uerséeing games, pageants & exercises. But you can not be ignorāt, whom I know to be very learned, * if Caesar were in possession of principalitie and ruled as king, that your behauiour and vsage may be discour sd vppon, two sundry wayes after a double order: eyther that your faythfulnesse deserueth commendation, and your courtese admiration, for so muche as the loue which you shewed to your riente, was not only manifest in the time of his life, but apparant also after his death: or else after this sorte, Which per∣aduenture Ci cero him selfe delighted in. that that libertie of a mans naturall countrie, which diuers do imbrace, is to be preferred before the life of his friend. Concerning these points, I wold you had the per∣ of my disputations. As for these two circumstaunces, which are, as it were, the two aine proppes of your praise, who  more willingly, or more often then I, hath giuen aduottements touching your person, both that you were So hee doth write to Ati∣cus. He was al ways thought to be authour of quitnesse. an earnest procurer that ciuil warre shoulde not be taken in hande, and also a diligent labourer, for the inoderation of the victorie? wherein I  no man which aented not to me. Wherfore I thanks my amiliar friend Trebatius hear∣tily, by whose meanes occasion of inditing this Wherin con sisteth my pn gation. Epistle was offered, whervnto, if you do not giue credit, you shal iudge me voide of all friendly behauiour, and desitute of all humani∣te: then which nothing can be more grieuos vnto my na∣ture, nor more  to your manners. Fare you well. Matius to Cicero. THE ARGVMENT. The excusation of Maus both for him self and also against his ma∣ accuso.
GReat He testisieth his good will towards Ci∣cero.▪ was the pleasure whiche did redound to me, by reading of your letters: bycause I vnderstande that you haue conceiued the same opinion concerning me, whiche I hoped and wished: whereof, although I did not labour in doubt, and trauell in vncertaintie: yet notwithstanding, by∣cause I had it in great price & estimation, I did what I could, that it might be inolable and continuall. As for me, in con∣science I am well assured, that nothing is of me committed, which might offend or stir any man to stomache: and muche lesse did I beléeue, that you, being one, whome nature hath beatified, with manifolde and precious ornaments, and Art also polishd with goodly perfections, coulde vpon temeritie and rashnesse, e persuaded to thinke amisse of me, specially, ithence you are the man towardes whom my good will hath not only leaned, but lasted, not only inclined, but continued. And for so much as I perceiue the case standeth as I would, I wil answere to such criminal causes, as you in my behalfe, resisted of your singular goodnesse: ad as it was méete, for the acquaintance wherein we are lincked and yoaked. For I am not ignorant what they haue burthened me withall, since the death of Caesar. They An obiectiō. count it a thing worthy of reproche, that I take the death of a very friendly Gentleman so grie∣uously, that I am greatly disquieted and out of patience, that he whom I loued is spoyled of his life. For say they: A mans countrie is to be preferred before friendship: as though vic∣torie were alreadie theirs, and that Caesars death had béene aduauntage to the common wealth. But I will not deale frauulently nor deceitfully. I am not ashamed to confesse mine vnskilfulnesse, and to acknowledge that I haue not* The confuta∣tion. yet clymed vp to this step of wisdome. For I did not followe Caesar in the ciuil dissention and tumulte: yet neuerthelesse, although I was offended at the Ciuil warre he meaneth. enterprise, I was loath to forsake my friende: neither did I at any time so alowe suche kindes of insurrections, or so well like of the cause of commo∣tion and bloudie battel, but that my desire ath béen earnest, and my labour readie, He was the author that ciuil war was not taken in hand but stay∣ed. to suppresse them in their infanci, and vtterly to extinguish and quench them whiles they were
in kindling. Wherfore, in the victorie, and triumph of a Gen∣tleman, whom I liked and loued, the swéetnesse of honour did not allure mée, the gréedines of monie did not insnare me, neither was I be witched with brauerie of promotion: which pensions & rewards, other that were not so déepely, as I was, in his highnes fauour, excessiuely, & weout al regard of mode∣ration abused. Furthermore my goodes, possessions, & main∣tenance of mine house, was diminished and impaired, by the force of Of whic lawe, read the third book o commenta∣ries of ciuil warres. a Lawe which Caesar enacted, ratified, and pro∣claimed: by the benefite wherof, the greatest number of them that reioyce in the ouer throwe and deathe of Caesar, haue made their continuance in the Citie. After that the Citizens were vanquished & ouercome, to the intent that they might taste the swéetnesse of He was t authour that moderation of the victo∣rie was not neglected. parcialitie, and not be dealt withall rigorously, I ioyned my minde & my might together, as pre∣cisely for their supportation, as for safegard of mine own life. These circumstances considered, I may thus conclude: Is it possible that I, whose wil was to haue all liue, and none goe to wracke, should not be muche moued in hart, and pinched with perturbations, for his death, of whom that incompara∣ble and moste gracious déede was obteined? sthence these men did not onely swel with the poison of enuie against him, but also sought his destruction and ouerthrowe. Punishment therfore is thy pension (say they) sithēce thou wast so saucie, as to finde fault with our doings. O vnspeakeable arrogan∣cie: O pride incōparable, the like report wherof neuer pear∣ced into the eares of any people: Adescriptiō of them that slewe Caesar, and of him∣selfe, compre∣hended▪ in this clause. that some in practising foule offences, should be so vainglorious, and other againe contra∣riwise, may not be suffered to shewe themselues gréeued, but must be pinched therefore, & extréemely molested. Those things wherin they would haue me restrained, are not deni∣ed to thē that liue in a seruile condition, they may be feareful they may be ioyful, they may be gréeued, they may be comfor ted, they may hope, they may despaire, & all with libertie of will, as not hauing their mindes in any mans subiection: all which priuileges of a curteous nature, those same authors & captaines of liberty, as they terme themselues, do what they can to wrest and wring from vs by the torments of terrour.
But lost is their labour, and their toyle to none effecte: the feare of no daunger shal at any time so possesse my hart, that there vpon should insue a diminution and empairing to due∣tiful courtesie: neither wil I yeald so farre to the inuasions of feare, as to reuolt & start back frō my professed humanitie. For, honest death I neuer thought to be auoided, but often & earnestly So are the woordes set down in three auncient co∣pies: and not to be sustei∣ned, as in some bookes it is imprin∣ted. to be desired. But why shold they spue against me their spiteful stomaches if I wishe but this, yt they might repent thēselues of their déed? For I desire yt the death of Cae∣sar may disburse vnto al, a bait of bitternesse, But I ought of dutie, sithence the part of a Citizen so requireth, wish wel to the common estate, and to be touched with regard for the safe tie of the same: which thing, for so much as my former trade of life, and my hope whiche remaineth, are sufficient confir∣mations that I earnestly esire, it is not for me to craue li∣bertie of spéeche, and with wordes to ouercome the matter. Wherefore, I beséech you most hartily, to preferre the thing it self, before bare talke, & to make more account of the very purpose, then of report by tounge: & credite me, there can be no felowship betweene me, and them that bee of corrupt con∣uersation and stained manners. Should I (to touche suche thinges as I haue aduentured in my lustie youth, Somewhat it to be graun ted to the de∣gree of yeres. when I might swarue with sufferaunce, offend and yet be pardned, doe amisse and be counted excusable) should I, I say, recant now in mine aged years, shold I make a mutation or change of that which is past, and as it were begin a new webbe? I will not do so: neither will I commit any thing, which might séeme scrupulous and offensiue: the gréeuous chaunce onely, of a man whom I loued excéedingly, of a man (I say) in supe∣rioritie and highest place of honour, doth moue me to mour∣ning: And if so be, that I had béen otherwise affected, I would not haue loode in contradiction and deniall of that, whiche I haue done: least I should be iudged a naughtie & lewd felow in offending, & a timorous & vain varlot in dissembling. An obiectiō against him. But those plaies, pageants, & shewes of victorie, which Caesar pro∣cured to be made and published, fel into my charge, and orde∣ring. His confu∣taion. What then, that pertained to the office of a priuate per
sn, and not to the state of th weale publique: whiche duesie notwithstanding, I was bound to sée performed, as wel for a memorial of our perfect frendship, as also for the exhibiting of deserued honor vnto him after he was intumbed: & finally to so passing a Vnderstan∣ding Caesar. young Gentleman, in whom especiall hope was reposed, what could I else doe, then conforme and fashion my will, to the satisfying of his requestes? Moreouer, I repaired oftentimes to the house of Consul Anthonie, for sautation & courteous gréeting sake: vnto whome, suche as  me to be an aduersarie to my countrie naturall, had ten re∣course, (I will not say, but seldome:) either to aske that whch was another mans right, or else to pray vpō that which was none of their owne. But what arrogancie is this? An argu∣ment from the lesse to the greater: By Caesars permission, I vsed their com panie whom he counted hi enimies: you will not uffer me to loue where I list. Caesar gaue me leaue to deale with whom I would, yea although he bare them little loue and affection, yet notwithstanding, he did not restraine me from vsing their companie: and why then should they that haue taken away my freende, iarringe, and snarring at me like dogs, labour with tooth & nale, to inclose me within certaine limites, to the intent that my loue might not haue libertie to lodge where it liketh? But I am suffici∣ently warranted, that the modestie of my life, shalbe of great force, to suppresse their false rumors, & also, that they which are at defiance with mée, for my constancie towardes Caesar, wil find in the end, that it is more auailable for them, to pro∣uide such frēds as are like me, namely, officious in the vtter most point of urtesie, requirable: then like them selues, in∣constant, vaine, lightheaded and variable. As for me, if I may enioy the fulnesse of my desyres, the residue of my lyfe will I* Which wa a free Citie. Ep. 7. Lib. 4. lead in Rhodes, where I may possesse peace & quietnes. But if I be intercepted with some finister chaunce, I wil so be re∣sident in Rome, as I may wishe and will, to be free from an∣noyance. To our trustie friend Trebatius, I giue great thanks, in that he hath not concealed from vs your kindenes, but reuealed the faithfulnesse of your loue vnto vs in séeme∣ly maner: & for that also, by his procurement it is brought a∣bout, that to him, whom I always loued from my very hart, I sée iust cause of further dutifulnesse & reuerence to be per∣fourmed. Fare you well
Cicero to Allieno. ¶ THE ARGVMNT. This Epistle is petitorie, for he craueth courtesie of Allienns, dei∣ring him to receiue Democritus Sicyonius into is fauour and protection. DEmocritus Sicyonius is not only my friendly interteiner, but also (a thing seldome and straunge among many, the Graecians specially,) a man ful of familiarite and courteous acquaintance. For there is in him singular honestie, excellent vertue, passing liberalitie towardes straungers, and plenti of reuerend behauiour: Moreouer, he preferreth me, before all other, in dueties of humanitie, gentlenesse, amitie, & kind∣nesse. This Allie∣nus, as it shold seem was lord Praesident of Sicilia, as may bee coniectu∣red by the cir∣cumstances of the. 79. Ep. lib. 13. whom Op∣pius in his boke treating of war in Afri ca, calleth som time by the name of Prae∣or, and some∣time by the ame of Pro∣onsul. You shall vnderstand that he hath principall rule not only ouer his owne people, but that the whole Prouince of Achaia also, is in his iurisdiction. I am bould to make an en∣traunce for this Gentleman to your honour, that he might knowe you, and that you with him might be acquainted. I am assured, that whē you vnderstand of his person and vsage throughly, you will of your owne accord, wtout suggestion of others, (such is the goodnes of your nature) iudge him a man worthie of your fauour, friendship, and entertainment. My petition and request therfore vnto you, is, that this letter be∣ing read and considered, it would please you to receiue him in to your protection, and make promise vnto me in his behalfe, to do what may be done, for my sake. To conclude, if you once perfectly knowe (as I hope it is like none otherwise to come to passe,) that his worthinesse deserueth your courtesie: I be∣séeche you to make muche of him, to loue and like him, and to reckon him in the number of your fréendes. Thus if you do, you shall gratifie me highly, and do him an excéeding great pseasure. Fare you wel. Cicero to Planco. THE ARGVMENT. He writeth of the determination of the Senate, not disagreing from
owne sentence, that the dignitie of Planeus might be augmented, & his honour inlarged. Finally, he addeth an exhortation of valiaunt∣nesse, willing Plancus to perseuer in resistence against Anthonie, till such time as all the sparkles of his furie in battell be extinguished, and vtterly quenched. I Had no sooner gotten opportunitie to inlarge your honour, but I pretermitted nothing, which might make for your aduauncement, either in consideration of the recompence of vertu, or in respecte of the worship that might be ministred by wordes. This to be no vntruth, you may vnderstand, by the determination of the Senate: For so was it enacted, and by authoritie confirmed, as I in writing gaue information, and in woordes vttered mine owne sentence: which the full court, and aemblie of Senatours, were so farre from dissa∣lowinge, that thereunto with earnest desire & large graunts, they condescended. And although I perceiued by your let∣ters which you sent mée, that the iudgment of good men, was to your greater delectation, then Which by the decree of the Senate were graūted. the ensignes and ornamēts of renowne in your expectation: yet, I thought that it was our dueties to ponder and weighe, how déepely the common wealth is growne in your debte, for your meritorious and wel deseruing behauiour, albeit you required nothing in the way of reward. Procéede you still as you haue begonne, and let your Bring that battel to an end, which the Consuls haue, for the most part, discom∣fited. last assaults be answerable to your first attempts. For hée that shall giue Anthonie the ouerthrowe, and fell his force flat vnder foote, shall in like manner bring that bat∣tel to an end. Wherefore Ilias. 4, Homere named not Aax nor Achilles  that is to say a conquerour of cities: but assigned that title to venturous Vlysses. Fare you well. Cicero to Planco. THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth Plancus for his assistaunce and speedie succour in the behalfe of the common wealth employed: giueth him counsell, to pursue Anthonie to Mutina, and by all meanes  to procure is destruction.
O Ioyfull report, and most acceptable rumour, which was scatered abroade two dayes before At Mutina, when  was put to flight. the victorie was ob∣teined, concerning your assistaunce, your fortifications, your earnestnesse, your expedition, your spéedinesse, and the cou∣rage of your souldiers. So that now, our enemies being van∣quished and vtterly put to flight, al hope in you is harboured, all confidence and assurance in your dealing reposed. For it is noysed abroad, that the most notable and principall ring∣leaders, of those rebellious robbers, and trayterous varlots, haue forsaken the foughten field, and being vnable, any lon∣ger to encounter, haue taken flight from Mutina. Therefore it is no lesse cōmodious to digge vp the rootes, then to cut off the small sprigs: and as commendable to pearce to the bone, as to pare the skinne: and as great puisaunce and prowesse, to take triall of the vttermost hazard, as of the formost ad∣uenture: and as much praise due to constancie, to wounde him to the death, as to draw out a weapon. I looked for your letters, and the letters of many more besides: I was in hope also that Lepidus would remember, In present danger: which compelleth good and true harted citizēs, to fight in the defēce of their countre. in these tumultes and stormes of the weale publique, to ioyne his power with your strength, whereby hée might satisfie the expectation of the cōmon wealth. Labour to the vttermost (friend Plancus) and thinke no kinde of trauel too tedious, that not so much as one litle sparckle of that outragious, cruel, and most mischiefous warre remaine vnquenched. Which thing if your wisedome and manhoode may compasse, you shall bestowe vppon the common wealth, a heauenly benefite, and you shall purchase to your owne person, euerlasting renowne. The third of the Ides of Maie. Fare you well. Plancus to Cicero. ¶ THE ARGVMNT. This Epistle maketh mencion of the preparation which hee made to ouerthrowe Ahonie.
I Thought that it was not impertinent to your personne, nor to the common estate, by these letters which I haue written, to vnderstand such thinges, as in processe of time haue chaunced. * My diigence, and circumspect dealing, hathEpi. 20. lib. 10. (as I hope) beene to my selfe a commoditie, and to the weale publique an aduauntage. For I ceased not to send poastes to Lepidus daily, that, all contention cancelled and cut in sun∣der,Epist. 2. 18. & 21. lib. 10. and* a recōciliation of both our willes obteined, his helpe ioyned to mine, and mine aide lincked vnto his, hée with mee, and I with him, might defend the common wealth, from the inuason of aduersaries: and that hée should not so much thinke vppon one Because in the conflict at Mutina, An∣thoni was discomfied. vile rascall, and contemptible outcaste, as on his priuate reputation, his children, affinitie, frendes, and naturall countrie. Wherein, if hée condescended to doe so, as hée was desired, hee might turne my seruice to his owne ad∣uauntage, in all thinges whatsoeuer. My request, was not voide in this case: for by Laterensis oure messinger passing betwene vs too and fro, I preuailed in my purpose: insomuch that the matter growing to this perfection, hée gaue mée his faith, trueth, and honestie, that hée would pursue and resist Anthonie in battel, if hée could not kéepe him out of his pro∣uince: besides this, hée besought mée to come & ioyne the aide of both our armies together, wherof hée was somuch y• more desrous & earnest, for that Anthonie was reported to haue a great power of horsemen, & Lepidus had no such troupe in a redines prepared. For not many dayes age, although smal & slender were his whole number: yet notwithstanding, tene of the best and chiefest of his horsemen, came ouer vnto mée: of which things I being not ignorant, made no prolōging nor lingering excuses, but thought forth with, that Lepidus in y• Whiles hee thoughte wel of the cōmon wealth & his countrie. commendable course of his good and wel disposed counsels, was greatly to be furthered & assisted. What profite did de∣pend vpon my setting forward, I perceiued presently: either because I might pursue & vanquish his troupe of horsemen with mine: or else, because by the presence of mine hoast, I might correct & drawe to obedience, y• part of Lepidus his ar∣mie, which is Or, whiche is corrupted withe bribes and rewarde to assiste An∣thonie. skarse sound, & reuolted frō the cōmon wealth.
Wherefore, a bridge being made ouer Plinie com∣pareth Isara to Rhodanus, lib. 3. cap. 4. Isara that great floud, which is néere the borders of the Allobroges, in one dayes space, thorough my procurement, I and my souldiers passed ouer to the other side, the fourth of the Ides of Maie. Now, when I was infourmed, that L. Anthonie, was sent before, with the aide of certaine horsemen and footemen, and so came to Forum Iulij: I sent my brother strengthened with the power of foure thousand horsemen, the first day before the Ides of Maie to méete him: I my selfe accompanied with There is mē cion made of fiue logions, Epist. 8. lib. to of foure. Epist. 13. lib. 11. foure swfte and spéedie legions, and the horsemen which I haue remayning, intende to take vppon vs the tracing tho∣rough tedious iourneyes, and forthwith to followe after, if our fortune bée but so so, indifferent (I meane) in the behalfe of the weale publique: then shall wée both beate downe the bouldnesse of those desperate conspiratours, and finde an end also of carefulnesse. Moreouer, if that pestilēt spoiler, hauing premonishmēts and forewarnings of our comming, shall be∣ginne to retire and drawe backe into Italie, it shalbe * Bru∣tusDecimus Bru∣tus, praesident of Gallia Cis∣alpina, nowe called Lum∣bardie. his charge to méete him, whom I know to flourishe in wisedome, counsel, and policie: and to want neither courage, puisaunce, nor valliauntnesse. Howbeit, if that chaunce come to passe, I will sende my brother with horsemen well roui∣ded, to followe after, and to defend Italie from violence. Sée that you neglecte not your health, and as I loue you, so loue mée againe. Fare you well. Cicero to Ligario. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. ee writeth that hee is in hope of Ligarius safetie: to the obteyninge whereof hee promiseth all the helpe that hee canne procure: in the meane space hee exhorteth Ligarius, to take his froward fortune & vntoward luck with moderation and patience. ALthough it behoued mée, in this This is the same Ligarius in whose be∣halfe Cicero made his ora∣tion, bearing title, pro Q. Ligario. your time of trouble, to write somewhat vnto you▪ according to the qualitie of
our acquaintance, either by way of consolation, that you might not be comfortlesse: or by way of assistaunce, that you might not be succourlesse. Yet, hetherto, I haue not accom∣plished that point of courteous duetie: because I perceiued that woordes and sentences could not preuaile, against your pensifenesse, which was vnappeasable, nor diminish any part of the same, it was so indurable. In processe of time, when hope began to beare blossoms abundantly, that the day was approching, wherin we should haue the presence of your per∣son, in health and prosperitie: I could no longer bridle the se∣crete motions of my mind, but néedes must declare vnto you my determination, & discouer the whole summe of my coun∣sell. I will therefore write that vnto you, whereof I haue a sealed warrant, namely, that the anger and displeasure of Caefar against you, will hereafter be assuaged. For, to tell the plaine truth, both the matter it selfe, the day, the opinion of people, and (as I gather by sundrie apparaunces) the in∣clination of his owne proper nature, allure him to gentlenes and clemencie: which to bée as I say, not onely the estate of other, ministreth mée occasion to presuppose, but the reports of his néerest friends, and Gentlemen he meaneth of Caesars neerest acquaintance, such in déede as with him are most familiar, persuade mée that you are towards the attaine∣ment of Grace with his highnesse. Unto whom, since the time that Concerning Pompeius cō∣plices, vanqui∣shed in Africa. newes came first out of Africa, I together with your brethren, intermitted no opportunitie, to put in prac∣tise the parts of Suppliaunts: whose vertue, integritie, vp∣rightnesse, loue and constancie towards you being incompa∣rable and singular, besides that, their carefulnesse for your safetie, being planted vppon perpetuitie and continuance, were so forceable and pithie, that there is no kinde of thing, which Caesars highnesse, Without the mediation, or intreataunce of any person. of his owne accord, wil not graunt and giue of his frée bountie: & if our petition be somewhat la∣ter obteined, then wée would, the cause thereof, is to be ascri∣bed to his great and earnest affaires, of whom all things are required with submission, which haue made harder accesse to his highnesse, so that wée might not at will, vse his gracious goodnesse. And besides his busie matters, Africa hath incen∣sed
and kindledBecause thei had renued warre. his anger, insomuch that hée séemeth, of pur∣pose, to worke their disquietnesse, whom he perceiueth tho∣roughly bent, to frame his continuall vexation. But wée vn∣derstand, that hée in a storme, is somewhat calme: against madnesse, marcheth with mildnesse: & is pight with patience against inconuenience. Wherfore, giue credite to my words, and repose this report in y• cosket of your memorie, that you shal not remaine long in these troubles, sithence they are like to haue their limitation. When Whē I haue shewed that which I mis∣like not. Epist. 10. lib. 5. I haue declared that which is hidden in my thought, it resteth behind, that, of the towardnesse of my wil to doe you pleasure, my deedes rather then my wordes, giue a testimonie. And if I could accōplish so much, as I might challeng of duetie in that cōmonwealth, wherein my merits (as you hold opinion) are not only mani∣fest but also manifold, you should be soone deliuered frō these discōmodities & daungers. For the selfe same cause hath bene a canckar to my Dignitie, re∣nowne, wor∣ship & estate. wealth & estate, which hath béene a plague to your health and safetie. Neuerthelesse, what courtesie so euer, the image & representation of mine auncient dignitie, what duetifulnes soeuer, fauour may afford, and friendship comprehend, my labour, my counsel, my desire, my furthe∣raunce, and my faithfulnesse, shalbe at the commaundement of your good brethren in euery respect. Sée that your hart bée couragious, as becōmeth a man: let it be now, as it hath bene alwayes in times past, first for the causes which in writing I haue mencioned: secondly, because you haue béene so well af∣fected towards the weale publique, as, that you may, not on∣ly at this instante, hope When you vnderstande that there is hope of safe∣tie. prosperously to flourish: but also, thoughe you were drowned and vtterly ouerwhelmed, with the waues of aduersitie, yet thorough ye comfort of conscience, knowing that your meaning hath béene vertuous, & your do∣ings cōmendable, to weare out al tempests whatsoeuer, with a manfull courage. Fare you well. Cicero to Trebiano. THE ARGVMENT. He is verie glad of Trebianus his returne into his countrie, by suite at
length obteined: he exhorteth him to blot thinges past out of the booke of his remembraunce, and to preferre the recouering of his dignitie, before the losse of his priuate goods and substance. IN time past, I did only fauourCicero his sonne in law. Epi. 16. lib. 2. & 13. lib. 8. Dolabella, being bound vn to him in no respect of duetie, for there was no cause of ne∣cessitie to exhibite such seruice: but he oweth vnto me duetie and reuerence, for that I was vnto him, a present refuge & defence, in his great Whereof mencion is made, Epi. 10. lib. 3. daungers. Now, through y• recourse of a late singular benefite, issuing from his humanitie & gentle∣nes, I am so streigtly tyed to his courtesie, because y• before, in the matter it selfe, and at this instant also, he hath satisfied me so plentifully, touching your safetie, that I know none, to whom I am déeper in debt, for such bounteous deserts. For which thing, I reioyce in your behalf exceedingly, y• I had ra∣ther you should shew your selfe glad in heart, then Because the suite concer∣ning your safe tie, was obtei∣ned by the meanes of my sonne in lawe, made to Cae∣sars highnes. to giue thankes vnto me for your good luck: the one of which I desire in no respect, the other you may wel do, without doubt of vn∣certaintie. Concerning that which remaineth, when by your vertue & worthinesse, free passage is made for you, to returne to your friends & acquaintance: your wisedome must so mo∣derate and rule you, and the valiiantnes of your nature must be so effectual, that you ought to forget that, which you haue lost, & thinke with your selfe what you haue recouered. You shal lead your life in ioy among your acquaintance: you shall be in the companie of vs your fauourers: more dignitie by many degrées haue you atchieued, then all y• priuate wealth can counteruaile, wherof you are dispossessed: which notwith standing would affoord you the greater pleasure and delight if there were any state of a commonwealth. Puteolanus, of whō some∣what is spokē in the Epistles Ad Atticum oftentimes. Vestorius, our familiar friend, wrote vnto mee, that you gaue me infinite thankes: this report vnto me is meruailous acceptable: and I giue you good leaue to vse it, both in the presence of other persons, and in the hearing of Siro also, your friend and my welwiller. For those thinges that we doe, our meaning is to haue them throughly approued & allowed, of such men as are indued with most wisedome, and grounded vpon the soun∣dest iudgment. My desire is to sée you as soone as might bée. Fare you well.
Cicero to Trebiano. THE ARGVMENT. This epistle conteineth an excus of his not writing: it conteineth also a consolation: finally, it conteineth a promise of good luck and for∣tunate successe, with a briefe memorandum of his owne dueti∣fulnesse. LOng since would I haue directed my letters vnto you, if mine inuention could haue ministred any matter, wher∣in my penne might haue béene occupied. For in In aduersitie when fortune is not fauou∣rable. such a time as this is, the courtesie of Epi. 13. lib. 6. friends craueth the benefite, ei∣ther of comforting, or else of promissing. I did not comforte you, because mine eares were ful of many rumours, concer∣ning your puissaunce, and your prudence, which arme you sufficiently against y• iniuries of these troublesome seasons: and beause the conscience and secrete knowledge of your owne studies and attemps replenished your heart with per∣fect consolation. Which thing if you doe (as I heare) the The profite of good & ho nest desires, is chiefly-obtei∣ned in calami∣tie. re∣uenues of your vertues wilbe inualuable: wherein I am as∣sured, your exercise consisteth: and to that rule and direction to leuell all your doinges, I exhort you earnestly. Further∣more, vnto you, a man absolutely furnished with the know∣ledge By dealing in matters, noting exam∣ples, and sear∣ching the kno ledge of anti∣quities, wee waxe learned. of many matters and examples, and in all manner of antiquities thoroughly instructed, I▪ not vtterly ignoraunt and vnskilfull, thoughe in desire, peradueture somewhat lesse occupied, yet in thinges themselues and in their triall, somewhat more conuersant then I would, make this com∣fortable promise, that these bitter bruntes, and iniurious déedes which you suffer, shall not long continue. For, euen his owne person, who is of abilitie & power to preuaile most, séemeth vnto mée, daily more inclined to equitie, and to the Which is, that one man should assiste, helpe and loue another. nature of things in their succession: and such is the kinde of your cause, that, together with the commonwealth, which cannot lie in ruine perpetually, and vnrepaired, it must of necessitie, as it were raeuiue, quicken againe, and recouer the
former perections: Moreouer, somthing is made more milde, gentle and liberall, than we, through feare, suspected. All whiche premisses, for so much as they depend often vpon th alterations of seasons, and chaunges of times: wee will marke euery moment, not pretermitting any opportunitie, whereby you may be (by our meanes) succoured, and assisted. Wherefore, that other kinde of letters, which I haue spoken of before, shalbe (as I hope) more easie and readie, to doe mée seruice continually, that I may be bolde to make promise vn to you of that, whiche in déedes rather, then in wordes, may be perfourmed. I would haue you to be in this beléefe, that you haue more fréendes and fauourers, then are in subiection to this your present chance, or euer haue béen in times past, so farre as I am able to vnderstand: vnto, Meaning that his friēd∣ship should surmount all others. not so muche as one of them all, purpose I to giue place. Sée that you haue a manly and valiant hart, which in you is not wanting: As for suche things as are in the dominion of Fortune, they shalbe gouerned by obseruations of seasons, We will aide and sup∣port you so farre forth a mans counsel is able. For all thinges that chaunce can∣not be auoi∣ded. and prouided by the as∣sistance of our counsells. Cicero to Trebiano. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He promiseth whatsouer he can do to the vttermoste of his power, that Trebianus may be set clear from danger: and sheweth him some hope, of better fortune hereafter. HOw I estéeme of you at this instant, how I haue accoun∣ted of your person in times past, and how much you haue et by my fréendship, I my selfe am a witnesse sufficient. For your counsell, or rather your chance, to remaine longer in ci∣uil warres, was alwayes vnto me Because I haue euer∣more well a∣counted of your perso. a great gréee: and this your infortunate lucke, for that the restitution of your re∣noune, is delayed and put off longer, then by equitie séemeth tollerable, or then I in hart haue earnestly desired, the care thereof pearceth into my minde, no lesse violently, then my
chaūces were graffed in yours, when I was in the like ex∣tremitie. Wherfore, Postumulenus and Sextius, Atticus also our familiar fréend, & next vnto him Theudas your fréean, haue vnderstoode my meaning, manifestly: yea to al and eue∣ry of them, I haue affirmed seuerally, and oftentimes pro∣tested religiously, that I am kindled with a certain kindenes, both towardes you and our children, in any thing whatsoe∣uer, to satifie your illes with my seruice. Wherof, I would haue you certifie such as tender your person, that they in like manner may be assured, that all my The like course of wor∣des are to be found Ep▪ 14. lib. 6 duetie, diligence, coun∣sell, abilitie, faithfulnesse, substaunce, & else whatsoeuer, is al∣waies readie, and at hand for their benefite and furtherance. If I can compasse so muche by mine owne authoritie, or by the fauour and good countenance of other my well willers, as of duetie I might, in that common wealth, wherein my me∣rites and desarts are not vnsealed nor vntestfied: then should you in short space, be the same man, whiche in times past you haue ben, namely in highest degrée of , & prince also of your honorable order. But in so much as, each  s were at one time, and for Because we folowed Po peius. one cause subiect to semblable lucke: I do both promise you those things which in writing I haue aboue mentioned, remaining vnto me as mine own, by vse and pos∣session: & those things also which I séeme otherwise besides to reteine, as fragments and portions of mine auncient dignitie. For Caesar himselfe, as I coniecture and gather by many cir∣cumstances, hath not against vs conceiued displeasure, as his aduersaries: and al those Gentlemen who with his person are moste familiar, being, For I had no suche fore∣sight, wherby I might make means in time to vse the be∣nefite of their help, if in time to come, I should stand in neede. by a certaine chance, bound vnto mée, through the great duties of courtesie, which of olde I exhibi∣ted, to their contentation, fauour me greatly and vse me very reuerently. Wherefore, if I can do any thing touching your estate, that is, in the behalfe of your safetie, wherin al things else do cousist, as I grow in hope day by day, through sundrie reportes whiche I heare: I will take a proofe of mine owe power: & what mine abilitie can cōprehend, I wil boldly put in aduenture. It shall not néede to stuffe my letter with par∣ticularities: take this for a general conclusion: All my studie,
all my beneuolence, all the meanes that I can make, is as your owne, to gratifie you, & at your pleasure, to doe you ser∣uice. But I am very desirous, & I take it to be a thing much touching my person, that all your fréendes vnderstand mine intent & purpose, which by your letters, as a moste conueni∣ent & fit instrument, may be accōplished, namely, that The like clause is vsed in the 11. Epi. of the firste booke, where he writeth to Vatinius. what soeuer is said and thought to be Ciceroes, the same also is due to Trebianus, fréely and at will to vse. Thus muche haue I signified, to the end that they might be well assured, nothing to be wrapped in such difficulties, but the same, being for your sake attempted, shall appeare vnto you most pleasaunt and comfortable. Fare you well. Uatinius to Cicero. ¶THE ARGVMENT. Vatinius being sent into Illyricum, at the commaundement of ae∣sar Dictator, commendeth his dignitie and honourble estate, to his friend Cicero, that he might defend the same from the slaun∣derous impeachementes of alicious and spiteful persons. IF you are in health, it is well: I am in health. If you kéepe your accustomed order, in prosequuting he parte of a pa∣tron, P. Vatimus your client cōmeth vnto you, as standing in néed of your present defence, and desirous to committee the handling of his cause vnto your wisedome: you wil not (I thinke) reiecte him in honour, whom you receiued in danger. As for me, vnto whom shold I make accesse, vnto whō should I appeal, but vnto him? He maketh a gappe to his good will, by ripping vppe to remem∣brance, a bene fite, receiued▪ of which bene fite: Valerius, Max. lib. 4. Cap. 2. through whose tuitiō I haue learned the attainement of victorie? What, should I feare I waxe faint, y• hée which for the tendering of my safetie, passed not a point for the conspiracie of such as were of most power & pu∣isance, wil not now, in the maintenance of mine honour, beat down the spiteful spéeches of vile abiects, & tread vnder féete, their enuious slaunders? Wherfore, if, as you were wont, you loue mée: then take vpon you the whole charge of mine
estate, and thinke with your selfe, that this burthen, what so∣euer it be, must néedes be laid vpon your shoulders, least my renoune runne against rockes, and so suffer shipwracke. You are not ignoraunt, that my fortune (I can not tell by what meanes) doeth hardly escape the baytes of backebiters, my behauiour hathe not deserued, any such doggishe dealing: but makes it any great matter, sithence it commeth to passe, I know not by what destenie? If there be any, that peraduen∣ture, wil be quarelling at our dignitie, to blemishe and em∣paire it, I beséeche you to continue your accustomed courte∣sie, and liberall nature, in defending me whiles I am absent. The letters whiche I sent vnto the Senate, concerningIn Dalmatia. our affaires, I haue exemplified, and hereunder set downe, point by point, that you might not be vncertified. It is reported to me, that your clearke or Secretarie, hath plaide the fugitiue or runnagate, and is among the Vardeies: Touching whō, I had frō you no speciall precept: Neuerthelesse, I haue out cōmaundement before hand, that inquisition should be made after him both by Land and Sea: and vndoubtedly, I will finde him out, that you may be at quiet, except he hath taken flight intoThe name Dalmatia is deriued of the itie Daimni∣um, as Strabo ith. Lib. 7. Dalmatia, from whence (notwithstanding he lurk for a season) we intend to hunt him out, at one time or ano∣ther. It shalbe your part to loue vs still. Fare you well. Da∣ted, the. 5. of the Ides of Iulie: from Narona where I am in∣camped. Cicero to Uatinio. THE ARGVMENT. e giueth signification of his good will, as wel towardes the wife of Vatinius, as also towards Vatinius his owne person: Moreouer, he requesteth him, in no wise to faile, but to sende home againe his runnagate seruaunt Dionysius. THat my dueties of courtesie are wel accepted of you, I do not wnder. For of al men aliue, I haue known you most
thankefull: The letter of Vatinius whr unto this is an ans, was lost: as it is cudent to poue. whiche report I neuer ceassed to blase abroad, for the increase of your commendation. For you haue not onely giuen a testmonie of your good disposition in that case, vnto me by motions of minde, and vtterance of wordes, but your déedes also, haue in moste ample and large manner con∣firmed the very same. Wherfore, you shal hue knowledge & experience, that in all your affaires whatsoeuer, my desire is semblable vnto yours, and my wil al one in euery respect. Whereas you commend vnto mée, Pompeia your wife and partener, a woman of great noblenes and excellencie: I had communication with ur fréend Suca, immediatly vpon the perusing of your Epistle, whom I willed, to say thus muche vnto her, in my name: that, in what thing soeuer, shee stoode in néede of my seruice, it would please her to send me certifi∣cate, and it should be done, with singular care and speciall re∣garde, to the satisfaction of her owne desire: I will therefore do no lesse then I haue said, and I wil conferre with her per∣sonally, if the matter depend vpon necessitie. Howbeit, thus much I would haue you infourme her by writing, y• there is nothing, be it litle▪ or be it great, which may séeme vnto mée, either too hard to accomplish, or too bae and vile for a man of ny calling and countenance to attempt. All thinges, whiche I shall do, touching your businesse, shall vnto mee, be bothe easie and honest. Concerning my seruant Dionysius, that runnagate, let not your labour be lacking, if I am in your loue and fauour: what promise soeuer you make vnto him, I mée selfe will sée it perfourmet. If he be intractable, stu∣burne, and naughtily disposed, (as he is) you shall leade him in triumph as a It appeareth by this tht Dionisius was in the handes and power of Vatinius. captiue and prisoner. The GODS sénde a plague of confusion, among the Dalmatians, by whose meanes you are muche molested: But, according to the te∣nure of your writing, they shalbe taken shortly, and by them shall your prowesse be made famous: for they haue always béene counted Martiall and Warlike. Fare you well.
Cicero to Seruilio Jsaurico. THE ARGVMENT. He signifieth, how delectable a thing it was to him, to vnder∣stand the course of Seruilius his Nauigation, or trauaile by Sea: whome hee also desireth to certifie and sende him worde in writing, of the state of the Prouince, whiche he had in gouernement, together with the trade of his do∣inges, and affaires: finally, hee promiseth his seruice in al thinges, whatsoeuer requireable. MErueilous pleasant and ioyfull were your letters vnto mee: whereby I vnderstoode the course of your nauiga∣tions and voyages: for This Serui∣lius was Cice∣roes fellowe, in the office of the Augur∣shippe. you set downe a testimoniall of your remembraunce concerning our auncient societie and felow∣ship: then which, nothing in the world could minister vnto mée more delectation. It remaineth, that my ioy shalbe the more augmented, if you applie your penne to write vnto mée familiarly of the state of the common wealth, that is to say, the condition of your Prouince, and also of the trade of your dealing, as your ordinances, and other affaires: whereof, al∣though I am infourmed, by the reports of many, to your high honour, and renoune: yet notwithstanding, I would very wil∣lingly, by your letters, as more welcome messingers, be cer∣tified. I will nt write vnto you oftentimes, what I thinke toucheing the weale publique in generall, because the intercourse of suche letters are daungerous: But what is done heere shalbe reuealed vnto you by mine Epistles, whiche shall not be your sealdome visitoures. I am in hope thatIn the Au∣guship Phi∣lip. 2. & Dio. lib. 4. Caesar (our felowe officer) his care hereafter, and regarde presently, will so prouide, that wée may recouer some one state of a common wealthe: at whose counselles that you bee present, it seemeth to no small purpose: But,
if in your iudgement, it appeare more profitable, that is to say, more honourable, to be President and Gouernour in Asia, and to haue the tuition of that parte of the weale publique, whiche is in an yll case, and to be redressed: then the selfe same thing, whiche maketh best for the profite of your person, and is moste auayleable for your commen∣dation, ought of me also to be desired. Touching your digni∣tie, and what so euer else belonging to the same, I will take vppon mée the whole charge, and therein shewe my loue and diligence: and to Who bee∣ing surna∣med, Isauri∣cus, of Isaurū, in Pamphilia, left the same name to his sonne as a por tion of his in∣heritance. your Father I will haue a princi∣pall respect, as he is a right noble Gentleman, yeloing vn∣to him my helpe, with all humilitie and reuerence: vnto the perfourmaunce whereof, as to the requitall of due debt, I owe the vttermoste of my power, bothe for the aunci∣entnesse of our acquaintaunce, and for your singular bene∣fites: besides that also, for his owne honour and renoune. Fare you well. Trebonius to Cicero. ¶ TH ARGVMNT. He declareth how ioyful and glad he is, for the good and lau∣dable disposition of Cicero the yonger (meaning the Sonne) towardes vertue: he sendeth cetaine verses, which he wrote in the dpraise and repoche of an euill Citizen to Cicero the elder (supposeing the Father) desiring him to  and place them, among his owne discourses, written vppon the destruction and ouerthrowe of Caesar. IF ou be in healthe, it is well. I came to Athens the . of the Calendes of Iune, and there  was my chance (a thing answerable to my desire) to sée your sonne, a yong man addicted to y• best kinde of studi, and of a passing good reporte of modesty: which thing, what pleasure it ministred vnto me, you may wel vnderstād, albeit I kéepe silence. For you are not ignorant, howe much I doe
account of your person, and howe greatly, in (respect of the loue wherwith we are linked, not grounded vpon auncient nesse onely, but also vpon faithfulnesse, a moste firme and vn∣shaken foundation,) I reioyce for your sake, bothe for this so As a son ne of so vertuous an inclination which is a iew el of excee∣ding great ioy e. singular and precious a treasure, as likewise for all other small commodities redounding to your aduantage. I would not haue you suppose (my fréend Cicero) that I fll your eares with these rumors touching your sonne: but it is a common voice abroade howe hee is disposed. There is nothing in the worlde vniuersal, of them, whiche are in Athens more belued, then is this your, and also our young Gentleman Cicero, (for what thing can there be within the compasse of heauen, betwixt vs twaine, seueral and not commune?) there is, I say none more desirous, to attain, y• knowledge of those artes & sciences, whiche you haue in highest estimation, I meane, those that be of moste excellencie and perfection. Wherfore, I am glad wt al my hart on your behalfe, I speake vnfeignedly, and no lesse ioyfull for our owne sake, to tell the trueth with simplieitie: because ée whome of ne∣cessitie we ought to loue, howesoeuer his nature were in∣clined, is of so vertuous disposition, and commendable beha∣uiour, that me must of force, iudge him woorthie of our loue and kindenesse, continually. This your Sonne, and yong Gentleman Cicero, when among other communication be∣twixte him and mée interchanged, he had said that he would sée Asia, I did not onely desire him, but also earnesly be∣sught him to accomplishe that his purpose, at suche tyme principally as the state of the Prouince fell into mine▪ autho∣ritie & gouernment: vnto whom (doubt you not) such seruice shalbe exhibited, on ou parts, as, both  th, and courtesie challenget▪ Moreor, we will haue a  re∣gd, namely, thatThat fa∣mous Philo∣sopher in the peripateticall profession: Ep. 21. lib. 10. and lib . &. 3. of Offices. Ctippus, kéep him   leat per∣aduenture, you might imagine, that he intermitteth & ceas∣seth▪ from those notable exercises of learning whiles he ma∣keth his abode in Asia, wherunto you incited him by your fa∣theuly precoptes & hortations, whiles he continued in A∣thens: for we wil not be slack to incourage him by our coūsels
who is alreadie, as I sée, furnished to the purpose, and as it were with Looke in Flauius Vge∣tius, for the better vnder∣standing of Plenus gra∣dus militum. a full steppe marching forwarde, that he may dayly procéede further and further, bothe in the instructing of himselfe, to be the more skilful, and also in practising him∣selfe, to be the more cunning. Of your estate and affaires in the common wealth, I did knowe nothing, at the inditing and insealing of these letters: Certaine reportes I heard of hurlie burlies abroade, wherin I haue so litle delight, that I wishe with all my harte, they were but méere fables and vae forgeries, to the intent that the time may once come, wherein libertie, and quietnesse may be recouered and en∣ioyed: of whiche benefite I haue hitherto, béene depriued. Neuerthelesse hauing obteined a litle leasure and opportu∣tunitie,Or, whiles we were in the Shippe, & had not so many matters wher∣aboutes to be occupied. through the meanes of our nauigation, I haue per∣fourmed a present, to the renoune of your person, aunswera∣ble to mine owne minde, and manner: in the conclusion and end whereof, I haue set downe a worde, whiche you, to our high honour, haue fréely vttered: and I haue also, not denied mine assent to you, but subscribed accordingly. In the in∣uention and conueyance of whiche verses, if I shall séeme, in your iudgement, somwhat liberall in language: the vilenesse of the person, against whom we inueihe, shall dispense with our doinges in that case, and make them tollerable. You shall in like manner, pardon our anger, which is iustly kinde∣led against suche as he is, being bothe euill men, and no good Citizens. For end, why should it be more lawful for The write and deuiser of Satyres. Lu∣cilius, then for vs, to arrogate and take vnto himself, that li∣bertie in writing sithence those whom he harmed, he equal∣ly hated: and yet for all that, had not more notable aduersa∣ries, vpon whom he might violently rush with woundin wordes. It shalbe your parte, according to the summe of your promise, to interlace my deuises among your treatises, for I trauel not in dubitation hereof, but that, if you write any thing at all, touching theFor this Trebonius was one of them that mur thered Caesar. death and ouerthrowe of Cae∣sar, you wil bestowe some porcion, and the selfe same not the least both of the matter, (you knowe my meaning) and also of your good will, vpon me your petitioner. Fare you wel:
and account my mother and all my friends, as persons vnto you commended. Dated the. viij. of the Kalendes of Iune▪ From Athens. Cicero to T. Fabio. ¶ TH ARGVMENT He vseth seuen sundrie circumstances, to comfort Fabius, being in ex∣ile and banishment. ALthough I, who am desirous to beFrom the sorowe of himselfe: for it is a kinde of consolatiō, when wee sig∣nifie our sel∣ues, to be tou∣ched with mu tual sorowe. your comforter, haue more néed my selfe to be succoured: because nothing hath this long time, séemed vnto me more gréeuous and insuffera∣ble, thn your priuate dammage and discommoditie: yet notwitnding, I do not onely exhorte you, but also for the loue wh ith we are lincked, require and beséeche you, to be of good courage, that your behauiour may be correspondēt to manhoode and valiantnesse: & that, moreouer, you would call into consideration, what is theFrom the condition of all men. common condition of all men, & From the state of the times. the qualitie of y• troublesome times, wherein we are borne by destinies appointment. Your vertue hath attribu∣ted and giuen more vnto you, then yourFrom the comparing of ood thinges. fortune hath dero∣gated and taken from you: because you haue atchieued those things, which many haue wanted: & haue likewise lost that, wherof diuerse noble and honourable men are depriued. To conclude, such séemeth to be theFrom the feare of com∣mune calami∣tie. successe of lawes, statutes, iudgements, determinations, and seasons, that he may thinke himself very wel sped and excused, whose luck was no worse, then with so light and small a punishment, to depart out of the common wealth.Frō hope of restitution. As for you, that want not wealth, that are not destitute of children, that haue vs, and besides vs, di∣uerse gentlemen more, knit close vnto you in a couenant of especiall kindenesse, and beneuolence: besides that, sithence you alone, among so many, suffer the penaltie of iudgement Because it was vniust. worthy reprehension, and whiche, asFrō the opi∣nion of men. all holde opinion with one assent, though somewhat vncertaine, that through the power ofCaesar. one, you are pardoned: in consideration of all these
circumstances, you ought to estéeme your burthen, so muche the more easie and light, and to lette the gréefe, by the iniurie of vndeserued éxile ingendred, mildely of you be susteined. As for my heart, both towardes your selfe, and also towardes your children, it shalbe none otherwise affcted, then will in you, and dutie in me, doe require. Fare you well. Cicero to Rutilio. THE ARGVMENT. He desireth Rutilius, that in the diuision of landes, he would not med∣dle with the possessions of Albinus. FOr so muche as, bothe by mine owne knowledge I am in∣structed, how highly I estéeme of your person, and againe on the other side, haue had experience & triall of youre good wil towards me oftētimes professed, I was nothing scrupu∣lous or doubtful, to craue y• at your handes by the way of pe∣tition, which, by necessitie to craue I was constrained. What great account I make of P. Who at such time as he was Tribune of the people, brought Cice∣ro home again out of banish∣ment. Sextius, mine owne conscience is witnesse sufficient: and, in what reuerence I am bound of duetie to haue him, bothe you vnderstand, and no man can be ignorant. This Sextius, after he had béene certainely infour∣med, by the reportes of many, that I was déepely in your fa∣uour and friendshippe, requested me, to write vnto you, as earnestly and effectually, as was possible, touching the inhe∣ritances and possessions of C. Albinus the Senatour: of the body of whose daughter This is ap∣parant in the Oration made for Sextius. L Sextius an excellent youngman, and the sonne of P. Sextius, descended. Thus muche haue I written, to the intent you may vnderstand, that I ought, not only for P. Sextius sake, to bestow my labour, but that it be∣longeth to Sextius in like manner, for the behoofe of Al∣binus, to employ his diligent trauell. C. Albinus recei∣ued of A. M. Laberius certaine Manours and houldes, by Acording to the tenure of Caesars Lawe concerning valuation: lib. 3. comment. de bello ciuili. valuation and apprisement: whiche land Laberius had
bought before o Caesar, beeing (sometime) the interest and goodes of Plotius, If I say, it maketh not for the weale pub∣lique, to haue them diuided: I might seeme rather to beare the office of an admonisher, then to play the part of a petitio∣ner. Neuerthelesse, sithence it is Caesars wil and pleasure, that the ordinances and constitutions of Sylla touching buy∣ing and selling, should beWhen as Cae sar notwith∣standing, ha∣ted uche as were of the sect of Sylla. ratiied, confirmed, and established, to the end that they might be idged his by more lawe, and he therein to haue the better title: If those landes shalbe di∣uided, and those possessions parted, whiche Caesar himselfe hath soulde, what authoritie, I pray you, can there be in his bargains of sale, and what assurance? But the course of this cause, you, according to the worthines of your wisedome, shal call in consideration. I beséech you in this behalfe so earnest∣ly, & so hartily, as it is not possible for me to aske any thing in the world, with a greater desire, for a matter of more e∣quitie, or in more feruentnes of spirite, that towardes Albi∣nus, it would please you to vfe parcialitie, and at no hand to medle or make with the landes, whiche are fallen into his own age, from the right of Laberius. You shall make mée, not onely a man passing ioyfull and merrie, but you shall, in like māner, increase mine honour and renoune, if P. Sextius, by my mediation, may satisfie the minde of him whom I loue excéedingly, for so muche as I am his debter, in many pointes of dutifullnesse: which to perfourme and accomplishe, I be∣séech you with instance. You cannot bestow vpon me a more acceptable benefite, and therfore in fulfilling my request, you shall dooe me a passing pleasure. Fareyou well. Cicero to Ualerio. THE ARGVMENT. He desireth Valerius, that he would not suffer Curtius his ground to be diuided: which he goeth about to persuad by sundrie rea∣sons.
I Am nothing disquieted, nay rather I am delighted, that the Signifying somewhat a∣boue bare friendshippe. entier kindenesse whiche th vs twaine together, is knowen among very many. Howbeit, I am not, vnto you, any impediment or hinderaunce (as you may well conceiue and thinke) whereby the matter which you haue taken vpon you, at the appointment of Caesar & his good pleasure, might not so bée orderd, as to your credite and diligence is moste agréeable. For, sithence many clients resorte vnto mée, with their sundrie suites, as desirous of fortunate successe, because they are in a certaine persuasion, and vndoubted assuraunce, of your good will towardes me, as muche as may be, inclined: I am so circumspecte and aduised notwithstanding, that to your office, through ambition, & ouer much medling, I be not an impediment. Euer sinceHe claimeth courtesie by pleading of modestie. I was a childe, and knew what acquaintance ment, I and Q. Curtius, haue béene vnited in very great familiaritie: at whose miserie, as at the calamitie also of Syllaes time ful of tumult, I, am sory, and lament: and yet neuerthelesse, when as graunt was made by a generall consent, that such as had suffered semblable inconueniences, al that they were worth being vtterly lost and spoiled, should returne and enioy the libertie of their countrie, I withdrewe not my wil from the rest, for the furtherance of their safety. This C. Curtius hath a certaine possession, or péece of lande, lying in Volaterrano, wherto he conueyed the remnant of al his substance, as it were from the daunger of deuouring ship wracke. At this instant it hath pleased Caesar, to admit him among the order of Senatours: whiche place and office of dignitie, he can hardly & scantly mainteine, For none might be a Senatour, vn∣lesse his pos∣sessions were worth. D. C. C. C. thou∣sandes. Suetonius in Augusto. None might be a Gentle∣man of armes vnles he were worth. CCCC thousandes. None might be L. Cham∣berlaine or high counsel∣lour, vnlesse his abilitie were a. C. thousandes, not onely whiles the cō∣mon wealthe was standing, but in the times of the Emperours: as Plinie repor∣teth in an E∣pistle. this possession of his being not reserued & restored. And surely, it is a thing, thā which none can be more grieuous, that he whose honour is higher aduaunced, should of substance and wealth susteine greater dammage: neither is it conuenient, that he should be dispossesse of that land, which is deuided at Caesars commaū∣dement, who is made a Noble Senatour by Caesars benefi∣cence. But touching the equitie & vprightnes of the thing I haue smal stomach, to vse more words in writing, lest I shold séeme to account more of the circūstances of the cause, then to
estéeme of your fauour and loue. Wherefore I beséeche you moste earnestly, that you would suppose the suite of C. Cur∣tius, as pertinent to mine own person: in so much that, what soeuer you do for my sake, by way of request, concerning the present cause of C. Curtius, persuade your selfe that you do it for Cicero: and let your opinion be occupied in this point, that what he, by your benefite, obteineth, the very same likewise Cicero receiueth: Thus muche to put in proofe, and also to perfourme, I beséeche you once again, and that with earnest∣nesse. Fare you well, Cicero to P. Sulpicio. THE ARGVMENT. He maketh a declaration of his duetie: commendeth M. Bollanus: desireth Sulpicius to be a meane, whereby Dionysius his seruant might be apprehended. ALthough my recourse be not so often, in these dayes speci∣ally, to the Senate: yet notwith standing, when I Thinke, that this P. Sulpicius, and P. Vatinius, vnto whom certain Epis∣tles in the 6. booke are written, had the rule and charge of Illyricum, by e commaun dement of Caesar. your letter was of me read & perused: I did thinke that I might in no respect bee a hinderer of your honour & renoune, but that thereby our auncient fréendshippe should be ecclipsed, and a great portion of courteous duties, passing to and fro betwéen vs, vtterly banished. Wherefore, in your absence I failed not to be your furtherer, neither did I shewe my selfe dissolute or negligent in ordering a solemne supplication for your behoof: and as for regarde to your wealth, substaunce, reputation, & dignitie, therein I will shewe my selfe at no time wanting. To the intent therefore, that your acquaintance may not be ignorant, with what a loueing affection I am carefull ouer your person, it is my wil and desire, that by letters from you they be shortly certified: to the end, that, if in any thing you stand in néede of mine assistance, they may not be in suspensi∣on to infourme mée of the same. Touching M. Bollanus, a man of no lesse honestie, then valiantnesse, a man (I say) fur∣nished
with all thinges, and one whom I haue loued, as a fréend, of long continuance: I send you singular commēdati∣ons. You shall do me a speciall benefite, and suche a plea∣sure as a greater cannot be perfourmed, if you do your ende∣uour, that he may vnderstand, this my commendation vnto you in his behalfe commenced, to haue béene to him, a princi∣pall helpe and aduantage: of whose good demeanour you shal so well like, that you will take him to be (as he is) a vertuous Gentleman, and a courteous. I make you this assurance by faithfull promise, that through the fruite of his friendshippe, and vse of acquaintaunce, you shall reape exceeding delec∣tation, and swéetnesse aboue measure. Furthermore, I be∣séeche you instantly, as you tender our kindenesse and famili∣aritie, and for the loues sake whiche vnto mee you haue per∣petually professed, that in this point, you would spare no paines, but labour to the vttermoste. Of him is menciō made, Ep. 9. lib. 15. to the same effect. Dionysius my ser∣uant, to whom I cōmitted the charge of my bookes, accounts and monie, after he had by stealthe conueyed away many, of those things, wherof I put him in credite, and suspecting that his offence was suche, as deserued due punishment, he tooke his héeles, and by flight sought for refuge. He is lurking in one corner, or other, of your Prouince. M. Bollanus my familiar friend, and diuerse other a great many, saw him inI finde no∣thing thereof written, saue that it was a riuer in Dal∣matia, now called Naren∣ta. Ptol. lib. 2. cap 17. but it should seeme, in this place, to be the name of some coun∣trie. Narona: to whom, after certain conference, when he had coyned this excuse, that he was, by me, manumised & set at libertie, they gaue credite to his report, & let him escape. If you wil vouch∣safe for my sake, to bestowe some labour, that he may be ap∣prehended, and sent backe againe to me his maister, what a benefite I shall receiue by your paines therein employed, I am not able, by vtteraunce, to testifie. The matter it selfe is but momentanie and light, but the gréefe of my minde is ve∣hement and great. Bollanus will instruct you in what place he abideth, and, what is to be done in this case, if you will vse his aduise. If it be my lucke to recouer the fugitiue fellowe, I wil thinke mée selfe, to haue receiued an excéeding great pleasure. Fare you well:
Cicero to Philippo. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth Oppius and Egnatius to Philippe the Proconsul, the one being present, and the other being absent. ALthough This L. Phi∣lippus was, (as I suppose) bro ther to Lu. Phi lippus father in Lawe to Au gustus. L. F. ▪ N. the reuerence & certaintie of our olde acquain∣tance, driueth all doubtfulnesse into banishment, that I cannot choose, but thinke my commendation to be ingraffed in your remembraunce: yet notwithstanding, I am constrai∣ned of courtesie, to commend, and recommend the same, L. Oppius my familiar friend being present: and the affairs of L. Egnatius, in his absence, to your patronage and defence. So great and so sure is the fréendshippe, whiche knitteth our hartes together, and so firme is the foundation of our famili∣aritie. that I can not but labour, as earnestly in his businesse, that it might be furthered, as I would trauell in mine owne matters, to haue thē mainteined. Wherfore, I shal persuade mee selfe to bée a partaker of a principal benefite, if through your procurement, it may come to passe, that he may vnder∣stand, suche to be your fauourable and courteous vsage vnto my person, as I haue alwayes thought and estéemed. Than this pleasure, I cannot receiue a greater, at your handes: wherfore, to sée to the perfourmance of the same, I desire you moste earnestly. Fare you well. Cicero to Seruilio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth Andron, the sonne of Arthemon, of Laodicea. WHiles I was resident in my Prouince of Cilicia, wher∣unto (as you knowe) thrée iurisdictions of It appeareth that Laodicea, at that time, belonged to the gouern∣ment of Asia: and not to Cilicia. for Asia was in the administra∣tion and rule of Seruilius. Ep. 68. lib. 13. Asia were assigned, I vsed the companie of no man so familiarly, as of
Andron, the sonne of Arthemon the Laodicean: with him I tooke vp my lodging when I was in that citie, and I had in his house very curteous intertainment: besides that, he was a man (in my thinking) meruelous fit for my fashion of life, and such a one as I delighted much to be conuersant withal. From whō after I had departed, I began to féele more kind∣nes kindling in my hart, to the cōrmation of further freend∣ship: because in many circumstances, I had experience of his acceptable seruice, and was throughly instructed by trial ta∣ken, that he was not vnmindefull of mée being absent. In consideration of whiche premisses, I was right glad when I sawe him at Rome. For you are not ignorant, sithence your bountie hath extended and stretched it selfe, to a great num∣ber in this Prouince, howe many Gentlemen there be found of a thankefull nature, and of manners not to be misiked. These thinges haue I written, of purpose, to let you vnder∣stand, that I haue a necessary cause offred me, to employ this present labour, and that you might so iudge of him, as of one woorthie of your courtesie, and deseruing gentle entertaine∣ment. I shal therefore be muche beholding to your good∣nesse, if you expresse and make manifest vnto him, as it were by euidence or witnesse, how you loue mée, and in what cre∣dit I am with you, and howe you estéeme of my person: that is to say, if you receiue him to fauour, vouchesfe to be his patrone and defender, finally, if it shall please you, in al cases and quarelles, (So farr forth to be his mainteiner, as your owne honestie and the wor∣thinesse of your owne person will suffer. Ep. 22. lib. 1. & 31. & 32. lib. 13. your honour kept vnblemished, and proui∣ded also that you be not thereby molested) to be his furthe∣rer. This shall make marueilously for my commoditie, and to the satisfaction of my réquest shalbe most effectual: which that you would do, I beséeche you hartily. Fare you well. Cicero to P. Silio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He giueth Silius thankes for the honour exhibited to Nero: whom he commendeth highly in all kinde of circumstances.
MY fréend As I conice∣ture, this was T. Claudius Nero, from whom Augus∣tus lead away Luia great with childe. Nero hath giuen you infinite thanks, yea such thankes, as are bothe maruelous & incredible: reporting vnto mée (in your highe commendation) that there was no degrée of honour which was possible to be bestowed, but you exhibited the same vnto him, for his speciall aduauncement. The profite and aduantage, whiche you are like hereafter to obteine, is As who should say: is great. neither smal nor indifferent. For, then that yong Gentleman, nothing is more worthie acceptation: and (out of questiō) I must néeds acknowledge, ye you haue done me a principal pleasure: for there is not one among all the Nobili∣tie, whom I haue in more estimation. Wherefore, if it shall please you to accomplishe those affaires, which he is desirous should fall in your charge and disposing, together with my la∣bour and industrie: I shall thinke my selfe so gratified, as if you had oen me the greatest good turne in the worlde. And first, touching Pausanias Alabandensis, supporte his estate, maintaine his condition, til Meaning, aboue named Nero. Nero his comming: For I know thus much, that And also Pausanias Ala∣badensis. he is wonderfull earnest, in And also Pausanias Ala∣badensis. his behalfe: and therefore is my request also the more vehement. More∣ouer, touching the Citizens of Na▪ a citie in Lydia. Nisaeas, of whom Neo maketh speciall account, defending and protecting them moste diligently, so take the charge ouer them, that of their estate you shew your selfe moste carefull: t the intent, the whole citie may vn∣derstand, that the supportation and countenance of Nero, is to them a singular sagarde. I haue commended Strabo Ser∣uilius vnto you oftentimes: and do the same againe at this instant, with more feruentnesse, because it hath pleased Nero to take vpon him the maintenaunce of Straaboes cause defen∣ded by Nero. his matter. Thus much by way of petitin, I craue at your handes: that you would deale in his cause, and not leaue him that is innocent & blamelesse, to the gaine of any one vnlike to your owne per∣son. This shalbe vnto mée, a point of duetie moste accepta∣ble: and I shall haue occasion, in like manner, to thinke, that your vsage is leauened with gentlenesse. The full scope of this Epistle, is, that you would adorne Nero to the vtter∣most of your power (as you haue determined and done alrea∣dy) with al ensignes of honor. The Prouince where you are,
hath a goodly great In the whi∣che Neoes vertues may be eene. Theatre, & of beholders no small mul∣titude, not as this our prouince, it hath I say many viewers of a yong Gentleman right nobly disposed, indued with wise∣dome, and such a one as is not gréedie of glorie, nor couetous of commendation. Wherefore, if he shalbe furthered by your fauour, as he is at this present, I hath in times past, he shalbe able to confirme and establishe those excéeding great retinues which he receiued of his auncestours, and shall binde them with the aboundance of his benefites. If you shal assist him in this order, your labour shalbe marueilus wel Vpon Nero, who will de∣serue your great courte∣fie. bestowed, and you shall impart to me, in semblable maner, a singular benefite. Fare you well. Cicero to C. Paeduceino. ¶ THE ARGVMENT This Epistle conteineth a commendation of M. Fabius. I LoueI thinke him to be the very same whom (in the second booke of his familiar Epistes) he cō∣mendeth to Coelius. M. Fabius entirely, with whom mine acquaintance is, not onely very great, but also auncient. I demaund not of you, what your determinations be, touching his controuer sies: (you shall saue, as your credite and dignitie requireth, your statute and ordinaunce) but my petition vnto you, is, that he haue easie accesse to your person: that he may obtein those thinges, which are not repugnant to equitie, your will in no point withstanding: and that he may sée iust cause, and take euident proofe of my fréendshippe, how appliable it is to procure his profite, especially through you, with whome my woordes are not vnlikely to preuaile. Not to faile in this case, I beséeche you moste earnestly. Fare you well. Cicero to C. Munatio. THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth L. Regulus, his free man, whose name was L. Luci neius, vpon certaine circumstances, seeming vnto him not vnne∣cessary, to be repeated.
L Lucineius Trypho is the frée man of L. Regulus my moste familiar frend, and best acquainted: the considera∣tin of whose calamitie causeth me to shewe mée selfe more officious towards him, and to exhibite larger dueties of hu∣manitie, to do him pleasure. For, my beneuelence doeth neither ebbe nor flowe, but continueth at a stay vnuariable, and therefore as my good will hath béene in times past, so is it at this present: Howbeit, Trypho is suche a one as I loue by him selfe, seuerally. For the seruice which he shewed, to do me good, in those our stormy times, was singular and excée ding great, in those dayes (I say) of ours loaden, as it were, wt daungers, when I had a perfect perseuerance in discerning the bounteus inclinatiō of people, or (at least) skil sufficient, in perceiuingFrom suche as vsed preten ces playing the counter∣fectes. their faithfulnesse. We do so commend him to your protection, as men defying ingratitude, and sworne enimies to forgetfulnesse, ought (being bound of duetie) to commend them, that haue well deserued. You shal seale your friendshippe vnto mée with a principall pleasure, if he may vnderstand (because for my saftie he hath thrust himself as it were vpon He hath put himselfe into many dange∣rous duen∣tutes. sharpe pikes, and for my sake hath passed many a voyage by sea, in the coulde time of winter) that some part of his seruice hathe beene to your aduantage: whiche, the goodwill that I beare towardes you, requireth. Dolabella to Cicero. THE ARGVMENT. Dolabella, Cicero his sonne in lawe, persuadeth his father, either to take part with Caesar, or else to conuey him selfe from warre, into some citie where he may liue in peace. If you haue your health, I reioyce, I am well, and so is our Tullia, as for Whom Pli∣me reporteth to haue liued a hundred yeares and eight. Terentia, she was not all after the best: but I am certaine, she is nowe receuered, and wareth strng a∣gaine: to be short, all thinges with you are in suche good case, that they cannot be better. Although there be no cause, why
you should haue mée in suspicion at any time, that I séeke to persuade you, as more regarding the part of Caesar, then ha∣uing respecte to your safetie and good estate, to ioyne your selfe in confederacie, either with him and vs, or else, for your owne preseruation, to séeke after ease and tranquillitie: yet notwithstanding at this present, especially, sithence theFor Pom pe∣ius had lost I∣talie & Spaine as hereafter in this present e∣pistle, is men∣cioned. vic∣torie is so farre from being pessessed, that it is in small like∣lyhoode to be atchieued, I can cōceiue none other opinion, but this, that I am drawne by duetie, to deale with you, touching your estate and affaires, by order of persuasion, because I cannot in this poinct vse taciturnitie and silence, saueing the zeale and affection which in mée, towards you, For affiniti sake, because Dolabella ma ried Cicero his daughter. is naturally required, harmelesse and vndiminished. As for you (my Ci∣cero) accept my woordes in such sorte, and haue such liking of my counsell, that whether you allowe it, or whether you dis∣anull it, as well my meaning, as also my writing, may séeme in your iudgement, to haue had issue from a gentle heart, courteously disposed, and to your goodnesse most bounden and obedient. You are not vnaduised, that C. Pompeius, notwith∣standing his By which circumstan∣ces he obtey∣ned that sur∣name of Mag nus, to be cal∣led▪ Pōpie the great. name of noblenesse, his title of dignitie, his re∣nowne in feates of armes, hispuisance in martiall exploites, his power by the meanes of the protection of kinges & coun∣tries, is in daunger: & that this which fortune denieth not to any one of inferiour degrée, cannot fall to his lott to obteine, namely to prepare flight, saueing his honour & honestie,  that hée is driuen out of Italie, now that hée hath the repu out of Spaine, his tried armie, and proued souldioursIn Spaine. taken, and hée himselfe At Dyrra∣chium. compassed round about on all sides, and so enuironed, that hee cannot escape: the like lucke whereof, whether any Emperour of ours tasted at any time, I am ig∣noraunt. Wherefore, what hée, or your selfe, may hepe for hereafter, cōsider and wey wl in your owne mind, according to the worthinesie of your wisedome, for so shall you, with great facilitie, take such counsell, and vse such aduisement, as to your owne person wil proue in sine, most profitable. Thus much more I desire of you, that, if hée haue escaped his daun∣ger, and kéepe himselfe close in the Nauie, that he be not be∣wrayed,
to be From that which is pro∣fitable. carefull of your owne affaires, not to neglecte your owne estate, which ought most of all to moue you, and now at length, towards your selfe, rather then to any other, to vse more friendship. You haue done seruice sufficient al∣ready,From that which is ho∣nest. The like to this, is in Virgil. To Priam & thy counrie: Th'ast shewed sufficiēt duetie. as well in consideration of duetie, as als in respect of acquaintaunce. Both parties are satisfied, and that common wealth, which you haue alwayes liked and loued, alloweth your doing, and is not discōtented. It remayneth, that where the weale publique is at this present, there wée also abide and be resident, rather then, whiles wée buisily hunt after an estate old and aunciente, wee haue none at all, but be quite dispossessed. In consideration of which premisses, I wishe you (my best beloued Cicero) that if peraduenture Pompeius being expelled also out of Pompeius was assaulted and set vppon at Dyrrhachi∣um a citie in Sicilie, now (as some sup∣pose) called Durazo. these places, flée of force and con∣straint, to other regions, to take your way to Athens, or else to some other citie, as it shall please you, for the enioyinge of quietnesse: which thinge if you shall doe, not reiecting my counsell tending to your commoditie, I would haue you cer∣tifie mée by your letters, that I, if by any meanes it is possi∣ble, may hasten to sée you well settled. Whatsoeuer, pertey∣ning to your dignitie and worthinesse, remaineth to be obtei∣ned of the Emperour, it is as easie as hearte can conceiue, (such is the clemencie and gentlenesse of Caesar) to gett it, for your furtheraunce: besides that, my requeste in your  vnto him, humblie made, shall preuaile and winne no  authoritie. It belongeth to you, as a badge of your bountie, to procure that the selfe same messenger, whome I sent vnto you with my letters, may returne, bringing backe againe from you, to mée, a conuenient aunsweare. Fare you well.
Cicero to Dolabella. THE ARGVMENT. Hee writeth to Dolabella, in his highe aduauncement and commenda∣tion, because hee ouerthrewe a piller that was erected, and sett vpp in open place of assemblie, to Caesar as it were to a God. Read the 4 booke ad Atticum, and Lactantius lib. 1. Cap. 15. ALthoughe I grudge not, ne repine (my He was no lōger sonne in law to Cicero▪ for he & Tul∣lia were diuor ced. Lib. 11. E∣pist. ad Articū. Dolabella) at your glorious renowne, but reape thereby great ioy, and pleasure vnspeakable: yt I cannot, but acknowledge and confesse, that by the popular reporte and opinion, I am ac∣compted and thought a partener of your praise. I séeke con∣ference with no man, and yet I haue daily communication, not with a fewe (for there are very good men, a great multi∣tude, who for the regard of their health, and maintenaunce of their owne safetie, haue recourse to Meaning Bae iae, a towne in Campania, ful of pleasaunt commodities, Epist. 12. lib. 9. where, it shold seeme he was: or else in Cu∣mano or Tus∣culano. these quarters: be∣sides them, there resort hether many of mine acquaintance, out of diuerse townes incorporate, not▪ of any great distance) but they all, one with another, Because you ouerhrew the piller and the altar which was erected to Caesar, of purpose to make him a God. aduauncing you with prai∣ses aboue hilles and mountaines, yea to the very heauen, giue great thankes vnto mée, immediatly thereuppn. For they say, that they are grounded vppon such assuraunce, and are in such certaintie of knowledge, that you, by shewing your selfe attentiue to my preceptes, and to my counsells be∣ing obedient, practise the part and duetie of an excellent citi∣zen, and frame your selfe to such commendable vsage, as thereby you are proued a For Dolabel la & Antonie were fellowe Consuls. singular Consul. To whom, al∣thoughe I can make a most true aunswere, that in your déedes, you followe your owne aduise and iudgemente, as not néeding any other mans counsel: yet notwithstanding, I do not assent thereunto manifestly, least I should seeme to di∣minish your cōmendation, if al the praise were ascribed to the benefite of my iudgement: neither yet wil I séeme vtterly to make deniall: for, in deede, I am more vaineglorious then I néede. Howbeit, y• is not repugnant to your renowne, which made much for the honour of Homer, in Iliad. lib. 1. who being  king, ad the  o th  in whoe  wee ∣ny kings. Agamemnon y• king of kings,
and prince without , to haue a sage Nestor for his wie unsellour: as for ée, I thinke my name not a litle nobled, n y• you being but a young man, and bearing the worthie of∣ce of a Consul, enioy the floure, & s I may say, y• pearle of praises, that you (I say) being, as it were H  hi is . pi▪ 17. lib 8. & 7. & . lib . my pupill and scho∣ler, weare the goodly garland of commendation▪ L▪ Caesar vn∣, when I cae to him in his sicknesse to Ad Atticm Epi. 17. li. 1. Naples, al∣though euery part of his body, both limme & ioynt were dis∣seased: yet notwithstanding, before salutation or grting fi∣nished, these words vnto me he vttered. O my friend Cicero, how reioyce I in thy behalfe, for that Dolabella hath thee in such estimation: and if I were in as great countenaunce with my M. Antoni∣us, Dolabella his fellowe Conul, whose mother sued asterward L. Caear her bro ther, when hee was a pro∣script or out∣lawe. sisters sonne, our safetie had not beene now to re∣couer, but long ago restoared. Touching your Dolabella, I see iust cause to bee ioyfull, and likewise to bee thanckefull: whom nexte and immediatly after you, wee maye well and deseruedly call by the name of a Consul. After continuance of communication, he spake very much of your notable déede and famous enterprise, affirming, that nothing was done at any time before, tendinge more to the renowne, the honour, and th Appi lib. 4 de bello ciui∣li. safegard of the common wealth: And this reporte of L. Caesar, in your highe commendation, is common in the mouth of all men: yea, it is the conspiring voyce of the people, to the increase of your praise. But I pray you, giue me leaue to succéede you, though Because it sprang not frō mee, as from the naturll stocke, and▪ therfore I am to craue and not to chalēg. not as a right, yet as a counterfect or bstardlike hire, in the inheritaunce of honour: and suffer mée to enter, as it were into possession, of some part or portion of your praises: howbeit my Dolabella (for whatsoeuer I haue before spoken, procéedeth of pleasure and iesting) I am muche more willing, all my commendations and titles of dignitie (if I haue, at least, any in owneage) to runne wholie into y• riuers of your rnowne, then to draw any one drop of your dignitie, for the inlargement of mine owne reputation and honour. For my loue and affection towardes you, hath béene hoat and feruent, as you might well perceiue: yea, so much y• more is my kindnesse kindled, through y• consideratiō
of these your famous feates, that in loue nothing is possible to be more ardent or fierie, no not in the highest degrée: and good reason why: Because, Nothing in the world vniuersal, beleeue mee, then vertue is more beautifull, more precious, more louely, or amiable. I haue alwayes borne goodwill (as you knowe) to M. Brutus, for the singularitie of his wise∣dome, the swéetenesse of his behauiour, his incomparable ho∣nestie, and his surpassing constancie: Yet notwithstanding, in the On the vrie same day that he and his cō∣panions slewe Caesar: Epi. 28. Lib. 10. Ides of Marche, so much was added to the loue which I bare him, that I wondered, how it might be possible, that loue to increase, which séemed so to abound and duerflowe. What man would thinke, that the loue which I both profes∣sed, and perfourmed towards you, could in any one point ée augmented? Yet it hath so proued, that neuer vntill now I séenied to The latine copie hath A∣mare, and Di∣ligere, the first exceedeth the last. Epist. 1. ad M. Bruum. Clodius saith, hee, Valde me diligit, fauou∣reth me great ly. loue you: in times past, but t fauour you▪ Wher∣fore, what remayneth wherin I should giue you exhortation?  hue a regard of your renowne, and not to be negligent of yur glorse? Should I sot before your eyes, as it were a spec∣ or looking glasse, men of great noblenesse and passing , as they are accuomed to doe, that vse such an order of imitation? I haue none more honourable then your owne person: bée an example to your selfe of prowee, and wrestle with your selfe in worthinesse: Nay, shal I tel you what? It is now highe time for you to degenerate, & to b vnlike your selfe, sithens your aduentures haue béene so manfull, & your déedes so famous: which being as it is, exhortation is not ne∣cessarie to be vsed, but reioycing is requisite, and may not bée refusd. For, that hath chaunced vnto you, which hath for∣tuned to none besides, at least to a very fewe in my thinking, that For the peo∣ple are better pleased with clemencie & gentlenes▪ thē with  and sharpnes. Ad Atticum lib. 10. Epi. 4. great rigour and sharpe reuenge in punishment, should bée not onely not enuyed, but also highly praised, and mst ac∣ceptable with men of vertuous disposition: yea, with euery commoner, and person of inferioritie. If this lott had fallen into your lappe, by a certaine luck, I would haue reioyced at your good fortune and felicitie: but the valliauntnesse of your heart, the worthinesse of your wisedome, and the efficacie of your counsel, are the causes of this your prosperous chaunce.
For I haue read ouer your Oration. then which nothing in my iudgemēt, is polished with more prudēce: your order was so séemely, both in clyming as it were by degrées, or footinge forward to the very cause, and reuolting from the cause to y• person of your selfe, that the That euery man thought you might lawfully take reuengement, vpon all those which erected and raised vp a piller or co∣lumne to the deifying of Caelr. very euent of the thing, gaue you leaue & libertie to punish: none to the contrarie withstan∣ding. In cōsideration of which your déede, y• Citie is deliuered from daunger, and sett frée from feare: neither was the com∣moditie, which you procured, being exceding great, temporal and momentanie, but perpetual and euerlasting, yea, such as shall succéede you, shall take it as an example for imitation, endenouring to doe the like: So that now, by this your fa∣mous feate, thus much you are to vnderstand, that the com∣mon wealth leaneth and stayeth it selfe vpon your shoulders: and not the maintenaunce onely, but the aduancement al∣so of such persons, the As if he said That which re maineth is lo∣ked for, of you to be per fourmed. beginning of whose libertie did pro∣céede from you, is reerred vnto you, and vppon you depen∣deth. But touching these matters, wée will haue confe∣rence shortlie more at large, as I hope: and as for you (my Dolabella) because you are a preseruer of the weale publiqu and our defnder, I counsel you to sée to your owne safeti, carefully and diligently. Fare you well. Cicero to Papirio Paeto. THE ARGVMENT. Hee answereth to two Epistls of Paetus, to the first▪ in this order, that he is of right, touched with a certaine deite of his wellare, the force of whose loue towards himselfe, hee hath tasted, and the pleasaunt∣nesse of whose witt hee hath highly esteemed: to the second e an∣sweareth in this sorte, that it maketh no matter, whether he be at Rome or at Naples: sithence at Rome, all thngs are vnder one mans gouernment: wherefore, hee saith that hee continueth in this opini∣on, to buy a house to inhabite in at Naples. I Will frame an aunsweare, o your two seuerall letters: one of the which I receiued two dayes past, at the hands of The names of two seruāts the last of whi che was a car∣rier of letters. Zethus: the other was deliuered mée by Meaning his carefulnes whereunto he hath relatiō. Phileros. By the former letter I vnderstoode, that my carefulnes for your
welfare, was verie acceptable: De diuina li. 1. de sini. lib, 5 the same or∣der of speach had pacuuiu, and Africanus the lesser vsed: Festus & Sc∣neca Lib. 19. Epist. whereof I am glad you haue attained the certaine knowledge: but beléeue mée, my letters cannot make you such substanciall assurance, of my desire touching your safetie, as it is Rome whi∣che he prefer∣reth bfore Athens: For e∣uery mā doth rater cōmēd his owne natu ral countrie, thē a foreign and straunge region. in déede, & triall hath te∣stified. For, although I sée my selfe, of many had in reuerce, (as I cannot otherwise report) and excéedingly beloued: Yet amonge them all, there is not, so much as on, in whō I reape such delight and pleasure. For, in so much as your kind hart towards mée is greatly inclined, (which you haue not, this long time changed nor discontinued, but euen at this instant, constantly put in practise) it is a thing not lightly to be regar∣ded, & whether I maye saye chiefely to be estéemed, I am vn∣certaine, but doubtlesse, I may say cōmune to you and many more a great number: howbeit, in that your merits are such, as they winne goodwill, and be, as it were, baites to beneuo∣lence, besides that, your vsage hauing in it such swéetnesse, & all kinde of delight somnesse, these properties are your owne, by title of due possession. To these your maners most séemely for a man, your talke replenished with pleasant meriments, not answerable to the trade of the Atheniens, but agréeing to the custome of the auncient Romanies, yea, correspondent to that which sprang vpp in the verie bsome of the Rome whi∣che he prefer∣reth bfore Athens: For e∣uery mā doth rater cōmēd his owne natu ral countrie, thē a foreign and straunge region. Citie: as for mée, (thinke you, as you list and like) I am meruelously delighted with merrie conceites, vttered with a pleasaunte grace, chiefely with them that bréede in oure owne countrie, (amonge the Romanes, I meane) and specially, when I per∣ceiue them to haue a smack and smel of auncient Latium, at such time as outlandish language was brought into this ci∣tie, which sauoureth at this present, so much of A part of Gal lia, where the people did weare long mantels. Gallia Bra∣chata & He speaketh those woords, because Caesar had made ma∣ny that came from Gallia trāsalpina, free denizens in Rome. Transalpina, that of our old merimentes, there is no apperāce remayning. Wherfore, at what time I haue a sight of you, me thinkes (to tel the truth without gloase of lying) I sée the Gentlemē ful of merie con∣ceites: To Lae∣lius in the 1. de o si. he as∣scribeth a pleasant coun : and in lib. de cla∣is. Ora hee commendeth him for his trmme elo∣quent tongue. I meruale he forgot Cae∣sar brother to Catulu, who exceeded al other in vt∣teng dlight some eastes with a coue∣nient grace. Lib. 1. de ofi. & lib. 2. de Ora. Gracchies, the Lucilies, the Crassies also, & the Laelies: and all the auncient Romanes in that thing famous & memo∣rable. I would I were dead, if besides you, I knowe one left, in whom I maye acknowledge the image of oure aunciente and domestical pleasauntnesse to continue, and remaine.
To these swéete and delectable iastes in communication,  so great le is lincked, and all for my cōmoditie, mer∣aile you that I was so sore discouraged, vppon the conceite of your health, which I wuld not haue to be in hazard: As touching your purgation or excuse, which you vsed in your other letter, that did not dissuade me from purchasing a new house at Naples, wherein to inhabite, but that you did rather cosell mée to make mine aboade still in the citie: I ooke your meaning aunswearable to your words. Howbeit, thus much I perceiued then, and by this letter I vnderstand no lsse, your opinō to haue tended to this marke, that I might lawfully (of which minde I méeselfe was) not giue ouer all mine affaires in the citie vtterly, but a great part of them for my priuate quietnes. You alledge vnto mée in this behalfe, Catulus for an example, and those times full of troubles: but wherein am I and Catulus to be likened and compared? It was no pleasure vnto mée, no, not when I was vniustly con∣demned to exile, to discontinue long from the safegard of a common wealth: For wée satt at y• sterne, and had the weale publique in ur rule and gouernement: but now we haue no place allowed vs, no not scarsely next We are con∣tempible per son, and tho∣ughte vnwor∣thi of any place, though neuer so vile and obsure. the pump, or the sinck∣hole. Thinke you, that the actes and ordinaunces of the Se∣nate would be the fewer, if I were at Naples? When I am resident at Rome, the Iudges are assembled by my meanes, the court and counsell, thorough my procurement, gather to∣gether, the decrs▪ of the Senate are ntred into writig, in the house of your * welwiller, and my familiar friend: & sure∣ly, when it commeth into his memorie, I am admitted to theEpi. 25. lib. 9. some thincke that these woordes are spoken ironi∣cally. penning of mine opinion: and I heard say, that there was a report brought to Armenia and Syria, that the decrée of y• Se∣nate (as it was said) was not disagréeable to my iudgement, long before the matter was menconed. I would not haue you thinke that I am disposed to ieast: For, let this not bée vnknowne to you, that I haue had deliuered to my handes, letters from kinges of farre countries, wherein they giue me great thankes, in that I call them by such a As, by the name of kings. royall name, and ascribe vnto them, in the vtteraunce of my sentence so
tles eing guoran  no only whther they ucre so called, but also not knowing in the world, whether they mo∣unted to the same, by the  of their byrth. What th is there to be say further? So long as he shal remaine He speaketh of Caes, wō the Senat had created censor, or magistrate for the refor∣mation of ab ses in ∣our, for the terme of three yeares. Diod. lib. 43. our president and gouernour, for the reformation of manners: so long as he shall occupie the name of a magistrate, I will be ruled by your aduiemēt: but when his office is resigned, and he from hene departed. I wll acquaint my selfe with your cheare, though it be but simple: If I shall be prouided of an house, for ten dayes space, I will disbursse for euery day, after y• rate appointed, by the lawes made for expences. But if I shall finde none to do me seruice, nor to my contentation, then haue I determined to take vp my lodging, in your man∣sion. For I am certaine, that I can not please you better, thē to reape the aduauntage of such an occasion. Touching Sul∣lane house, I was in desperat dout of it, as in my last letters vnto you directed, I let you vnderstande, howbeit I haue not quite forsaken it. I would haue you, according as you write, to haue carpenters about you. and to viewe it where it is decayed, and standeth in néede of repayring. For if the walles be not ruinous, nor the roofe rotten, of the rest I shall like well enough. Fare you well. Thus farre out of the fami∣liar Epistles of M. T. Cicero.
THE EXTRACT OF Epistles, out of Isocrates, the excellent Rhetorician among the Atheniens. Isocrates to Philippo. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Isocrates purposing to nde to Philippe an Oration, touching th reconciliation of the Graecians, and the assaulting of the Barbari∣ans, penned this Episle, being as it were, a smmarie of the whole Oation, and a meanes to mouhis maiestie to the reading and perusing of the same: in so much that it appeareth to be nothing else, but a preamble or entrance into that Oration, which is inti∣tuled, Oratio Philippica: The Oration to king Philip. IF I were in the pearle of my youth, and had in my bones marrowe: in my limmes and ioynts strength, and in the rest of the parts of my body, desired abilitie, I wold not make wri∣ting, the instrument to speake vnto your This epistle was written to Philip king of Macedonia fa ther to the great Alexan∣der, the noble conquerour: in the beginning whereof Iso∣crates goeth a bout, by way of excuse to purchase fa∣uour: and by comparison to moue atten∣tiuenesse. maiestie. But for so muche as, I am entred into my wrinkled & withered age, which with mine accustomed exercise is at disagréement (for I am much hindered, by rea∣son of my yeres, and yet as the case nowe standeth, the mat∣ter may be dealt in, conneniently:) I will attempt to dclare to your highnesse, after what order thinges may be brought to pass, and, as I meane, established. I am not to learne, what difference there is in persuading by liuely voye, and by giuing aduise in letters, the messengers of the mynde: not only, for that there is more facilitie and easinesse obteined, when matters called in question, all in conference of per∣sons
present, then there is, when hand writing and Epistles passe too and fro in absence and distance: or bycause all people are more applyable, to count that which the toung r∣porteth, deseruing more credite and that which the pen de∣cyphereth, worthy of lesse beliefe: listening to those, as to things of certaintie, but attending to these, as to shadowes of immagination: but most of all, & principally, for that in con∣uentes and méetings, and intermingling of communication, if any word, clause, or sentence, escape in speach, not (perad∣uenture) aply vnderstoode, or, not so redily beléeued, the per∣son in presence, with little labour, may cure both the incon∣ueniences. But if so be that in writing, any such scrupous and doubtfull circumstaunce appeare, there is no man (the liely interpretation of the writer wanting: or the authors apologie to séeke, by occasion of his absece) that ma mini∣ster a medicine to heale vp the maladie. , for so much as y• iudgemēt of y• whole matter, is in your maiesties por, I am  vpon hope and aiaūce, that our  sal   om being itlesse, that it is like to wi singular credite, and to preaile much with your highnesse: not mistrusting, but that your grace (cutting off all impedi∣ments to the contrarie) will ake a viewe of the cause, & wy the same, not superficially, but with due cōsideratiō. A point of rhetorque, cal led Occupatio with som what a liberall ad∣monition vn∣der a counter∣fet shewe of praise and cō∣mendation. Some thee were, who hauing recoure & mutuall alke with your pisance, did what they could to diuade & withdraw me frō mne honest purpose, saying, that you had fatterers & meal∣mouthed merchants in high estimation: but that such as told you truth with simpliciti, & gaue you precepts poudered wt prdence (then which, nothing more necessarie for a prince) ere in , disdain, hate, & detestation: whose words & aine speaches, if I had taken for For things of certeintie & vndoubted truth. Oracles, I had altogether stayed my pen, neithe had I presumed to write my minde in paper. But no mans talke shal be of such authoritie, as to per suade me that it is possible, any man to ecell others, in re∣noune purchased by famous feates of armes, or in y• praise & worthinesse of wisdome, excep to other he shew him selfe a scholer, a hearer, a benefactour: and soprouide, of him selfe,
(by al meanes as he may) that Iuels and ornaments, where∣with the wit is beautiied, and the mynd gloriously inriched, be not to seeke, when they should be possessed. In considera∣tion of which premisses, I was incited, and (as it were) spur∣red forward, to write to your princely puisaunce. And for so much as, my taulke tendeth to matters of such moment and weight, yen to such things indeede, as it becommeth no man liuing, more then your maiestie to heare and consider: I thought to labour to your noblenesse, by way of exhortation seasoned with earnestnesse, that your highnesse would vouch safe to giu the Which he made to the king: therein declaring what ought to be the exer∣cises of a king: and whervnto his udie should be ad∣dicted. Oration (which of purpose I haue written) attentie earing. I am not surprised with the incantations and sorceries of vaine  neither▪ am I ignorāt, that your grace hath giuen diligent , to the like Ortions, euen till such time as your atention igendred todiousnesse. Further∣more, ▪ is and veryer pedient. that such as desire to vaun their wits, and blase abroad their skill▪ sholde▪ pro∣cure (as is not vnknowne to a) to them selu  as∣semblies, and   with   of ∣ples, among  they might finde may  at their eloquence▪ and to make a world wonder, at their su∣gred, vteraunce: And who so is willing to bring any thing to perection, necessitie craeth, that with him, on whose p∣wer and abiliti the  of matters by  ∣pressed and made manifest , conference be not . If (most noble souereigne) I were to giue counsel to a∣ny citi & incorporation, I would frame my self to iterlace commnication and talke with the magistrates, the gouer∣nours, the princes of the people, and the seniours of the itie: But hauing a matter of more wight in my handes, namely, aduice & iudgement touching the intenance of the safeti, & the supportation of the good estate of the Graecis in gene∣rall, to whom ought I more iustly appeale, then For the king is the ground worke and foū dation of the weale publike vpon him the people stay as vpon the prop of their , suche a one therefore shuld want no holesome counsell. to him, who in nobilitie surmounteth, in puisance surpasseth, in au∣thorititie excelleth all the inhabitaunts of the Graecian kingdome? It is not to hosurmised, nor imagined, that the mention of these matters is vnseasonable, and out of op∣portunitie:
For, whiles the Lacedemonians be in possession of principalitie, it were a thing too painefull and combersome to your highnesse, to take of vs (your people) the safegarde and tuition, and to resist their power as a fe and aduersatie. As for their estate at this time presente, such it is, that they thinke them selues in no yll case, if they might inioy their owne dminion. As for our owne citie, it shall she we it selfe maruellous applyable to fortifie your force, by the adioyning and putting too of their power, if it shal please your highnes, to make the Graecians, partakers of the fruites of your goodnesse. What better occasion then this presently offered, can be ministred to your maiestie? The figure Occupatio yet again vsurped, wherby he en∣duoureth to challenge to him selfe au∣thoritie. Maruel not (most renou∣ned king) that I haue attempted a thing of such difficultie, weight, and importaunce, being neither Oratour, neither Emperour, nor yet potentate: maruell not I say, that I am so presumptuous, as to take vpon me, two things of such ex∣céeding gratnesse, as they may séeme incomparable: name∣ly, talke vttered by me, that endeth to the state of Graecia: and cousel offered, to you as a prince both puisant and poli∣tique: For, as I neuer had to deale in the common wealth: (rō the which, what causes cōstrained me to be abstinent, it were a buse and laborious thing to declare:) so no man will make denyall, I suppose, that I am destitute of knowledge and instruction, which conteineth thinges of baser counte∣naunce, and that laboureth to the attainment of matters of more importaunce. Wherefore, it shall not séeme to sauour any whit of absurditie, that* my sight be somewhat sharper in discerning what is coodions for the weale publique, then they that, there, are in superioritie, hauing the common wealth in gouernement, as presidents ouer the people. It shall not be long, ere we giue a testimonie, whether we be of any worthynesse and reputation: wherof our Oration here∣after, shall procue due experience.
Isocrates to Philippo. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle is tripartite, or consisting of three portions. First hee dehorteth Philip from making warre rashly, whereof Cicero al∣so, in this order writeth: In the field to vse temeriie, all vpon the head to handle the weapon, and to enter conflict or skimish with the enime▪ it is no point of humaitie, but the propertie of a sauag beast: But whe time and necessitie requireth, then on with armour, and fight for life, pre∣ferring death, before seruiude and miserie. Secondly, he giueth him aduise, to make warre against the king of the Persians. Lastly, he counselleth him not to refuse the friendship of the Atheniens, and to be bountifull to the Graecians in generall. OF truth (right renouned Roy) A way to win fauour by the figure Oc cupatio: and to attentiue∣nesse by vsing comparison. I am not to be taught, the humour of al men to be so infected with philauty and self loue, that vaine praysers are accepted and had in estima∣tion, when wise counselers and recounters of honestie and vertue, are reiected, put by, as people of no price, and counted contemptible: especially if any man, voluntarily and of his owne accorde, take vpon him the office of giuing prcepts to to amende thinges amisse, not being therevnto wonne by o∣thers requestes, nor yet warranted by commaundement. As for mine owne person, if I had not heretofore, euen in those pointes which were pertinent to your high estate, of a right good meaning and purpose, put you in remembraunce: I would not at this instant, haue bewrayed my secrete mea∣ning, in open and apparant speach, concerning those thinges, which are to your highnesse allotted. But, forasmuch as it is my determination, of conscience to be careful in affaires tou∣chig your person, being a puisant prince, both for the affecti∣on of loue, wherewith in my countries cause, I am inflamed, and also for the duties sake, where with all, for the benefite of the Graecians, I acknowledge my selfe to be burthened: I would suspect in heart, that I had committd a heinous and filthy offence, to offer then to your maiestie, in matters not so necessarie and vrgent, the vse of my counsel: and nowe in ca∣ses of great importaunce, and which require, for their weigh∣tinesse,
no small circumspection, not once to mutter, nay ra∣ther to be still and silent. A sentētious dehortation from ▪rashnes in fighting in battel by com parison, by dilemma an argument not to be auoyded by diuision, & from exam∣ples. Then was the gem of your glory only, in hassard to be blemished: Nowe, the satie of your life is in feare to be indaungered: wherin you séemed to all those that hearde termes of contumely thundred against your grace, very secure and negligent. For, what mā is there, but knoweth that in perilous attemptes, and desperate aduen∣tures, you are carried away with more temeritie, then, by the ensignes of your royaltie, is sufferable? and that you are stoung with more loue, to heare your selfe for valiauntnesse aduaūced, then touched with tendernesse, to sée y• whole body of the land politiquely preserued. It is altogether a discom∣mendable and infamous, for a man being inuirned with his enimies, though he fight valiauntly, yet with the rest of his fellowe souldiers to be in equalitie: as it is to throw him self in dungeons of daungers, and to plunge in pittes of perils, when necessitie offreth no such constraint, which being avoy∣ded & ouercome, he hath done nothing, wher by he shuld be re∣nouned: and yet loong his life, immediately followeth shipwracke of all things that he is worth, and an vtter ouer∣throwe of his whole estate. It is not (out of doubt) alwayes to be counted worthinesse in a warriour, to bee hackt and hewen in the fielde with the edged weapons: But then is praise the pension of puisance, when, for For as the nature of cir∣cumstāces be, such are the actes & deed depending on the same: and many times the circum∣staunce alte∣reth the acti∣on. &c. the defence of his naturall countrie, the safetie of his parentes, and the weale of his children, he pusheth vpon the sharpe pikes, as not ter∣rified with the sight of any bloudie aduenture. But when the aboue named, shall receiue annoyaunce, when they shall be damnified, by such a kinde of death, and when the suc∣cesses of aduentures in times passed, shall be blemished, stay∣ned, and ingloriously defaced: such a death is so far from be∣ing commended, that it is vtterly condemned, so farre from being imbraced, that it is to be abandoned, as an enimie to honour, and a procurer of shame and infamie. Good it were and conuenient, in myne opinion, that you followe the same order in battell and warfare, which cities vse and exercise: For, all and euery of them, when they send their armies and
bandes of harnessed souldiers, to any place, so prudent and prouident, that hauing a regard first to the weale publique, and the Senate, they Consultati∣ons at home, are as necessa∣rie, as skirmi∣shes abroade with the aduer sarie. leaue them at such stay, and set them in such conuenient order, as they may consult and deliberate without interruption, vpon suche matters as tende to their estate: where vpon, this commeth to passe, that, if any wound be inferred with force of foreigne weapon, yet doth not the strength of them all decay, neither is their power generally suppressed: but they are of abilitie to suffer many slaugh∣ters, and of sufficiencie to recouer their riches, as not subiect to perpetuall impouerishment. Which thing (most mightie Prince) you ought to haue in contemplation, and perfect viewe: persuading your self in iudgement, that to For that be∣ing lost, what commoditie, what delect∣tion can re∣dound to any man? life and safetie, nothing, though most prcious, is comparable: besides that, this ought to be a principall part of your meditation, namely, the well vsing and commendable ordering of obtei∣ned victories. Doe you not sée, in what great carefulnesse of their kings good estate, the Lacedemonians labour? insomuch that the best citizens, and the chiefest among them, in wor∣ship and countenance, disdaine not to stande in their defence, nay rather conforme their harts & hands to hae them sup∣ported: to whome greater shame doth redounde, & controul∣ments of discommendation inforce fouler blemishes of infa∣mie, in It is highe honour there∣fore, in the  be∣halfe, to exhi∣bite duetie & seruice, & pe∣cially in time of tmultu∣ous battell. not protecting the life of their Prince, and preser∣uing him from deadly daunger, then in casting downe their targets, as faughted with fearefulnesse. You are not igno∣rant, what fortuned to Xerxes, busying him selfe to oppresse the Graecians with eruitude, and what chaunced to Cyrus, endeuouring to challenge possession of the Persian dominion. For the one of them, being vanquished in so many conflictes, discomfited in so many skyrmishes, and sorely assaulted, af∣flicted, and dismayd with so many slaughters & bloudsheds, that it psseth y• memorie of any man, to rip vp a semblable example: neuerthelesse, in so much as his Life preser∣ed, all other losses my in ime be eco∣uered and sup∣plyed. life escaped ship∣wracke, his kingdome was not only, to his owne contentati∣on restored▪ but the same also as left to his sonnes by suc∣cession, as theirs by interest of inheritaunce to be possessed:
Yea, he so fortified Asia, that it is no lesse to be feared, then in former times it hath bene accustomed. As for Cyrus, after al the kings armies were ouerthrowne, when all things fell to the lot of his iurisdiction: through his temeritie it came to passe so preposterously, y• The incon∣ueniences of temerous and vnaduised dea∣ling. of so large a kingdome, he not onely sustaine the depriuation: but brought al his souldiers into vt∣ter hassarde and extreme inconueniences. I coulde make a recapitulation of an infinite number, who, when they were gouernours of lands, & captaines generall ouer huge hoasts, bicause they them selues suffered an vntimely discomfiture, and perished contrarie to xpectation, they drewe after them innumerable multitudes into destruction. The conclu∣sion of his for∣mer discourse: and a transiti∣on to the se∣cond part of his epistle, co cerning the mouing of warre against the Persian people. These examples ought you to consider, and as presidentes not vnmeete for a prince, prudently to ponder, that the praises of valiaunnesse and magnanimitie, which is yoaked with temeritie, & inor∣dinate ambition, should not be hunted after of your maiestie, sithence they are annoyances to true nobilitie: neither wold I wish you, in so manifold mischiefes of mightie monarchies, to intrude your selfe into other daungers of battel and mur∣ther to the darkening of your dignitie royal: neither encoun∣ter with them, that either are not vnwilling, to sustaine the losse of a life, ouerwhelmed with wretchednesse: or in hope to obteine larger wages and salarie, cast them selues very rash∣ly and securely into millians of mischiefes, and daungers in manner inextricable: neither shew your selfe desirous of that renoune, wherein there appeareth to be some Bicause the praise proper to a prince ought not to be popular: but peculiar, as his estate is se uerall. communitie with many Barbarians and Graecians, but be you studious & inquisitiue after that glory which may garnish your maiestie in such sort, as you may seeme a myrrour in this our age, and a prince admitting no mate: neither set your affection vpon suche vertues, as to contemptible persons, and people of base degrée, are not denyed: but after those singular ornaments labor with an insatiable appetite, & an vnquenchable thyrst, whereof no man of a lewde and vicious disposition, is a com∣municant or partaker: neyther let your battell be inglory∣ous, exempted from noblenesse, and intangled with difficul∣ties, when they may be honourable, magnificent, valiaunt,
and accompanied with pleasure, niether let your attempts be such, as through your occasiō, your déerest friends, & those thē whom none can be more néere, shuld be For that ten∣deth to your owne disho∣nour. damnified, & dashed out of courage: your enimies on the contrarie, harbouring in hope & confidence: of which thing you cannot, no not at this instant, be excused, sithence therein you haue offended. But as for these barbarous and forreigne people, with whom you are now at defiance, it shall be sufficient so long to be conque∣rour, as your owne kingdome, Necessarie points inci∣dent to a king or gouernour: these docu∣ments and in∣structions are not set downe with such elo∣quence, as thi suour of wis∣dome. by your policie and discretiō, is safely & soundly established. And touching him, whose title is so stately, as to be called Rex Magnus, The great King, it remaineth, y• his exterminion out of the empire e procured, & that of principalitie he be dipossessed: y• by these means, as by redy instruments, both your own renoune may be ampli∣fied, and that to the Graecians it may be apparant, against whome battell is to be denounced. I wishe most earnest∣ly, that I had written thus much to your highnesse, before your expedition: that eyther, if you had bene conformable to my counselles, you had not bene so greatly indaungered: or if you had nt bene applyable to my preceptes, I might not séeme to persuade you vnto those things, which none do nowe disalow, hauing séene the euent and successe of the same: but ye end it selfe, might giue a testimonie, ye mine admonitions & aduertisements, cōcerning these matters, were, in respect of veritie, not to be disanulled, and in consideration of vpright duetie and scruice, not to be controuled. Nowe, The transiti on to the third part of his E∣pistle, touch∣ing the Athe∣niens. for so muche as the nature of this discourse is suche, as it offereth plentifull occasions wherein to continue talke: I will not wade further in this case, bycause I am of opinion, that as well your owne person, as also the chiefest and faythfullest of your fauourers, will adde to that whiche I haue already alledged, many more circumstaunces. Furthermore, I feare least in deliuering myne opinion in this point, I haue shewed my selfe ouer curious. For, whiles I procéede by lit∣tle and little, and as it were goe forewarde foote by foote, I haue not remembred the thing present in my handes, but neglecting the breuitie of an Epistle, haue followed the course and order f an Oration. Wherein, Or, althoug I haue forgot∣ten to limit my lines, by∣cause the argu ment wherein my style is cō uersant, is of importance. &c. although I
haue not béene circumspect, yet is it my duetie, not to pre∣termit and passe ouer with silence, such necessarie things as tende to the estate of our citie, and require due vtteraunce: But I must doe myne indeuour, to persuade you all that I may, to the knitting of familiaritie with the same, and to the gracious beneite of friendship. For, I thinke, there are not a fewe, who report and blase abroad in the eares of peo∣ple, not those méere odious tales whiche ring in our hearing, to the defamation of your royaltie, but letters, tales, and fa∣bles, cast in the moulde of their owne immagination: vnto whose For nothing is more perni cious to a prince, then to giue eare to Parasites, slaū∣derers, clawe∣backs, & such like noysome monsters. infecting tongs, O king, be not attentiue, for it is not conuenient. And why? Bycause it is a flat absurditie, and a thing directly against reason, that you, nipping your people with sharpe reprehensions, bycause they lende liste∣ning eare, to the lewde language of detestable slaunderers: shoulde haue them in high reputation and fauour, who pro∣fesse that facultie, and vse it for a common exercise. And you know, that thei can persuade our people which way they list, much more fit then is it for you, to rule the same at your plea sure. For, if so be they, who towards the cōmon wealth haue not béene meritorious or bountifull, attaine by wordes alone, to what so euer thing they wish and will: How then can it be but requisite and conuenient, that your maiestie, in whose power it resteth, with liuely déedes, to assiste vs excéedingly, not to obtaine at our hands, what so euer plea∣seth your highnesse? As for those kynde of men, that re∣ferre all thinges to the Atheniens, I sée them opposite and set against, the bitter accusers of our citie: and them in like manner, that affirme the Atheniens in no kynde of thing, eyther greate or small to be culpable. But bée it farre from me to vtter any such speache. For, sithence some are of this opinion, that The saying of a Pagane not vnworthy of the mouth of a christian: these words of Isocrates ag with the doc∣trine euange∣licall. not the Goddes them selues, notwith∣standing their state of perfection, are free from all of∣fence, I woulde bée ashamd to bée so vaine gloryous, and swolne with ostentation, as to challenge a aultlesse life, saying, that at no time our déeds haue so swerued, that they might be amended: Howbeit, thus much I am to affirme, y• your maiestie shall finde no citie, more requisite for the Grae∣cians, L. ij.
or for your affaires more conenient: which benefite is of you most diligently to be considered. For it shal not pro∣cure to your highnesse, excéeding great commodities, not only if with your Grace, it enter societie: but also, if it doe but séeme vnto you fauourable, and you againe vnto it appeare friendly & curteous. For, to turne ye sum of my talke to them whom your highnesse hath in present obedience, if they shall haue none other to lée vnto for refuge, thus much I dare pro mise, that to your maiestie they shall continue dutifull: & as for the Barbarians, you shall with more facilitie and spéedi∣nesse, compell them to loyaltie. What may be thought now of y• The beneuo lence & good wl of people, is a cause that the prince pro spereth the bet ter. beneuoēce, which is of such qualitie, as we haue aboue mencioned? is it not to be desired, is it not to be sought after, and that with earnesnesse, sithence by the efficaci and ver∣tue of the same, your Grace shall be of power sufficient, not only to protect your possessed Empire from forreigne inuasi∣on, but also to inlarge your dominion: yea, and that without hassard and detriment? Now, out of question, I can not but haue those princes dealings in admiration, that hire strange souldiers for salarie in battel to do them seruice, y• mainteine them with great and large wages, they them selues not be∣ing ignorant, that many, by giuing credite to such false var∣lots, haue bene betrayed, and very fewe (doutlesse) from losse of life preserued: not endeuouring, rather, to win to them sel∣ues the good willes, and procure, for their owne aduauntage, the assistance of so mightie & victorious a citie, as hath saued many places from ruine and decay, yea, the whole lande of Graecia, from the spoyle of desolation. An incitatiō to further noblene, drawne from the cōmemo∣ration of his paises: a point of a rhetorici∣n worthy imi tation. O prince, ponder this in your cogitation, let it be weyed precisely in your thought, that many praise your prudence, many extoll your wisdome, bicause you dealt in suche order with the people of Thes∣salie, as séemed not repugnant to equitie, and for them most expedient: which maner of men, are not of so tractable a na∣ture, are not of so milde a disposition, but hedstrong, sedicious, giuen to mouing of mutinies & rebellions. Euē so (most migh∣tie Monarch) iudge of vs, sithence you know wel enough, y• as y• region of the Thessalians, so the power of the Atheniens, is
from you not so many degrées distant: which, by your boun∣tifulnesse, you can not do amisse to reconcile, sithence Fauour of people, far bet ter then con∣questes and triumphes. It is a point of more noblenesse, puisaunce, and valiauntnesse, to obtaine and winne the fauour of incorporate cities, then to scale castle walles, towers, bulwarks, and fortifications. For as this doth not only purchase hatred and enuie, euery thing for the most part, that is done, being ascribed to the violent souldiers: Euen so, on the contrarie part, if you could vse the meanes to winne the hearts of the people, and to get mens good willes, what is he, that shall not wonder at your wise∣dome? Concerning myne assertios and reasons, in the be∣halfe of our citie, right requireth that you continue worthy of credite. The figur occupatio, wherby he go eth about to his wordes to adde autho∣ritie. For it is too too manifest and apparant, that it is so farre from my custome, to play the flatterer with my ci∣tizens, that there is no one man besides me, to be founde, of whome they are more often reprehended: yea, it is wl kno∣wen, that the multitude haue me in no esimation (I meane, those that be clawbacks and mealemouthed merchants, ma∣king account of their painted sheath:) but some of them know not what I am, othersome hate me as yll as they hate you. Neuerthelesse, this enuie incident to vs both, hath in it a cer∣taine difference: for they repine at you, bicause of your po∣wer, your riches, your wealth, and your prncely port: at me they grudge, bicause I professe my selfe, to be indud wt more wisdome then they: and more are there that delight n their companie, then that tak pleasure in my familiaritie. I would it were as easie for me, as it is for you, to remoue the opinion of the multitude, so vnaduisedly conceied. A thing very vsual with so crates, still to be putting in the princes minde, the thing which is in present hād ling. Nowe the matter resteth in your highnesse, you may ée thervnto, if you will: As for me, partly in consideration of mine age, and partly in respect of other causes, mine owne estate must be carefully regarded. To coclude, I sée not to what purpose it were, to make more words in this matter: howbeit, I will adde this ouerplus, that betweene your kingdome and your felicitie: the prosperitie of the Graecians, and their  there may be some communion & intercourse, nothing to the contrarie withstanding.
Isocrates to Philippo. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee beginneth this Epistle following, with an Argument dra∣wen Ab vtili: according to hs vsuall order. Then he coun∣seleth King Philippe, that hee setting aide all other matters what so euer, should make warre, as soone as may be, against the king of the Pesians. The conueyaunce of his matter shall appeare plaine and manifest enough, if one part with an∣ther be aduisedly conferred. ALthough I haue had sufficient conference, as I am per∣suaded, with Of this name there were fiue in number, as is to be read in Authors, 1. A Sydoiā Po et, 2. a Tyrian Philosopher: 3. a  philosopher, 4 an , 5. an Hieropo∣itane sophi∣ster: the sixt a Macedonian, and the sonne of olaus, and this is he of whom he spea eth in this place. Antipater, as well touching the profites of our citie, as conterning the commodities of your person: yet willing was I not withstanding, to write vnto your high nesse, what, after the conclusion of peace, were not amisse to be done: to write (I say) vnto your maiestie, matters not much dissenting from thse that I haue mencioned in myne Oration: howbèit, much briefer. For, mine aduise, at that time, consisted in this point, that all controursies of our cl∣tie, of the Lacedemonans, of the Thebanes, & of y• Argiues being cancelled, the Graecians might be reconciled and set at concorde. For, I was in opinion, that if you could obteine so much of the chiefest and most principall cities, the residue would in like manner giue assent, and, at no hand, stande in contradiction. At that time, things were in another estate: but now are they in such , that to vse reasos of per∣sasion, it is not ncessarie. For, in conderation of the con∣ or battel attempted, al are compelled to returne to their right mind, to remember them selues, and of those things du∣ly to consider, hich I supposed requisite, both to be sayd and also to be done, of your highnesse: that war, I meane (Two infec∣tiue diseases in the mindes of en. mad∣nesse being remoued, and Two infec∣tiue diseases in the mindes of en. cotousnesse cut ff, where with
the mindes of men are inected) should be made in Asia. Fur∣thermore, many there be, that demaunde this question, whe∣ther I gaue yo counsell to bend the force of armes against the Barbarians: or whether I, after you had so determined and purposed, allowed your intent? As or me, who hitherto haue had no conference with your maiestie, touching that matter, I say, that I know nothing of a certaintie: yet neuer∣thelsse, that to your ounsels I denyed not my consent, wher in you vsed, long since, much deliberation. Which answere after they had receiued, they assaulted me with a request, namely, that I would giue you aduise, not to chaunge your meaning, but in your determination to persist. For, A persuasi∣ble ar gument vsed for his purpose, con∣sisting in cō∣mendation of Philippes do∣ings. more renouned déedes, more famous and noble actes, or tending more to the profite of the Graecians, could neuer be aduentu∣red: neither might better opportunitie, to put things in prac∣tise, at any time be ministred If therfore I were indued with that ripenesse of witt, and abilitie of vtteraunce, wherein when He sheweth with what an earnest desire he is touched, or the furthe∣rance of his cause, in cal∣ling his for∣mer yeares in question, and pleading his present vnabi∣litie. I was young, I flourished, and if I were not by rea∣son of myne olde age so distressed of strength and Rhetoricall ornamentes, which beautifie and pounce the style of an Or∣tor: I would not make letters the instrument of my mea∣ning to your highnesse, but I would in presence of your pui∣sance, with such patheticall speaches as I might, moue your maiestie, to take vpon you this enterprise with valiatnesse. Nowe, in consideration of the premisses, I deale with you by way of The weapon of aged per∣sons. exhortation, as I am able, coūseling you, not to neg∣lect such opportunitie, nor to reuolt from it, before you see it accomplished. Moreouer, to boyle in the miserable desire of any thing besides, is contrarie to honestie and honour: for the most prte, are at suche deaunce with A vice and a vertue. extremities, that A vice and a vertue. mediocritie is the trasure whiche they count com∣mendable▪ neuerthelesse, to seeke to the attainement of re∣noune, to clime vp to the castle of glorie, none ought at any time to giue ouer with ediousnesse▪ none ought to aiure wt lothsomnesse: especially, if they be called to places of , and aduaunced aboue others, to stately préeminence,
Note the or der of Isocra∣tes how he ta∣keth occasion alwayes to stir the spirite of the prince. which Royall condition, and Emperiall dignitie, is allot∣ted to your maiestie. Againe, let this be your meditation, that your noble name, and flourishing fame, cannot be empai∣red, but that it shal be quall to your martiall exployts, when those Barbarians (prouided, that they, who are conformable to your maiestie, and to your graces regimēt not rebellious, be not among the number) be inforced by compulsorie mea∣nes, to yealde seruice to the Graecians: and when you haue constrained that king, who is nowe named The great king: mening the king of Persia.  the mightie Monarche, to put those things in practise, whiche are limitted vnto him by your royall commaunde∣ment. The present estate being as it is, your maiestie maye with more facilitie and ease, consummate and perfourme these matters, then you attained that power and noblenesse, which by the assistaunce of your auncient kingdome, you re∣couered. Nowe there remaineth nothing ouer and besides this, but that among ye Gods, as one of their number, you be ascribed. This one thing, I am to thinke a benefite of myne age: bycause I haue liued till such time, as to sée such things as my minde was occupied about, in my young yeares, both in mine Oration called Panegyrica, and in that also whiche I sent to your maiestie, intituled Philippica, which I wrote with myne owne hande, partly put already in execution, and for that I rest in hope also, they shall hereafter be accompli∣shed and perfourmed. Isocrates to Philippo. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He commendeth highly and notably his scholer and▪ friende Dodo∣tus, together with his sonne: giuing priuie precpts to Philippe, to get him wise counselers, and not to misike the liberall lan∣guage of his wel willers, in admonishing him of things tending to his profite.
ALthoughe among vs it be a perilous attempt, to proe the conueying of letters into Macedòa; not onely nowe that wée are at warte with you, but also in the time of peare: yet not withstanding, haue determined and , to direct an Epistle to your highnesse, concerning Hi scholer, or disciple, in whose behalfe this Epistle right commē∣datoie was penned. Diodotus. For, I thinke reason requireth, that I accompte of my fa∣miliar friendes, whose desertes to vs ward clame course of duetie, as of persons not contemptiie, but worthi stima∣tion: and touching him, in whose behalfe I deale by writing, I cannot giue too great a testimonie of courtesie, in conside∣ration of his A thing that requireth equal heasure o courtesi. beneuolence to vs extended, and the integritie of his behauiour plainly signified: I was very willing to com∣mend him to your maiestie: vnto whome, after that accesse was graunted by others mediation, vnto your highnesse, thus much remayned vnto mee to accomplish, namely, in his cause to giue some testimoniall, that the knowledg which your grace hath of him, and hée likewise of your highnesse, may bée, by my meanes, confirmed, ratified and established. For, insomuch as many and diuers sortes of men, amonge whom the greatest part be of good countenaunce, honourable and renowmed, Or, haue not refused to kepe me com∣pani. haue framed themselues to my conuersati∣on: othrsome also flourished in elquence, wisedome, poliie, and déedes of armes: and some againe in modestie of life were singular, and for decencie in maners verie much commended, being otherwise, altogether vnapt for other vses, & in other exercises vnexpert and ignorant: yet this Diodotus my scholer. one odd man, of whom present mention is made, such is the dexteritie & rea∣dinesse of his witt, such are his rare ornaments, whereby na∣ture and Arte haue beautified him, that in all the premisses, and aboue cited cyrcumstaunces, hée is most cunning, most perfect, and in no one point vnfurnished. Which thinges, I durst not presume to auouche A cōfirma∣tion drawne from an ifal∣lible reason. but that I am so farre from being deceiued in the man, that, what he is within and with∣out in affections of minde, and outward actions, I am most ab solutely instructed: and that I also thought, your maiestie hath atteined the vnderstanding of this report, aswell by  of your familiar méetinges, as also by the information
of them to whom hée is well knowne and acquainted. Of whome, there is not so much as one, except hée be inflamed with extreme enuie, and meruelous maliciously minded, but will rport him to be a man of singular In eloquēce and counsell Diodotus coū ted excellent. eloquence, and in wise counsell to none inferiour: besides that, in iustice incom∣parable in modestie matchlesse, to auarice or couetousnesse a bitter aduersarie, and in all the trade of his life, a pleasaunt companion, and courtecus in behauiour. Moreouer, that hée hath vttraunce at will, vtteraunce I say, replenished with decencie, abhorring whatsoeuer is vnseemely: yea such is his libertie of speach, as of right it▪ may be reputed, a manifest ar gument of his beneuolence, towards his friends and fauou∣rers: That rela∣tiue pronown hath repecte to libertie of speach his pro per antecedēt, in the clause going before. which, being in déede, not discommendable, such as a∣mōge men be of principalitie and honourable estate, as haue their mindes so affected, as the maiestie and countenaunce of their empire requireth, highly reuerence, as a thing passing commodious and profitable. As for those whose natures are not correspondent, to the greatnesse of their power and do∣minion, they, I say, as a morssell of too hard digestion, crie, a∣way with it, for it is cumbersome: as thoughe thereby, they were compelled to put something in execution, which to their owne wills is repugnaunt, not vnderstanding, when delibe∣ration is had concerning profite, those that in speach dare stand in contradiction, to affoord vnto them excéeding great a∣bilitie to compasse what they wil. For, it is conuenient and necessarie, The litle good that pa∣rasites, atte∣rers, clwbac∣kes, and uch a speake pla sible thinges, do in commō wealthes. that such as studie, deuise, meditate, and occupie their braines, to speake all thinges to please, and nothing to offend, cannot by any meanes establishe, the dominions of kings, which drawe after them great and manifold dangers, and such in déede as depd vpon necessitie, and cānot be auoi∣dd: but that they are altogether insufficient, to confirme the libertie of commonwealthes, which doubtlesse, are in some∣what more safetie. It is a thing Tellers of plaine trueth, without dissi∣mulation, are to be had in estimation. well beséeming such, as for the commoditie and adauntage of their hearers, smoulther not the inward thoughtes of their minds, with secret silence, but vtter freely, whatsoeuer they thinke conuenient, to bée so estéemed off, as of men not vnable, of many things to procure
the preseruatiō, which othrwise séemed very nigh ruine and desolation. In consideation of which foresaid premisses, An admoni∣tion for prin∣ces, gouernors magistrats, & sch as beare offce of coun∣tenaunce in cōmon weal∣thes. it ought of right to be prouided, y• princes, gouernours, and such as are plāted in seates of authoritie, should more estéeme the woords of them that tell the trueth with simplicitie: then the smoth speaches of them, that speake all thinges to currie fa∣uour, and yet indéede, say nothing that deserueth fauour. Ne∣uerthelesse, of custome it commeth to passe, that some, and of them not a fewe, make more accompt of such as fawne on them with flatterie, then of those that affirme the Which was the cause that Diodotus was so vexed and molested. manifest veritie: Which was a great occasion, that certaine of the no∣bles and péeres of Asia disquieted Diodotus: towardes the commoditie of whom, although hée was touched with a care∣ful consideration, as appeared, not onely by ministring whol∣some counsells, but also in déedes of armes, and putting him∣selfe out to daungeros aduentures: yet notwithstanding, in so much as he admonished them of their duties, some what largely in language,An vnmeete recompence for such hono rable and in∣gular seruice as well of mind as of bo die. hée was dispossessed of such honours as in his countrie sometimes he enioyed, and besides that hée fell from the hope of passing great rewards, wherwithal he was attainted. Thus were the plausible speaches of phantasticall parasites of more efficacie, then the merites and good deedes of so notable a man, wre of authoritie. For these causes m∣cioned, albeit he were from time to time determined, to haue accesse vnto you, yet, I wott not with what maner of Timorous∣nesse a shrewd hindeer of . io∣rousnesse and feare he was hindered: not because he supposed them that were placed in highest degrée of dignitie, to be al a∣like amge themselues: but, for th hauing taken triall & experience of others croked cōditions, he durt not intertaine the aaunce and hope, which of vs to hi was offed: So that in this case,Diodotus cō pared to a paf singer vppon the fea. The course of the comparison is not vnworthie the noing, for imitaon▪ o . he may be compared to some y• sail vppon the swelling seas, who being discmfited with the storm and tempestes thereof, neuer enter shippe to the same ende a∣gaine with quiet minds: albeit they know & sée, y• sailing▪ of∣tentimes hath prosperous successe, & happie fortune. But, be∣cause he is cōmended to yur maiestie I think it a meritori∣ déede, & I am of opinion, it wil redond to his cōmoditie.
The occasiō of which my thinking▪ is principally ingēdred by yourVertues that ought to be resident in euery prin∣ces minde. clemencie, your humanitie▪ & your mildnesse, which is not here at home wtin the walls of your owne dominion, but in forreigne iurisdictions & barbarous countries, to your sin∣gular renowne by ye clanging trmp of swift report, proclai∣med. Moreouer, I am of this iudgement concerning you, that you are not to learne, howe nothing within the eompasse of the heauens, procureth more pleasance, obteineth more pro∣fite, thenHonest and faithful friēds are an inualua ble iewel, & a most precious treaure. the purchasing of such friends, as bee honest and faithfull, by wayes of well doing, I meane benefites: and of such men to be carefull, to deserue none otherwise then wel, in whose behalfe, for courtesie to them exhibited, many, yea innumerable, will shewe themselues thankfull. For, such as be furnished with the armour of vertue, such as glister and appeare glorious with the leames of learning, acknowledge no lesse praise and reuerence, to them that honour and high∣ly esteeme such, as in vertue and learning bee famous, then they would, if they themselues were partakers of these ex∣cellent benefites. But such to bée the disposition of Diodotus, I dare warrant, as by his owne industrie and priuate mea∣nes, hée will winne your maiesties fauour in such sort, that you must néedes vouchsafe him courtesie. WithNamely by the comme∣moration of your clemcie your gentle∣nesse, your af∣abilitie, and other vertuous ornaments. sembla∣ble persuasions I assaulted his sonne, to haue accesse to you, that y submitting himselfe as a scholer to your discipline, he might thereby reape aduantage, and of his susteined labour recouer an acquitall. Which aduise when I had giuen, and hée with attentiue eare had receiued, he confessed forthwith, that of your friendshippe, there was not in all the world, then he, a man more desirous: howbeit, to his wordes thus much more he anexed, for further discouerie of his secrete mind, y• hée was there unto drawne with semblable affection, as hée hath béene toExercises of acturitie, wher an the winner receiued a crowne o a galand: these gmos were alled Gymni ca certamina, and in aunci∣ent ime very much frequē∣ed. open games and spectacles, rewarded with crownes and garlands. For (said hée) I was in loue with the adununcemente of victorie, but to offer the triall of my selfe, in those exercises required, I wanted courage: and why? Be∣cause I perceiued the vnworthinesse of mine abilitie, farre inferiour to the fame & renowne, issuing from those solemne
coronations. In like maner, hee wished most hartily, by your mediation to mount to honour: but hee suspected, something in himselfe to harbour, wherby hée should be hindered. For his * want of experience is to him an impediment, andThe first make men vn∣meete for pla∣ces of honour, the second di ueth them in∣to an amas∣ment. ye glo∣rious shew of your stately authoritie, a sore discouragement. To which imperfections his body may be ioyned, being not so finely proportioned, as it should escape reprehension, which in many respectes, as hée supposeth, wil be letts to his furthe∣raunce. Howbeit, whatsoeuer to him shall séeme auailable, to doe that, let him haue leaue and libertie. So that, whether hée addresse him to come to you, or whether hée leade his life in this soile, being addicted to quietnesse and abhorring the cō∣trarie,A summarie of the whole petition made to king Phil∣lippe by Iso∣crates, in the behalfe of Diodotus and his sonne. let him finde such fauour at your graces hands, that as well all necessaris whatsoeuer, by your procuremente, may be supplied for his maintenaunce, as also that both hée & his father, may be so prouided for, as they may lead their life frée from annoyaunce and feare of daunger. For thus ought you to thinke, that wée commend him to you, as aWhich re∣quireth a care ful regard, a prouidēt eye, and whatsoe∣else is necessa∣rie. thing de∣liuered to your kéeping by vs in this our old age▪ (which is to be had in high honour, and reuerence) committed I say to you by our authoritie (if at least wise it carrie any shewe of coun∣tenaunce) of good will, yea of the same goodwil, which to you, through the whole course of my yeares, I haue professed, and to your weale also, put in practise and executed. I would not wishe you to be moued with admiration, either at the large∣nesse that I vse in this letter, or for that I haue vttered some what therein, sauouring of curiositie or auncient experience. For, setting all other thinges aside, I bent the whole force of my will and witt to this ende, that it might be apparant and not vntestified,A conclusiō testifying the disposition of his heart to his friend whome he lo∣ueth. the commodities of my friendes to kindle in mée excéeding carefulnesse, whome I loue and tender with as much duetie as is possible. Isocrates to Alexandro. THE ARGVMENT. Hee reioyceth that Alexander loueth learning, whome vnder a couler
of commendation he exhorteth, by keeping companie with vertu∣ous men, and vsing the familiaitie of such as be indued with know∣ledge, to seeke after loquence, finesse of speach, & policie in gouer∣ning the commonwealth, rather then the intangled disputations of Logique, and quarelling questions of the Sophisticall Science: not without a priuie rebuking (as I suppose) of Aristotles profession. WHen I sent letters toKing Philip of Macedonia your puissant predecessour. your father (right noble king) I thought my selfe to attēpt a thing repugnant to reason, if I séemed not to be mindefull of your highnesse, and to ac∣knowledge some courtesie by salutation, considering that you enoy the selfe same title of renowne, the selfe same maiestie of a Monarche, the selfe same seate of royaltie, and al thinges else to principalitie apperteyning: yea, I thought my doings to sauour of no sparckle of duetie, if I wrote not somewhat to your puisace, whereby people might conceiue an opinion, (those I meane to whom I am vnknowne) thatFor if wise∣dome should want in old men, in what age were it to be lound? ld age hath not depriued me of wisedome, and so deluded my iudgment, that I am vtterly drowued in dotage: but that they might thus rather thinke, that the witt which remaineth in me at this houre, being not consumed and wasted, as the strength of my body, by sunory casualties, & multitude of yeares (spe∣cially) infeebled, is not vnworthie of that abilitie, of y• order, ofOf Rheto∣ique or the oratoe pro∣fession. that facultie, and of that conueyaunce in writing, wherein, when I was young & not subiect to these present infirmities, I flourished. The renowne of your maiestie, striketh-into* An allusion to the good inclination of Alexāder: who was but yoūg when this E∣pistle was writ . mine eares: For in whose mouth is not this report, that to ye Atheniens, you are meruailous fauourable, and excéeding friendly, béesides that, verie wel disposed to the attainement of wisedome: wherin, vndoubtedly, you giue a testimonie, not of vnaduisement, but of an approueable iudgement. I must néedes confesse, that for this cause, cōmendation is the merite of yor maiestie, because the voice goeth, y•Wheron the praise of a Prince princi∣pally doth de∣pend. you haue in coū∣tenaunce and estimation, such of oure citizens, not as want ye ornaments of vertue, not as lacke learning, not as be boyd & desritute of wisedome, no as be of a corrupt inclination, & as it were fettered and fast bound wt a detestable desire to prac∣tise deedes ending to hischiefe: but such, of whome you haue
good liking, hearing their prudent discourses, & learned rea∣sons without satietic, lothsomnesse, tediousnesse:The com∣mendation of his worthie qualities con∣tinued. in kéeping of whose companie, and vsing whose conuersation, you are so farre from being indaungered, or running into any kinde of annoyance, that you are much benefited, and from many in∣iuries defended. For the acquaintance ofMen of ap∣proued life & honest conuer sation. such men is to be desired, their familiariti is to be sought after with seduli∣tie and earnestnesse, especially of such as haue the name and credite of wise men ineede. Amonge all kinde of sciences, and professiōs of knowledge, you haue such an emulation & enuie toLogique, which techeth men to make fasitie , & veritie sal∣sitie, by sophi∣sticall conclu∣sions. exercises Dialectical as y• you improue thē as toyes, yet not to be vtterly disalowed, (for so of your highnesse it is re∣ported:) but so to thinke of them, as of things in priuate mée∣tings of friends & familiar compamōs, very requisite & auai∣lable. Neuerthelesse, to princes, gouernours, rulers of people, and persons placed in highe seate of authoritie, not so necessa∣rie and profitable. For, thus stoode your opinin, that i is a thing neither expedient, nor yet decent, that such as passe others in worthinesse and preeminence, should vse with their citizensA thing prop per to iāgling sophisters and questionistes in their quar∣relling exerci∣ses & Logique schole points. quarelling questions, or giue to the rest liberti of ouerthwarting in language and vnséemely contraciction. So that (as the rumour runneth) this manner of profession is no Howell in your Alphabet, is no flower in your Garden, is not regarded of your person: but that eloquence, finenesse of phrase in vtteraunce of talke and communication, is the thing which you accompt excellent, which with vs is vsuall, both in the affaires beoging to our daily cōuersation, and at such times also as wée deliberate in matters touching y• cō∣mon wealth. Through the attainement of whichEloquēce & Philosophie. the one consi∣sting in sweete and orderly vtteraunce: the other in wise and prudent preceptes. singular Sciences, you haue aspired to that perfection of abilitie, that you most prudently instruct them, that to your grace are o∣bedient, euen presently, what shal happen hereafter, and skil∣fully infurme them, what euery one, of duetie, is bounde to put in practise: yea, that ripensie of iudgement you haue at∣tained, whereby of thinges concerning honestic, & instice, you can giue approued sētence: and of their opposites or cōtraries deliuer a good opiniō. Furthermore, of this cōmoditie you are
made a possessioner, thatBy wisedom & knowledge. therby you can measure the penal∣ties and punishments of offenders, according to the proporti∣on of their crimes, not running intoOf too litle, or to much. either extremitie, but kéeping an equalitie. The selfe same also is your direction, in recompencing such as do wel, with rewards not vndeserued. Your wisedome therefore, and your passing eloquence, are worthie to be pouldered with perpetuall praise, in considera∣tion that you (a prince and king) acquaint your selfe in such kinde of studies, & in them spend your time, being (no doubt) commendably bestowed. ForA conclusiō kindling fur∣ther incorage∣ment in the minde of A∣lexander drawne from hope & boune esperaunce. by this your indeuour, you minister hope to your father, and affoord plentifull affiaunce to your friendes, that in processe of time, as your yeares in∣crease, and you continue in these vertuous exercises, it will come to passe, that in wisedome you shall so farre outrunne all the rest, how farre your father is beyonde all other that are aliue, none excepted. Isocrates to the ofspring of Iason. THE ARGVMENT. First of all hee prefixeth the reason that moued him not to goe into Thessalia. Then, by a prolonged insinuation he persuadeth him, to be of this opinion, that ciuil beneuolence is better then tyrannicall gouernement. ONe of our Embassadours made report vnto mée, that you drewe him a side from his companie, and demaunded of him seuerally, being seperated from the rest, whether it were possible to winne mée by persuasion, to leaue the place of my present aboade, and to take on mée a forreigne voyage, to the intent, wée might enioy one anothers familiaritie? My will is good touching this matter, for Iasons sake and Polyazes causeOr, both which haue vouchafed me friendly entertainmēt, and courteous vsage. both which haue exhibited vnto mée singular significa∣tions of courtesie: and I know that if it might be compassed, that wée méete and conferre, it is like to proue a generall
commoditie. But I haue many hinderances, among which this is a chiefe and principal,A necessarie cause wherby old men are to be holden exused. the weakenesse of my nature, that cannot indure the labours of painefull iourneying: bée∣sides that, it is not séemely, that I being so aged and strucken in yeres, should lead the rest of my life in a straunge and out∣landish countrie. Againe, many, hearing of that voyage, nay, all would haue mée in contempt, and that deseruedly, because in my drowping dayes I attempt tedious trauelling, hauing framed the former course of my life in tranquillitie and quiet nessesithence it is conuenient, yea, although I had liued long in some for reigne land, yet nowe to drawe homeward to my natue soile, considering that death standeth at the dore, & my next lodging must be y• graue. Further more (for to what in∣tent should I lye) I stand in feare of mine owne citie, I mi∣strust it much, seing the leagues and cōfederacies made with it, so sone violated, so soudeinly crackt in sunder. And surely, if in your affaires the like chaunce appeare, how, which way, by what meanes, may I escape reprehension, may I auoyde punishment, (considering y• it is a thing not so easily brought about▪ how, I say, should I shunne shame and infamie, some thinking that for mine owne cities sake, I neglect your safe∣tie, or for your cause am carelesse of my countrie? And séeing that the commoditie is not common, how I might gratifie both, I doe not vnderstand. The reasons therfore, for y• which I may not doe that which I would, are many. Howbeit, I thincke it vndecent, that I writing of mine owne matters, should, in yours, shewe mée selfe negligent: but what hath béene discoursed vpon too and fro, in place where I am, I wil imparte the knowledge of them vnto you in writing, as I féele mee selfe able. I would not haue you conceiue this sini∣ster opinion, that moreThe first I abhorre, the last I do e∣steeme. for ostētation and vaineglories sake, I haue penned this epistle, then forThe first I abhorre, the last I do e∣steeme. consideration of your courtesie and gentlenes: For I am not so madd a man, as to be ignoraunt, that I, in this my deerepite and drowping age, cannot indite and frame my style in writing after a better forme and order, then in former times, whē that which I did publish and make manifest, was very plausible, and thought
praise worthie: But if I pronounce y• which is nothing so good, it is like, y• the light of my renowne, shal not suffer a partile eclipse, but it shal be in maner, wholy darkned. Further more if I should séeme serious, in doing seruice to the aduauncemēt of mine owne wit, among al other maters, I would not haue those this argument: wherupon to make an apt discourse, it is merueilous easie: but I would haue béen inquiitiue after things more cōmendable, & openingOr, a larger field, wherein I may haue scope to deli∣ner my mea∣ning in words a fréer passage to mine vtterance. But, to this day, haue I not so well liked of these things, sithence there be other matters which the rather I re∣gard, wherof a multitude are ignorant: neither in considera∣tiō of that, haue I at this present, taken vpon me this labour. But when I vnderstande, that you are burthened with busie affaires, and such thinges as bée intricate and fraught wish difficulties, what my iudgement concerning them, is, A wil not be deintic to make declaration.An entrance to his purpose I thinke, that abilitie to giue counsell is agréeable to mine age, and that I want not wisedome for such a purpose. ForExperience maketh old men passing cunning. experience, and the vse of many thinges, haue made old men cunning and exprt: yea, it worketh in them such perfection, that they abo al other haue perseuerance and knowledge, what is profitable, what is inconuenient. As for discoursing vppon present ccasions, swéetly, smothly, finely, eloquently, cunningly and artificial∣ly, it is a worke and labour of our old ageBecause such thinges are more agreable to younger yeares and ri∣per wittes. not to be cracted. Wherfore, this my seruice shal séeme sufficient, if I discouer mine opinion, & lay my meaning naked to the view of others iudgement. I would not you should merucile, if I fall in mē∣cion of some circūstance or other, where withall heretofore, y hearing you are acquainted: For, peraduenture, I shal be cō∣strained,Cum nihil dici possit quod non sit dictum prius: Sythence no∣thing can bee spoken, but that which heretofore hath bene vt∣ered. to entertaine some of them into the manour of my memorie, which must néeds be vttered: othersome, for that I know them seruiceable to my purpose, I may not pretermit: For I should shew my self inbrawnd with foolishnes, when I sée others vsurping that which of me hath béene vttered, yet I me selfe to be so precise, as to abstine from such words & sen∣tences, as in times pas, both by tongue & also by pen I haue deliuered. Thus much haue I placed in the front by way of a preamble, because y• cōming first & being most manifest, is one
them y• are least abstruse & secret. For I vse of custome to say sayth the Greeke text: Quidnam ora∣tione, saith the Latine inter∣pretation: which wee haue Engli∣shed, Utte∣raunce. to the folowers of our philosophie & discipline, al other things whatsoeuer, this to be considered, what, by * vtterance, & the mēbers of the same, is to be cōpassed: Which when we haue found, & diligently, or rather throughly dispatcht, I tell them againe, y• sensible reasons, and ornamēts must be vsed, which to the argumēt or whole cause is a beautifying, & a meane to attaine y• end whereunto our attempts were leuelled. This, cōcerning oratorie exercises, is our persuasion: the selfe same is the groundworke of al things else, & of your deliberation, it is the prop, maine post and piller. For nothing can bee wisely wrought, except, first of all you make this your meditation, &  singularitie of skil thus considerPremedita∣tions not to be neglected. what maner▪Or what kind of men. of people ye wil proue your selues to be hereafter, how you wil frame the course of your life, & conuersation, and to what maner of au∣thritie your  shalbe directedin choice of honour, which to like & loue, either that, which▪ y• citizens offer of voluntarie motion, or y• which is gotten perforce, wroung frō them con∣trarie to their wills, & praye vpon with tallans of extortion These things prudently pondered & marked, al maner of ac∣tions whatsoeuer, daily and hourely incident, are semblably to be considered: & you must do y• vttermost of your indeuonr▪ that al your attēpts may be referred to the selfe same, which was laid before you in the beginning. If you sha ths limit your selues, hauing an eye to this platforme, & acquainting your wits withWhich ingē der actions or dedes corres∣pondent to their kinde. wise consultations, your purposes shal haue streight ayme, as it were at a white, to the readie reaping of your comoditie, & the more able shal you be to enioy it. But if▪ you lay not such a aft foūdation, putting in practise whatsoe∣uer chanceth, it must néeds folow, y• as your witts wander,The incon∣uenience of temeritie. so of many things y• you might other wise haue, you shalbe fru strate.A priuie ob∣iection. One or other peraduentnre of them y• haue liued in∣ordinatly, wil go about to quarell & find fault wt my reasons, buisily beséeging me with commaunds, to deliuer vnto themOr, some substantiall reason, in the confirmation of mine asser∣tion. some sentence of certuintie, touching this proponed contro∣uersie. I may not therfore  my iudment in the whole matter.A resolutiō or answere to the former ob iection: cōtei∣ning a com∣parison of a priuate man and a tyrant: of whom Xe∣nophon sub tit. Simonidis, & Hieronis, largely dis∣courseth. The life of priate men (in ine opini) is more secure, more quiet, & better, then the life of tyrants: & I sup∣pose
those honours more pleasaunt and acceptable, which vnto princes, by valiant hearted people are exhibited: then such dignities as the tormēts of terrour, extort & wring fō such as with seruitude are oppressed. And although I am not igno∣raunt, that there wilbe many to stand against mée in contra∣diction, & among al other, such as be of your familiar acquain tance, principally: yet neuerthelesse, concerning this matter, I must somewhat giue a tast of my iudgement: for I thinke that euen these, through your persuasions are suggested, and meruailously prouoked, not onely to haue tyrannie reteined, but to sée the same established. This doe they so much the ra∣ther, for that they take not a full vewe, of the whole nate thereof, but being intangled in blinde , throwe ∣selues into riuers, nay, mayne seas of errours▪ They haue respect to his Which out∣ward circum∣stances breede errour. authoritie, they conside his commodities, they are touched with consideration of his  delights,  the obteyning and enioying of all which, thy hope themselues to be in possibilitie▪ But (alas) they   The trou∣bled state of tyrannical po wer dscribed. whle worlds of troubles, their manifold eares, their  or like bloudsheads, finally, the infinite annoyances that attend vp princes▪ and on such as be in princes fauour▪ these mischefe they marke no these perills are vnperceiued. That falleth on them, which happeneth Note the course of this comparison. to such as attempt mos  of∣▪   notorious▪ who althogh they be igraunt what wdnes lucketh▪ & what he ynousnesse is harboured in the  they go about, yet neurthelesse, they are o farre from despaire of wel spéeding that their foode is cōnfidence to reape such profite and aduauntage, as therin consisteth, al pe∣rills escaped, & al daungers that are wont to be ioyned to such pernicious enterprises, auoyded: pāpering their minds with this imagination, that they be as farre from all annoyaunce, as heauen is from hel, and as nigh neighbours to al maner of commodities, as the flesh to the skinne. If therfore, any be of this beleefe and opinion, I giue them leaue to vse their Or, to enioy their happines and blessed condition in their owne blockishne bea∣titude and felicitie in their folishnesse. I should be ashamed, if I taking vpon me the charge of a Counsllour, should not , neglect others profie, &  own aduantage: &
rather (setting al a haard, both mine owne , and all thinge els whatsoeuer, as vtterly ) giue them suc , a should tend wholy  their . Then would I wishe you, s to listen and learne my , as that you may giue euidence, you are fully reolued, Or, my mea∣ning to be none other∣wise then I professe with tongue. my hart and my tongue to be at agréement. ocrates to Timotho. THE ARGVMENT. Hee highly aduauneth the  of a certaine tyrant: and giueth him counsell, vnder the preence of praise, to be gentle and courte∣ous to  is citizens. Lastly, hee tempteth Timothus with a petition▪ namely to bee a  and succoure to one . WHat tried friendshippe hath knitt s twaine in one, you haue (I thinke) receiued by the report of many. First of all, I An exhorta∣tion to clemē ce, vnder the couler of com mendation. cannot but  for your sake, in that your vsage, in this possession of principlitie, is farre bettr then your fa∣thers was, and your oings tempered with mre : Secondly, because you are inamed with a greater  o purchase honest and honourable renowne, then to gather ∣gether in huge heapes, abundaunce of riches, and moe like mountaynes: In which your doings, no slender signification of vertue appeareth: but rather a most manifest test oniall of your well disposed nature, and right commendable disposi∣tion. Wherefore, if, as your bginninges are, (nowe in the mouthes of all men, and in all places, to your high praise pro∣claimed:) so bée your procéedings, it is not like that you shall want Witnesses of your , by whome your fame may bee blowne a∣broade, to your eternall renowne. instruments, for the aduancement of your wisedome, or tongues to eroll with triumphant trumps, this your most noble enterprise▪ I suppose also, that those things which are noysed abroade, concerning your father, will be of very great force and efficacie, to proue your prudene, and to shew also, wherein, aboue others, you are to challenge excellencie. For it is a custome amonge many vsed, not so much to com∣mend and make honourable Childrē not following the vicious quali∣ties of their fathers more to be comē∣ded, then such whose good behauiours are correspon∣dent to their parets exam∣ple. the children, that are descen∣ded
of piseworthie paents: as to haue them in reuerence, whose fathers being tyrannicall, sauage, bloud thirstie, and mercilesse, yet their sonnes degenerating from kinde, and indued with qualities in all respectes clean contrarie. For, what soeuer is in the nature of men, not answearble to ex∣pectation, that in all pointes is much more gracious, and ac∣ceptable, then those thinges which of custome are loked for, and by ordinarie course come to passe. These premisses, therefore, curiously canuassed, narrowly fted, and streight∣ly examined, this ought to be your chiefest meditatiō, in this (I say) must your minde be eanestly conuesaunt, Pinces minds in what pointes they ought to bee occupied: for though the e∣pistle be speci∣all: yet the pre epts are ge∣nerall. by what meanes, through whse help, by the vertue of whose , you may both redresse the calamities of the , prcure the  of the people, woorke meanes how they mighte leade their liues in more pleasantnesse and securitie, then they haue in times past to their great disquitnes. For these dueties of clemencie, these practises of humanitie and gentle∣nesse, are the ornaments of good gouernours, and the preci∣ous pearles wherewith all princes are beautifie. Which inualuable Iewells, many hauing in contempt, applied all their power and abilitie to this onely end, namely, to attaine the full measure of their pleasures and cncupiscences, with libertie excessie, and more then epedient: Citizens, in the meane season, of great worship and wisedome, being defaced, vtterly vndone, and spoiled. Such Caterpillers in Common wealthes, ar ignoraunt, that It is to the praise of a prudent prince, yea that it maketh much for the estimation of wise∣men, aduaunced to these high and stately thrones of noble∣nesse, by Which iniu∣rie the lawe of nature graffed in our mindes in our  forbiddeth. others sorrowes not to seeke their owne delight, by others miseries not to purchase their priuate pleasure, nor to the detriment of others, to procure their owne profite: but rather by their carefulnese and diligent industrie, to aug∣ment and increase their peoples felicitie, to bee inlinable to clemencie, conquered with compassion, not rigorous in re∣uengment, not pitilese in punishment, nor of his owne safe∣tie to seeme carelesse and negligent: but with the Scepter of mercie, & sword of iustice in such order to gouerne his king
dome, that none dare bobould, by treacherous ▪ to bring their good estate in hazard▪ and to be no lesse circum∣specte, that his owne life be strongly dfended. Yea, therein to be so diligent, as i all the world conspired to woorke hi ouerthrow and destruction. For by this meanes it shal come to passe, that they shal be exempted from peril, and lourish in fame, among all the rest of the Graecians: Then these sin∣gular benefits, & incōparable cômodities, it is Because they ae the verie best and most souereigne, without com∣parison. too too hard to attaine greater or better. As I was thus occupied with my penne in writing, I soudenly remembred, that in all thinges you haue excéeding prosperous sccesse. For you haue abun∣dance of wealth, plentie of riches, which cannot be gotten wt∣out extréeme tyrannie: Hee enioyed all prosperitie by inheritāce. these you haue by inheritance, your father with much violence, and through flaming fyers of en∣uie obteined them, you haue them now in possession: the For therein standeth most commendan∣on otherwise, it turneth to shame when wealth is abu∣sed. good and orderly vsing of the which, is in your hands, it becômeth you to haue  singular regard how they bée bestowed, not vainly, but necessarily, not vnadisedly, but dicreetly, not to your reprehension, but to your commation. Touching this matter, therfore, these are my precepts tēding to your profit. Thus, then, standeth the case: if you estéeme of monie, if you make accompt of great power, if you haue such transitorie things in reputation, then Because, a the shadowe doth followe the substance: to daunger accompanie  chesse. you must néedes loue dangers al∣so, without y• which those things cannot be recouered, nor at∣tained: so that you must, elsewhere craue counsel, & of others séeke assistance. But if you aue sufficient, nay, if you haue a∣bundance, if you loue vertue, if you loue an honest & honoura∣ble report, if you be incensed with the desire of y• A thing spe∣cially to be obteyned. peoples fa∣uour and beneuolence, thn imprint mine admonitions in y• tables of your memorie, ibrace my coūsels, let my precepts be y• rule of your actions, striue to be equal to those y• gouerne cities vnder their authoritie most excellently: contend I say, not onely Do your en∣deuour, not to be equal with them onely, but to excell & passe them also. for equalitie, but also for superioritie. For this I haue heard concerning Cleomenes, whose Dominion lay in Methyma▪ that in at his enterprises he discharged the dutie of  good and prudēt gouernour, was also so far frō putting a∣ny to death, frō driuing any into exile▪ frō From brin∣ging any into that case, that they are not onely 10. be dispos∣sessed of all that they were worth, but their liues al∣so to be in    making any pro∣sript or outlaw, from procuring vnto any one such miserable
nience that his citizens liue in singular securitie, in ease and quietnes, a wil and in wealth: that hee calleth home againe such as were thrust into baishment, intertaineth them into the imbracing bosome of their countrie natural, that were de priued of that passing ioyfulnesse: that of all their possessions, whereof they were spoiled and robbed, hée maketh mercifull restitutione ud that they might easely▪ recouer interest in their owne, he maketh large paiments, to such as bought the goods of the banished, to giue ouer their purchased title to the former and lawfull owners: and, not being here withal satis∣ficed, he furnisheth al y• citizens with armour, and séeth the prouided to the purpose, for his present assistaunce, nothing  the mischefous insurrections, and rebellious at∣tempts of such as fauour As not con tent with an vniformitie in gouernment. chaunge, and buisie themselues to bring in alteration. And if any dare be so bould to set abroach such an enterprise, he thinketh much more auailable, that his owne life in consideration of his humanitie, gentlenesse, be∣nignitie, and mercifulnes to his citiens plentifully: testified, should suffer shipwracke: then exenting crueltie vpon them, and taking Ab effectu, because it thirsteth after the losse of life, bloudie reuengment, to furuiue and outliue ye re∣sidue. Touching this matter, much more (peraduenture) I might haue mencioned, and more artificially with you haue reasoned, but that I perceiued me selfe stayed with an impe∣dimēt, namely lack of loysure to lengthen my letter, in y•  ting whereof, I was forced to vse great has. But another time shall serue to minister counsell vnto you, for your Which is the end of ho nest counsell. pro∣site and commoditie, if mine old age be not mine hinderance: For the present time, we wittake occasion, to discourse vp∣pon thinges perteyning to your priuate person, Autrontor, the bearer and deliuerer of this letter vnto you, is a man with whome I haue much familiaritie: For, I haue béene conuersaunt in the selfe sane Or, studies tending in knowldge, or, oe & the selfe same sci∣ence and pro∣fession. exercises, wherein hée hath béene occupied, and I haue oftentimes nd the vse of his Arte and knowledges , I haue béene in hand with him, &  that not seldome, to addresse his iourney vnto you, and that hée hath so done, I was y• author and procurer. In   which premisses, I would y• you entertaine him honorabl,
in such order, as to eyther of vs is expedient and profitable: & towards whome, Or, how fa∣uourable soe∣uer you doe shewe your selfe for his a∣uaile and pro∣site. what duties of humanitie so euer you ex∣hibite, what courtesies so euer you shew him for his furthe∣raunce, persuade your selfe, that some part or portion of the same tendeth to my benefit. I wold not you shuld wonder at my so blunt and bolde nditing considering▪ that I neuer cra∣ued any thing of Clearchus, For, in manner all, that sayle from you to vs, report you to be like such among vs, as be of most excellencie? so that concerning Like it is that he mea∣neth Clear∣chus the Lace¦daemonian Duke: for of that name there wer two other, Clear∣chus Solensis, and Clarchus Ponticus: as Suidas sayth. Clearchus, thus much must be signified, that at what time he was conuersant with vs, by al mens confession that euer had conference with him, of all our disciples or scholers, he was of most liberalitie, of most mildnesse, and of most gentlenesse. But after that he had aspired to principalitie, and had caught gouernement within his clawes, his minde was so altered, his conditions so changed, & what not in him so alienated, that euery one, to whome in times past, he was not knowne, had him in highe admiration: in consideration of which causes, my former ac∣quaintance with him, is turned into strangenesse. To come again to you, whom I loue & like, my desire is, and that with earnestnesse, to accept vs familiarly: & so sone as you can, giue vs some assuraunce, that your wonted courtesie towards vs conceiued, remaineth still vnchaungable. For you shall to This Auto∣crator was one of his deerst acquaintance, and his verie friend. Autocrator, be a fauourer and a furtherer: you shall like∣wise, procure a letter to be sent vnto vs, whereby our aunci∣ent friendship, and acceptable seruice tending to gentle in∣tertainement, may be renewed. Fare you well: and if it be your pleasure, to vse our labour, in any thing to your person pertaining, send vs worde by writing. Isocrates to the Magi∣strates of the Mitylenaeans. ¶ THE ARGVMENT
Agenor the Musician by name, his kinsemens maister, beseeching them to disburthen him of the heauie yoake of banishment, and to restore him againe to the sweetenesse of domesticall libertie. THe sonnes of Aphareus my kinsemen, whome Not Agenor the king of Phaenicia: Vit gl li 1. Aen. nor Agenor the son of An∣tenor: Homer lib. 11. Iliad. but a third of that name, by profession a Musician. Agenor the Musician taught to play on melodious and tuneable instruments, besought me with instance, to be earnest with you by letter: that, sithence it hath pleased you to cal home a∣gaine a greate nūber out of exile, you would vouchsafe also, on him, his father, and brethren, be stow the same benefite of restitution. To whose demaund, or rather request, when I made this answere, that I should not only shew my selfe foo∣lish and insipient, but also saucie and impudent, in labouring for the graunt of so great a grace, to magistrates with whō neuer before I had conference, nor yet acquaintaunce: they Or, were more earnest and instant with me, to graunt their re quest, that their friends might also be gratified. assaulted me with more serious supplications, not holding me (say what I could to auoide their intreatance) excusable. Now when they were frustrate of all confidence, & readie to be (as it were) deuoured in despaire, it was manifest to all men, and maruelous apparant, that their minds were excée∣dingly molested, and tooke their repulse very vnpatiently. Nowe, when I perceiued, their perturbatours were more vehement, then was conuenient, at length yealding to their request, I made them promise, to write this Epistle, & to sée it sent vnto you also, for their further cōtentation. And thus much I had to say, concerning the offence of foolishnesse and importunacie. I can not but thinke, that your déedes are not discommendable, ne yet vnprofitable, in that you haue In that you are growne in to fauor with your people, and haue ob∣teined their good wil: then whiche, a go∣uernour hath not a better thing to de∣sire. en∣tred reconciliatiō with your citizens: in that you do your in∣deuour, y• the number of such as be banished, may be dimini∣shed: that you lay to the vttermost of your labor, y• societie in the common welth may be increased: finally, for that, in this sedition, you set before you the state of our citie, as a presidēt or paterne for you to follow. Among all other thinges praise worthy, this one déede is principally to be extolled, that toge∣ther with the restitution of their country, you also see surren∣dred, all such possessions and substaunce to those whome you haue called out of comfortlesse exile, as were taken from thē
by force and violence: In which your vsage, you make plaine declaration, that you did not procure their expulsion out of the citie, as incensed with the desire of others mens wealth and riches, but as fearing some danger imminent and hang∣ing ouer the weale publique. But, although you had not ben resolued in any of the aboue cited circumstances, neither yet had receiued into the libertie of their countrie, any person proscript and banished: yet notwithstanding, I would thinke it much for your commoditie, if, to them, of whome I write at this present, you shewe your selues so beneficiall, as to bouchsafe them restitution to their countrie. For, sithence none is ignorant, that in the knowledge and Art of Musike, From the au thoritie and commendatiō of their owne countrie. your citie is incomparable, and that among you, are bred & borne, men maruellous cunning and expert in that professiō: it were an offence tending to dishonestie and dishonour, y• he to whom, not so much as one in this our age can be found e∣quall, in skil of so famous a science, should lose the libertie of such a noble citie. And forsomuch as it is vsuall among all o∣ther Graecians, to make frée denizens of their cōmon welth, such as excell in any alowable Art, albeit they be foreiners & altogether strangers: As who said, it wer a shame that you shuld so offend. wil you, whose name for this cause, among so many nations is nobled, be so inflexible & voyde of courtesie, as to suffer a citizen of your owne, a citizen (I say) in a most necessarie science so singularly practised, to liue a∣mong aliants? I can not but maruell at those cities, as at a worldes wonder, that, to such as be winners in Bodily exer∣cises: as run∣ning, leaping, iumping, wrestling. &c, vsed in for∣mer ages. Gymnicall games, assigne larger rewardes, than to them, that by their compassing wittes, and incessant labours, haue founde out somthing, to the life of man most profitable, and to the main∣tenance of his estate verie expedient: not considering in the meane season, that Swiftnesse in running, and strength of bodie, continue not when death makes dispatch, but va∣nishe and consume to nought with the fleshe, which is sub∣iect to corruption: and that the nature of Arts and Sciences is such, as it is lincked with eternitie, as it maketh them per∣durable, as it is to the searchers learners and louers of them, at all times and seasons, meanes of aduauncement.
This ought to be the meditation, of such as are indued with wisdomo, first Wise pre∣cepts and hoal some counsels to haue in high estimation & reuerence, gd and iust gouernours of common walthos: then to gaunt and giue the next degree of dignitie, to such as thay be an or∣nament to their cities, and instruments to garish the same with glory. Many therebe, (yea, the most part of men) who taking but as it were, a super viewe of these thinges, fall into this erronious and preposerous opinion, that all o∣ther citizens whatsoeuer, are like to them, whome we haue mencioned. An objectiō supposed. Some peraduenture, will assay me with this obiection: Is it not reason (syr) that whosoeuer laboureth in the petition of a benefite, and is desierous, it were attained, should shewe by euident demonstration, not the thing it selfe, wherein he trauelleth, to be commendable▪ but that they ought in like manner, to giue manifest testimonie, them, in whose urtheraunce, they take vpon them the office of medi∣ators, not to be vnworthy of that, wherein they doe their in∣deuour by way of intercession, of full intent, their requestes might be satisfied? The resolu∣ion. Thus standeth the case, as you shall heare discouered. I haue abstained from the administrati∣on or gouernement of the common wealth: I haue with∣drawne* The infirmities of Isocra∣tes wherby he was hindered from pracii∣sing the Art Oratorie. my self from controuersies of plea in courts & sessi∣ons: I haue not put in practise the facultie of an Orator, tho∣ugh I am one by profession: and why so? Forsooth bycause I wanted vtteraunce, I wanted a voice to that exercise an∣swerable, and I wanted likewise, boldenesse and audacitie: Notwstanding which impediments, I haue not ben idle, Seruices most necessa∣rie in▪ commō wealthes. I haue not ben as one, of whose seruice there is no vse, I haue not bene quite voide of authoritie. But if you consider well of the matter, you shall finde in conclusion, that I haue bene a counselor, and an assistant to them, that haue mainteined and supported, both the dignitie and commodities, as well of your societie, as also of other incorporations. Furthermore, concerning restitution of libertie and auncient priuileges to be made to the Graecians, I haue bene more frée in speache, then they all, that in solemne assemblies haue wasted many wordes, and worne with their often going vp, the An appoin∣ted place for the pleading of controuer∣sies, and mat∣tes called in question. Oratorie
pulpite. In respect of which premisses, you should of dueti, though not with rewardes, yet with thankes, measure my merites: For this estate of the common weale, you haue al∣wayes, with earnestnesse desiered. I suppose, that Two Athe∣nien dukes or valiant cap∣taines. Conon, and Two Athe∣nien dukes or valiant cap∣taines. Timothie, if they were aliue, and A Rhetorici∣an, wel deser∣uing of the Mitylenes. Diophantus also if he were returned out of Asia, would labour in my behalfe right busily, yea, they would wish, that vnto me to be graun∣ted, which of them selues they would desire to be obteined, if they stoode in néede of your helpe & furtherance. Touching whome, to waste many wordes, it were impertinent to the purpose. For there is not so much as one among you, altho∣ugh he be but young in yeares, so obliuious and forgetfull, but remembreth well enough, what benefites at their hands you haue receiued. And touching this present occasion, you shall be thought to determine with reason, if you ponder, both what he is that playeth the Isocrates. mediatour, and for what manner of Agenor, his father, and brethren. men he maketh intercession. For you shall vn∣derstand, that to such as haue bene great benefactours vnto you, I haue professed singular friendship, and fauoured them excéedingly. Now, they in whose be halfe I am become a sup∣pliant, are men of such disposition, as neither to the seniours of the people they will shew them selues troublesome: nor kindle their vnquietnesse, that are in office of magistrates: but to be yong men, of a commendable inclination, delighted in studies tending to pleasure, and not resisting profite: yea, addicted to such exercises, as for this our present age, none cā be more conuenient & nécessarie. Wonder not at my plaine writing, neither maruell, that I make it a matter of small la∣bour, being intreated to direct my letters vnto you, both in the cause of others, and touching them that to me are most deare beloued: The reason that moued him to write to the Mitylo∣nean magistra∣tes. For, I am desierous to gratifie my posteri∣tie: & hereof to leaue a substanciall witnesse, that, although they be not aduaunced in the weale publique, to degrées of countenance, and titles of honour, but in their course of life and maners, liuely represent my conuersation: yet not with∣standing, it is like in time, to win them worship, and to open frée passage to estimation▪ One thing remaineth behinde, yet
vnsatisfied, namely, He conclu∣deth with the renning of his petition: for suites must be moued to memorie, till they be obtei∣ned. my petition, which if it be your plea∣sure to graunt. Agenor and his brethren, shall haue occasion to acknowledge your courtese, & shall likewise vnderstand, that through my procurement partly, those thinges are at length obteined, which with such instancie they desired. Isocrates to Dionysio. THE ARGVMENT. He rebuketh Dionysius the Sicilian tyrant (him as I thinke, that was named the younger) for his pride and hautinesse, and also for his contempt of the profitable precepts of Philosophie, endeuouring to reuoke his mynde to a better disposition. OFficers of countenance and worship, persons in high au∣thoritie, and in attainement▪ of the stately throne of preeminence, what good else do they, but darken the desire of wisedome, with the mystie cloudes of sensualitie? neither can there be founde, a more maine mischiefe, then that, for the speedie supplanting of vertue, and the vtter rooting out of all praiseworthy properties. Why This Epistle was writen to Dionysius the tyrant of Sici∣lia, of whome Trog. lib. 31. of this name there be. 9. re∣corded in olde writers. 1. a Lo gician of Bi∣thynia.  a ge ographer of Corynthus. 3. Gramarian of Alexandria. 4. an historiogra pher of Myle∣tum. 5. Chroni cler of Hali∣carnassus. 6. King of Hera clea and Anti∣ochia. 7. a Pre∣sident of A∣thens. 8. a Pre∣sident of Co∣rinth. 9. a Pre∣sident of Alex andria: & our first named Dionysius (making ten in number, if not more) Sicilia. man, though your fortune be changed, yet your nature is not altered: for why, you carkasse is compassed in a corruptible skin. Your nati∣uitie and byrthe, was like other mennes, they are subject to death, and you likewise are but mortall. This Epistle was writen to Dionysius the tyrant of Sici∣lia, of whome Trog. lib. 31. of this name there be. 9. re∣corded in olde writers. 1. a Lo gician of Bi∣thynia.  a ge ographer of Corynthus. 3. Gramarian of Alexandria. 4. an historiogra pher of Myle∣tum. 5. Chroni cler of Hali∣carnassus. 6. King of Hera clea and Anti∣ochia. 7. a Pre∣sident of A∣thens. 8. a Pre∣sident of Co∣rinth. 9. a Pre∣sident of Alex andria: & our first named Dionysius (making ten in number, if not more) of Sicilia. To what purpose then, doth vaine glory inflate and puffe vp til i swel againe, this brittle bottle framed out of clay▪ what meane you mā, to be subiect to such madnesse: O vnhappie wretch, why art thou so be witched? why art thou spoyled of that knowledge, which put thée in remembrance of thy frayle nature▪ Haue these stately aduauncements of flourishing fortune, so blind∣ded thine vnderstanding, as that thou art cōpelled to swerue from thine This Epistle was writen to Dionysius the tyrant of Sici∣lia, of whome Trog. lib. 31. of this name there be. 9. re∣corded in olde writers. 1. a Lo gician of Bi∣thynia.  a ge ographer of Corynthus. 3. Gramarian of Alexandria. 4. an historiogra pher of Myle∣tum. 5. Chroni cler of Hali∣carnassus. 6. King of Hera clea and Anti∣ochia. 7. a Pre∣sident of A∣thens. 8. a Pre∣sident of Co∣rinth. 9. a Pre∣sident of Alex andria: & our first named Dionysius (making ten in number, if not more) of Sicilia. accustomed contemplation? haue they brought thée to that point of securitie, vtterly to abiure and forsake so sober a spirite? In times past, your moderation did lift it selfe aloft, nowe it lyeth groueling vpon the grounde, your fortune is nowe in her brauest flowre of iollitie: arme your
selfe therefore, to shrinke from the vaine shadowes of false and counterfet felicitie: prepare your minde and manners, no longer to follow flitting fortune, whose lightnesse and vn∣faithfulnesse if you can preuent, when souden alteration of your present prosperitie shal chaūce, your fall wil be so much the more sufferable. ¶Thus end the nine Epistles of Isocrates. Epistles of most famous Philoso∣phers, prudent Princes, and other men of great wisedome. Solon to Periandro. THE ARGVMENT. Wise Solon, writing to Periander of his dāgerous estate, giueth him counsel to see to his owne safetie: Vnder whose person is repre∣sented to the viewe of the reader, the miserable case of tyrants, & Princes, who sit in the seates of their royaltie as not possessing them, hauing not the hearts of their people. YOu write vnto me, that many ly in wait to worke your ouerthrowe, but This Perian der was king of Corynth: & one of the. 7. sapients, yet a bloudie ty∣rant. Diog. La er. lib. 1. & i∣dem alibi sub tit. Periand. Suidas and o∣thers. you, in consideration of your crueltie, shall not be so excused. For, one or other of them, whom you haue lest in suspicion; fearing his owne life to be in hassarde, and sée∣ing you so mistrustfull of imminent mis∣chiefes, as your mynde is neuer vnloaded of disquietnesse, will (no doubt) epying opportunitie, as desirous to gratifie his countrie, attempt your destruction. It were not there∣fore amisse for you, nay, it woulde make much for your com∣moditie, to absteine from tyrannie, that al causes of corosiue
cares being escaped, you may harbour in the hauen of quiet∣nesse. But, if you persist in opinion, that For he sayde that to giue it ouer volunta∣rily, or violent ly was daun∣gerous. tyrannicall power is not to be suppressed▪ it must be of cessitie, so séene vnto & prouided on your behalfe, that outlandish strength and for∣reigne force, surmoūting the might that your tie can make, be obteined: that none turne you to trouble, and that you thrust none into exile. Fare you well. Solon to Epimenidi. ¶ THE ARGVMT. Witing to Epimenides, he firste maketh a discouse vppon lawes: thē taketh occasion to speake of Pisistratus his aspiring mynd to : sheweth the ignorance of some, or rather the blockish∣nesse, that could not perceiue his purpose: and the timorousnesse of other some, that seeing whrevnto he , dust not (for all that) resist his proceedings. Then he hah a Prosopopoical speach to his countrie, wherein is testified▪ his good will in doing his countrie seruice. Lastly, he entreth into a dscourse of the aboue say de Pisistratus, detecting his deceiuable doings, bent wholy to the destruction of the common wealth. MY lawes and ordinaunces were not much commodious to the Atheniens: neyther were This Epime nides, was by byrth a Cre∣tensian, liuing in the time of Pithagoras, as Apul. sayth, Flor. 2. of him reade Dio. La∣er. lib. 1. sub. tt. Epim. &. 8. sub. tit. Pytha. you, after their abro∣gation, a proeurer of the cities profite. For not the Gods on∣ly, and lawe makers, are of abilitie to sée to the safetie of ci∣ties, but they also, that haue the way to wn the multitude, to like and well allowe of what sentence soeuer is pronoun∣ced: and to such (vndoubtedly) as disharge the administrati∣on of the common walth, according to iustice, lawes are ad∣uauntage: to the contrarie, what are they else, but a hinde∣rance. The lawes and statutes, which I my selfe did penne, were so farre from being profitable to me, that they were in∣conuenient: and yet notwithstanding, such as neglected the obseruation of them, brought into the weals publiue many detriments, whiles they made no resistance against An Atheniē yrant. Trog. lib. 2. of this name there was another, a Larislean  s saith Suidas Pisi∣stratus, being gréedily affected to tyrannie. My presignificant
speache, and forewarning watch wordes, were counted vn∣worthy credite. A flatterer was thought more faithfull and trustie, among the Atheniens then I, by whose toung simple and plaine truth was vttered. Wherefore, putting off myne armour before the palace gate, I gaue this sentence in praise of mine owne person, that I was more couragious & valiant then they, y• perceiuing Pisistratus aspiring to so pernicious a principalitie as tyrannie, were affrighted to trie their mā∣hood for the libertie of the cōmon wealth: & that I was more circumspect and wise, thē they that had not the wit & discre∣tion to perceiue, in that point, his detestable enterprise. But they tooke Solons true tale for a vaine toy, his plaine mea∣ning they made a mockerie, and accounted his vndoubted di∣uinations, madde immaginations. At length, calling my na∣turall countrie to recorde, I put my selfe foorth in open view, and this was the speach that I vttered. The wordes of a true and faithful louer of his natu∣rall countrie: by the figure Prosopopeia. O countrie, coun∣trie, that Solon, that same Solon (I say) whose truth thou art able to testifie, is prepared and in a readinesse, both in deede and also in word to succour and assist thee: As for these fel∣lowes, what doe they else thinke of me, but as of a frantique foole. Wherefore, (my countrie) I among all the rest, being an aduersarie to Pisistratus, depart to bestowe my time else∣where: as for these men, loe, they are at a becke, both to giue signification of their conceiued fauour, and to scale an assu∣rance of their dutifull obedience. H turnth his talke to his friend Epi∣menides, vnto whome this present epistle was directed. O my friend, thou kno west the man, thou knowest with what fraudulent and soxe like iuglings, thou knowest with what  practises, thou knowest with what canckred nature, thou knowest by what craftie collusion, he hath clammered vp to the thron of tyrannie. He began with swéete bayts of flatterie, to circum∣uent the common people, h spared no coloured pretence to allure the vulgar sort, he became a butcher to his body, woū∣ding his flesh with a piercing blade of strong stéele, he mang∣led him selfe to cloake his determined mischiefe: But The preten∣ces of Pisistra∣tus, to attaine principalitie described▪ com∣ming in open place, where people assembled, crying out a∣maine, he discouered te bléeding gashes, and casting out hor∣rible exclamations, sayde▪ that his enimies had so anatomised
his flesh, with their weapons: wherevpon he made suppli∣cation, and besought them pitifully, that they would of their bountie, allowe him to the number of foure hundred pickt and chosen men, hugest in stature, and fullest of force, to be the guard of his person, and the defenders of his life. They gaue him Not percei∣uing the mis∣ that were lik to insue. a graunt, and yealded to his request, notwith∣standing my negatiue voyce or denyal, to the contrarie. The sorecited young men, whome he by petition had obteined for his protection, were armed with such maner of weapons as would both breake & bruse, as would (I say) beare off many a shrewde blowe, and hauing these to daunce attendance v∣on him, and readie at his mandate to do mischief He crept in like a Foxe, ruled like a Lion, and spoi led lie a Wolse. he inuaded the common wealth, and of the same hath wrought the sub∣uersion and ouerthrowe. Nowe, whiles they dreaming of a drie Sommer, laboured to set their poore people at libertie, least being otherwise tempted▪ they shuld serue for salarie, it so fel out, that all, one with another, were forced to beare the burthenous yoake of bondage: and doe nowe submit them selues to the power of Pisistratus, &c. Fare you well. Solon to Pisistrato. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle (being, as it should seeme) written after Piistratus his establishment, in the Monarchie, signifieth a certain desire in So∣lon, to obteine the tyrants fauour: it sheweth alo, that faine he would returne to Athes, but yet tha he is loath: the reason of his suspended and doubtfull mynde, appeareth plainely in the Epistle. IAm in beliefe (I may peraduenture Thereby meaning that his hope and afsiāce might deceiue him. sowe my séede in the sande) that you will doe nothing vnto me, wherby I should be harmed. For, before you atteined your affected Or, regimēt: in auncient times the na∣me of kings was so odious hat kings were called ty . tyran∣nie, I was your friende and fauourer, neyther am I at this insant, a greater enimie to your person, then any other A∣thenien that liketh not, ne loueth that kynde of gouernment. For, whether it be more commodious, to be in subiection to
the rule of one, or that the administration of the weale pub∣lique, should be committed to many, I haue not to bewraye mine opinion: let euery one giue his seuerall iudgement, I meane to be silent. Out of question, I must néedes confesse, that of all Or, of all kings: where note, how So∣lon praiseth Pisistratus in presence: whō he discommē∣ded to Epime nides in ab∣sence. tyrants, you are the noblest, matchlesse in maie∣stie, incomparable in prowesse, excellent in worthynesse. I knowe, that it is not for my profite to returne to Athens, least at my arriuall, I incur iust and deserned reprehension, for that, not long since, I graunted an equalitie in gouerne∣ment, and hauing principalitie prosered me in possession, made a voluntarie refusall of the same: all which déedes of myne, my returne (no doubt) would discredite, for I shall séeme to Bycause I was an earnest enimie to that state of go∣uernement, wherein you are establi∣shed. ratifie and confirme your enterprise, by my souden repentane. Fare you well. Solon to Croeso. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Solon being sent for of Croesus to liue in the libertie of his king∣dome, after he was absent from Athens, and yet notwithstanding (as appeaeth) not destitute of a place answerable to his desire, gi∣ueth thankes to Croesus for his courtesie. The letter is familiar, and therefore giueth likelyhoodes of their long and great ac∣quaintaunce. YOur This epistle was writen to Croesus king of Lydia: tou∣ching whome reade Plut. sub it. Solo∣nis. excéeding beneuolence, and good will, garnished with grace, wherof we haue tasted y• swéetnesse, we haue in high estimation: and, by the Gods immortall (I sweare) had not my determination bene, long since, there To liue at ease and qui∣. to feather my neast, where the common wealth enioyeth libertie, I would rather haue chosen, vnder your maiesties dominion, and within the limits of your kingdome, to leade my life in tranquillitie, then to continue in Athens, where Pisistratus playeth the tyrant with extremitie and violence. But, in such a place haue I taken vp my lodging, much more to my contentation, where all thinges are equall, and in common. Howbeit, I will come vnto you, and accepting your courte∣sie, Least I shuld seeme to con∣temne the fruit of your gentlenesse. vse the benefite (for a season) of your interteinement.
A Panoplie of Epistles Thales to Pherecydes. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Vnderstanding that his fiende Pherecydes, was assaying a iourney into Ionia, he giueth him counsel to chaunge his purpose: after certaine other circumstaunces menioned touching his mynde, howe it is affected towardes his friend, he inferreth the readinesse of his owne will, and Solons also, to sayle to Pherecydes. Lastly by an argument of the commodiousnesse of the place, where hee abideth, persuadeth him to tarie: therevpon bringing in a compa∣rison of him selfe and his friend, he concludeth. I Thales a Mi lesian one of the seuen sapi ents: Plu. Dio. Laer. sub tit. Thaletis li. 1. heare it reported, that Pherecydes was Pythago∣ras his master &c. Suidas & Diog. Laer. li. 1. sub. tit. Tha∣let. you are preparing to Ionia a coū trie in Graecia. Plin. lib. 5. cap. 29. Ionia, of purpose to reason openly among the Graecians,  thinges concerning celestiall contemplation: But, beléeue me, your opinion shall be the more auailable peraduenture, & thought more worthy acceptatiō, if you wil reade among your frends & them with whom you are familiarly acquainted, such dis∣courses, as you haue already with painefull pen entered in∣to paper: then by letting them that list, haue libertie of your exercises, they (in the meane while) reaping no commoditie. Now certainly, If you make me of your coūsel in those pointes, wher∣of you write. &c. if you would make me accessarie to those things, which you attempt, I would be content you shoulde so doe: my will there vnto is applyable. As you bid me I will do, addressing my iourney towards you, withall speede. For, neither I, nor yet Solon of Athens, are so infatuate and foo∣lish, so dull, so blockish, and wanting it, as hauing sayled to Crete to sée the situation of the soyle, passing also through Situate in A sia, of this coū trie all haue witten, that are any thing famous in ge∣ographie. Aegypt, there to conferre with the vnprophane priestes, and learned Astronomers, would not in like manner, with equal measure of desire, aduenture a voiage, to thée our wel∣willer? I dare say, thus much in Solon his behalfe, that he will come, if you giue him but he wil come at a becke, or if you do but winke: mea∣ning some li∣tle token to styr him to at tendaunce. same slender signification. For, you being as it were, fettered with fancie & good liking of that place, doe but sildome prepare to passe ouer into Io∣nia, neyther, yet are touched with any affection of outlan∣dishe men, aliantes (I meane) forreiners and straungers.
But, as I am in hope, you are inclined and earnestly bent to the exercise of writing discourses, as for vs, that liue like idle droanes, not so muche as putting pen to paper, necessarie it is, that we trauell through the quarters of Graecia, and the landes of Asia. Fare you well. Thales to Solon. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Solon being determined to leaue Athens, and liue in it no longer, is counselled of Thales to addresse him selfe to Myletum: hee sheweth that the conuersation of friendes ought not to be edi∣ous, but delightsome: Lastly, he concludeth with Bias, who wrote to Solon, to come and make his abode in Priena. IF Solon, oe of the seuen sapients or wisemen of the worlde: whose names are thus recor ded: Solon, Thales, Pitta∣cus, Bias, Cleo bulus, Chilo, Periander, tou ching the nū∣ber, diuers au∣thors are at va riance: Diog. Lae. lib. 1. sub tit. Thal. you forsake Athens, you may (as I thinke) haue a very fit and commodious mansion at Myletum: for it is one of your liberties, neither shall you be put to any inconuenience or grieuance. And, and if you account tyrannicall regiment, an execrable regiment, and therefore haue it in detestati∣on among the Mylesians, (for such is your propertie, that you abhorre that principalitie, with equall proportion of spightfulnesse) yet notwithstanding, to liue with vs your friends, and to kéepe vs companie, it is so farre from being a∣ny cause of heauinesse, that it is a ready pathway to plesant∣nesse. Bias wrote vnto you, to haue you go to Priena, if your affection serue you, in that countrie to make your habitatiō & dwelling, we wil not be long from thence, but thither also after you direct our iournie, wt al possible spéedinesse. Fare you well. Pisistratus to Solon. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle is apologeticall. Pisistratus defendeth him selfe, and his doings, in attainening the Empire, writeth to Solon, how the lawes by him enacted (are through his commaundement) duely obserued: exeuseth him selfe of violence and iniurie, wherwith∣all
tyrannie is charged: writeth to Solou earnestly, to returne to Athens, promiseth him honourable aduauncement on the same condition: giueth him leaue to vse the libertie of his choice: de∣sireth that hee bee not counted the occasion of his absence from Athens. I Alne, of all the Graecians, haue not obteined the estate of a Monarche by extertion, neither haue I taken any thing, that was not mine owne by vsurpation: for I am by byrth, a The first kings name of Athens was Cecrops, of whome, the kings succee∣ding in the seate were cal∣led Cecropi∣ans Pli lib. 7. cap. 5. 6. Cecropian, I challenge that vnto me by right of ow∣nage, which the Atheniens in times past, hauing confirmed and made ouer with assurance to Codrus, and to his nation, afterwards againe repealed and with drewe. Furthermore, against the Gods I haue committed no crime, and as for mē I haue them not offended. The lawes and decrées which you prescribed to the Atheniens, I commaund them duely to be obserued, and charge them to frame the course of their liues, after the same your ordinaunces: and vndoubtedly, the ob∣seruation of them is better séene to and prouided, then it would otherwise e, in Whē the pe ople rule the roast, a mon∣ster of many heads. Democracie, when the multitude haue gouernement. For what do I? isistratus his purgation consisting in negatiue poin∣tes. I suffer no man to be oppressed with iniurie: I am content with my Monarchicall maiestie or title royall: I diminish nothing that is proper to the cmonaltie: I am satisfied with these stipends and pay∣ments, which were due to my predecessors, long before this power fell to my possession: I burthen none with newe ex∣actions, tributes, or subsidies: To be short, eueryone of the Atheniens diuide the tenths of their reuenues, not to be dis∣burssed for our profite, nor sor our pculiar seruice, but for publique vses, and common aduauntage: and also, to supply expences & beare out our charges, if it so fortune, that at any time warres be  against vs, by forreigne enimies; or otherwise, rebellious rings attēpted. I conceiue against you I am not dis pleased with you for reuea ling mine in∣tent. no stomach at all, in that po detected my counscl, in that you discouered my purpose: bycause (as I doe consider) you did it rather of aloing desire towards the cōmenwelth, then of malice and enuie, to bring my person in discredite: & also bycause you knwe not what maner of man I was of
conditions: or howe I woulde haue behaued myselfe in the kingdome. For, if you had not ben ignorant therof, you wold peraduenture haue thought mine enterprise tollerable, and not haue fled from the citie, as though you were indangered. Wherefore Solon, returne I pray thée, For Solon had forsaken the citie of A∣thens, whiche fel in Pisistra∣tus his posses∣sion. returne, in hope to be saued harmelesse and vndamnified: and trust my words without an othe, Pisistratus meaneth not any mischiefe a∣gainst Solon. For you know that I wrought no mans detri∣mint: no, not so much as mine enimies haue at my handes susteined any discommoditie. For end, if it shal please you, to accept our friendship, Pisistratus his large pro∣mises to Solō, to haue him returne to A∣thens. you shal be in place with Gentlemen of the best countenaunce, and highest degrée of honour: for, I haue had such experience of your doings, that I must néedes say thus much of truth, your attempts to be honest, voide of treason, deceit, and whatsoeuer else is vicious. ut if you be disposed, elsewhere to make your continuance, rather then in Athens, He graun∣teth him to take his cho∣ice where he best liketh. do as you will, your purpose shall not be hindered by our procurement: only, my desire is, that it be not sayde, that we were the cause, why you forsooke your countrie. Fare you well. Chilo to Periandro. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. The vnquiet estate of a tyrant, in this Epistle is most liuely decy phe∣red: in the end wherof, Chilo setteth down his opinion, touching the same kinde of gouernment, giuing to note, howe rare a thing it is, tyrants to die without violence. YOu Chilo, a La∣cedemonian Philosopher▪ one of the. 7. wisemen of Graecia. Pli li. 7. cap 32. & Di og. La. li. 4 sub tit Chilonis Lacedem. commaund me to cast off mine armour, to cease frō war, & to leade my life in a forreigne countrie: as though you were in likelyhoode to possesse peace, & to be lulled in the* By cause ty∣rants commō ly are murthe red▪ and verie sildome or ne uer are so bles sed as to dye naturally. lap of safetie. Neuerthelesse, I am of a contrarie opinion: for I thinke, that A monarch or king cannot enioy, no not that which is his owne by inheritance, and most assured interest, without much turmoyle, disquietnesse and daunger: yea, I account that king or tyrant, most happie and fortunate,
whose lucke it is, within the wals of his bed chamber in the court, naturally to dye, without lifting vp of weapon, with∣out slaughter and bloudshed. Pittacus to Croeso. TH ARGVMENT. Pittacus being sent for of Coesus to come to Lydia, there to leade his life▪ pleadeth his contented minde with a measurable liuing, for an exuse: neuerthelesse, least e should seeme to neglect the profered courtesie of a king, he condiscendeth to Croesus his de∣sire. YOur pleasure is, to haue me come into A countri in Asia, neare to the Aeoli∣as and Ioni▪ ans. Pompon. lib. 1. &c. Lydia lande, to the intent I might sée your royall treasure, and great ri∣ches: concerning which, I say thus muche, that although I haue neuer set eye therevpon, and therefore not able in that behalfe to giue certaine iudgement: yet dare I, weout wa∣uering, giue this report, that ye sonne of Meaning Coesus the king of Lydia whose fathers name was Aly as, &c. of him reade Plut. sub tit. Solo. Alyas is the weal∣thiest king in the worlde, most richest in golde and treasure. Againe, I am sur, if we shoulde assay to come vnto you at Sardis a citie in Lydia, the kings seate royall. Horo∣dot. lib. 1. Plin. lib. 5. Horat. Epi. 10. Sardis, we could ware neuer a whit the more worth: For, as for golde, we want it not, being content with a competent and reasonable liuing, euen as much as is sufficient both for mine owne selfe, and my friendes. Neuerthelesse, I will not refuse your courtesie, that I may be familiar with you, whō I heare to be much inclined to humanitie, and not a litle de∣lighted with hospitalitie. Fare you well. Cleobulus to Solon. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Vnder the person of Solon, whome he sayth to haue fauourers infi∣nite, he comforteth wise and learned men, supposing that they cā not be friendlesse nor harbourlesse He persuadeth Solon also to chaunge his soyle, drawing his reasons from the aptnesle of the place, and from other circumstaunces.
FRiend Solon, you haue an infinite number of friends, and with al and euery of them, you haue a house, wherin to be harboured: Neuerthelesse, friend Solon, Cleobulus was one of the seuen wie men of Grece: he had a daugh ter named Cle obulia excel∣lently wel lea ned. Diog. Laer. lib. 1. sub it. Cleob. & Sidas. Lindus (as I think) wil be a most conuenient place for you to inhabite, and make your dwelling in: it is a frée citie, and Lindus a towne wherin Cleobulus was born, from whence he tra ueiled into Aegypt. &c. it is compassed round about with the sea: if you be disposed, there to make your cō, tinuaunce, you shall haue no cause to stand in feare of Pisi∣stratus, and your friends shall haue accesse vnto you from all places, by flockes, thick and three old. Periander to the seuen Sapients. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle declareth in what estimation wise and learned men were, in former ages: yea,  such time as that estate of gouernement was erected, which many abhorred. Vnder the person of Periander, offe∣ring courtesie to the seuen Sapients or wise men, princes and suche as be in place of authoritie, are instructed to haue learned men in reuerence. I Of Periāde the king of Corynth, read Diog. La. sub tit. Peri. lib. 1. & Suidas.▪ Render immortall thankes, to Pythius Apollo, in that mine epistles haue had such prosperous successe, as to find you al out, gathered together in one companie, & I hope that, as hitherto they haue had no ill happ, so they shall haue good luck, to bring you all to The citie Metropoli∣tane of all A∣chaia. Strabo lib. 8. it is cal∣led Bimaris, because of the two seas, name∣ly the Ionian and the , which flow by it. So  it, Fst. lib 4. Corynthe. These are therefore to let you vnderstand, that I looke for your comming, you shall sée and trie, with what ciuilitie you shalbe intertayned. As therefore, the last yeare, you tooke the paines to come from Sardis to Lydia: so I beséech you, vouchsafe mée, king of Co∣ynthe, with the like labour. For, the Corynthian people, will reioyce excéedingly, when they see you entring into Pe∣rianders palace. Fare you well. Thrasibulus to Periandro.
THE ARGVMNT. An ausweare to an embassage, first made by an example of violence: then, by word of mouth importing great crultie, to Periander a ty∣raunt. Wherein is to be seene, readie counsell, but yet for all that, passing daungerous. I Thrasibulus the Athenien, of whom Iso∣crates Orat 5. aduersus Cal∣limach. & Cic. in Philip. Va∣lr. sub. it, de Modestia. There was an▪ other of that name, a My∣lesian. Front. lib. 2. Dissembled not with your embassadour, neither concea∣led from him the secrets of my counsell: but bringing him into the corne sield, and smyting off, with a wand that I helde in my hande, the cares of Wheate that were of highest growthe, he following mée in the footepath, and seing the or∣der of my doinges: I ad him reporte this message vnto you at his returne, namely, whatsoeuer hée heard mée speake, or sawe mée do. Wherefore (Periander) if there be any impedi∣ment, that you cannot, with the benefite of your safetie, pos∣sesse your tyrannicall principalitie, neither in the same be e∣stablished: listen to my lore, and let my counsel e your direc∣tion. Wordes sa∣uouring of slaughter and bloudshed. Dispatch the Princes and chiefest of the citie, whe∣ther they be your friendes, or whether they bée your foes, dis∣patch them I say, let them not liue, but make hauock of them one with another, spare not such as séeme to bée your fauou∣rers: For, many and oftentimes, a tyraunt hath cause to hau his friends in suspicion, Anacharsis to Croeso. THE ARGVMNT. Anachasis being in Grecia, writeth to Croesus king of Lydia (who was desirous to haue him come into his kingdome) the cause▪ why hee taieth in that countie: hee sayh that hee wanteth no gold for his costage. &c. Wherby ee signifieth, howe lightly the Philoso∣phers of old time regarded monie, & that they accompted learning sufficient prouision.
I Anacharsi the Scythia Philosopher, of whom Cic. lib. Tuscul. 5. & Diog. Lae. lib. 1 sub tit. Anachar. (O noble king of Lydia) am arried in Grecia,  selfe to be acquainted with the manners of the people, and to be expert also in their exercises. I lack no gold, and as for my purueyaunce, it is sufficient to bring me back againe to the Among whō he was bore and bred. Scythians, garnished with more commenda∣ble maners, and furnished with better stoare of learning. Ne∣uerthelesse, I wil sée you at Sardis, estéeming your friendship and familiaritie, most wrthie acceptation, Epimenides to Solon ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle, written by Epimenides to Solon, touching , first declareth howe hee came to that kinde of regiment, name∣ly by violence: and what maner of men, hee made yeeld to his power. Secondly, it sheweth that it is hard for people auing li∣ued in liberie, to bee kept in long lasting bodage, with a cer∣taine hope, that the Empie shalbe cut off from Psistratus his off∣spring. Lastly it conteyneh a petition, wherein hee desireth So∣lon to come to Crte, vsing a reaon drawn from the freedome of the Countie. FRiend Of these twaine, Diog. Laer. li. 1. sub tit. vtriusque Plato. 1. & 3. de Leg. & Cic. Tucul. lib. 1. Solon, bée not discouraged: For if the Atheni∣ens had béene in subiection, as to a thing vsuall, and ac∣custod: or as people vnder good lawes and ordinaues, not well gouerned: Pisistratus (no doubte) had possessed the kingdome, not for a season, but in long continuaunce. How∣beit, insomuch, as by compulsorie meanes, he hath constray∣ed such to yéelde to inforced obedience and seruitude, as are For noble hartes cannot digest serui∣tude▪ both vertuous and venturous: yea, such as remmbring Solons admonitions, are so ashamed of themselues, that they sighe for very sorrowe: it is not like, that they wil any lo∣ger, suffer Trannicall seruitude. And althoughe, Pisistra∣tus be now set in possession of the Citie, yet I hope, the Em∣pire shalbe hereafter in such a case, that is posteritie shall
haue no occasion, to make claime vnto it, as their lawfull in∣htance. For, For libertie nd seruitude are as cōtrary as any elemē∣tarie qualities. to people lyuing long in libertie, to people (I say), liuing vnder most notable lawes, it is a thing, than which a harder cannot bee named, to indure vnacquainted subiection, But to let this passe▪ I would not haue you bée in the case of an etrauagant, I meane hunted ou of house and home, but addresse your selfe rather to come vnto vs, with as much spede as you can, to Now called Candie vnder the gouern∣mēt of Venice Strabo lib. 2. Virg. . lib. . Dior li. 6. Plini. lib. 4. cp. 12. &c. Crete, where tumultuous tyrāe is not entertained, to any ones disturbaunce and vexation. But if peraduenture, you chaunce by the way, to méete with some of his fauourers, I feare mée, you are like to incurre some inconuenience. Pherecydes to Thales. THE ARGVMENT. After his gratulation finished, he maketh mencion with what a loath∣some sicknesse he is disquieted: Then hee taketh occasion to write something, of certaine inuētions of his owne, the publishing, or not publishing of which, hee referreth to the iudgement of Thales. Last∣ly hee falleth into a conclusion answerable to his beginning, where∣in he painteth out his terrible and miserable perplexities. I There were 3. of that name as I read, one an Athenien Philosopher. 2. A Leean hi storiographer 3. A Syrian, & maister to Py∣hagoras, who was the Au∣thour of this Epist. Dog. Laer. lib. 1. sub tit. Pherec. & lib. 8. sub. tit. Pythag. Ac∣linus lib. 10. Wihe thée well to die, when thy fatall ay is come. &c. At the receipt of your letters, a miserable sckenes inuaded mée, wherewithal I was pitifully tormented: for all my skin cralled with lyce, and my flesh (a loathsome sight) was eaten with that filthy vermine: besides that, I was troubled with a quaking Feuer, thorough out all my members. I desired my frends (making no accompt of life) that after they had bu∣rid my body, they should procure such pamphlets to be con∣ueyed vnto you, as I left behind mée in writing. Which, if you shal allowe, in their examination, let them bée published, that they may be read and perused, as are the doings of other wise writers: but if you shall mislike of them, then stay their edition, and let them not come abroade. Some what there
is in them, wherewith I am skarcely pleased, for of certaine circumstances the truth is not assured: either did I, in that point, bind my selfe in a promise, neither yet haue I professed, that I vnderstand, what trueth should bée. Something I haue reserued, perhaps, touching Theologie: the knowledge of y• rest, you must séeke after, sithence I do not lay all things open to perfect view, but rather touch them & so passe them ouer. My disease growing daily more and more, and tormen∣ting mée with greater extremitie, I suffer mée selfe to be no Physicians patient, neither can I abide, that any of mine ac∣quaintaunce, should come néere mine infection. But vnto them, standing without the doores, and demaunding of mée, how I fare, I put out one of my fingers through a crannel of the wickett, thereby making them an answeare, that Touching the order of his death di∣uers haue di∣uersly writtē. I pu∣tree and consume aboue ground: giuing them also a watch∣word by the way, that they assemble themselues solemnely, and sée my funerall exequies perfourmed. Fare you well. Anaximenes to Pythagoras. THE ARGVMENT. In what estimation Thales Mylesius was in auncient time, by this E∣pistle written to Pythagoras, it is apparaunt. Wherein is signified the earnestnesse of the Philosopher in the contemplation of star∣res in their course, that he thought not on the ground wheeup∣pon hee troade. THales, Of ∣menes, read Diog. Lar. lib 2. sub. tit. A∣nax. & lib 8, sub ti. Pyth. (from the flower of his youth to his crooked age) giuen to vertuous exercises, and of a passing gentle dispo∣sition and nature, hath ended his life honourably. Hée at such tie as he went out a stargazing (according to his custome) béeing accompanied with a prettie damosel, as hée went out, I say, of his owne house early in the morning, hauing forgot∣ten the situation of the soyle where hée was resident, behol∣ding the Heauens with earnest eye, glistering with starres gloriously, fell into a ditche. * The Mylesians imagine this
to be the end of him, that so narrowly obserued the starrs re∣uolution: but wée, neuerthelesse, louing learning, haue that man in great reuerence, leaning to his doctrine and precepts Philosophicall, as to principles of greatest authoritie, and we begin our Or, exercises in reasoning. talke alwayes with ye name of Thales Mylesius. Anaximenes to Pythagoras. THE ARGVMENT. Shewing the perplexities, and troublesome laberynthes, wherewith he is intangled, hee commendeth the prouidence of Pythagoras: betweene whose estate and his owne, he maketh a comparison. YOur doinges hauing béene more circumspecte then wée thought, cannot but tend to your commoditie, in that you haue left The name of two Ilands, the one lying in the Ionian sea, besides E∣phesus: the o∣ther in the Ae gean sea by Thracia. Stra∣bo lib. 10. Virg. lib. Ae∣neid. 7. Samos and gone to Croto a citie in Italie, neere Tarētum &c. Strabo. lib. 6. Croto, to the intent you may leade a life acquainted with quietnesse: For, as well the Ae∣acides, with others, are very outragious: and tyraunts also, whose power is violent, haue dominion ouer▪ the Mylesians. Furthermore, the king of Media, layeth sore assault against vs, except we yéeld our selues to be his tributaries: albeit the Ionians séeme to encounter the Medes, in maintenaunce of common libertie. For they trouble vs so extremely, on eue∣rie side, that there is no hope for vs, to escape the hazard and losse of oure liues. With what heart therefore, with what minde, with what desire, may Anaximenes search out the se∣cretes of heauen, who is haunted with the feare of seruitude, and tormented with the terrour of death? As for you, how can your case be but good, sithence the Croto a citie in Italie, neere Tarētum &c. Strabo. lib. 6. Crotoniates haue you in estimation, and the Of whom hee was wel thought of, & beloued. Italians likewise reuerence your per∣son: besides that so many resorting vnto you out of Sicylia? Archytas to Dionysio. THE ARGVMENT. By the summe of this Epistle, it should seeme, that Pythagoras was
in Sicylia, and not in Athens, whether, (as it is recorded) hee made three seuerall voyages: and beeing hd in suspicion, the seconde time of his abiding in Sicylia, to haue persuaded & also encoura∣ged the mindes of Dion and Theotas to attempt the Islndes li∣ber tie: Archytas (after vnderstanding thereof had) wrote to Dio∣nysius this Epistle following, wherin hee purgeth Plato of the within mencioned suspicion. WE The Taren∣tine Philoso∣pher, of whō Cic, lib. 3. de o∣rat. & Diog. Laer. lib. 3. sub tit. Platonis. all (being the welwillers and familiar friends of Pla∣to) haue sent vnto you, Lamisius and Photidas, of pupose to bring backe againe from you, that same man (you knowe whom I meane) as the lawe and equitie of our auncient ac∣quaintaunce requireth. Your doinges therefore shall con∣curre and agrée with reason and conscience, if you cal to your remembraunce, with what earnestnesse of woordes, you desi∣red vs y• Plato might come into your countrie: which we cō∣sidering, exhorted him to do no lesse, that your mind might be satisfied: calling also to memorie, that you promised him all thinges that might séeme necessarie, and that by your licence, leaue and libertie, hée should go and come at his pleasure, no∣thing to the contrarie withstanding. Forgett not, therfore, what accompt you made of his presence, bée not vnmindefull how the same was accepted, and that you loued him aboue all other, at the same season, séeme not to be ignoraunt. If there be any diention sprong, if any hatefull strife be ingen∣dered, vse such prouisoes, y• you deale with him Because his desartes haue beene such, as they ought courteously to be considered. none other∣wise then courtesie requireth (for so it behoueth you to doe, and it is conuenient) restoaring him vnto vs vnharmed, vn∣damnified, and in perfect safetie. This if you shal accomplish, iustice on your part shalbe executed, & wée on the other side, shalbe gratified. Arcesilaus to Thaumasias. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle giueth vs to note, that the maner of making last wills and
testaments, hath beene a thing of no late iuention, it conteyneth three seuerall members. In the first hee acknowledgeth his owne weakenese, whereby hee is forced to leaue his will in writing, as vncertaine of his death. In the second is signified, a considerati∣on of one friend to another, with a commendation of faithfulnes, the strong foundation of friendship. In the last is mencioned an admonition, for the well disposing of thinges put in Thaumasias his charge. I Oaue my last will & testament to Diogenes, to his hands it was deliuered, to the intent that it might be conueyed vnto you conueniently. For, in consideration that I am al∣wayes surprised with sicknesse, and that my body is much in feebled, I thought it necessarie to make my last will: that, if any thing chaunced besides expectation, I might passe the pil∣grimage of this wearisome life, without any For, peraduē tur, hee had made him ful exequutour of his goods: or else the case so stoode, that if Arcesilaus had died without wil, some trou ble woulde haue insued to Thamasis: which by ma∣king a testa∣ment was pre∣ented. iniurie to you redounding, who alone, among al the rest of my friends and fauourers, hast, by the feruent affection which thou bearest to my person, best desered. And forsomuch as, you haue bi the faithfullest and most assured friende that I haue, none with you to be compared, so do your endeuour with diligence, to kéepe carefully and truly, that I haue committed to your credite and kéeping: First, in consideration of our old age: se∣condly, in respect of our great acquaintaunce. Béeing, there∣fore mindful of our matters, haue a speciall regard to that, wherewithall Of Arcesila∣, read Diog. Ler lib. 4. b tit. Crat. Crant. & Ar∣. I put you in charge, that to the vttermost of your abilitie, all businesse vnto mée belonging be honestly or∣dered. Fare you well. King Antigonus to Zeno the Philosopher. THE ARGVMENT. In what price and praise Philosophers were, in auncient time, by this letter of Antigonus sent to Zeno, may be gathered: wherein hee confesseth first, the royaltie of kings to be inserour to the know∣ledge of wie and learned men: thereuppon desiring him to take so much paines as to come to Mcedonia, promising also, both
▪ I Zeo ∣cus, of whom Diog. Laer. sub tit. Zen. at large writeth: lib. 7. & Cic. in Oratore. Am of opinion, that  fortune, & glorious iol∣litie my life is much more excellent then yours, (learnd Zo:) But, if cousideration ée had of knowledge, of liberall Artes, and of perfect felicitie▪ all which are in your possession, I perceiue my condition▪ in no respect with ours to be com∣parable. Wherfore, I haue determined with e selfe to send for you, dsiring that ou would not refuse y• panes to come vnto mée, as I  you wil do, not permitting my  in so honest a matter to be   . Wherefore, eploy y• vttermost of your labour,  wée may  your : assuring your selfe▪  you  not onely bée An∣tigonus his teacher, but maister also, or instructour of all the Macedians▪ For, who so infourmeth the king of Mace∣doia    For, as the king, disposed is in minde: So commonly,  pople are inclind.  Prince  . Fare you well, Zeno to Antigono. THE ARVMENT. This Epistle is an aunswere to the former, wherein is comprised first a commendation of the king , with a declaraton what  knowledge is: next what they ought to doe, (  from pleasure) that meane to attaine that , & what be∣nefites they rape: Th a  clause, touching quicke & readie wittes: Lastly, is answeare to the king, wherein are plea∣ded the impediments of his not comming, with his good will to haue the kinges minde contented notwithstanding. I Cannot but highly commend The king of the Macedo∣niās, of whom Diog. Laer. lib. 7. sub tit. your vehement desire, to∣wards the attainment of learning: because you offer your selfe so appliable, to gett that knowledge which is not pain∣ted with pretences of trueth, nor garnished with gay glosses
of profite, not coulered with the  hewes of popularitie,Zeno nd Plu tarch. in the life of king . finally, not preposterous and perilous knowledge, which is so farre from reforming manners, that it peuertech euery  properie: but the mo true vnderstanding▪ whch then is most beautifull, when it is most naked. For▪ e that is inflamed with a feruent affection, and ardent desire of Phi∣losophie or wisedome, declining frō the pathes of that plea∣sure which is vsually followed, the poyson whereof, whiles some young men haue sucked, their minds haue degenerated from thei natural disposition, and haue  fected with effeminate wātonesse: certaine it is, that he doth maintaine, not onely true noblenesse, but exerciseth hmselfe in the rue workes of vertu. Moreouer, if one, whose wi is pregnant, and capable of worthie diplines or sciences, haue with his aptnesse, measurable practise coupled, (prouided, that a tea∣cher be not wanting) such a one, quickly attaineth the per∣fection of vertue. Assuredly (most renowmed king) were I not His laweful excuses (vpon impediments not to be a∣oyded) in∣ferred. ouerburthened with drowping  ge (for I am fourescore yeares old:) besides that, were  my body so weakened, I would addresse mée selfe to come  you, and by my seruice accomplish your desires. But, because the a∣boue cited circumstaunces, are impediments to this purpose, that I cannot personally satisfie your will, I send vnto your highnesse, certaine of mine acquaintaunce, who in considera∣tion of y• ornaments of their mind, Or, are e∣qually mat∣ched with me. are not mine inferiours: and, in respect of bodilie abilitie Or, are farre beyonde mee, or aboue me. are by many degrées, my su∣periours. With these, if it shall please you to haue confe∣rence, whatsoeuer belongeth to perfect felicitie, assure you, it shalbe ministred. Fare you well▪
Pythagoras to Anaximenes. THE ARGVMENT. Pythagoras now bing (as the course o the Epistl  me to thin) i talie, whee e wrote this letter toAnaximenes  first toucheth the condition and estate of hi▪ whether seriously or sportingly, it is vncertaine: For I reade not that  had such  as might bee coniecturd:  it seemeth rather spoken of Pythagoras by way of pleasure▪ preily puttig him in mind that friends should haue recourse one to another. O∣ther thinges are touched in the Epistle▪  are paine and  by perusing. GOod matchlesse Gentleman, if you were nothing more excellent then Pythagoras, by byrth and by honour, you wod (n doubt) haue come vnto vs from Myletum: But, no   take not the pain, hauing ch , , the   your  & ∣ces left you by your fathe and  in , which should also be impedimentes vnto mée, in the like case, if Or, if I were Anaximenes his equal: mea ning, in welth goods & lāds: Or, it may be spokē eiroi∣cally, for fami liar friends vse ieasting nowe and then, in their letters. I were in sembla estat with Anaxines. But tou∣ching the purpose, if you shall forsake the Cities by angura∣tion, persuade your selues that the benefite of the same will vtterly decay and vanish: and the Medes, in like maner, wil∣bée more fierce against them and violent. It is not méete and conuenient, to be alwayes gazeing vppe into the cloudes, to marke the course of starres, and viewe the rolutions of the heauens: Nay, it is more auaileabl▪ I wisse other whiles to haue consideration of your countrie,  in the estate of the same, to haue your minde occpied. For, I am not busied a∣bout my fables, incessaantly: bt sometimes I impart a por∣tion of my will and power to play the warriour, as the Ita∣lians doe, who are at dissentio and variaunce one with an∣other. Fare you well. Arcytas to Plato.
THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle should seeme to e Responsor: or it maketh answere in such order, as if Plato had sent a letter to Archytas before. A∣ a oter  wheof son)     to th  beng somewhat obsc▪ men  ade of cer∣tain woorkes of lato, his desing▪ which Archyt had in kee∣ping. YOu Plato, of whome Diog. Laer. lib. 3. sub tit. Plat. haue not done amisse, in ignifying vnto vs, that you haue recouered your health, which was shaken with sicknesse▪ you haue certied vs in like maer▪ of Damasco: touching the Commentaries, wee haue not béene negligent, in doing our endeuour. Wée came to the Lucans, and there wée had communicatio▪ with the  of Ocellus: what treatises ▪ are in our hands▪ concerning Bookes bea∣ring such ti∣tles as are here▪ named. Regiment, awes, Iustice, & the Generation f all thinges, soe of them wée hae sent to   vno ▪ Tose tat  are no so readily to   wh    wee will  them to  . Plato to Archyas. TH AVMENT▪ First he speaketh of  ,  (as it appeareth▪) by an vnowne Authour: then of other commentari that    . THe Whereof they intreaed was in secret to them two alone: for, not so much as the Authors name is recor∣ded. Cōmentares which you sent vs, & wée receued, how welcome they were vnto our hands, & how glad we were of them, t is a thing vnpossble, with tongue to testie cōcer∣ning y• Author of them, thus much I must airme in his ō∣mendation, that among all other writers, at him we do mst wonder. For ▪ he ha   most euident d∣claration, and left a substantiall witnesse, that hée was not
vnworthie of those his progenitours, men most auncient & passing vertuous. These men are reported to haue béene Myraeans: they were also among those Troyans, that accō∣panied The father of king Pria∣mus a Troian after whose name Piamus is called Lao∣medontiades, Virg. lib. , 3. Laomedon, men of commendable demeanour, and praise worthie, as those things that are concerning them and their doinges registred, doe verifie. Touching the commen∣taries, which remaine with mée, whereof you haue also writ∣ten, they are not as yet perfected, neither will be, I thinke, perfourmed to the proofe: neuerthelesse I haue sent them vn∣to you, least you should dreame of a denial. As for the kéeping of such pamphlets as you cannot readily finde, I am not dis∣contented: further admonition therefore is not necessarie. Fare you well. King Darius the sonne of Histaspes to Heraclitus the Ephesian Sapient. THE ARGVMENT. Taking his beginning from a booke which Heraclitus did write, e∣nygmatical and darke to vderstand, and crauing a verball expo∣sitiō of the whole worke, he requireth him by the title of his roy∣altie to be his teacher: rebuking (by the way) the insolencie of the people, that garded not such wise men, as should be honou∣red. Lastly, to the end hee might winne Heraclitus to be his in∣structour, hee promiseth him intertainemet, very largely and Princely. YOu This booke was intituled De Natura. &c. which when he had finished e id the same in Dianaes tem∣ple, written of sett purpose, very darkely, that none mig ht vnderstande it, but sch as were learned. cōpiled a certaie booke, full of obscurities, doubtes, and darke clauses, in many places: which booke being ex∣pounded, it appeareth to conteine in it a certaine speclation or view of the world vniuersall, of al things within the com∣passe of y• same included, and of them also that are carried a∣bout with celestial motion circularly. In the reading of sun∣drie places of which your worke, touching these citd circum∣stances, many haue béene so insnared & intangled (as it were) in nettes of doubtfull reasons, that most of y• which they did read, bred an ambiguiti, though the whole treatise sémed vn
to you orderly penned, and plainly enough, to the capacitie o men, deuised. King Darius therefore, the sonne of Histaspis, is desirous to be your scholer, and would be acquainted with the Grecian knowledge. Repaire therefore to our maiestie without delay, and appeare before our presence inour prince∣ly Palace. For the Grecians, as, many of them haue wise men in litle reuerence, so they accompt their precepts méere contemptible: notwithstanding (to say the trueth) they bée such, as lack neither learning nor grauitie. As for It is repor∣ted of this He∣raclitus, that being diseased with a dropsie, not passing a point for Phi∣sick, he laded al his body o∣uer with tal∣low, and lying along in the sunne to drie in the grea∣ie fat, fell a sleepe, & was torne & eaten with dogges. Suidas. you, thus much I promise, and assure by perfourmaunce, that with me you shalbe honourable, you shal possesse all principallitie, and noble titles of worthines, you shall wante no dilient atten∣daunce in seruice requisite, you shall haue mée as familiar as can bée, both in communication and companie, and (finally) my, whoale life shalbe conformable to your maners. Fare you well. Heraclitus the Ephesian, to Da∣rius the sonne of Histaspis. TH ARGVMNT. He aunswereth to the Epistle of king Darius, seeming offendd at his pro∣mises, as not careing for his courtly, although honourable, prof∣fers: shewing also that hee is content with that litle, which to his share is allotted. The beginning of the Epistle, declareth at what defyaunce hee is with worldly vanities. THere He taken oc casiō to frame his beginning after the cours of the wicked∣nesse of the age wherein he liued, and  we many a∣buses. is no one man liuing in the earth, but swerueth frō trueth, delighteth in falshoode, wandereth farre and wide from equitie, and is (as it were) wedded to iniustice. Coue∣tousnesse hath kindled such a huge and flaming fyer in their heartes, that by liberalitie it cannot be extingnished or quē∣ched: vaine glorie doth so puffe them vpp, with blastes of boasting brauerie, that by hmilitie it cānot be redressed: & al this is done, that sensualitie may be satisfyed, and that men in the madnesse of their imaginations, may be pampered. As for mée, I frame not the vse of my memorie to such vanities,
but I haue buried in the graue of forgetfulnesse, al such kind of offensiue conditions: and I, abandoning all courtlike state∣lynesse, escape the poysoned darts Hatred hun∣teth honour. of cankered enuie, which is an vnseperable companion of honur and hautie estate: & therefore am not so soone wooed, to be acquainted with the Persian Princes palace, but enioying that which is aunswe∣rable to mine owne desire, liue with a litle, and yet to my cō∣tentation. Philippe to Aristotle. ¶ THE ARGVMNT. He reioyceth first that he hath a sonne of his owne bodie, and sheweth reasons of hi conceiued gladnesse: Hee knitteth vpp his letter i hope, namely that a learned Aristotle, would make a learned A∣lexander. In this Epistle therfore is declared the desire of Philippe to haue his sonne brought vpp in knowledge and vertue. THes are to let you vnderstand, that of my body I haue an Namely A∣lexander, who for his valiant nesse, was sur∣named Mag∣nus. heire to succéede mée in my kingdome, for the which be∣nefite, I giue the Gods immortall thankes, not so much for that he is borne vnto me, wherby I haue issue, as because his birth hath so fortunately chaunced, in the dayes of your life. For I hope it wil come to passe, that hée, being trained vp vn∣der your tuition, and instructed at your mouth, shal proue a prince not vnworthie of His father. vs his predecessour, nor of The posses∣siō of the king dome▪ those thinges which we shal leaue as his inheritaunce. Alexander the great to Aristo∣tle his maister. TH ARGVMENT. He seemeth to be somewhat angrie▪ that Aritotle should make that cō∣mon, which he taght him priuately: and giueth a testimonie howe he loueth learning, which he preferreth befor al outward riches. I This epistl is a manifest witnesse of the earnest desire, that flamed in Alexander, for the attaineing of knowledge am rapt into no smal admiration, y• the natural secrets, in the vnderstanding & knowledge of which, I haue at your mouth béene instructed, are common abroode in bookes by you published.
For, in what one thing can we excel others, if that which we haue learned, be frée for euery man to know and exercise him with all? For surely, it is my desire and wil, to outrunne al men, in thinges belonging to learning: yea, I had rather excel in knowledge aboue all other, then in riches, landes and pos∣sessions to be péerelesse. Aristotle to Alexander the king. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee aunsweareth to the letter of Alexander, and excuseth himselfe, as hee may, in that wherewith he is charged. MY Of this A∣ristotle, read Diog. Laer. lib. 5. sub tit. Arist. & Plu∣tarch. in Sylla bookes, Auscultatorie, so intituled, with the publica∣tion of which you charge me as blameable, when it was more méete, that, as mysteries and matters of high secrece, they should be layd vp and kept close from being made com∣mon, I would your maiestie vnderstoode, that they are pub∣lished, and they are not published: For, they are common to none, but to such onely as be our hearers in that exercise. Aristotle to Alexander the king. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle being replenished with holesome preceptes, for the ver∣tuous framing of maners, Aristotle sent to Alexander. It may be a generall admonition, for all that be aduaunced and established, in place of authoritie: good to be learned, and better to be vsed. KEepe Precepts phi Iosophicall most worthie of hearing, learning, and following. close secrets. Speake sparingly. Temper thy talke with trueth. Bée not hastie and giuen to rashnesse. Cutte off anger. Stand not in contention. Bée not ambitious. Bée∣ware of wyne. Remember the graue. Incline your selfe to mercie. With an vnknowen fellow ioyne none acquain∣taunce. Bée not credulous (in any case) and light of beléefe.
Trust not thine enimie too far after reconcilement. Be not grieued for a losse irrecouerable. Reioyce not in thy neigh∣bors aduersitie. With a stronger then thy selfe do not incoū∣ter. Neuer disclose thy secrets, eyther to thy wife or to thy children: bycause women and children kéepe And that which they know they cannot keepe in secrete, but must needes make it mani fest. that in counsel whereof they are ignorant. Couet not the thing which can not be obteined. An incredible report estéeme as a lye. If you wish wel to fare, and in honour to mainteine your royaltie, learne these lessons, print these precepts in your memorie, and put them in practise. Fare you well, and procéede in the gift of knowledge. Peregrinus, or an vnknowne Philoso—pher to Aulo Gellio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He sheweth wherein true wisedome doth consist (a lesson as he him selfe affirmeth, most worthy to be learned) namely, in auoyding offence: shewing in what manner, this absteining from doing a∣misse should be imbraced. THe thing which you required me to note vnto you princi∣pally, receiue at my handes at this present in breuitie. If your desire be to be indued with true wisedome, beware to offend: yea, take héede to your actions and enterprises, although it were so, that neyther the eyes of the eternall Gods did beholde you, nor of mortall men view you. For, we ought not to absteine from doing amisse, through suspicion of following punishment, or for feare of infamie: but, therefro should we be withdrawne, for a regard to equitie, and of an inward honour had to honestie. Panaetius to Andronico. THE ARGVMENT. Ehorting Andronicus to the imbracing of vertue, he sheweth that
it is more excellent, then al worldly substance: an admonition to withstand fortune, to indre labours, to set light by life (though it be deare and precious, for the attainement of vertue) is heere also conteined. &c. I Haue alwayes bene of this opinion, and iudgement (my Andronicus) that it is the duetie of a man adorned with wisedome, to preerre vertue, before riches, honour, and all other things vaine and transtorie: to kéepe off Fortune furiously offering the combate, & not to be subded with her weapons, to be armed for the indurance of labors, seatings and watchings: yea, Wee must thincke no thing labori∣ous and trou∣blesome for vertues sake. for vertues sake to put his life in has∣sard, and to haue death in s small account, as vtterly to des∣pise it and haue it in contempt. These things do not ingen∣der terrour in the hearts of such, whose praise can not perish, whose renoune is ioyned with eternitie and uerlasting∣nesse: but in those they bréede feare and quaking timorous∣nesse, with whose life, al things else, whatsoeuer, vanish and ae extinguished. Socrates to Theopompo. THE ARGVMENT. He inciteth Theopompus to the imbracing of knowledge, sheweth that no place is more meete for to lodge it in, then is mans mynde or memorie. KNowledge is a thing most perfect, most honourable, and most beautifull: deseruing not to Meaning vp pon leather, which is apt to receiue any print and marcke. be marked on the backes of brute beastes, but to be imprinted and grauen in the mindes of men. Wherefore (Theopompus) commit to the casket of thy memorie, the vnderstanding of those things wherein to be instructed, thou art so desirous: & from hence∣foorth abhorring the hydes of deade carkasses, frame your selfe to be delighted with mens liuely voyces. Fare you well.
Apollonius to Estieo. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee sheweth that vertue and riches are contrarie: preferring wise∣dome before wealthinesse. VErtue among Of the name of Apollonius there were. 9. as I reade. 1. a Rhodian. 2. an Alexandri∣an. 3. an A phro disean. 4. an A labandan. 5. a Nyssean. 6. A poll. Erophi lus. 7. a Nau∣cratitian. 8. an Athenien. 9. a Tyanaean, which of thē wrote this let ter to Esti∣us, I can not directly re∣port. vs, is coūted contrarie to mony, for when the one of these diminisheth, the other increaseth: & when the one increaseth, the other diminisheth: howe then is it pos∣sible, that they should both haue place in one person, except after the opinion of sooles, that thinke riches to be vertue. Suffer not therefore your friendes and acquaintance, to be ignorant of vs, what we are: neyther let them conceiue of vs this opinion, that we had rather hose to be wealthy men, then to be wise men. For, it is a thing most worthy of discō∣mēdation, yea, it is a foule offence, if that for riches we should aduenture tedious and daungerous voyages, which passe a∣way like smoake, and shadowes: neglecting in the meane season, the noblenesse of vertue, which is lincked to eternitie and euerlastingnesse. Virgil to Augusto. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He writeth to Augustus, touching his worke called the Aeneides, wherein (he saith) things are out of order, therevpon inferring his rason. AS Virgilius Maro, prince of Latine Po∣ets: of whose life Pet. Crinit lib. 3. de Poet Lat. & Pet. Ram. in scho. sup. Bucol. Virg. largely. I haue receiued from your hands many Epistles, so some concerning mine His twelue bookes trea∣ting of the actes & deed of Aeneas the noble Troian Aeneas, which if it were worthy of your person, I wold most willingly presēt it to your high∣nesse. But it is such a confused and disordered heape, that I thinke my selfe scarse well in my wittes, when I tooke vpon me to write such a worke, sithence (as your Grace knoweth) other deuises, to the eautifying of such a booke, are more to be required.
Cato to Caesar. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle beeing written by a heathen or Pagane, might bee a mirrour to a Christian. For herein Cato sheweth his opinion tou∣ching the soule of man, saying that it is heauenly: he declareth also in what worke our mindes ought to be busied. WE Cato Vticen sis of the Stoi cal philoso∣phers professi on. must be of this iudgement (friend I thinke it was C. I. Cae∣sar the comen tariographer: for of that name diuers are recorded in writers. Caesar) that our soules, concerning the which we haue had often confe∣rence, descended and came downe from the heauenly habita∣tion, being sunke (as it were) in the muddie element of grosse earthly substaunce, a place repugnant to celestiall matter, and cleane contrarie to eternitie. Furthermore, we must be∣léeue, that the immortall and euerlasting Gods, haue instil∣led and powred our mindes into our bodies, that we shoulde liue in the world after a seuerall order, that we should be oc∣cupied in heauenly speculation, viewing the course of celesti∣all creatures, that in modestie of life and vprightnesse of ma∣ners, we might imitate and followe them accordingly. Plato to Dionysius his alies. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He writeth to Dionysius his kinred and alies, to leaue off their la∣uash cheare and delicates, teaching them that they shall euer be wise or sober, so long as they be so sensually disposed: and that they shall neuer attaine true delight, if they learne not to be pru∣dent and continent. WHen Plato wrote this Epistle to Dionysius the Sicylian ty∣rant. I came to sée that straunge kinde of life repleni∣shed with Italian iunkets, and Syracusane deinties, car∣rying a report of a life flourishing in felicitie, I was so farre from allowing the same, that twice in one day to pamper the paunche, séemed vnto me, a thing worthy of much misli∣king.
And as I say of this, so I say of nightly sléepings taken absiuely, and of all things else whatsoeuer, to the necessitie of this life incident, inordinately vsed. For, in such Bycause fo∣brietie & mo∣derate vsage in all thinges, is the way to wsedome. superflu∣itie no man shall attaine to wisedome, none shall acquaint them selues with temer aunce. For what nature, by suche meanes, m learne moderation? Nowe▪ out of question, There can bee no life accompanied with perfect pleaaunt∣nesse, whereon prudence and temperaunce giue not atten∣daunce▪ Fare you well. Plato to Aristodoro. TH ARGVMNT. IT is reported vnto me, that He was som Philosopher by profession, or else some fauourer of Philosophie. you, aboue the rest, are in fa∣miliaritie with Dion, and that your chiefest exercise consi∣steth in vertuos behauours, answerable to the precepts of Philosophie. For, this is myne opinion & igement: that, Wherein true Philoso∣phie doth con ist: or, the sum of per∣fect Philoso∣phie to con∣sist in vertue. Constancie, faythfulnesse, sinceritie, and such praise wor∣thy properties, are true Philosophie▪ As for other sciences, artes faculties, and professions, seruiceable to other thinges, if any man call them by the name of Ornaments, hee shall gi them no vnfit terme, as I suppose. But, Fare you well: and in the cmendable conditions, where withl you are presently acquainted, make continuance. Plato to Archytae Tarentino. ¶ THE ARGVENT. He writeth to Archytas toching some  of the an∣ent Troans, whose name is not knowne,  hi
hs inuention and ordr, sinally▪ he maketh mention of  commentaries, but treating of what matters, between them two it was in secrete: the like Epistle (if it be not altogether the same) is before recited. IT is a wonder, to thinke with what excéeding ioy, I re∣ceiued the Commentaries whiche you sent me: with the singular witte of whose author, I maruellously delighted.* Of this Ar∣chytas Tren∣tinus, it is re∣ported, that he was an excel∣lnt Geome∣tricin. Of that nme there was an other, who was a Mity le∣nean musiciā. The in (vnadoutedly, as by his worke it is apparant) deser∣ued right well of those his auncient progenitours. They say▪ that of them there were ten thousand men in number, who among all the other Troians, that accompanied Laomedon (as it is reported) were most noble & renoumed. Touching, the commentaries, which by writing, you do require, these are to let you vnderstand, that as yet they are not finished: neuerthelesse, receiue them as they are. I meane vnperfect. Concerning the custodie of the writings; whereof you wot, my minde with yours is agréeable: wherefre, urther talk in this matter is néedelesse. Agesilaus to Plutarcho. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He answeareth to a letter, sent vnto him at suche time as he was bu∣sie in warlike affaires, to put him in minde of his returne: In the end of the letter, he sheweth with an example of himselfe, that Prince must be ruled by lawe, and counsel of highest officers. WE haue subdued a great part of Asia, we haue vanquish∣ed the Barbarians, and we haue made many battels or skirmishes in Iconia. Notwithstanding, because you will not haue mée passe mine appointed day,  will be at home at my limited time: o, else, perad∣uentre be∣fore I am lo ked for. I wifolow, or (per∣aduenture) preuent your Epistle. For I beare rule and go∣uernement, not for my selfe, but for my countrie, and mine equals. And surely, he that is placed in authoritie doth euen then rule with moste iustice ad equitie, when he repineth
not, that as well the lawes of the lande, as also other magi∣strates in the citie, should be his superiours. Apollonius to his brother Apollonio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee writeth to his brother Apollonius, whom, (being in sorrowe) by reason of the late deceasse of his wife he comforteth, giuing him counsell not to abiure or forsweare matrimonie, by cause hee hath lost so good a partner and yoake fellowe, but to marrie a∣gaine, least by defection of issue, their name should weare out of memorie. ALthings This is the same Apo lo∣nius (as bi the methode and the matter  his Epistle I coniecure) of whose life P lostratus, and before him Damis, hath written. that be in the worlde, are of that nature and disposition, that when they are at their ful ripenesse, then are they most fit to fall away and pearish: such a thing is old age to all men and womn liuing▪ whiche being not able to continue, yealdeth vnto death. Wherefore, although you haue lost your wife of late, yet be not therewithall grieued: neyther be you of this opinion, that life is a thing muche more excellent then death, bicause it is reported to daunt the harts of men with terrour, sithence among men indued with courage and valliauntnesse, a life, in all respectes, is farre worsse then death. Or, declare your selfe to be a right Py∣thagorist: or ele a true A∣pollonist, of the first, eade Diog. Laer. li. 8. sub tit. Pyr∣of the second, reade Philost. lib. 8. cap. 12. Shew your selfe the cousen germaine of a Philosopher, Pythagoras I meane in profession and propertie: but be principally, the brother of Apol∣lonius: and cease not to mainteine your familie, by marrying a seconde wife. For, if in your first wife there had bene any qualitie blame worthy, we would mistrust and suspect the seconde marriage, and that meritoriously. But, if she were beautified with the precious diamond of chastitie, if she, to∣wardes her husbande, were most louingly affected: and in consideration of such gracious behauiours, deserued sembla∣ble kindnesse: what then can créepe into your cogitations, what thought can inuade our myndes, that wée shoulde so despaire and be out of hope, as not to get the like againe?
Sithence it is likely, that she will do her endeour, to be bet∣ter then her Then your sormr wife. predecessour, bycause there i no occasion offe∣red her f slouthfulnesse in the other, whereby she shoulde waxe carelesse, negligent, idle, and yll occupied. Let the case and estate of your brethren, sinke into your considerati∣on, and what their condition is at this day, prudently pon∣der. The eldest hath not, as yet, bene acquainted with the swéete pleasures of wedlocke: The youngest i in hope to haue children, but the same consisteth vpon reasons and cir∣cumstaunces. There are of vs, in number, thrée brethren, to vs thrée no issue is raysed to this day. Ou countrie may not be lft frustrate and voyde of hope, nor they whiche suc∣céede vs, lose that which hath béene long looked after. For, if we, then our father, are farre excellent, as he also surpas∣sed his syre: what impediment is there to the contrarie, ut that of your bodies may be bred and borne, childrē much better then vs their parents? Let suche prouisoe  be vsed, that we may haue posteritie, by whome th memo∣rie  our names may be mainteined, in semblable maer▪ as they haue bene hitherto, by That as our predecessours names remai∣ned vnto vs, by tradition: so our names may be conti∣nued to our . our parents imposition. I coulde not, for aboundaunce of teares trickling downe my chéekes, write any more touching this matter, neyther had I any thing at all, where abouts to occupie my penne, answe∣rable to this that I haue written, in force and efficacie. Apollonius to Euphrata. THE ARGVMENT. A commendation of Pythagoras, in this Epistle is expressed, for he maketh a rapitulation, first of his knowledge in sundrie scien∣ces liberal then of the ornamentes wherwith his minde was in∣riched: lastly of his bodily abilities: all whiche iuels they obtei∣ned, that framed themselues to his profession. I therefore the scholers proued so excellent, what shall we thike of th mais∣ter?
WHo so vseth the companie and conuersation of Pytha∣goras, it is a worldes wonder, to consider the commo∣dities, and excéeding benefites whiche shall redound to his aduantage. I wil giue you a taste of them in a brief summa∣rie. He shal attaine the knowledge of making lawes. H shal proue a good Geometrici∣an, a good A∣rithmetitian a good Musi∣cian, a good Physician. &c. He shall learne to be skilfull in the art Geometrical, Arithmeti∣call, Musicall, Cheyrurgicall, Physical, Astrologicall, and in all pointes, of the science of diuination, or Southsaying, hée shalbe wel experimented. Yea, besides the within named professions, he shalbe benefited, with thinges of more excel∣lencie: as, with Maiestie, with magnificence, with constan∣cie, with eloquence, with an assured iudgement concerning the Gods immortal, and not with an erronious opinion, whi∣che is so farre from beautifying, that it blemisheth: he shalbe furnished with a certaine knowledge of celestial spirits, and not carried away with vaine persusion: He shal not couet excesse, but shalbe directed with a minde, of it selfe, conten∣ted with perseuerance, with frugalitie or thriftinesse, with no superfluitie of things necessarie, wt quicknesse of the sen∣ses, with nimblenesse, with drawing breath without impe∣diment, with a good colour and complexion, with soundnesse and safetie, with contempt of life, though it be pleasant, and likewise of death, although it be terrible. Now to come to Euphratas, whither it were the same of whom Di∣on writeth, In vita Adiani, I cannot wel say: of any so named be∣sides him, I rade nothing recorded. you, what shall they reape, that frequente your fieldes? They shal gather such gleaning as agrée with your haruest, namely the same vertue wherwith you are iudued, shalbe to them aduantage. Pythagoras to Hiero King of Sicylie. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hiero king of Sicylie sending for Pythagoras, is in this Epistle answe∣red with a flatte denyall. The reasons that the Philosopher vseth, are all borowed from abuses: in whiche ee praiseth a competent kinde of liuing, suche a one as he himselfe loued: and discommen∣deth
a lasciuious life, wherwith Hiero was delighted. The Epistle is worthie to be cōmitted to memorie, and more woorthie to bee pt in practise. THeThe differne betweene a Philosophers and a Prin∣ces life in bre uitie of words described. life that I lead, is not acquainted with care, but esta∣blished vpon tranquillitie: as for yours, there is no cir∣cumstance, wherein with mine it is consonant or agréeable. A man addicted to temperance, and not in subiection to the rage of his perturbations, néedeth not the Syracusane dein∣ie iunckets. Pythagoras hath al things in sufficiencie, wher vpon to liue at all times, and in al places, competently. The seruice that an vnderling, or he that is boūd to obey, oweth to his Lord and maister, Because in conscience, & by custome of seruice they are tyed to do seruice. is neither greeuous nor tedious: specially to them, that are already instructed by honest cus∣tome and vse, to acknowledge submission and to doe re∣uerence. Moreouer, a minde satisfied with his appointed lotte, is a thing of great account, & hath passing priuiledges of libertie, from imminent aduersities and daungers. For, that one and onely minde, hath neuer an enimie, to lay traps and traines as instruments of further mischiefe: Wherefore it foloweth, of necessary consequent, that such a life appro∣cheth moste nigh, to the nature of the Gods, in semblaunce of properties. Furthermore, vnblameable affections, and a constitution or state of the minde framed to the right rule of reason, hath not their generation or issue, from the enticementes of Venerie, I meane (to speake more sensi∣bly) from carnall pleasures, neither of aboundance of pam∣pering belly cheere: but of Pouerie the troden pab to vetu ous▪ conuersa∣ion. pouertie, whiche leadeth vs the plaine pathway to vertue, of whose noblenes Vile man is moste vnworthie. Againe, varietie of desires and delightes in voluptuousnesse, together with an immoderate wallow∣ing in sensualitie, casteth the mindes of men, defiled with effeminacie, and bewitched with wantonnesse, into the sla∣uishe imprisonment of vices most detestable: yea, into that bondage it bringeth them, by vsing themselues familiarly to such foule enormities, as Pinces ues drowned  of . you your selfe incurre, and lye tumbling in accustomably. Where vpon it foloweth, that you (as a captie or prisoner) cast away your target and
sworde of resstance, and haue yéelded vppe your selfe whoy, to the power of those tyrants, in whose clawes since you are caught, it is hap hazard, if you escape vndamnified. For, a∣mong all other thinges, not so muche as your wordes, but are as it were, in league with thinges altogether vnprofita∣ble, and very superfluous. Send not therfore for Pythago∣ras to come to Of : he sent al∣so for Pda∣rus and Simo nides, as he did for Pyth goras. your kingdome, to enter with you into fami∣liaritie, to be conuersant with you in your Palace. For, Physicians (as people reporte) neuer wishe to be partakers of the diseases of their grieued patientes. Socrates to Lysistrato. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. To a familiar freende, indued by nature, with goodly qua∣lities, and yet sore entangled with idlenes, he writeth pleasantly: (after many exhortations before giuen, for the auoyding of slouthfulnes) vsing a fable of the grasshopper, and the Ant, ther∣by thinking to incite him to set in open shewe, the giftes which lye hidden in him, as fruitelesse. FOr Whether this were Ly∣sistratus the Sicyonian, an image ma∣ker, not of metals (or in his time it was not vsed) but of plaste∣ring worke, and earthly mixture: Plin. lib. 25. cap. 12. I dout much: thinking ra∣ther it was some other priuate man. &c. so much as, notwithstanding our manifolde and mar∣uelous admonitions, for your commoditie vsed, preuaile so litle that our labour is lost, and that (with Penelope) wee dooe and vndooe, no perfection or finall successe (in the meane while) folowing: we wil attempt another way, & begin our busines a fresh, vsing deuised fables or moral tales, as instru ments seruiceable for our present purpose. So peraduēture it shal come to passe, that the things, which of vs are pronoū∣ced, shal of you be sooner heard, and better liked. The grasse∣hopper (in the auncient world) when the pleasant & flourish∣ing season of the yeare serued, skipped, leapt and chirpte, in her kinde, among the gréene herbes & summerlie plāts, & cō∣ceiuing in his song a certain pride, was delightsomly disposed The ant, on the other side, kéeping company with the labou∣ring
reapers, and being prouident in purueying victuals for her nourishment, was occupied in gathering wheat cornes together, & hoording them vp closely in her conuenient gar∣ners, farre more prouidently employing her paines then the grasshopper. Now, when the sunne had entred into the Nouember, December, Ia∣nary, &c. winterly mo∣nethes. Hy∣bernicall signes, harues posting from vs, and winter hasting to vs, a season vnpleasaunt to the earth: and when the Sea casting away calmenesse, fell to continuall raging: the mari∣ners tooke vppe their harboure in hauens, the husbandmen sate warming their shanckes by a lustie fire that filled the chimney: and the litle pretie Ant couching closely in her countrie cotage, inioyed, in due season, the swéetnesse of her sweating labours, susteined in summer. The grasshopper therefore resorting vpon a time, to the Ant, besought her in∣stantly, to impart some small portion of reliefe, out of her store and prouision: but the Ant chyding and driuing away the singing grasshopper, from the doore of her homely house, among all other motions shewed, to reprehend the grasshop∣pers sluggishnesse, fell into an excéeding great laughter, cal∣ling to memorie the mellodious tunes, & swéete songes that he sounge in pleasaunt summer, there withall quipping the Because it e∣lighted in pre sent pleasure, and had no respect of su∣tue . foolish grasshopper by way of exprobation. To conclude, the swéete harmonie of the grasshopper turned into a long hun∣ger, and the sweating labours of the Ant were chaunged in∣to cherishing sustenance. This fabl (Lysistratus) is apply∣able to thy person, whose propertie of idlenesse is suche, that thou art in worse case then any one that is haunted with a feuer or quiuering age. For shame, shake off this sluggish∣nesse, and vse thy selfe to some exercise: for, sithence your bo∣dy lacketh no strength, no might, no abilitie, is it not a re∣buke vnto you, to be so vprouided of knowledge & cunning in all things, onely by th meanesA isease reigning in  ag too too plentiful ly: y the ex∣ample▪ of the litle▪  all  . of this mischiefous idle∣nesse? and to purchase suche a a slaunder and euill report, to th  of those goodly ornamentes, wherwith by na∣ture, you are inriched? But, Fare you well.
Epicurus to Hermacho. ¶ TH ARGVMENT. Beginning with a complaint of his disease (whiche he afterwardes stayeth, through an inward conceiued gladnesse) he putteth Her∣machus in minde, to keepe very carefully, the bookes or workes of Metrodorus. AT what time we This was Epicure the Atheen Phi∣losopher: who writing three seuerall Epis∣tls, to three sundrie per∣sons. 1. na∣med Herodo∣tus. 2. Pytho∣cles. 3. Meno∣creus, diuided Philosophie into three partes: Cano∣nicall, Physi∣call, Ethicall, Diog. Laer. lib. 10. sub tit. Epi. enioyed the blessed day of our life, the same being likewise the last, we wrote out this present Epistle: at whiche time we were so gréeued with a disease of the bladder and the bowels, that worse tormentes none might indure, then we suffered. Neuerthelesse, thoughe my body were so dolorosly vexed: yet, with the ioy of minde that I conceiued, through the memorie of my dooinges and deuises, they were somewhat redressed. But according to the inclination of your will towardes me, and the loue that you beare to the profession of Philosophie, whiche from your young yeares, in you hath béene ingendered, do your vtter∣moste indeuour, that the volumes of Sometime Epicure his scholer: these two kept com panie and vsed conerence ve∣ry familiarly. Metrodorus, may be safely reserued. Lucianus to Sabino. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle, though it were written, as a speciall letter, beeing full of preceptes, and holsome counsels tending to the reformation of behauiours: yet, in consideration of the within coneined cir∣cumstances, I see no cause with standing, but it my be general. To drawe the particularities thereof, being so many and diuerse, would exceede the order of an Argument. IF you be determined to attempt any newe enterprise an labour, the causes of your purpose are firste to be can∣uassed,
and  considered, least your vnorderly pro∣ giue manifest eivence of your temeritie and foolish∣sse. For, we are ashamed The dees thereore tht we tke vpon vs. ought  rather to be regr∣ded. to speake without licence of lawe, or authoritie. To Nigri∣no.. It is more auaileable and praise∣woorthie, with a litle losse, to growe to agreement with an aduersarie, then with great daunger and expence, to stande to triall of lawe, whose iudgement is hard and doubtfull. For, the sentence of the iudge, is oftentimes vncertaine, and cleane contrary to the expectation of the Clients, whose cause is in controuersie. To Mo∣nio.. If you be desirous, to knowe the nature and disposition of any man, marke his sayinges, and viewe his dooinges: as for his countenaunce, account it of small cre dite, hough suche as be experte in the profession of To giue  o mens con∣ditios and ortune by their counte∣naunces. Physiognomie, presume by mennes faces to giue coniec∣tures. For Dissimulation or hypocrisie dasheth out all sight of iudgement gathered by the viewe of the visage. To Ni∣grino.. Suche workes as you take in hand, if they be famous, and worthie, make haste to haue them finished: leaste you be preuented in your purpose, before it be accomplished. To Phi∣lopatr.. They that be lightened with the greater learning, and more exercised, ought to put this in execution, as a portion of their duetie: namely to teache the vnskilfull, and to in∣struct the ignorant. For to the imbracing and entertaine∣ment of vertue, it is an exhortation, (then the whiche none can be more effectuall) if this be your meditation: that plea∣sures grounded vpon constancie, and assuraunce, that plea∣sures (I say) not dceiuable by painted pretences, spring out from the fountaine of honest exercises. Contrariwise, disslowable delightes, sauouring of filthinesse and vnde∣cent demeaour, sythence they be momentanie and vanishe like shadowes, what else do they ingender, but extreeme miserie, matched with continuance. To Ni∣gno.. To your parents, to your affinitie, and to your instructours, you can not do a thing more worthie acceptation, then if you do your dili∣gene, that their hope be not vnsatisfied, and that with the excllencie of your witte, and the worthinesse of your for∣tune, (you vse such caueats,) that vertue may be ioyned. For,
sonnes ought to conforme, and exactly fashion themselues to the vertues which in their fathers lorished: yea the good properties, and commendable behauiours of their parents, ought to be vnto them lawes and statutes, requiring precise obedience and exquisite reuerence. To Mene∣craes.. Those that you ad∣mitte to be your counsellours, let them be of the wiser sort: or let thē be suche (at least) as will not spare to speake Not suche as bering two aces vder one hoode, blowe hor & colde breath out of one mouth, run∣ning with the hare & hu∣ting with the hound. free∣ly what they thinke, and not suche as  smo∣thering trueth with cloakes of dissimulatiō. To Sabi∣no.. The know ledge of Poeticall discourses, is moste apt and passing pro∣fitable for young learners: either for this consideration, An opinion dissenting, rom diuerse that I haue heard againse Poetrie. be∣cause it withdraweth them, when they come to be striplings from many foule offences: and when they come to be per∣fect men, from that whiche is vndecent. To Philo∣pater.. Good and di∣ligent scholers, are wonte to praise, and take for example al∣so, whatsoeuer their teachers doe speake, or put in practise: As for you, suche thinges as are cast out vnaduisedly, they are to be reiected: & suche thinges again, as are substantially grounded vpon reason, are to be imbraced. Fare you well. Menecrates to Philippo. THE ARGVMENT. What other thing dooeth this letter sauour off, then of meere arro∣gancie. For he compareth himselfe to a king, nay he aduaunceth himselfe aboue a king, for he taketh to himself the tile of Iupi∣ter. In this letter there is nothing to be folowed, but all to be ab horred. IN your possession is the kingdome of Macedonia, and A Syracu∣sane surgian or physiian: of whom Ac∣liaus in lib. de Var. hist. 9. of the same name there was a Como∣ediographer, as  Sui∣das. I haue the principalitie in the proession and practise of Physicke. In your power and authoritie it consisteth, to kill suche as be lustie and healthfull, o my skill and cun∣ning also it dependeth to cure suche as bee sickely, weake, and diseased: yea more then that is in my possibilitie: for I canne minister suche receiptes vnto men, as shall preserue
their healthes, till they sée many yeares, and haue growne to a great age, if (at least) they will be ruled by my counsel. For, I beeing Iupiter their helping Father, giue life when I list. Philostratus to Tini Philo. THE ARGVMENT. To one (belike) that thought his wordes Oracles, he fendeth this letter, telling him plainely that they are but vaine. In conclusion he vseth a precept to the same person. YOu I take him to bee the same Philo∣stratus that wrote the life of Apolloni∣us. féede on hope, that your sayings and sentences will remaine in the memories of the Graecians, after your death, by no storme of perturbations remoueable. But, in so muche as they are nothing, when they séeme to be some∣thing, what wil they be, when they are nothing at all? Tini philo. Feare the common people, with whom you are growne into such fauour. Anonymus to Anonymo. THE ARGVMENT. An Epistle Apophthegmaticall, declaring that in our doinges pro∣portion and measure must be vsed. Diogenes craued of Plato a goblet of wine: Plato very li∣berally, sent him a flagon. To whome (vpon this occasi∣on) the Cynical, Philosopher gaue thankes by letter in this frme and order. When you are asked the question, to what umber twise twaine doo amount, your answer is, that As the num∣ber answerd▪ is not agreea∣ble to the number : no ore is your , pro∣  to  . it ariseth to twentie: euen so, your gyftes are not correspon∣dent to the petitioners request, nor your answers agréeabl to the denaunders question.
Cyrus to Cyaxares. ¶THE ARGVMENT. To the intent that Cyaxares might persuade himselfe, stil to be in fauour with Cyrus (whiche neuerthelesse he partly mistrusted) this letter is written: wherein are touched ceraine points con∣cerning bothe their ersons. YOu Cyrus, who in his infancie was nourish∣ed of a Bytch that gaue sucke: and af∣terwardes, through th bounie of fortune, was aduauncd to be a king. Srabo. lib, 15. Xenoph. lib. 1. 2. 3. 4. &c. Herodo. & Iustine. lib. 1 & Q Curt li. 4. & 10. are not of vs quite forsaken, (for what man is voide of fréendes, that hath his enimies in subiection?) neither at our departing, did wee suppose that you were in pe∣ril: but the further we are distant, the more secure séeme we in your iudgement. For, not they that sitte at their fréendes elbowes, minister and afforde to their fréends most incouragement and securite: But they that so put their valiantnesse in proofe, as their enimies are forced to kéepe a loofe, or as discomfited to committe themselues to flight, they I say purchase to their friendes moste assuraunce of safetie, and lesse suspicion of daunger. Neuerthelesse, Cyrus, who in his infancie was nourish∣ed of a Bytch that gaue sucke: and af∣terwardes, through th bountie of ortune, was aduauncd to be a king. Srabo. lib, 15. Xenoph. lib. 1. 2. 3. 4. &c. Herodo. & Iustine. lib. 1 & Q Curt li. 4. & 10. I woulde haue you to weigh and consider, howe to your person, I am affected: and againe on the other side, howe you towardes mee in minde are disposed: this tried by due examination, spare not to accuse me. I proured you ayders, not suche as you woulde, but suche as I could. You graunted mée as many as I might winne by persuasion, when I was in a countrie that shewed me muche good will and fauour: But nowe that I am in foughten fielde againste mine enimies, you do not reuoke such onely as are willing and inclinable, but all the Medes one with another. Nowe certainely, the time was, when I thought mée selfe bounde to either of you in seruice of courtesie: But at this present, I am by your meanes constrained, to burie you in obliuion, and quite to forgette you: and towardes suche to shewe mée selfe thankefull and readie to make recompence, as haue hitherto continued in my companie. I can not resemble
you in manners, who sending into Persia for more souldiers, giue charge and coumaundement, that howe many soeuer haue recourse to my campe, they shoulde (if you stood in neede of their assistaunce) repaire vnto you, before they addressed them selues to come vnto mée, that you might haue the fruites of their seruice, That their seruice should be at your cō∣maundement, and not at their owne pleasure. not as they themselues lysted, but after your owne pleasure. How beit, I wil regard your commoditie, although I be the yonger, least you should with drawe that whiche you haue already giuen, and leaste in steade of thankes, hate be retailed. Trie not to recouer thm, whome you would haue come vnto you in haste, with threatning. As for vs, our willes and helpes shalbe rea∣dy, in all suche thinges as tende to As make for the commo∣ditie of vs bothe indiffe∣rently. ur mutuall furthe∣raunce. Alexander to Dario. THE ARGVMENT. After Alexander had discomfited Darius, taken is tent, taken his mother, wife, and children captiue, (whome notwithstanding, suche was the noblenesse and clemencie of his nature, hee com∣maunded royally to bee mainteined) and had also put him to flight: as he was laying siege to Marathon, there were deliue∣red to his handes, letters from Darius: wherewith Alexander (be∣cause they were very proudly indited) conceiued great displea∣sure. But moste of all, this stirred his stomache, for that Darius did arrogate vnto himself the title of a king, and derogated from him the same name of dignitie. In the same letter, he declared himselfe a commaunder, rather then a petitioner, bidding him a∣uoide out of the limittes of other princes landes, and to lie content with his owne patrimonie: with suche like circumstances were the letters of Daius infarced. To answere whiche Epistle, Alexander, in the heate of his choler, writeth in this order. THine Darius the king of Persia: a name attribu ted o the prin ces of that re∣gion: of whō we may read, almoste in  ry historio∣grapher: an of this our Darius and Alexander, muche in Q. Curtius. Auncestours, hauing receiued no iuiurie at the handes of the Graecians, concerning Macedonia, and the residue of the Greekishe region, committed many a mur∣ther
and bloudie slaughter. In consideration whereof, the Graecians haue created me their souereigne captaine, of such inforced violence, to worke reuengement: and therefore am I arriued in Asia. The Perinthians were assisted of thée in battell, a people working the disturbaunce of my Father Philippe. An armie, whiche was at our commaundement and seruice, Ochus sent into Thracia. Moreouer, my Fa∣ther Philippe receiued his deathes wound, at the hands of them, whom thou didst hyre (or purpose) to committe that villanie: for whiche heinous offences thou vauntest in thy letters and triumphest. Furthermore, thou hast got∣ten possession of the Persian principalitie by sinister meanes, not by interest of right title, nor according to the lawes of the Lande. Thou wrotest letters vnto the Graecians, full Whih dis∣couered thy malice, ad shewed the poysoning sting of thy enuious sto∣mache. of hostilitie and canckered enuie: Thou diddest vse all the suggestions that euer thou couldest inuent and deuise, to make them take weapon in hande againste mée, and to attempte a rebellion. Thou diddest sende monie to the La∣cedemonians, and diuerse of the Gréekishe people, for the accomplishment of the same purpse, whiche notwithstan∣ding, was refused of all the Graecians, the Lacedemonians onely excepted, of whō it was receiued: by which thine into∣lerable enterprise thou didst labur tooth & naile, to sowe dis∣sention in the place of , and to kindle malicious enuie among suche as I was lincked withall, in ∣shippe and societie. In consideration of Or causes in this presnt letter mentio∣ned & made manifest. whiche pre∣misses, I haue prepared battell againste thee, flly deter∣mining to encounter thée in open fielde. And sithence I haue conquered thy Captaines, and  thy ice∣royes: sithence by the violence of my , I haue dis∣comfited thy souldiours: sithence I haue (y the graunt of the GODS) gotten all The third part of the worlde: the o∣ther twaine be Europa, & Aphrica. &c. Asia into my possessio: thence the residue of them that escaped the heate o  , committe their liues to my : lt them,  ∣tarie moion, fight vnder my banner?    ci∣cumstances Of prowese courge, pui∣sau, valiant nesse. &c. declare, that Asia is n my ) me thou also personally before our presence. If thou cceiuest
any suspicion of daunger, and thereupon art in feare, sende whome thou wilt to take my faithe and promise, that thy comming shalt not redounde to thy dammage. Thus if thou dooest, thou shalt For he had taken them all prisoners, whē Darius was discomfited. receiue thy mother, thy wyfe, thy chil∣dren, and what thing else so euer vnto the belonging, vn∣damnified. And take this for a generall warning, that from this day forward, when so euer thou writest vnto mée, re∣member that thou writest to the Because hee wrote a letter to Alexander, calling him∣selfe by the name of a king, and not ascribing to Alexander the same title royall. king of Asia: not as to thy companion and equall, but as to the Lorde and owner of all thy goodes, landes, life, and possessions. If thou do∣est contrarie to the wordes in this letter conteined, I will so deale with thée, as with him, that against my person wor∣keth iniurie. And, if thou stande in contradiction aboute the right of the kingdome, put thy life in aduenture, fight for it valiantly, winne it Conquerour like, and let not fligh be thy refuge, which is proper to a white liuered souldiour, and a timorous coward: for hereof be thou persuaded, that, which way so euer thou séekest to escape, I will continue spéedy pursuite. Nucillus to Gibbo Verno. ¶THE ARGVMENT. Because the Epistles of Nucillus, were so Laconicall and shorte, that many of them needed none Argument: we haue therefore compact them al into one body, or boundel: not onely that wee might drawe the meaning of them more commodiously: as because there is suche affinitie and semblaunce in the matter, that we could not doe amisse to ioyne them all together. Ne∣uerthelesse, euery seueral Epistle is distinguished with this mark (*) against whiche also, in the margent, the name of the person is set downe to whome the same was directed. To be short, all the letters runne vpon preceptes, and clauses right woorthie to be remembred.
IF * battell be bidden against butter flyes, againste myce,*1 To Gibbo &c. He was (belike) some Pomilio or litle dwarfe, and that made him to vse this eironical method. against Fleas, or against Frogges, happe hassarde it is, if you be not prest out for a souldier. But if warre be proclamed against men of courage and valliauncie, content thy selfe man, thou art no fit fellowe to fight in such a skir∣mish. For To whome you are as much compa∣rable as a mole hill to a mountaine. Caesar neuer made warxe at any time, against an hoast of Craines. To Gibbo. &c. A deformed and ylfauoured bodie in proportion, is a liuely representation of a vicious and yll disposed nature: so then, it is a necessarie consequent, that, as your body is crooked, crabtrée like, and growen out of all order, so your mynde is monstrous, and stained with many foule qualities. To Regulo. In that you, being of late surprised with pouertie, are made riche and wealthy so soudenly: estéeme it to spring of this cause, that The vniuste dealing of Fortune, in ad uauncing the vnworthie. Fortune is disposed to vse a litle daliance, who aduaunceth euill men to the top of fe∣licitie, sooner then she doth such as liue in vprightnesse and integritie. Nowe, hauing chaunged your estate, you haue forgotten your former condition, and as for your auncient friendes, they are so farre from being had in countenaunce, that they are growne into contempt: this you doe, not con∣sidering with your selfe, howe great is the instatilitie of slip∣rie Fortune. For she hath aduaunced you to so high a place, that when she is disposed to play the deccitfull dame, your falmay be the more grieuous. To Bar∣daeo.. You must vse drinking of wine, and the swéete delight of Venus, with moderation: if you meane not to beget to your selse the The sicke∣nesse of the goute, ingen∣dred of immo derate drink∣ing and in∣continent plea∣sure of the fleshe. Podagricall dis∣ease for your daughter, to whom, when you are once become a father, you shall finde neuer a fonne in lawe, on whome to bestowe her in marriage, no, not if she had most large & infi∣nite riches giuen to her dowrie: but, as an vnméete wife for any man to match withall, she must be kept and mainteined in thine owne house continually, of thy priuate charges, co∣stes, and expences. To Bsi∣lisco.. I maruell much at this one thing, as at a strange monster, that you, hauing a wife, with whose companie you may satisfie the desire of the flesh, & quench the flaming coales of kindling concupiscence, continue notwith∣standing, in lthy suspicion of loathsome leacherie. To Tor∣nico. I
notwithstanding, in the filthie suspicion of Not so much loath∣some of it selfe, as▪ loath some for the foule infecti∣ons which it beedeth: as th spanishe pocke. &c. loathe∣some lecherie To Tor∣nico.. I woulde haue you to vnderstand and learne this lesson, that in a perfecte musician two thinges are required: the first is cunning in his profession, the seconde nimblenesse of the fingers in handling his instru∣ment: these twaine must goe together, like inseparable yoke felowes, for the one with out the other is lame and maymed. To Romana.. So often as I take a viewe of your pic∣ture, which I haue hanging in my house, painted in a table, the remembraunce of your person ingendreth my heaui∣nesse. To Re∣gulo.. I haue many times and oft, marueiled at your familiaritie, and no lesse wondered at your iniurious vsage and contumelie: Nowe, when I had perceiued (by triall taking) that your friendshippe was leauened with light∣nesse and inconstancie, yea, that it did wholy incline to slaun∣der and reproche, I forsooke your fréendshippe, as vnwil∣ling to suffer such ignominious and wrongful vsage any lon∣ger. To the Sarabaites.. What with your legerdemaine, your iuggling, and your lying, you haue gathered together suche moun∣taines of monie, impudently and without regard of honesty, that in wealth, opulencie, and richesse, you are in manner, equall with Princes. No maruel then, ought it to be vn∣to a great number, to sée what benefites are obteined, by the sweate of other mennes labours, and also by the fatte crumbes of other mennes trenchers, To Fontano.. Our Coniu∣rer hath cast out a deuil, not with exorcismies or practises of art magical, but with the filthines of a foule mouth, whiles his tounge ranne at randon, and founde none ende when to be silent: of this, I thought you shoulde not be ignorant. To Tornico.. We sée and are sorie, that the comfortable science of musicke, whereby olde auncientes did sing and sound the martial exploites and noble aduentures of valiaunt Cap∣teines: whiche was the meane and instrument, whereby the mindes of men were inflamed to goe on warrefare, and to attempte enterprises moste hard, honest and honourable, is nowe so degenerated and growne out of so singular a
vse: yea, that it is made a seruaunt to effeminacie, to wan∣tonnesse, and all sensualitie, beeing turned wholye into a tuneable sounde vpon twangling stringes, or a noise run∣ning vppon numbers, onely to fill vppe the measure of vaine delight. To Tornoni.. At what time you were a priuate man, you were somewhat well: but after you mounted vppe to more worshippe, you waxed woorse: In former times, heauenly thinges were your vsuall meditation: but that being abandoned, couetousnesse of coyne hathe wrought an alteration of your behauiours. To Regulo. I eate but once in a day: but to day I dyned at your table, and after that at our comming home, wee did eate againe: wherefore, prouide your selfe hereafter of other guestes: For, from this time forwarde, I will take héede howe I come at your table. To Gibbosulo.. Beware of the Alluding (peraduen ture) to the name of Re∣gulus before mentioned, vpon some oc casion. Regulus, a monstrous and venomous Serpent, a beaste of the wil∣dernesse: least you be deuoured. To Val∣do.. I cannot but ac∣count your dooinges, moste woorthie of commendation, in that you refused profered honours and dignities, pre∣ferring the inheritaunce, whiche by your fathers deceasse, you haue in possession, and a quiet life, before suche thin∣ges that are but vaine and transitorie. I wishe with all my heart, that many would followe your example. To Agio. Praise woorthie you are in déede, for the loue that is in you, bothe to learne and practise Vertue: sythence That is to say, vertue, This is the thing that is onely called by the name of good, this is the iewell whiche too man is a beautify∣ing, this is the precious pearle that hee ought properly to possesse: all other thinges are vncertaine, vaine shadowes, dreames, and fansies. To Roleo.. Understande you, that the richesse of the minde are the true richesse: knowe this also, that hee deserueth rightly to bee called a wealthie man, That vseth his riches as they ought to be vsed. who is not ignorant of the true vse of his substance. To Los∣meo.. I send vnto you for a present, the skul of a putrified carkasse, the sight whereof dooeth put vs in remembraunce, that we
ought not to hang vpon the hope of thinges vaine and tran sitorie▪ but taking a view of our selues by this looking glasse to make full and iust account, that into the same fourme, wherof this is a figure, we shalbe changed. To Iu∣nio. In the dispen sing or laying out of your goods, you must be touched with a due consideration of death, which is so certaine that it can not be auoyded: and with the litle assurance (or rather none at all) of life to be prolonged: lest you be carefull in keeping those things, that you must leaue behinde you, or to prodi∣gall* This was not Pindarus the Ephesian xyrant: but Pindains the Thebane Poet: whose style in verse was so stately that it excee∣ded immita∣tion. Ho. lib. car. 4. Ode. 2. and lauash in wasting them, whereon dependeth your maintenance. To Lo∣cero. I heard say, y• you are translating the most excellent Poesis of Pindarus, into Latiue: Nowe surely, they are rather to be soung to the melodious Citerne, then to ee turned into another language: For, as it is in han∣gings of tapistrie, that, when they be turned, loase a good por∣tion of their brauest beautie: euen so it may be said of his verses, that in turning thē in a foreigne tonge, much of their worthinesse and trimnesse is diminished. For, in them is conteined an excéeding pleasauntnesse, excellent, inimitable and not able to be folowed. To Qui∣rino. My counsell & aduise vnto you, for your auaile, is, that you would giue ouer the trade of a Mariner, and acquaint your selfe to play the husband∣man: For, in plowing the lande there is muche more safe∣tie, then in sayling on the Sea, whiche all men knowe to bee daungerous. To Ba∣silisco.. Howe can you be a good man, hauing in possession riches in such plentie: considering that your father left you nothing either by déede of gift, testament, or any o∣ther conueyance? A precept, that if it could pearce into the harts of woldlings vertue would soone mount aloft, that now hangeth downe her head as asha∣med of the world. Couet not to be ful of monie, to growe in wealth and substance: but labour rather to be riche in ver∣tue. For he gathereth goodes together all in waste, whose minde is naked and not armed with vertuous furniture. Thus farre out of Isocrates, Philosophers, Princes and other writers of Epistles.
¶ The Extract of Epistles, out of C. Plinius and others. C. Plinius to Arrio Clementi. THE ARGVMENT. He writeth to Arrius of Euphratas the Philosopher, whom he com∣mendeth: toucheth other specialties here and there, as the order of his Epistle required. IF at any time our citie flourished in the knowledge of the sciences liberal, if in any age it glistered in the glo∣rie of learning Philosophical, then now is it in the top of all renoune, and triumpheth more then euer it did, in the floure of felicitie. Of that which I haue airmed there be many examples, and especiall presidents not a fewe, but a∣mong al the rest, Euphratas the wiseman shall be sufficient. In my youthfull yeares when I did weare and vse my wea∣pon, I sawe him in Syria soyle, I was in his house, and I en∣ioyed his companie, with whome to growe in fauour I both desired & laboured, although there was no néede why I shuld greatly trauell towards the attainement of the same. For he is a man full of affabilitie, milde of nature, and easie to be intreated, his humanitie is singular, his gentlenesse is rare, and the curtesie which he professeth is incomparable. I wold my lucke were so blessed and fortunate, to reape as aboun∣dant an haruest of my conceiued hope, as he hath augmented his vertues, & increased the ornamentes of his noble minde. But nowe I haue those Iuels of nature and art in admirati∣on, bicause I haue aspired to a further sight in them, albeit the vnderstanding which I haue gotten is vnperfect. It is not for ignorant and vnskilful per∣sons to vtter their opinions in that, where of they can rē der no reason▪ For as to giue precise iudgemeut, in the woorke of a painter, of a grauer or caruer, belongeth to none so well, as to a cunning artificer practised in that mysterie: euen so it perteineth to a wise and prudent man, and to none else, to discerne one sem∣blable
and like to him selfe, from one contrarie or counter∣fet. Neuerthelesse, so farre foorth as my dimme and darke eyesight is able to pearce into the view of his vertues, I per∣ceiue in y• Philosopher Euphratas, many things which carrie with them a countenaunce of excellencie, and surmounting estimatiō, which conteine in them such efficacie and mouing passions, that they are able omewhat to allure men of lear∣ning, & are inclinable to delectation. When he disputeth it is done with exquisitenesse, grauitie, and eloquence: he repre∣senteth the loftinesse and déepnesse of Platos Methode most commonly: his vtteraunce is not only inriched with plentie, but garnished with varietie and choice: Maruellous swéete are his wordes as they flowe from his eloquent lippes, and of suche force, vertue, efficacie, and vehement operation, that they ouercome and leade away the myndes of suche as struggle and resist. Moreouer, The exter∣nall goods of Fortune des∣cribed in Eu∣phratas, wher∣in, according to the custom of that age, he excelled. the tall proportion of his body, his amiable countenance, his long hairie lockes hang∣ing downe his shoulders, his hoarie bearde wherewith his face was beautified: al which ornaments, notwithstanding they are thought to depende vpon Fortune, ad to be toyes méere transitorie, yet they were vnto him, not trifles of va∣nitie, and shadowes seruing to small purpose, but instru∣ments where wt he obteined estimation, and wonne worship conuenient for his proper personage: in his visage is no stear∣nesse, no sadnes, but much seueritie: so that to méete & marke him, would moue a mans mynde to His fatherly countenaunce deserued such dutie of reue∣rence. exhibite vnto him due honour, and to abandon all manner of feare and terrour. His order of life was wonderfull religious, his humanitie was incomparable, and the goodly disposition of his nature was right excellent. He doth not rebuke the persons, in whome vices be resident, but reprehendeth the vices where with the persons are infected: neyther is it his fashion to correct, and sharply to nip such as doe amisse, but mildely to amend them and to vse them to a gentle reformation. If he admonishe thée, tho layest too thyne eare with attentiuenesse, and fol∣lowest his preceptes with a certaine gréedinesse: yea, after his persuasions haue pearced into thy heart, thou Or, begin∣nest. desirest
to assault thy selfe with the like engines, that thy mynde may not be repugnant and contrarie to his meaning. He hath thrée children, whereof two are Masculine, whome he trained vp most diligently: and very painefully instructed. His The wise∣dome of Pom peius in pre∣ferring Eu∣phratas the philosopher▪ to the marri∣age of his da ghter. father in lawe, Pompeius Iulianus by name, was a man high & honorable, both in the whole course of his happy yeres, and in this one respect, accounted most noble and gra∣cious, that he being a Prince of a Prouinciall inrisdiction, and possessing the chiefest place of préeminence among Gen∣tlemen of no meane or base degrée, vouchedsafe to elect and choose out for his contentation, a sonne in lawe, not being a potentate in honours and titles of nobilitie, but a Prince in wisedome, and ensignes of knowledge. But what meane I to interlace so many wordes, concerning a man, whose com∣panie I am not admitted to vse, nor yet may enioy his lear∣ned conference? Doe I it to increase myne owne anguishe and torment, bycause the way is stopped vp, that I can not haue entrance to such a benefite? For I am restrained and kept backe with a certaine impediment, namely an office of excéeding great authoritie, and maruellous troublesome for the paines ther vnto pertaining. I sit in place of iudgement, I compile bookes, I indite epistles, I scrible many vnperfect pamphlets and letters voyde of all art and learning. Some∣times I am accustomed, (for such a thing otherwhiles doth chance) to make my complaint to Euphratas of these weigh∣tie and vrgent affaires: He puts me in comfort. Further∣more, thus much doth he affirme: That y• To perform the office and function of a magistrate, is the principall part of phi∣losophie. greatest & the ve∣rie best portion of philosophie, is, to take charge ouer the common welth, to knowe controuersies, to decide causes, to pronounce iudgement, to deliuer wordes in good order, to exercise the precepts of iustice, and to put that in proofe & experiment, which philosophers thē selues haue discouered in many a holsome rule & document. Howbeit, in this point he shall fnde me impersuasible, & not to be exhorted: y• it is more auailable for me to be a practitioner of the premisses, belonging to a magistrate, then to consume whole dayes in his cōpanie: that by hearing him I might learne y• wherof I
am ignorant. Wherefore I counsell you so much the rather, for so much as you are not to complaine of lacking leasure, that the next time you come into the citie, which I woulde wishe to be somewhat the sooner, to suffer him without grud∣ging, to supply your imperfections, and to polishe that in you, which might be more beautifull. It is not my proper∣tie, to be enuious against other, (which is a tricke incident to a great number) for the good qualities which they haue, and I haue not: But contrariwise, I reape pleasure and delec∣tation, If I see my friends furni∣shed with those things, which I my elfe do want. if I see those thinges whereof I haue a denyall, and therefore am not in possibilitie to possesse, abounding in my friends with all store and sufficiencie. C. Plinius to Catilio Seuero. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This letter is certificatorie: wherein hee writeth to a friende, of a friend afflicted with sicknesse: hee reckoneth vp sundrie circum∣staunces to his commendation, as well for his inwarde qualities of mynde, as for his outwarde behauiour. Finally, hee addeth a conclusion of well wishing to his friende, that they both might thereby reape some benefite. MYne abiding and continuance in the citie hath béene somewhat prolonged, where I was troubled in mynde, and also disquieted. The infirmitie, and weakning sicknesse, wherewith Some friend of his with whom he was well acquain∣ted: and was sorrie for his icknesse. Titus Aristo is sore pinched and pined, mi∣nistreth vnto me no small molestation and heauinesse: to whom my loue singularly inclined, as to a man worthy of ad miration. For, thē he, nothing poudered with more grauitie, nothing indued with more faithfulnesse, nothing leauened with more learning and knowledge, in so muche that he sée∣meth vnto me, so farre from being a man, that euen wise∣dome & vnderstanding it self, yea al good arts and sciences, as it were in a certain mutual agréemēt, are in him most liuely represented. How skilful is he both in priuate causes pertei∣ning to the law, & in controuersies rising among the cōmons?
Howe doth he abounde in reasons and circumstaunces? Howe plentifull is he in vttering examples? howe déepely is he grounded in antiquities? with what vnderstanding is he furnished concerning auncient monumentes? There is nothing in the worlde vniuersall, which a man is desirous to attaine vnto, and with knowledge willing to comprehend, whereof he is not able to giue preceptes, and sufficient to teach and instruet, So often as I make inquisition & search after any abstruse and mystical matter, he is my treasure, he is my storehouse. O, what trueth and honestie is in his lan∣guage: what authoritie resteth in his countenaunce, and what maiestie: what decencie there is in his delayes, and in his doubtfull demaundes: what subtiltie and quicknesse of wit: what is it whereof he is ignorant? and yet notwith∣standing he laboureth oftentimes in a Bycause it is more com∣mendable for a iudge to de∣liberate and cast doubts in cases of con∣trouersie, then to be ouer∣quicke and ha stie, which somtimes per uerteth equi∣tie. laberynth of vncer∣taintie? Bycause it is more com∣mendable for a iudge to de∣liberate and cast doubts in cases of con∣trouersie, then to be ouer∣quicke and ha stie, which somtimes per uerteth equi∣tie. he doubteth in diuersitie and sundrie sortes of cau∣ses, which he thresheth and sifteth in such sort, that the verie originall and beginnings of them are by him rehearsed, dis∣cerned, examined, and considered. Furthermore, howe par∣ciall and sparing in diet, how moderate in apparel and cloa∣thing? When I enter into his chamber, and cast my rolling eyes from corner to corner, yea, when I beholde his bed, and the necessarie furniture there vnto belonging, I sée a liuely representation and image, of the frugalitie and thriftinesse, which was in high estimation among our ancestours. These things are beautified with the noblenes of his nature, which referreth nothing to ostentation, painted popularitie, and vaine glorious opinions, but trieth al things with the touch∣stone of conscience: and weygheth, whatsoeuer commeth in question to be decided, in the balance of iustice and equitie. The reward of a good déede he fetcheth not from the reporte of the people, but sifteth it out of the circumstances wherby the cause is knowne. To knit vp all in a summarie, no man would be so madde and ouerséene, as to account any one of those, which by outward gesture & habite of the body, make a iollie shew & a glose of singular wisdome, comparable to the man whom I haue mencioned. He is no idle talker, eyther
in hall or gallerie. Neyther doth he make other mens lea∣sure, and his owne quietnesse, Bycause he was so learned and therwith∣all so wittie in reasoning. delightsome with tedious disputations: but sitting in his long gowne, or riche robe, is occupied in suche matters as are of him to be determined. Or, he is an aduocate to many, and a counseller to more, &c▪ the wordes may admit a dou∣ble interpre∣tation. He is a furtheraunce to many, in being their aduocate: and an helpe in hassard to such as vse his counsell: in chastitie, in vprightnesse, in iustice, in constancie, he is préeminent, and no mans inferiour. If a man were in his companie and saw his behauiour, he would be astonished: such is his patience, in suffering the sharpe assaultes of his sicknesse, in resisting the violence of sadnesse and sorrowe, in wrestling with thirst which requireth moyst recepts, in passing through the incre∣dible heate of burning feuers, without shrinking. Not many dayes agoe, he called me, and diuers of myne acquaintaunce vnto him, whome he loued entirely, and desired vs to resorte to physcians for counsell, and of them to learne the extremi∣tie and vttermost daunger of his infirmitie and disease, that, if it were past remedie, he might prepare him voluntarlly to leau this life: but if it were in difficultie, and yet not in des∣paire, he might resist and struggle with it, till suche time as perfect health were to be recouered. For the petitions of his louing wife, the lamentations and teares of his deare daugh ter, and the state of vs his good friends, are not to be neglec∣ted, all which premisses are directed to one limitted marke, namely, that he would not cancell our hopes (if at least wise they were of assuraunce and not built vpon vanitie) with voluntarie death. That thing doe I estéeme and iudge hard, vneasie, and worthy of principall commendation. For Voluntarie death ought not to be at∣tempted of a∣y wise man, notwithstan∣ding many a one among the brutishe swarm of peo ple, vse it as a remedie a∣gainst miserie. to runne as it were with a certaine force and violence to death, is common to many: but to vse deliberation concerning the end of life, to consider of the causes which depend therevp∣on, aduisedly and as reason prescribeth: so to be persuaded eyther to liue or dye, is the propertie of a well disposed minde, and a certaine token of a man armed with valiaunt∣nesse. As for the physicians, of whome we asked counsel, they put vs in good comfort, promising that all things will turne to the bst, and that there is little feare of daunger to death.
It remaineth that God say Amen to their warrants, & that he disburthen me of this care conceiued: of whiche when I féele my selfe deliuered, I will to my Laureninum a fresh, that is, to my bookes, to my noting tables, and such exercises of learning, as are, both quiet and fruitfull. For, continuing where I am, I haue no leasure to reade, neyther yet any lust to write, such is mine inwarde anguishe. You vnderstande, what it is that I feare, and you knowe what I wish: besides that, what I haue purposed hereafter to attempt, you are not ignorant. As for your self, I would haue you write more Merrily, say some copies, for the Latine word is laetio ribus: Both i terpretations are alowable. largely, that letters may haue passage and repassage be∣twéen vs twaine, and that I may be informed, how you haue bene exercised, how you are presently occupied, and whervn∣to you will apply your time, your wit, your labour, and your leasure. My distressed condition shall be indifferently redres∣sed, & seasoned with measurable consolation, if you cease from complaining, & haue no cause by smart & anguish to lament. C. Plinius to Pompeio Falconi. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle runneth wholy vpon resolutions: For, as it appeareth, a question was demaunded, whether a Tribune might pleade at the barre, wherevnto answere is made with sundrie reason. YOu aske my counsell and aduice, whether I thinke it re∣quisite, that in y• office of the tribuneship, you shuld plead causes. It is a thing not lightly to be regarded, that you con∣sider what that office is: whether it be a vaine shadow, and a naked title destitute of honour, or a religious authoritie: against which magistracie, as no compulsorie meanes should be vsed: so ought they y• beare the same office, not to trie any man by constraint. At what time I was a Tribune, or pro∣tectour of the people, I might (peraduenture) haue offended in thinking my selfe to be that whiche I was not, A Tribune may not be a pleader of cau ses in commō courts of iudgement. and then did I abstaine from pleading causes, and medled
not in matter, which in common place of iudgement are o be . First, byause I supposd it a great  and disorder, that he to whome all men ought in rising to re∣uerence, and in giuing place to vse most worshipfully▪ should stand on his feete like an abiect, whiles all other sit in prepa∣red plaes: and that he y• might by authoritie, commaunde al men to be huit and silent, should haue his tong limited and tied, o the running of an houre glasse: an that he, whin in talke to interrupt and hinder▪ was counted a thing  t∣lerable, should haue contumelies, and reproches, ringing a∣bout his eares, whiche if he sought not to recompence by re∣uengement, then was he thought straight way a cowardly beast: and if he would not let them passe without  and payment of some smart, then was he thought proud and insolent. This was also a horrible heart griefe, when as, eyther In law they are called cō∣pleynant and defendant. he whose suite I mainteined, or he against whom I directed the force of my plea, was before my face, and called vpon me in open assembly: Bicause such offices are ne∣uer separated from much la bour & toyle. whether it were better for me to be quiet and kéep silence, and as it were, forswearing and for saking so busie an office, become a priuate person. By these and such like reasons, which offered them selues to mine vn∣derstanding and memorie, I fealt my selfe much moued, in so much that I thought this rather of the twaine to be worthy∣est of election and choice: namely, to take vpō me the charge and office of a Tribune, for the behoofe of all: then to become an aduocate or solicitour for a fewe. But to you once againe I sing this song. It is I thinke not lightly to be regarded, that you consider with your selfe, what the office of a tribune is. Shewe your slfe  wise man in the whole course of your life, that will win you woship aboundtly. Resemble your owne person, and be circumspect whom you represent, yea, put on the person of your owne self, which a wise man ought to make so itte for his purpose, as it is of abilitie to open wide wayes to preferments and promotions.
C. Plinius to Caninio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee expostulateth with Caninius, vnto what exercise he applieth him∣selfe: giueth him libertie and free choice, to recreate his bodie and minde as liketh him best: sheweth how desirous hee is to enioye the like leasure and pleasure: for end, certifiet  him howe he i still occupied in many matters. ARe you occupied as a student? or as a fisher? or as a hun∣ter? or doe you practise and vse all these exercises at once? For there is no impediment to the contrarie, but that they may euery one, bée put in prooe and triall at our manour of Carium▪ For the iuer affordoth fishe, the Parckes and for∣rest yéelde fleshe, and there is a solitarie place, merueylous méete and conuenient for meditation & studie. But whether you exercise all these at once, or whether you practise but one of them seerally, I can not say I am enious against you: Neuerthelesse, I feel my selfe somewhat stounge with an∣guish▪ because▪ I may not doe as you doe, & enioy those things whereof you haue the fruition, the pleasure, and the profite: which I desire and couef, as the sicke and crasie patient lon∣geth after wine▪ bathes, and water springes. Shall leasure and leaue neuer be obteined, to vntie Matters of weight and great impor∣aunce: A speach Meta∣phoricall. thes tangld knottes? Rather then I wil taie the loosing of them, I wil cutt them in sunder. But I thinke I shall neuer haue the opportunitie to vse so beneficiall a priuilege. For at the ende of old con∣trouersies, newe spring vpp and growe, whiles the first are skarcely dispatched: such a rancke and rowe of litigious cau∣ses, and earnest matters, increase day by day, and hange one vppon another, as linckes in a long chaine. Fare you well. C. Plinius to Octuio. THE ARGVMEN.
Ver the name of children signifying bookes, (the testimonies o learning and knowledge) hee counslleth Octauius, to keepe them no longer in hugger, but to let them haue libertie to shewe themselues abroade, that therby hee himselfe might be commen∣ded, his friendes delighted, and straungers profited. O Man too déepely planted in patience▪ Or rather to hard▪ cruel, and tyrannical! Hee clleth the fruites of Octauius his witt, as books and learned workes which he wrote, by the name of children. Who hauing begotten and trai∣ned vpp children of such excellencie, kéepest them to thine owne vse and custodie, not suffering them to go abroad, that vnto others they might impart their commoditie. How long will you enuie your owne honour and estimation? how long will you grudge at our gaine and commoditie? how long wil you bée an enimie to your owne praise and adauncement? how long also will you continue an aduersarie to our plea∣sure and delectation? Let your offspring be spoken off abroad among the multitude, let them take their flight from place to place, and possesse the triumph of renowne by the trumpe of euery mans tōgue: restraine them no longer, but let them haue frée passage both farre and neare, where the Where the armes & en∣signes of the Romaine Em pire are spred▪ o some boo∣kes are to bee xpounded, which varrie in the word. language and speach of Romanes is vsed: Great hath béene the ex∣pectation, wherin wée haue laboured, touching you & youres, and as it hath béene great, so hath it likewise béene longe: which as you maye by no meanes frustrate and make voide, so may you not at any hand, differre and putt it off, to fur∣ther time. Certaine Uerses of your notable inuention, haue beene read, heard, and reasoned vppon, which against your Are blowne abrode, and noised in  plces, a∣gainst your minde. will, violently brake out of prison as desirous of libertie: and certainely, except you gather your other broode about your bodie, and kéepe them close together, it is to be doubted, least as wanderers not acknowledging any proper maister, they loose you, and finde one or other to be their father. Sett beore your eyes, the liuely myrrour of immortalitie, which by this memorable monument alone, you are in possibilitie to purchase: and lay the lookeing glasses of this transitorie life in your sight, from which you may be deliuered, by the sure for∣tification and bulwarke of your passing penne: for al thinges else, compassed within the pauillion of this worldes wil∣dernesse
are subiect to frailtie, to corruption, to decay, to ruine and rottennesse: following the course of an ebbe and a flowe, as men themselues, in whom is no hope of certaintie, are in generall. You will say (peraduenture) according to your cu∣stome, it shalbe no part of my charge, let my friendes looke thereunto if they lust. I wish with all my heart, that such friendes you may finde out, being indued with faithfulnesse, garnished wt learning, & not deintie of their trauell, as would vouchsafe As to pub∣lish the books and volumes which you haue written in your name, that by your paine, you may winne fame and re∣nowne. to take vppon them so great a burthen, and for your sake susteine such a labour. But play the part of a pru∣dent and circumspect man: Looke aboue, belowe, and round about you, least it be obiected against you for a point of smal prouidence and forecast, to rest in hope of other mens glea∣ning, when you are able of your owne selfe, to gather in the whole Haruest. And concerning y• edition and publishing of y• worke, determine with your selfe, as you please: but yet pro∣uide so at the lēgth, that it may haue libertie to goe abread: y• you may reape some pleasure of your paine, and in your toile finde cause of sufficient ioy: which I mée selfe longe ago pre∣sumed vpon, in your behalfe, how beit, not rashly, or without aduisement. For I imagine, what running, what wonde∣ring, what shouting and what silence weighteth vppon the sight of your Bookes, a  o translation, from the bo∣dy to the minde. children: wherein I am no lesse delighted, whi∣les I talke and make mencion of them, then I am comforted in the noysing of your name. Let your silence be tempered with diligence, earnestnesse and desire, to heare further tou∣ching these matters, which are in likelyhoode to followe here∣after. And as for your owne person, be so carefull and wise, that by your long lingering, and doubtful delayes, you robbe not your studies of their due interest, & defrade your owne labour of their prepared pension: which fault in you if it growe in excesse and passe beyonde the limits of measure, it is to bée doubted Least your delayes gett you the  of a sluggarde or idle lub∣ber: or else of a feaesul, co∣wardly, and dastardly loute. least it runne in report of slouthfulnesse and ignoraunce, or else of timorousnesse, and fearefulnesse. Fare you well.
C. Plinius, to Saturnino. THE ARGVMENT. Writing to Saturninus, he declareth what a pleasure it is to him, to see and heare friendship flourish among men of vertue and hone∣stie. In the end of the Epistle, he is grieued, that Saturninus is bu∣sily occupied in matters of suites of lawe, that he cannot haue his companie. NExt & immediatly vnto our friend Priscus, because such was your commaundement, I haue most willingly and liberally perfourmed the dueties of thankfulnesse. For it is vnto mée the pleasauntest thing in the world vniuersall, that you being men not of the basest degrée, nor yet of the meanest maners and behauiours, besides that, such whom I loue most sincerely and farre aboue al other, For the mu∣tual agreemēt of friend, is a thing where at wee ought to eioyce: as the vaiaunce of friendes is a thing whereat wee should be greeued. cleaue so closely together in frendly conuersation, that you thinke your selues mutual∣ly bound and tied in knottes of perpetual kindnesse. For, hée cofesseth and proteseth also, that by the benefite of your friendshippe, hée perceiueth himselfe a communicant and partaker of singular delectations, contending and struggling as it were to outrunne and conquere you, in the most honest combate of concord and kindnesse, wherunto processe of time will giue large and plentifull increase. That you are in∣tangled and earnestly occupied in buisie matters, I am for this cause somewhat sorrie, for that your seruice being yoked to such necessitie, cannot satisfie our desires: Howbeit, if by the helpe of the To whose hearing & de∣termining the atter called in qestion was cōmitted. Iudge, the one controuersie may be finished, and by your paines the other also accomplished, you shall be∣ginne first where you are to enioy rest and quietnesse, and af∣terwards as you finde your selfe sufficed, towards vs to ad∣dresse your iourney. Fare you well.
C. Plinius to Fusco. TH ARGVMENT. Hee teacheth Fuscus how to bestowe his time, commending that kinde of studie which is applied to translating out of one tongu ino another, wheruppon (by the way) he toucheth many circum∣stances. Hee sheweth also, by specialtie, wherein it is good to bee exercised. And though Plinie wrote this Epistle to one particular man, laying before him (as it were) a platforme of studie: yet I see no cause to the cōtrarie, but these precepts of Plinie may serue as well to teach all young studentes an order and method in studie to be obserued. YOu demaunde of mée a question: and what is it, but to be instructed how I thinke it were best for you to bestowe time, now that you are in Not that so∣litarinese whiche nature doth abhorre: but by solita∣inesle e mea neth in this place, want of friendly com∣pnie, and f∣miliar ac∣quaintanc. solitarinesse, and sequestred from companie. Mine aunswere to your question is this: That in my iudgement, you shall finde this exrcise very profitable, if you frame your self to interprete out of the Gréeke tongue into the Latine, or i you tranlate out of the Latine speach, into the Gréeke. In which point of practise, the propertie of the language is to be pondered, gaynesse of woords to be follo∣wed, abundaunce of tropicall and figuratiue floures to be ob∣serued, and finally, a patheticall and veheent order in wri∣ting to be continued. Moreouer, through imitation of the best & most approued Authors, abilitie to cōprehend the like thinges is obteined: and that wherin the reader wanteth vn∣derstanding, is much deceiued: the translatour hauing the di∣rection of knowledge and the ende of art, is not rauished: yea, by the exercise of translating, wée purchase perseueraunce, & by the vse of the same, our iudgement inclieth to ripenesse. There is also some aduauntag to bée gotten, A readie and exquisite way to attaine knowledge in a forreigne lā∣guage. to write that downe which you read, in wordes of a contrarie tongue, to the intent that the whole substaunce and argument of that which the booke conteineth, may be ingraffed i your memo∣rie: to conferre and examine that which you haue written, with that which you haue read, and so diligenly to consider,
wherein your Author hath aptly framed his inuention, and you not vnorderly dealt in your translation. Great glad∣nesse wilbe offered, if in some thinges you amend your Au∣thour: Great shame and discredite also will insue, if in all pointes he shewe more skilfulnesse, and bring his matters to more perfection. It shalbe lawfull also for the translatour, t choose and pick out such thinges as be most manifest, and ap∣parant: then afterwardes to canuasse and sift them with dis∣cretin. A bould and presumptuous kinde of contention, I must acknowledge this to bée, yet neuerthelsse, not euill or  it is honest and blamelesse▪ malicious: and why? because it is secretly practised: These and such like contentios, I wot wel, many haue attempted, and thereby wonne commendation, whiles they wanted not sufficient abilitie to Whiles thy  skil enou∣ge▪ and art sufficient to followe their authour: and were in hope also to atteine more excellē∣cie. followe after as it were in a che, and despaied not likewise to outrunne the ringleader, and there∣by to gett ground. By translating, this commoditie ariseth: to renew that in memorie, which sometime you read & haue forgotten: to retine many thinges n minde, when time ser∣ueth to be vttered: to passe ouer many circumstances vppon consideration: to interline here for necessitie, there for exor∣nation: to reiect that which is written, by writing it againe. This exercise, I must confesse, is laborious and paineful, yea, it is replenished with toile and tediousnesse: On the other sde againe, in that by the difficultie & hardnesse of the work, perfection is recoered where much was out of square, & re∣sitution of strength gotten, which was diminished: the com∣moditie is answearable in proportion & measure, to the wea∣risomnesse of the labour. For end, to put too newe immes, ioyntes, and members, to the perfourmed body, not displacing them that it had before, is another pleasure which redoūdeth to the Translatour. I know, that at this instant, your studie standeth principally in playing the Oratour, howbeit, I la∣bour not by persuasion, to win you to the pracise of this skir∣mishing, warlike, and fghting style: For A similitud not to be pre∣ with ou du consi∣deration▪ as ploughed lands, are satered sometime with this seede, & sometime with that, because varietie is profitable: so our witts in like maner, are to bee exercised, one while with this meditation, another
while with that, because diuersitie draweth with it much pleasure. My Precepts for younge scho∣lers to obsrue and followe. counsell moreouer, in this case, is, that you buckle your selfe to translate some what out of histories, and that in writing epistles you vse great diligence. For it com∣meth to passe, many times and oft, that vppon vrgent necessi∣tie, wée must (as it were) leuen our Orations with historical narrations, and béesprinckle the same also with Poetical de∣scriptions: as for epistles by them this commoditie is gotten, The com∣moditie that redoundeth to him that di ligently rea∣deth epistles. not onely a methode in writing and speaking compact in breuitie, but the selfe same also full of smoothnesse and puri∣tie. Furthermore, it is permitted to the translatour, to take the benefte of relaxation and refreshing his musing minde, with versifying, I do not meane, in that wherein amplicati∣ons, and large discourse are vsed (For I am not ignoraunt, that to the  of such an eterprise, much leasure and labour is required) but that rather, which, as it is quicke and wittie, so is it short also, and not tedious, which dispenseth with all maner o cares and businesse whatsoeuer. They are called playes of dispt, and trifling pastimes: neuerthelesse, as much renowne otherwhiles is by them athieued, as by matters more earnest and wightie, is procured: and to dis∣couer a manifest trueth, which silence oughte no longer to smouther (for why should I not vtter verses, whiles I exhort you to the stdie ad meditation of the same?) True is this Comparison As A compri∣son betweene waxe, whose propertie is to receiue eueie impression: & the wi of man, which is apte for the knowledge of many and sun∣dri sciences. wax is praisde, if soft it bee, and yeeld, To euerie shape, which workemans fingers frame: Minerua chaste, and Mars with sword and sheeld, Faire Uenus grace, that miable Dame▪ Her prtie sonne who Cupide hath to name: With thousand sortes of thinges that disagree, In waxe by Ate which plainly printed ee: And as the flames of hoat and scortching fire, Are quenched quite with water of he spring, And sloures in field thereby to growth aspire,
And medowes greene, of grasse which plenti bring: So witt of man by skill (a goodly thing) n diuers Arts must taught and trained bee, What gaine is gott thereby the blind may see. And therefore Oratours most excellent, and men of great reputation, vsed either to giue their mindes to that kinde of exercise, or else in the sae were excéedingly delighted: nay rather, they did both take pleasure in it, & thought no skorne to make it their practise. For it is a wonder, to consider and weighe, how y• minde labouring in this meditation, is (much like vnto a bowe) some times bent very tight; and sometimes againe made slack for the nones: that is, it is other whiles bu∣sily occupied, & otherwhiles againe, it is pleasatly disposed: For the Poetre dea∣eth in al kind of matters as well warr like and wightie, as wanton and pleasaunt. subiect or argument, wherof erses consiste, are per∣urbations and motions of the minde, as loue, hate, anger, mercie, mildnesse, frowardnesse &c. Besides that, they con∣teine all kinde of thinges, which béelong to the course of our life, and, not so much as caes of lwe, pleadable in courtes of assise &c. but in them verses are conuersaunt. Poetrie hath also in it a peculiar commoditie, and it openeth a passage to pleasure in other exercises: for that being tyed to the necessi∣tie of obseruing quantitie and proportion of syllables, we de∣light our selues in proae, applying oure penne to write that more willingly, which, comparison doth proue vnto vs more easie and lesse laborious. You haue (peradenture) more wordes spoken in this behalfe, then you required: Neuerthe∣lesse, one thing hath escaped, for I haue not made declaration what I thought worthie the reading, albeit I expresse what was worthie the writing. It shalbe your part to xe and in∣graffe this in your remembraunce, that with diligence you must elect and chse, the best approued author in their kind of methode and exercise: a common saying it is in y• mouthes of many, Multum legendum esse, non multa, That much and ofen reading must be vsed, and For that con foundeth, ra∣ther then cō∣firmeth know . not one thing vppo another. And what Authors those are, that are most to be allowed, it is so manifest and euident, that i néedeth uo demonstration: and
if I should set downe a catalogue or beadroll of their names, mine epistle should extend and stretch it selfe an vnreasona∣ble length, insomuch that whiles I set downe directions and precepts, how you should order and dispose your studies, I my selfe séeme to diminishe and consume the time, which o∣therwise on my booke mought be employed. Take into your handes againe your noting tables, and write somewhat that is alreadie spoken, or else the selfe same thing that you haue begonne. Plinius to Traiano. THE ARGVMENT. This epistle is petitorie, for it compriseth a shorte supplication made to his Prince Traianus, for the graunt and gift of an Augur∣ship, or Septemuirship, two seuerall offices: in the end hee addeth a reason, whie his request is, to be of the number of the Augurs. FOr omuch as (right gratious Souereige) I knowe of a certaintie, that it belongeth to the testimoniall and com∣mendation of my behauiour, to be adorned and aduaunced by the iudgement of so bountifull a Prince: I make my humble supplication to your highnesse, that it would please you to amplifie and inlarge my dignitie (whereunto I haue aspired through the benefite of your Graces clemencie) either with the office of an Offices in the common∣wealth of cre∣dite and coun∣tenance: thou∣ghe he craue promotiō, yet because hee mighte pleade merite, he is not to bee thought am∣bitious. Augur, or of a Offices in the common∣wealh of cre∣dite and coun∣tenance: thou∣ghe he craue promotiō, yet because hee mighte pleade merite, he is not to bee thought am∣bitious. Septimuir, because there is place voide and to be furnished: that I may, according to the relligious rites, and ceremoniall order of priesthoode, pray publiquely vnto the Gods immortal, whom at this present I worship and adore priuately, for the preseruation and happie estate of your highnesse. Plinius to Fabato. THE ARGVMENT. He beginneth with the celebration of bearth dayes: then, descendeth
to talke of a Village in Campnia, (a Countrie in Italie, Pli▪ lib. 3. cap. 5. Flor. lib. 1. Strab. lib. 5▪ and others,) whereof Fabatus (to whome hee directeth this letter) was Lord and possessioner: shewing that somethings were in decay, and other some thinges againe in good estate: hee  of his want of acquain∣taunce with men of the Countrie, whose natures agree well with labour: at last, making mencion of Rufus, touching some secrete matter, hee concludeth. WE are bound of duetie, no lesse to A ting cō∣mō in the age of our Aunce∣stours, to kepe banqueting & to ve other  & customes, on the dayes of heir natiuitie, a thing sauou ring of Epicu∣risme, and not of Christia∣nisme. celebrate your bearth day, then our owne, sithence the ioy and delight of ours dependeth vppon yours, by whose diligence and care, it is come to passe, that when wée are here, wée are merrie, and when wée are there, wée are not sorrie. The Uillage called Camilliana Villa, which is in Campania and in your posses∣sion, is meruailous olde, rotten, and ruinous: howbeit such thinges as are of most value and price, doe either remaine whole and sounde, or else haue but litle harme. Wée will therefore giue attendaunce that they may bée repaired in or∣der conuenient. I séeme to haue friendes a great number▪ but of that kind & stampe, which you séeke, and your matter oth craue, I haue almost neuer a one. For they are all They were neuer trayned vpe in coun∣ie matters, & therfore their skill is to seeke. gowned men and Citizens: and you knowe this, that th admini∣stration and buisinesse belonging to farme places, and ma∣nours in the Countrie, require a painefull and laborious fel∣lowe, and such a one as is hard and toughe, and able to in∣dure toile and trauel enough: to whom, as that kinde of exer∣cise is nothing grieuous, so the charge and care thereof is not vnséemely, neither is their solitarinesse seasoned with sadnesse. Concerning Rufus you thinke very honestlye, for he is lincked with your sonne (as it were) in In most sin∣cere and faith∣full frendship. fetters of fami∣liaritie and friendship: Howbeit, what new thing hée cane compasse for himselfe, I cannot tell: his will is bent to do ve∣rie much, I beléeue. Fare you well.
Plinius to Quintiliano. ¶THE ARGVMENT. The daughter of Quintiliaus, (to whom hee writeth thi epistle) being towardes marriage with Nonius Celer a younge Gentle∣man▪ Plinie would haue so attyred, as to the office and calling of her husband is most correspondent and aunswearable: Hee gi∣ueth her a summe of monie to mende her Dowrie, and thinking his gift but small, doubteth not for all that▪ but it shal be well ac∣cepted. ALthough you are a man of singular continencie, and haue trained vpp your daughter in such dececie, and vertuous order, as best beséemed her, to whom you are father, and Tu∣tillius Unckle: yet notwithstanding, for so much as, shée is towards marrying, with a man of worship and counenance, A younge man whome Plini fauou∣red. Nonius Celer by name, whose place and office being such, as that of necessitie it requireth aunswearable deking and gorgeousnesse: shée must bée trimmed and arayed in her ap∣parell and garments, wherewith dignitie is not augmented, howbeit for all that, adorned, according to the condition and estate of her husband. As for you, I knowe it to be a trueth, in minde you are garnished with perfect felicitie: as for your bodily riches and substaunce, your stare is not excessiue, but indifferent. In consideration whereof, I take vppon mée to beare on my shoulders some part of your burthen, that you may be the lighter: and as a second father to the damsell, I bestowe vppon her towards her dowrie, A large dow rie giun with a young da∣mosell in ma∣riage: wherein though Plinie was liberall, yet note his modestie. fiftie thousand pée∣ces of coine, hauing purposed to open the sluses of my libera∣litie yder  her further inriching, but that I beare my self bould vpon: confidece of your well disposed & honest nature, in the accptation of this small and , that it could by no meanes, of you bée . Fare you well.
Plinius to Apollinari. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee writeth to Appollinaris to bee a labourer with him, that Sexti∣us may bee furthered to the office of the Tribuneshipp, in whose behalfe hee sheweth howe readie hee is, not onely in taking paines himselfe, but in strayning his friendes ayde also, that such meanes may bewrought, as to the accomplishment of the matter which is in hand, might be most auailable. THe petition of Sextus Erutius my frend, maketh me ful of anguish, & out of quiet: I am troubled with thought, and with musing molested and amased: Yea, the care which in mine owne behalfe I auoyded, I haue, in Meaning his friend, whome hee accōpteth as himselfe, be cause true friendes are twaine in bo∣die, but in heart one. another, as if it were for mine owne sake, susteined: For if I had done other∣wise, my honestie, my credite, my reputation, and my worship had béene in hazard Through the earnesinesse of mine inter∣cession vnto Caesar, I haue obteined for Sextus, the honoura∣ble authoritie of a Snatour, I haue procured him accesse to the office of the Questorship: through my voice and sentence, hée standeth in election to be a Tribune: and except his peti∣tion preuaile, in that poit with the Senate, I am greatly in doubt, least I should séeme to haue dealt with Caesar, to whom he was suppliaunt in the behalfe of Sexus. his highnesse deceitfully. In consideration whereof, it behooueth mée, to la∣bour most circumspectly, that by the iudgement of all men, hée be proued the selfe same person in qualitie and behauiour, as Caesar toke him to bée, vppon my report and conunendati∣on: which cause, if it should not further my desire, yet would I wish with all my heart notwithstanding, that hée might be fauoured and assited, because hée is a youge man of a vertu∣ous disposition, garnished with grauiti▪ inriched with lear∣ning, & as worthie of praise, as he that is worthiest: and as I wish to him, so wish I to his household and familie. For his father,An argumēt from the fa∣ther, to winne credite to the fonne. Erutius, is a noble Gentleman, vertuous, auncient, discréete, and in causes of controuersies not vnexcercised:
none more faithfull, no more ,  mor  dably inclined or graciously giuen, that I  Th doe all loue mée, and make of mée  s, one as wel as  her,  exception . is   of▪  but  nuber of  indifferently: t make the al amends therfore in the behoofé of oe, I must  mie a∣bilitie▪ I rge my friends, I pray them▪ I  thm▪   to their houes, I seeke out their ▪ and   can compasse, either by mine owne credite and , or by others mediation and fauourable furtherance, I put in experience. My request vnto you , that of this s heauie a burthen, you would beare some part with mee for compa∣nie. I wil consider your paines, if yu aske your duetie: and though you should not aske, yet wil I make recompence. You are in fauour, you are in worshipful calling, you are resorted and sought too of many. Doe but giue a signification of your will, and you shall haue them readie and at ha, that to your minde  confomable▪ Fare you well▪ Brutus to the ▪ THE ARGVMENT. due to their gouernour,  by him in displeasure . In the end of the epistle  vseth a sentence, wherein is declared the me∣rite of free obedience and forced . THe monie which  sent vs, ppon   of our com∣maundement, is to you none oher aduauntage, as you may well be persuaded, but euen sch as they , who by compulsorie meanes, or rather, by iolent extortion, be∣ing racked, pay that which they cannot kéepe: I onsidera∣cion whereof, you incurre a dóuble detriment. For you shall suffer penaltie, equal in proportiō to your lingering delayes: and so much the worfe shall you bée vsed, as you were vnwil∣ling
to  that you did, before  were forced▪ and so much furthe shal yu bée from finding , as you shewed your  in behauiour  obedience. For  bedience  both large commodatiō and more am∣pl rewards, then that ser∣uice which by constraint is recouered. For semblable and like courtesie, is not to be exhibited to such as through constraint vouchsase to affoord their seruice, & frame them∣selues to be officious when they see none other remedie, as is to be shewed towards such, as in time cōuenient giue proofe of their allegiaunce, and driue no toff rom day to day▪ their dufulnesse. The Pergamenians to Bruto. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. his loue and fauour, vse argumentes  vppon , and alledge thei pouerie, as n    of vnperfourmed duetie. F Pleading dif ficultie and hardnesse in the matter, wherwith they are charged, they excuse themselues to Brutus. y• exhibition or     as is , might be compassed with facilitie and litle labour, wée would not haue béene so dissolute and carelesse, as by our de∣layes to deserue your displeasure, and by our vnwise dealing to runne ino double danger: Because such as are of abilitie, if they enie to giue, are so farre fro  , that they procure their priuate : and suh againe on the other side as contribute against their willes, thoughe large∣ly, are notwithstanding frustrate of fauour. But of this you are not , that To giue with speedinesse, is an action & work of great wealth and substance▪ & though festination or hast making be  veement, yet po∣uerie so prouideth in the end, that hast is ouercome and vā∣quished Wherfore For as the stoare of the one is to bee , so  wāt of the other is to be pondred. it is not consonant to equitie, nor agre∣able to iustice, that such as by penurie are prouoked to bee loose in obedience, should purchase grater displeasre, and inde lesser fauour, then they that hauing plentie and a∣bundance,
giue presently without  or lin∣gering. Brutus to the Rhodians. THE ARGVMENT. By  comparison of two sortes of people, he goeth about to  the Rhodians to submission, giung a note of his  in the end hee offereth them the  and choi  wo  conditions. THe A people in∣habiting Asia, called by that name: of whō Herodotus in his first boke maketh men∣cion. Xanthians, renoting from their seruice, wherein we ha inerest, wée caused to suffer punishment with seueri∣tie and rigour: For wée▪ tooke reuengemnt-vpon them in ex∣tremitie, making of them all  bloudie slaughter, not sparing their infants an younglinges, so farre were wée beyond all compassion: and as for their countrye which they inhabited, what with fire and sword, wée vtterly spoyled it, and made the same deslate. As concerning theCitizens of , a citie in Lycia, a countrie of A∣ia the lesser, lying betwixt Pamphylia & Caria. &c. Pataraeans▪ for so much as they perourmed their allegiance, and shewed themselues duetifull with faithfulnesse, wée diminished their tributes, and made lesse our exactions: Ye, wée did giue and graunt them the benefite of liertie, and haue discharged them, of thei  ubiection. Furthermore, towards the reedify∣ing, and reparing of such buildings as were batered downe, and brought to ruine, wée sent them  talentes. Nowe you may take counsell with your selues, and vse aduisement, whether you had rather be compted (as were y• Xanthians) our aduersaries: or contrariwise, to bée estéemed our friendly wellwillers, as were the Paaraeans. The  to Bruto. THE ARGVMENT. The aunsweare of the Rhodians to Brtus, conmning his offer: with a
prai of the , & a rebke of the Patarans, in their su∣drie respectes. Finally, the last clause of the epstle cōprehendeth a testimonie of their owne opinion. ALthough your vsage towards the Xanthians, who resisted your power for the maintenaunce of their libertie, sauou∣red of crueltie and bloshed: yet notwithstanding Wee Rhodi ans will with∣stand thee at the swordes point▪ though wee die: & not yeeld like bea stes to bon∣dage. wée are so farre, from intending to represent the Pataraeans, (who be∣ing ouercome with the allrements of rewards, committed themselues to méere seruitude) that wée meane to doe that which is cleane contrarie. And therfore, wée abhorring their fortune and condition: besides that, condemning their coun∣sells and purposes▪ in  ▪ wil kéepe still or vncontrouled ▪ and doe what wée cn to  our puisaunce. For wee are of this opinion, And there∣fore, had we a ther encoun∣ter with thee: then yeeld & become ∣iect throughe entising gits. that libertie pur∣chased with  and , is much more▪ excellent, then any kinde of succour or refuge, obteied through gifts and rewards. Brutus to the Pataraeans▪ THE ARGVMENT. Damasipps  (as it should seeme) not the best   in bat∣tell, was  cetified,  to the  of the foresaid countrie, to haue him remoued. Hermodorus the Samian merchan, infourmed mée, An enimie to Brutus. that Damasippus the Admirall of the Rhodian fléete, after their conflict finished, prepared ight from the Phractians, and, for his succour and refuge, is nowe harboured in your greatest hauen. I accompt it not your fault, and therefore haue you Because (per aduenture) you knew not of his cōming. excused, that héehath conueyed himselfe thither: neuerthelesse, if you suffer him there to continue & remaine, not indeuouring your selues to haue him thence remoued, I will impute it to mie owne person for Because you succour mine aduersarie. iniurie, and ascribe it vnto you for Because you take part with a coward. cowardise.
The Pataraeans to Bruto. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. The Pataraeans answering Brutus, excuse them selues: by pleading of ignoraunce. IF Hermodorus had giuen vs to vnderstand, somewhat sooner then he certified you, of that thing, whiche to vs in writing you haue signified, Damasippus had not escaped, in semblable manner, as he lay lurking in our hauen, but shuld haue had He shoulde haue susteined like hassard as the rest of the Rhodians. his Portion in the Rhodian skyrmish. As for you (all considerations set aside) you spare not to rebuke vs as ri∣gorously, as if the whole matter had béene manifest and ap∣parant vnto vs, from the first originall and beginning. As we deserue, so also we desire pardon in this behalfe, sithence we were ignorant of the end and Whether ∣ny such cause should haue bene offered, as therevpon Damasippus should be for ced to take his flight. euent of the battell: ney∣ther in this is there any countenaunce or likelyhood of truth, that we receiued him as tendering his safetie: for so muche as it was vnknowne to vs, whether the cause of his cōming was for the preseruation of his life or no: wherefore we are not to be controuled of cowardise. Hippocrates to the Senate of the Abderites. THE ARGVMENT. The Abderites sending for Hippocrates, to come and cure Democri∣ts. Whom they supposed to be madde and beside his right wits, receiue an answere to their mesage. This Epistle is for the most part, reprehensorie: for therein Hippotates rebuketh such Phy∣sicians, as neglecting the worthinesse of so singular a profession, addict them selues wholy to gather gaine with greedinesse. In the conclusion of the Epistle, he declareth, wherein true riches do confist: annexing to that notable sentence, a few words teding to his owne priuat person.
Yur citizen Mellissagoras came to Cos, the day of coro∣nation & assumption of the scepter, when the yerely she∣wes, and pompe prepared with great cost & sumptuousnesse, were solemnized at Cyparissus, which are done according to custome, by the ministerie of them, to whome that religious seruice belongeth. But whē it was apparant, by y• vtterance & countenaunce of Mellissagoras, that he came in hast, being persuaded none otherwise, then the matter it selfe imported: after the view and reading of your letters, I fell into an ad∣miration and amasement of minde, that for one mans cause, the whole citie should be troubled and disquieted, none other wise, then if the whole multitude of people therein inhabi∣tant, were but one indiuisible person. Nowe, A true sen∣tence of Hip∣pocrates, for in wisemens politique go∣uernement, s more safetie: then in other artificiall de∣fences. happie and fortunate are those people say I, who by wisedome prouide men of honeste and vertuous disposition, to be their pro∣tectours and defendours: not taking strong towers, huge castles, and vnbatterable walles for their fortifications: but the graue and prudent decrees of wise men, and sage seigni∣ours, for their establishment. Out of doubt I am of pini∣on, that Arts are the graces of the Gods; and that men▪ are the worke of nature. To you therfore (O you Abderites) let it styrre vp no storme of trouble, nor minister matter whereby your myndes shoulde be molested, if I thinke my sef not sent for of you, but called vpon of nature to heale that vp by the fruitfulnesse of For Art con firmeth na∣ture, and gi∣ueth vnto her more strength physicke, whiche is in great daunger to perishe and putrifie. Wherefore in taking vpon me to cure Democritus, I will rather shewe my selfe o∣bedient to Nature, and duetifull to the Gods, then applya∣ble to the satisfaction of your requestes, if it be indéede, a sicknesse, and not an errour: which is of me the more wished. For, it shuld be a signification of your larger bountifulnesse, to him exhibited, if suspicion only did affright you with suche disquietnesse. For my paines taken, to restore Democritus to soundnesse, neyther Nature, nor yet God hath promised me any pension. Wherefore you Abderites, The contra∣rie minde of Hippocrates to al physici∣ans of our time: He deni eth his helpe to such as pro fer monie: they with∣drawe wil and worke except rewards be re ceiued. &c. assault me not with monie: but rather so deale in this case, that a liberal art may haue a liberal accesse, frée recourse and passage without interruption, to procéede in practise. For such as minister
medicines to maladies, and sell their skill and labour for lu∣cre of monie, they goe the nexte way to make the liberall sci∣ences sauour o seruilitie, and by chopping their cuning for gréedinesse of gaine, chaunge the frée estate of honest arts in∣to bondage and slauerie. And, as the fashion commonly is, when they come to the practise of curing, if the disease haue in it much difficultie and doubtfulnesse, somtimes they lash ut lyes largely and shamelessely: and somtimes againe, they denie to repaire to their patients, as if the sicknesse were not to be feared, not withstanding they promised: and sometimes also they vse often recourse, yea when they are neyther sont for, nor desired. O, most miserable is the life of mortall man, whome intollerable gréedinesse of gaine, as it were a win∣terly winde, vexeth without discontinuance. Which sithence it is more grieuous then y• phrentique sicknesse of madnesse, I wish with all my heart, that Physicians, had the wit and vnderstāding to sée this The greedi∣nesse after gaine is a dis∣ease in physici ans far worsle then mades of mynde, if it be precisely pondered. rather redressed, thē that amended: which although it ingender annoyance, bréede crasinesse, and disherit health of his harbour, yet notwithstanding, so force∣able is it, and of such efficacie, that it is thought to aduaunce the poore patients to the mount of felicitie. I am of this opi∣nion and iudgement, that extreme madnesse kindleth disea∣ses in the mynde, bycause that it worketh in them certaine opinionatiue imaginations, and phautasticall impressions, which by no meanes can be extermined and cast out of the closet of the mynde, except vertue vouchsafe assistaunce: she purgeth, she cleanseth, she healeth, she restoreth. Now, of cer∣taintie, (yea Abderites) As if he had sayde: what of fer you me monie? I tell you that I sel not my cun∣ning for coine if I were willing to waxe wealthy, if. I had a desire to gather riches, & to scrape transitorie trash together in a dunghil heape, ten talents shuld not tempt me to come to your citie. To the puisant prince of the Persians, whose people are not poore, & whose subiects possesse riches in plentifulnesse, I had not denied to goe, when I was sent for thither, to appease the pestilence, whiche among them was outragious: But, bycause that countrie was at deaunce and daggers drawing with the lande of Graecia, I with∣drewe my will, made deintie of my labour, at no hand con∣senting to succour them, in suche a putrifying and festering
contagion, and with all my might and maine that I was a∣ble to make, I was an aduersarie to the Barbarians. Nowe, without all controuersie, I would blush and be ashamed, to receiue monie of a king, yea of such a king as is at enimitie & variance with my natiue countrie, considering that I, being as it were a defender of Graecia, haue bene so farre from ha∣uing monie in estimation, that as a thing most conomptible and vile, I haue cast it away from me, and thereof made no account. And why? Bycause to rake vp riches, is not to bee wealthy and worthy: Wherin ver the doth con∣sist, is here to be learned. for the inualuable mysteries, and se∣crete ornamentes of vertue, consist in iustice, and in integri∣tie of life: not in metals and minerals, digged out of the bo∣fome of the earth, but in those things that are apparant, that are manifest, that are obiect to the eye, and fall within the view of the sight, I meane in outward actions, and commen∣dable behauiours. What will you then thinke? will you say that it is of equall discredite, to cure the diseases of a sicke friend, and to salue the sore of a wounded fe for monie, mea∣suring an excellent profession, with so vile a recompenco? as for me, I meane so to moderate myne actions, and in such or∣der to direct my doings with discretion, as that my labour shall not be layde to loane for lucre: bycause I reape no ad∣uauntage, by ministring Physicke to patients in perplexi∣tie. I am For till such time as hee made his voy∣age to Abdera, he thought certeinly that Democritus was mad in deede, as it was reported. sorrie to heare that Democritus is phrentique: who if he haue recouered, & be restored to his former health, know you that I estéeme of him, as of my friend: and if he be molested still, with that mischiefous maladie, yet being deli∣uered, by holesome receipts and preserning electuaries by me ministred, from the danger of his disease, vnderstand you that friendship betwéene vs shal be augmented, and loue in∣larged. I heare that he is constant, that he is of a vertuous and laudable behauiour, that his demeanour and vsage is such, as to the common wealth he appeareth a precious Iu∣ell, and a principall ornament.
Hippocrates to Dionysio. THE ARGVMENT. Being determined to take his iournie to Abdera, he writeth to Dio∣nysius to ouersee all things in his absence: the excesse of vertue worcketh no manner of annoyance. Towardes the end of the E∣pistle, he writeth concerning his wife, ouer whome hee desireth Dionysius to be carefull: taking occasion, vpon a certaine con∣ceit of icalousie, to discouer the corrupt natures of women, if they be let alone to liue at libertie: Other circumstaunces are here and there, through the whole Epistle, to be considered. EYther stay for me (good friende) at Halicarnassus, or els by making more speede, preuent and ouer goe me. For I must of necessitie, addresse my iourney to Abdera, for the be∣nefite of Democritus: vnto whome, in this his sicknesse and disease, I am desired, and earnestly intreated, with a commō consent of his citizens, to come, and minister medicines to his maladies. The affection of The Pro∣noūe (whom) hath relation to the Abde∣rites, for so the sense inferreth albeit the wor des be some∣what prepost rously placed. whome is such, as in wordes it can not be expressed. For euery one of them, as if they were but one soule, but one life, but one body, are infected all at once with one sicknesse: vpon which occasion, it is to be tho∣ught, that they stande all in néede of some wholesome reme∣die. Wil you heare mine opinion? Now doubtlesse, I think, that it is not a disease, but a certaine excéeding and immode∣rate desire after learning, knowledge, wisedome and vnder∣standing: or, to tell the plaine truth, not an vnmeasurable de∣sire, but so supposed of the ignorant and vnskilfull. For, the desire of vertue, being honest and honourable, though it be Not as tho∣ugh vertue could be in ex tremitie, (for euerie extre∣mitie is incli∣nable to vice) but he mea∣neth supposi∣tiuely, if it were so that vertue coulde exceede. excessiue, yet is it not noisome, yet is it not hurtful, yet is it not infectiue. As for ye opinion which is sprong, touching this sicknesse, from whence floweth it, or from what other foun∣taine doth it burst, then from the blunt and dull capacities of them that giue iudgement. Euerie one thinketh with him selfe, that there is ercesse, where one hath that in abundance which another hath in scarsitie. So, the timorous and feare∣full cowarde, thinketh valliauntnesse and prowsse to be an
excesse: and the couetous gatherer, thinketh no lesse of libera∣litie: Thus euery defect and want of weale, estéemeth eue∣ry vertue to be a vicious extreme. As for my selfe, when I shall sée him, talke with him, and heare what he sayeth, the matter shall be more manifest vnto me, and more plainely reuealed to mine vnderstanding. Wherefore, friend Diony∣sius, doe your endeuour to come: for, till my returne, here your abode shall be: my will is that you haue the charge of al my matters, and that aboue all things, the citie be commit∣ted to your gouernement. Furthermore, bycause I sée that this yeare can not choose but be healthfull, kéeping the natu∣rall accustomed course, and considering the scarsitie of sick∣nesses that do reigne or rather raunge, I would that you pre∣pare your selfe, spéedily to be present. For in my house shall be your conuenient dwelling: my wife for this time of mine absence, shal haue her abiding with her parents: vnto whom neuerthelesse This charge giuen by Hippocrates to Di onysius tou∣ching his wife auoureth of iealousie. haue an eye, that she leade her life in conti∣nenie, least lacking the wonted pleasure of her companion, she ioyne wt others in works of wantonnesse. And although from her yong yeres, she hath bene chaste & honest, hauing had progenitors ciuil and curteous: hauing a sire like a man indoede, yea such a sire, as hath vices in hate and detestation: yet bycause he is aged and full of hoarie haires, neglect not your charge, considering, that The prone∣nes of women to lewdnesse set downe in breuitie. a woman is so lewde of na∣ture, that she needeth daily and hourely correction: she gro∣weth out of order, she forgetteth temperance, and waxeth incontinent, showting and springing still like vnto a tree, except she be looked vnto, and kept in subiection. Mine opi∣nion, in this case, is, that in the ouersight and charge of a wo∣man, the seruice of a friend is seasoned with more diligence, then the seruice of a father: For seblable affection of kind∣nesse, is not in friendes and parents, which is an occasion of∣fentimes, that due time of ministring correction is neglec∣ted. For end, that man (in my minde) is indued with the greater wisedome, who is not blinded with affection: proui∣ded alwayes, that he be not churlishe, but gentle. Fare you well.
Hippocrates to Crateuas. ¶THE ARGVMENT. Writing to Crateuas (a Physician, by profession, as it should appeare by the course of his Epistle,) hee commendeth him, first, for his knowledge and cunning: Anon he falleth into mencion of De∣mocritus, whose disease he discouereth: inferring such matter as to circumstaunces and offered occasions seeme most agreeable. Lastly, he entreth into a discourse of hearbes, and so taking occa∣sion to speake as knowledge gaue him vtteraunce, in matters not impertinent to his purpose, he concludeth. I Am not ignorant (friend Crateuas) that in knowledge con∣cerning the vertue of hearbes and plants, you are to be cō∣pared with the best: hereof I am assured, as well by your owne studie in that science employed, as also by the famous report of your For a man taketh after his progeni∣tours, either in things tēding to praise or dispraise. auncestours, who in that profession were ex∣cellent: in so muche that I must néedes confesse, nothing in you to be wanting, wherein your father Crateuas, and your Grandsire flourished. Now therfore, discouer your cunning, and giu a taste what you can do: for doubtlesse, necessitie in∣foreeth. Gather hearbs and sende them to me with all spéede possible, for one mans benefite and commoditie, Or, of his countrie cal∣led an Abde∣rite, but ha∣uing to name Democritus. by country an Abderite, but by name Democritus. The whole citie cō∣plaine that he is phrentique, and falne into starke madnesse, which if it be as they report, he had néede take some pur∣gation, to expell the cause of that difquieting disease. But, al∣though we beléeue, that medicines and healthfull receits are not needefull: yet notwithstanding, it is the point of a wise and skilfull Physician, and suche a one as estéemeth his cre∣dite, neuer to be vnprouided: but (as he ought) to haue all things in readinesse, and nothing to séeke when it shoulde be occupied. I haue many times maruelled, at the wonderfull vertue of hearbs wherof you had good store, as at y• nature of al things, y• disposition of al creatures, & y• goodly situatiō of y• earth: which is ye mother of al liuing beasts, of plāts, of trées, of foode, of wealth, of riches, & of al things requirable for ye vs
of men. Whiche comm odities, I woulde the earth did not afforde at all, for then shoulde not insatiable desire haue such libertie: neyther should the Abderites, supposing me to be a hireling readie to serue for a rewarde, being in déede by profession and practise a Physician, Thinking that monie hath me at commaun∣dement: then the which I esteeme no∣thing of lesse alue. tempt my seruice with tenne talents. I would (friend Crateua) it were in your abi∣litie, to wéede out by the rootes, the bitter plant of couetous∣nesse, and gréedinesse of gaine, that of the same not so muche as one braunch, sprig, leafe nor séede be remaining: that as well the myndes of men may be cleansed from the cogitati∣on of vices, as their bodies purged from noysomnesse of disea∣ses: But these things are to be desired, sithence they are not so easie to be perfourmed. Nowe, to turne my talke to you againe, touching the matter first named, I would haue you perseuere and continue your exercise, gathering such hearbs and plantes as growe in highe mountaines, in loftie and hautie places inclined to no moystnesse, where the earth hath thicknesse, and the aire finesse. For, what these haue in them by vertue of attraction, is forceable to prolong life. Neuer∣thelesse, touching the flowers of such hearbes, as spring by the sides of lakes, fennie soyles, waterie groundes, neare to the flowe of riuers, or suche places, as we call brookes and springs, they haue not in them suche efficacie and no∣table operation: suche quicknesse, and swéetenesse, I am well assured. Wherefore suche hearbes, out of whiche you straine and wring the iuice and moysture, procure to be con∣ueyed vnto me in glasses: but such hearbes, whose flowres and leaues must do vs seruice, put into earthen vessels, well couered and close stopped, least, féeling the blastes of the winde, they wyther, dye, and lose their proper vertue instil∣led into them by the prouidence of Nature, for medicinable cōpositions: Thus when ye haue done, sende them vnto me, with as much spéede as you can make. Moreouer, I can not but fall in consideration of the season of the yere, being now the Spring: a time, then which for the purpose, none more conuenient: so that I am cōstrained of necessitie, to take vp∣on me, the cure of the foresayde madde maladie. For, as pro∣crastina
And yet ne∣, sch due deli∣beration must be had and v∣sed, that eme ritie and rash haste making▪ be auoyded: For as the one is daungerous so the other i cōmodious.    ,     but that he shall be reored to his forme  and safetie in whom, if there be any defection, any want of that which ought not to , it is to   to ,  some other cause ▪ For,   as we are mo∣tall and subiect to ,  it is not, for vs to be ∣ched with an vniuersal knowledge: I meane, there be  infinite wherof we are ignorant: to the persect vnderstan∣ding, of the which, bycause we can attaine, neither by dili∣gence, nor yet by any other meanes; it commeth to passe, that we are lead into vncertaintie. We must therfore be doing, sithence in vs appeareth abilitie: fo such as are indangered, are not sufficient to compasse that, which is in our power to comprehend, who many times, couet that with earnestnesse, which is not graunted vnto vs to performe. All our actions ae leueled, and directed in maner, vnto two ends, the one is Man, the other is Art: the first is variable & of no assurance, the other is tyed to certaine rules, precepes, and obseruati∣ons: in which two, a third thing also is required, and that is, fortune or good successe. Bicause that humo which is cleane to be purged, and so cleane that no dregs remaine: and those diseases that are to be cured, that they growe not againe, is not perfectly in our knowledge: and we many times, mini∣string medicines, haue present consideration to the stomach, that that be diligently purged, measuring ou medicines af∣ter the nature of the patient, of whose disposition we are ig∣norant, and in the constitution of whoe body we haue no ex∣perience. For, the nature of men are diuers, and sundrie be
their complexions and euerie nature hath his proprieti, & (as it were) Proper qua∣lities ingraf∣fed: for that is the meaning of Hippocra∣tes in this place. a peculiar inheritaunce. Furthermore, some hearbes are infected with the  of Serpents, whiche they cast out, and therby make them empoisoned. Such kind of hearbs take héede of: for in éede of medicine they worke mischiefe, in place of health they drawe indaunger: except some signe appeare in them, a an ylauoured blacke colour, or else some ranke stinking suour. So that Art and cunning it selfe, by the meanes of Fortue, is oftentimes deceiued. Wherefore, suche purgations as procéede by the receipt of Helleborus, haue in them somewhat more certaintie: the which (as it is reported) * Melamps vsed to restore Praetus: and Anticyreus to heale Herculs. But in curing Democri∣tus, we will come to no such remedie: onely wisedome shall be the most effectuall medicine that can be ministred in this his present passion. Fare you well. Hippocratos to Damageto. This Epistle is historicall. THE ARGVMENT. Democritus, by natiuitie an Abderite, a philosopher of his time, most famous and excellent, being wearie of house keeping, and ouer∣charged (as it were) with tediousnesse of keeping companie with his citizens, giuing ouer that carefull life (as I may rightly terme it) and burthened with businesse, got him to a desart placas an Heremite or wildernesse wanderer, not farre distant from the citie▪ Abdera, and there leading his life, fell a laughing at what so euer  sawe done. Which straunge thing the citizens his countrie∣men noting, supposing that he was distracted, and robbed of his right wites, to speake plaine, phrentique and madde, sent in em∣bassage to Hippocrates Cous, (a man in the profession of Phy∣sicke and practise of that Art, most renouned) to come to Abde∣ra, and to take vpon him the curing of Democritus. Hippocra∣tes being wonne to the satisfaction of their desires, both by em∣bassage, and also by letters signified, sayleth to Abdera: and be∣ing there arriued, and abidng with his patient, certifieth Dama∣getus,
(to wlose credite▪ in his absence  committed the eusto∣die of his house, and the whole charge of all thinges else to him belonging) both of the doings and also of the sayings touching him selfe, and the aboue named Democritus: as appeareth in this present Epistle, next and immediately following. THe suctesse of al things (friend Daagetus) was answe∣rable to our suspicion. For why, For hauing seene him, and also hard him, he reporteth other wise thē he suppose of Democri∣tus. Democritus was not distracted or out of his right wits, but was of a more excellēt mynd then all other men, and farre beyond the rest in perfec∣tion of indgement: by whose meanes we are made better acquainted wih wisedome: and others also, by and through our procurement, indued with the more knowledge. I haue sent you your shippe backe againe (best beloued) which as it may rightly haue the name to pertaine to Aesculapius: so, next vnto the ensigne of Sol, I woulde haue you place the cognisaunce or badge of Salus: bycause my voyage which I tooke in hands, hauing winde and weather at will, a swift barcke, and prouided to the purpose, was prosperously per∣formed. For the very same day, wherein I made prmise to set forwarde (such was my happie successe) I arriued at Ab∣dera: and being there landed, we had conference with the ci∣tizens, who were gathered together in a cluster at the gates of the citie, gasing and tooking on vs, as on a worlds wonder. This multitude did not consist onely of men, but also of wo∣men, both olde and young, and (by the Gods I sweare) there were among them children of tender yeares, in whose coun∣tenaunces, a certaine sadnesse of mynde was represented. These were in such taking, as if Democritus had bene out∣ragious indéede: who was nothing so, How Demo crit us, who was thought to be madde, was occupied. but at the same in∣stant, was earnestly addicted to Philosophie, and in contem∣platin with wisedome. So soone as they sawe my person, they beganne somewhat to recouer, staying them selues (by reason of my comming) vpon the sure anchor of hope. ut Philopoemenes besought me with instancie, to take my odging at his house: with whome to be intertained, it was agréed vppon by consent. But I sayde to the Abderites,
that I had nothig  doe, saue onely so visite Democritus: whiche wordes when they heard mée vtter, they gaue me grat praise, and they themselues also were surprised with souden ioy. Then they conducted mée through the middes Or, of the chiefest streat where most concourse of people vse to be. of the market place, some following, other some going before, & the rest clustering about mée, al giuing great shoutes, & out∣cries with one voice, Mightie Iupiter tho gret Kig suc∣cour vs, assist vs. I hearing this noyse, exhorted thē to haue good hearts, and not to be discouraged, sithee there was no cause at y• time, of mischief to be feared: & though there were, yet nouerthelesse, tha it was in  to  reedied, which wordes when I had spoken▪ I departed For the house was no greate distance from that plac & to say the trueth, the Citie it selfe was of no great compasse or ▪  to the walls and for  wherof, Democritus inhabited. For, right against the turret of the town, there was a migh∣tie mountain or huge hil, plentifully planted, in  order,  poplar trées, of The poplar trees grewe high & thicke together. notable talnesse: and passing thicknesse, & from the foresaid turre; Demos might be cried. Hee ate vnder a Plane trée, with spreading boughes and gréene leaues, all alone, coursely arayed, pale cored; like one al∣most famished, his beard shan: thus like an Hemite, face he vpon a stone in sleed of a stoole, in solitarines, ye   fréend of companie: On his right hand out of the hill  a pleasant spring, which made a getle & softly unde: with y• falling of y• sweete streams. Aboue this hil, as it may be con∣iectured, was a place consecrated to the Nymphes, a place (I say) ouershadowed wt vine branches, growing in y• place, not Not planted by mēs hands but growing of Nature. by meanes artificiall, but by appointment naturall. At the same momēt or prick of time, Democritus had vpō his knées, or in his lap as he sate, an excéeding beautiful booke, wide o∣pen, & other bookes round about him, vpō the gréene ground. He had also, gathered together, as it were in a droaue, much cattel, many of which, he did rip, cut, and mangle: sometimes stoping forward or leaning downe, he▪ wrote a running hād: & otherwhiles againe restraining his pen from paper, he sate sill, as a man full of muses, and earnest in contemplation.
Thus when he had done, anon after he arose, walked vp and downe, his head being fraught wt myllians of imaginations, For hee was making an Anatomie. to the end hee might attaine to the know∣ledge of the constitution and composi∣tion of mans body. he behelde the bowels of the beastes whome he had anato∣mised, tooke a viewe of their entrailes, hauing so done, layde them euery one in his proper place passing orderly, and sat downe againe to his painefull pennes exercise: The Abde∣rites, that stoode rounde about me (as it were in circular manner) being sore surprised with pensiuenesse, gored with griefe, and tormented with stings of sorrow, could scarsly re∣raine from wéeping, at the viewe of such a spectacle: Sée, sée (say they) the fashions of Democritus: looke on the present state of his life: beholde his straunge behauiours: would not any man iudge, by marking his vsage, that he is phrentique, and vtterly dispossessed of reason? For he is not maister of his owne will: ouer his owne déedes he hath not power: he is altogither ignorant wherabouts he is busied. Among these people, in perplexities of perturbations intrapped, one being disposed, more manifestly to declare Democritus his mad∣nesse, The perples ities of the Ab derites, who would none otherwise be persuaded, but that Democri tus was as mad as the di∣uel of hell: or worse. made a harsh squeaking noyse, & cast out many shrill shrinkings, like vnto a pititull mother, bitterly lamenting the deade bodie of her childe, lying in the coffn, put into the sepulchre, and raked vp in clods of earth, all exequies con∣uenient, done vnto the putrifying carkasse. Anothr maketh outragious exclamations, and tragicall outcries, howling most hideously, as if the déere childe of his owne body, and bringing vp (before his owne face, & in his own presence) had most vnmercifully bene murthered. These extreme passi∣ons of mynde, with tong not vntestified, when Democritus had heard, simpeing and smiling, he began somwhat leisure∣ly to write, and wagged his head too and fro: wherein he had some meaning. Then said I, you Abderites shal in this place make your tarriance: & I my selfe aduenturing to go neare vnto him, will, both by his communication & gestures of bo∣dy, soone attaine to the perseuerance of his grieuous agnie, if (at least) he be in any passion. When I had thus spoken, I at∣tempted to clime the séep & slipperie hil, but scarcely could I come at him, I felt the ascending vp so labourious: howbeit,
whē I approched somwhat neare him, his pen went passing swiftly vpon the paper: I stood stil, & gaue attendance, til such time as he had finished his writing. Then he, staying y• spée∣die course of his hand a litle, & beholding me not far off out of presence, sayd, God spéede friend. And you also (said I) O De∣mocritus, wt whom, in wisdome, no mā is comparable. Then he hauing in him self a souden conceit of suspicion, bicause (as I suppose) he called me not by my name, as I did him by his, demaūding of me what my name was? For (said he) through ignorance of your name, I called you by y• common terme of friend, vsed at méetings in gréeting to strangers & such as be vnknown. I made him answere, that my name was Hippo∣crates, & that by profession I was a physician. Whervpon, he inferred this question, saying, what, of the race of Aesculapi∣us? of his line are you discended? The praise worthy report of your noble name, in the practise of physicke, hath this long time, bene blased among vs, & is most famous. But, tell me, (good friende) what occasion constrained you, to séeke accesse hether? Democritus entertaineth Hippocrtes. sit downe first of al, and then we wil conferre. Sée, here is a heape of leaues, gréene, soft, & to sit vpon easie & nt vnpleasant: for such seates they be as by lucke are alotted, more to be accepted, then to be refused. When I had taken my place, according to appointment, he put forth another de∣maund, & said: Declare vnto me euidently, whether the busi∣nesse, wherabouts you haue come hither be publique or pri∣uate: for, to disburthen you of all doubt, I am disposed to exhibite vnto you so much dutifulnesse and seruice, as mine a∣bilitie shal graunt me by permission. Then shaped I this an∣swere: the cause of this y comming, was to sée & heare you, whom I had learned by common voice to be a philosopher of great fame, & flourishing in wisedome. Your owne countrie ministred this present occasion, in whose behalfe, I beare the office of an Embassadour. Then saith he yet againe: you shall first tast y• benefit of our curtesie & intertainment. Thē, I be∣ing desirous & earnestly bent, to take trial of him in al points & circumstances, as narrowly as I could cōprehend, albeit, I swe in him no signification of madnesse, but manifest argu∣mēts & tokens of sobernesse, began my cōmunication wt this
queion. Do you knowe a citizen of this your towne, named Philopoemenes? why said you not rather, y• sonne of a diuell, whose abiding is The name of a brooke neare to the which was his dwelling: as if one of vs, no∣ting our fren∣des house, sayed thus: he dwelleth by Alderman burie conduit or some suche like speach. neare to Mercuries brook. But (friend De∣mocritus) let min intertainment be seasoned wt more cour∣tesie▪ & tel me first of al what it is y• you write so busily at this present. Thē he pausing a litle space, said, it was a pamphlet intreating of madnesse. Whervpō I fell into these words wt a certaine admiration: Oh mightie Iupiter, you write a trea∣tise for citizens, not out of season. For what citizens? (saith he. Democritus (said I) my tong ouerruns my knowledge, I say nothing, for being vnaduised in my language, I tooke no héed how those words escaped. But what thing do you write touching madnesse? who made me this wise answere: what else, but what it is: how, in y• mynds o men it is ingendered: & by what meanes it ought to be cured: for which purpose, I haue ript open, launced, cut & mangled, these beasts y• you see bathing in their own bloud, not y• I haue the work of omni∣potent. Iupiter in contempt & detestation, but for y• I am ear nest to know y• places, where y• foure natural humors be set∣led, & specially y• place & propertie of melancholy. For, of this you are not ignoraunt, y• melancholy being predominant, or more abounding thē y• other qualities, moueth men to mad∣nesse, which humour is not wanting in any of vs, by the ordi∣nance of Nature, although in some it haue more, & in other some lesse quantitie. For the surplusage of y• same, what is it else but a méere maladie or sicknesse, which being of it selfe good & necessarie, is, other whiles, changed into Into that which is noy∣som, pestilent daungerous & hurtful. a contrarie? Then sayde I: Out of doubt (Democritus) your wordes dis∣sent not from truth, nether séeme they repugnant to reason. Whrfore in my iudgemēt, blessed is your condition, whose fortune is  fauourable, as to liue in that libertie of quiet∣nesse, the benefite whereof we are not suffered to enioy. Up∣on these wordes of myne, he moud this question, demaun∣ding of me, what should hinder me, more then him, from the vse of such felicitie. To whome▪ I mae this aunswer: An enumera tion of suche impediments & lets, as stop men rō the vse of contem plation: which is here called Felicitie, or happinesse. By∣cause my landes, my children, my debtes, my cures, my ser∣uauntes, my wife, and other worldly matters wherein I am ouerwhelmed, cutte me off from the profite of that
prosperous opportunitie. Immediately vpon these words, y• man (according to y• accustomed course of his passion) fel into a lowd laughter: and shortly after refrained from that sou∣den motion. Then sayde I: To what purpose laughed you in that order Democritus, tell me? what iudge you of the words which I vttered: were they approuable, or were they disalowable? vpon this demaund he laughed out of measure. The Abderits, who standing aloof and beholding his behaui∣our, clapped with their hands, and gaue a shout: some smote them selues on the heades vnhappily: other some buffetted them selues about the face pitiously: and some againe pluc∣ked their haires vp by the rootes most rigorously. For, as af∣terwardes they gaue me to vnderstand, Democritus laugh∣ter was neuer so excessiue. Then began I to speake againe to the man, and sayde: I am desirous, most prudent Demo∣critus, to learne the reason of this perturbation, or affection: For he sus∣pected that De mocritus had spied some va nitie in him that was re∣bukeable. whether the presence of my person, or the vtterance of my wordes, ministred vnto you cause worthy of laughter: o the intent, that I being by your admonition instructed, may sée myne amisse decently reformed: or else, that you being ∣ked, may absteine from such fondnesse, which to a man is as great commendation (being vnreasonably vsed) as the ha∣uing of a qualitie that deserueth reprehension. Then sayth he: Nowe, without all controuersie, if you could controule me and my manners, you shoulde heale me of suche a sick∣nesse, as you did neuer any since you practised physicke, by ministring to them medicinable compositions and receites. Then sayde I againe: what man, may you not be controu∣led? Is it not an absurd thinge, and to reasons rule most isa∣gréeable, at the deathes of people, at their diseases, at their madnesse, at their slaughters, or at any thing wose thē these (if worse may be) chauncing in the course of this mortalitie: moreouer, at marriages, festiuall days, education of chil∣dren, rites of consecration, holy ceremonies, honourable ma∣gistrates, high authorities: finally, at what thing else besides that beareth the name of that which is good and commenda∣ble, to vse a continuall laughter, or an immoderae géering?
For, at the estate of such as are to b , you fall a laughing: againe, at their ondition towas whō you should shew your sele ioyfull, you vse the like behauiour. Where∣fore vpon thse premisses, I see entraunce to this plaine con∣clusion, that beetwéene good and euill, you make no diff∣rence. Then said hée, your assertins are repugnaunt neither to trueth nor reason: but, notwithstanding the course of this your communication, how cunningly so euer you séeme in your dealing, yet in the cause of my maddnesse, your know∣ledge is blinde ignoraunce: to the vnderstanding wherof, if it bée your fortune to attaine, you shall carrie away with you the aduauntage of a greater benefite, then this your embas∣age can couneruaile: namely, this my laughter: whereby* The bene∣fits of Demo∣critus his mad nesse: if all mē were madde in that maner, it would turne to their owne auaile. you shall worke this effect, as well in others, as also in your owne selfe, increase of wisedome, & prudence in great plen∣tie. In consideration wherof, you will (peraduenture) make manifest vnto me, for mine instruction, the mysteries of min∣gled medicines, and the practise of Physcke, suspecting with your selfe, that mn buify their braines, about maters wher∣in they ought not o meddle, hunting after such things, as are not worthy of a creature indued wt reason, but deseruing vn∣measurable laughter. Then said I▪ By the Gods immor∣tall, if all the world wist not that they are subiect to sicknesse, neither yet knew the meanes in diseases of daunger to séeke after remedies, wha might a mā else iudge of it, then as be∣witched, and depriued quite of reason. Then said hée: In∣déede Hippocrates, the ignoraunce of the world is grosse & palpable: for, touching Nature their skill is but superficiall, and like a shadowe destitute of substaunce. O, Democritus, (said I) these things shal you teach mée at times conuenient: For I much mistrust, least whiles you are occupied in detec∣ting the ignoraunce of this world full of vanitie, you will also interpose and sawce the same with laughter. Nowe there∣fore, discouer the occasion of the same, and delier vnto mée a plaine discourse of the trade and order of your life. Hée ca∣sting vppon mée a ower visage, and a sterne looke, sayed: you suppose, that of my laughter there bée two causes, that is to
say, a good, and  badde, As for mée, thus much I am to say, A caus that moued Dmo critus to lughter: were the vaine stu∣dies and prac∣tises of men, tending who∣ly to anitie. that the man who is a lmpe or masse of foolishnesse, is the onely occasion of this motion: yea, at him alone doe I laugh, in whom ignoraunce is graffed, in whom vertuous exercises are not lodged, who in all his purposes and practises, playeth prackes of puerilitie and childishnesse, consuming himselfe with labours, vaine, noysome, and superfluus. For, such a one, breaketh into the bosome of the earth, openeth the secret bowells of the same, being embouldened thereunto, by insa∣tiable couetousnesse, which is alwayes féeding like a gréedy worme, and neuer satisfied. Such a one searcheth the very heart and entrayles of the ground, for gold and siluer, vnceas∣santly. And to the end that the greater store of goods, might fal into his possession, sithence hée is cloyed with carefulnesse, hée spareth no labour to fulfil his felicitie. One while hée setteth his seruauntes and hyrelinges with mattoks and spades to digge déepe pittes in the grounde: in which kinde of woorke and sweating toile, soe are saine with the sou∣daine ruine and fall of a banck: othersome, being as it were bought & sould to that laborious kind of life, spend their days in that allotted torment of toile, as in their natural coū∣tri: thus whiles they search for gold & siluer, they search for dust & sand: they rake vp clods of clay in a confused heape, as it were a muckhil: they cutt the secret sinewes of the earth, melt the very marrowe, and open the idden veynes, making their great grandame Lterr' a plaine Anatoe, then whi∣ch wrong worsse they could not work, against their sworne & deadly enimie. He, whom they wonder at and also reuerence, they tread vpon with their trampling féete: what great cause i there offered hereby of laughter? That part of the earth which is hidden, they desire: and that part which lyeth open▪ they despise. Some buy hoūds, some buy horses, sm purchas an infinite deale of land, & whiles they séeke to be other mens lords and maisters, they become vassalls to themselues, and drudging seruants. Ouer hastie bée they to enter wedlocke, & as spéedie shortly after to sue a diuorcement▪ Whome they loue, him in semblable maner they hate. They beget childrē, &
yet forsake the faith & pitie of parents. This kind of careful∣nesse, is méere vanitie: yea it sauoureth wholy of absurd dea∣ling, of dealing (I say) nothing differing frō meere madnesse. They all at variance betwene thēselues, they deale blowes one to another, as it were in battel: against thir parents they raise rebellion: they lay traines of treason to ouerthrow their princes: māslaughter they estéeme as a mockerie. Itum st in viscera teae: They digge, and delue the grod Tht vauntage may bee fnd. saith the Po. They dig the ground like gréedie metal mongers, & insatiable searchers for siler: whē they haue gotten that which they gaped after, they fall to purchasing: they sel the fruits of their lands with lucre: and stil for monie is al their chopping & changing. Alas in what labyrinthes doe they lose themselues: in what silthy puddles do they wallow. He that hath not monie in possessiō, studieth by what meanes he may satisūe his desire: & ater h hath caught that within his clawes, after which he was euer yawning, he is so farre from putting the same to any cōmen∣dable vse, that he reapeth therof no benefite to himselfe, inso∣much as hée burieth it in the gound, thinking it safe from y• purloyning robber, if there it be hidden. These perplexiies of foolish people, when I precisely ponder, when I consider these circūstances touching y• maners of men, circumspely: when I behold these vndiscrete behauiours, wherwith they are im∣brued, I cannot but burst out into laughter. Moreouer, men quarelling & falling at dissention one wt another, rack lawes, violate and abuse politique orders: If truly spo∣ken, in his time, then (no doubt) much more agree∣able to veritio in these our dayes. For they are so addicted to kindling of cōtrouersies, y• citizens are disquieted, brethren set at variance, and parentes robbed of their due reuerence. These lew & vnhonest properties they put in vre, for things transitorie, that vanish, things of no valure, things y• be bare shadowes, things I say, wherin they haue no interest, or right of possession, but like Tenaunts at will, enioy them at their lords pleasure. They are enious one to another, deers of violence, murtherers, oes to their friends, & to their parents vnthankful. Trifles, not indued wt life, are beautified at their expence: to dec adorne senselesse toyes, they spare not their riches▪ in buying siatuies or stāding images, they spend their substāce, because they appeare vnto them, not to be spechle:
But yet they that tell trueth simply and without preence, haue these kinde of people in hatred & detestation. Their de∣sire is to deuowre that which is anothers: For the None con∣tent with his estate▪ whiles they make profit the end of all their ac∣tions. inha∣bitantes of the land, séeke wayes to wealth by the sea: and Islanders couet the commodities of the continent, or firme ground. Thus they make profite the ende, whereunto all their endeuours, and practises are referred. Whiles they ad∣uaunce valliauntnesse in feates of armes, they themselues, being in batter, are subdued of their owne affections, where∣with the eyes of their minds being bleared and blinded, they leade a life voyde of all wisedome, counsell and discretion. Se∣ing these forecited causes, how should I absteine from thi motion of minde, whereat you marueile, sithence they them∣selues refraine not from foolishnes, but one mans abuse wor∣keth anothers missdemeanour. For, hée that persuadeth him∣selfe to be indued with the vertue of sobernesse, deideth him that is addicted to dronkennesse. One abhorreth him whose heart is haunted with Venus, whiles hée himselfe is annoyed with a more dangerous disease: Some scorne at such as ven∣ture their liues and goods vpon the swelling seas: and some againe on y• other side as fast, make a mock a such as frame themselues to the trade of tillage, whiles (in déede) they them selues, as ore blemished with blame, desere extréeme laughter: For, as well their words as their déedes bée at disagréement. Democritus (said I) you haue spoken very aptly to the purpose, neither is it possible, for any man, with more effectuall reasons, then you haue vsed, to expresse the frailtie of this our life, subiect to innumerable inconuenien∣ces: But yet, domesticall busines, matters of controuersie in lawe, and affaires of the common wealth, wherein men cannot but be conuersant, limit vs within the lawes of neces∣sitie. For Then is it meee and cō∣nenient, wee should therin occupie & ex∣ercise our sel∣ues, wherunto wee be called & appointed. Nature hath not giuen vnto men their esence & being, to be congealed and frosen in idlenesse, to slugge and snore in the couche of carelessnesse, but to acquaint himselfe with exercises, and still to bee doinge: for that is the end of our natiuitie and creation. But, many times and oft it chan∣ceth, that, from these artes and occupations, the beautifull
floure of vaine glorie sringing, the mindes of men, although their reason be perfect and sound, are neuethelesse cōmonly deceiued: who take a triall of all y• meanes they can imagine, to defend and saue themselues from falling: but in such blind nesse &  darknesse being dispossessed of perseuerance, they cnnot auoyd th fall whereof they be in danger. As if hee should hue sd: there is not so muh as one man that doth so meane or . For what man is he, that in his loanes for lucre loketh for death, loketh for seperation of this life, loketh for depriuation of successi, loketh for losse o lāds, loketh for sinking of ships, loketh to bee disherited of royaltie, loketh in battel to take the foile of his enimie? Fnally, looketh for the lacke of any thing that to him is good and comodious, sythence no man presupposeth with himself, that one day he must needes fall without remedie. For, one with another, is carried away with hope of that which is good: as for that which is euil, they raze it out of their memories. Wherefore, to touch this your laughter, is it agréeable to these ircumstances lately men∣cioned? You haue (saith hée) but a blunt head of your owne, & your opinion doth differ much from my iudgement, sithence you measure the motions of minde, and the qualitie of quiet∣nesse by ignorance. For the verie same thinges that you a∣firme, if men framed themselues to followe, with an vpright conscience, they should in short time bée deliuered from al an∣noyance, and cutt off al occasios ministred vnto me of laugh∣ter. But, in consideration of those thinges, which they compt the foundation and maine piller of their life, and which wan∣ting, they are in beléefe that life cannot consist, in their owne maddnesse they are blinded, and lacking discretion and perse∣erance, refuse to bée instructed, as learners, in that whereof they are ignorant. For The wae∣ring and wan∣dring asfecti∣ons o people, as vnstable as the wind, or as  as a weather cocke. the swit, the soudaine, and the often changing of things that daily doe chaunce, and the continuall course of fortune, ministeth to euery man, counsell to serue his turne, sufficient. In a thing of certaintie and stayed con∣dition, they are incumbred with infinite affections, nowe co∣eting his, and now desiring that; whereby no fruie or pro∣fite is to bée gained: so that in fine   out, that they be∣ing ouerwhelmed in Maeanders of mischiefes, lamēt their fol∣lies
with too late repentaunce. But hée that attempteth no∣thing without consultation, hée that knoweth himselfe and hi owne condition, is so farre from falling, that throughout the whole race of his lise, he is not in feare of any such hazard: and examining his owne estate, kéepeth himselfe conented with a cōpetent stay, not letting loose the bridle of libertie to his concupiscence, or crauing y• which is so farre aboue suffi∣ciencie, that it is plaine supersluitie: such a one (I say) repre∣senting Nature the nource of all men▪ passeth his time in plentie and abundaunce: For, as in a bodie of a good com∣plexion, the daunger of a disease is quickly perceiued: so in the greatnesse of prosperitie, nothing can be long cōtinued: and in aduersitie, what mannes minde is matched with valli∣auntnesse, it is manifest and apparaunt. Many, not seeing those thinges that lye (as it were) before their feete, perish in the fondnesse of their affections: and such thinges, on the o∣ther side, that be as bright as the cleare Sunne shine, they be∣hold, as darckened with a mystie cloude. And though the whole course of mannes life might bée a mirrour or looking glasse, wherein to viewe thinges necessarie to bée dne, and thinges inconuenient to put in vre, whereby, afterclappes & perills that in processe of times may chaunce, are preuented: yet notwithstanding, their eyesight faileth them, and their vnderstandinges waxe so much the more blunt and duller. These causes, and the like moue mée to laughter. Foolishe men And yet they will not bee aught to frame  to wise∣dome. féele the smart of their follie daily: yea, when they looke not for it, then it falleth vppon them: They are pincht with the punishment of their owne naughtinesse, of their owne couetousnesse, of their owne spitefulnesse, of their owne mali∣ciousnesse, of their owne craftinesse, of their owne deceiptful∣nesse, of their owne enuie, and of other vntameable pertur∣bations of their mindes, rebelling against reason, the fort of which, oh how hard a matter it is to assault, but much more vneasie to batter downe or ouerthrowe. To be short, Ignoraunce hath the rule of euery mans lie: no mer∣uaile then, though they . Ignoi∣raunce ruleth euery man like a Quéene or Empresse: For when they  opinion peruersly, they stand in con∣tention with their sophismes and captious conclusions. er∣tue,
which belongeth to the beautifying of manners, they dis∣grace i most preposterously, in that they make pleasure the foote pathe which they followe, and lying the race wherein they kéepe their running, setting as much by lawes as an old shooe latchet, or by a thing most vile and contemptible, which to bée no vntrueth, that they are charged withall, this giueh in euidence sufficient: For one findeth fault with anothers ignoraunce, whiles in the meane season, hée himselfe is voyd both of séeing and hearing: which two senses, are the most principall in man, a creature indued with reason, to foresée thinges to come, and to bée wyse in thinges present. This béeing vnto them a goade of griefe, yet notwithstanding they  themselues in the same webbes of woe: For The vnitie of mēs minds▪ caried away with incōstan∣cie, and not setting them∣selues to a ce∣taine trade, science, and estate. one while they cursse Nauigation, or the Arte of sayling, yet, forthwith and anon, they aduenture the Sas. They leau off the vse of Husbandrie, and by and by, fall to tillage a∣gaine. They put away their wyues, and enter againe into wedlocke. They bui their children whome they haue begotten▪ and immediaely thereuppon raise vpp newe issue. They desire old age, and when they haue it, they finde fault there withall. Their counsell is not constant, for no state is to their contentmente. Kinges and Princes approue the life of a priuate Commoner. Commoners alowe the liues of lustie Couriers. They that haue too much leasure and haue little to de, praise such as haue buisinesse wherein to bée occupied. Contrariewyse▪ such as haue asfaires, where∣in to bée exercised, commend those that liue at ease and plea∣sure, as hauing attayned a condition of more assured safe∣tie. Rich men preferre the trade of poore men, as the bet∣ter of the twaine: poore men wish to be wealthie, supposing méede much more woorth then néede. Thus, euery man is ledde awa in sensualitie, and not so much as one amonge many and , will addresse himselfe o learne a life of quietnesse and tranquiitie, which, thoughe i bee plaine, easie to attaine, lightsome, and nothing slipperie, yet to sett their féete in so pleasaunte a pathe, not so much as e hath the heart or the courage. But to goe a contrarie
way, a way (I say) that is hard and tedious, it is a worldes wonder to sée, howe they runne headiong: passing throughe which (for the number of them that frequent it, is great) they blowe, and pant like discomfited souldiers, whome their eni∣mies pursue euen to the slaughter. Those that are supposed to bée the first, are reputed the last. Some béeing (as it were) manciples to impudēce, hauing their owne loues in suspici, satisfie their flaming affections, with stolne delight of another mannes wanton. Another is tormented with the incurable disease of couetousnesse. Other, like bloudsuckers, wound the verie bowells. Others againe, being puft vpp in the pride of their nature, aduaunce themselues to the hautie heauens: a∣non, the burthen of their vices pressing down their shoulders make them tumble downe to the bottome of hell. Some dig for mettalls and mineralls to erect stately buildinges, wher∣in they reape pleasure most plentifully: shortly after repen∣taunce followeth their perfourmed labours. They cancell and cutt in péeces the lawes of friendshippe,  the swéete sap of the same, into most bitter iuye of enuie. Their neighbours cannot liue quietly by them, without distur∣baunce: all which specified enormities, flowe  the cor∣rupte fountaine of couetousnesse. They Men in their variablenesse and ignorance (which is ex∣ceeding grosle and palpable) compared to children. differ nothing from younge children, whose age is a hinderaunce, that they canne atmpte nothing with wisedome and counsell: such thinges as carrie a countenaunce of pleasauntnesse, they throng after with violence, to none other end, then to staunche their grée∣dinesse: to staunche said I? when the nature of their concu∣piscences is such, as it will neuer bée satisfied? therein not to bee compared to any beast, that lacketh the light of reason. For, Brute beastes wanting the gift of vnderstanding, when their appetite or lust is satisfied, they beat ease and quiet, for a season, not seeking further to haue more when they are once filled. No Lyon hath beene heard of at any time, to hyde gold in the secrete celles of the earth. So long thir∣steth the Beare, till hee haue water sufficient. So long deuoureth the rauenous Woolfe, till hee haue enoughe, and hauing enoughe, taketh his rest, till lust requireth su∣stenaunce
againe: so long doeth the Leopard raunge, til hee haue his pray, and hauing eaten to staunche his hungrie mawe, seeketh no further: so long feedeth the Bull till his belly beefull, and then forsaketh he his fodder: But All crea∣tures are con∣tent: onely man is insati∣able and hathe neuer inough. man is neuer satisfied, day and night he desireth, and neuer is content. Beastes and byrdes ceasse from the acte of ingendring, a whole yeares space almoste: man is e∣uermore busie in that bodily pleasure, and like a bottom∣lesse hell hath neuer enough. Whether will you that I laugh at him, that lamenteth his lewde loues, from the en∣ioying and swéetnesse whereof he is excluded, when his sub∣stance is consumed? Whether wil you that I laugh at him, who putteth al that he is woorth, and more too, in aduenture on the tossing and tempestuous floudes, hauing before cur∣sed the sea with a thousand execrations, when he suffered shipwracke? Whether will you that I laughe at him, who fraughteth his shipp with heauier and weightier burthens, hauing bewailed the losse of suche wares as hee had before imbarcked? O Hippocrates, As if he had said, these vain studies and en deuoures of people deserue exceedingly to be laughed at and moc∣ked. séeme not these and such lyke thinges in thine opinion, worthie of excéeding laughter? I would therfore, that a stronger remedie be prepared: for this emplaster is too gentle. But as fortune falleth, our sore is none suche as it should stand in néede of saluing: and there∣fore spare your paines, least, employing it where it ought not, you reape an yll recompence? Your progenitour Ac∣sculapius may serue for an example sufficient, who when he had by his medicinable confections, reserued the benefite of healthfulnesse vnto mortall men, was blasted from heauen with souden lightning, for his presumptious enterprise, rea∣ping that terrible punishment, for a recompence. Doe I séeme in your iudgement, to be frentique, & rapt beside my selfe, who to the intent I might sifte out the cause of mad∣nesse & vnderstand the reasons of the same, & sée vpon what occasions it springeth, make a slaughter of Cattel, and man∣gle them in this order as you sée? But the cause thereof, men themselues ought to searche most seriously. For The wordes of a Pagan Philosopher, but (vndoub∣tedly) wel wor thie of christi∣ans to be dili∣gently mr∣ked, for the shme of their sinne, and the amēdment of their liues. the whole world, as you perceiue plainely enough, is replenished with
grudging enuie, & repining emulatiōs, the contagious sick∣nesses, & festering sores, the putrified botches and irksome scabs of vices, all growe to a huge heape. What thinke you of man himself? is he any thing else, euen from his concep∣tion & natiuitie but a very dunghil of diseases? Loke vpon him with a circumspect eye, consider of his estate and con∣dition by degrees: in his infancie, he is fitte for nothing: in his childehod, he is wantonly disposed: in the pearle of his youthe he is foolish, resisting to be ruled by a tutor: in his lustie yeares, he is at his own swinge, & wil (in no wise) bite any longer on the bridle: hee is ambitious, and ouer busie in many matters, in his manhod: in his olde age he doteth & walloweth in wretchednes, hauing spent the whole course of his former life, in vanitie, without reason: for, man is mi∣serable euen from his mothers wombe. Some swell in wrath and furiousnes: some delight in bawderie and lasciuiousnes: some liue vpon rapine & vnthriftines: some spend all their inheritance, and fall into begger linesse: finally, one with a∣nother is totally inclined to naughtines. O Hippocrates if I might haue libertie & leaue, to make souden entrance into mens houses, to sée howe they are occupied, wherupon they spend time & leasure, if (I say) I might haue permissiō also, to bewray their couert behauiours, abroade to open view: you should sée some stink with surfetting: some inglutting so im∣moderately, that they fall a vomiting: some so full of wine, & intoxicated with Bacchus berries, y• they be drowned in drū∣kennes: some suffering anguish & tormentes of tediousnes: some tēpering empoisoued potions: some putting in practise means to worke mischiefe: some pitiously plagued with the cholicke passion: some vp to the hard eares in their disports & merriments: some Or, inuen∣ting some qel to his  . pēning infamous libels to the discredit of his fréende: some swelling in arrogancie & pecoklike pride, all these falling from their right wits: and many more enor∣mittes, besides these that I haue named, should you see: yea and farre worse, bearing such swinge & sway in the minds of men, that they séeme to be in an extréeme madnes. For, both A world of wretc  & . yong and olde one with another, make this their dayly practise, & continual occupation, to aske, to deny, to sweare to forsweare, to labour, to ly, and all for silthie lucre. Some
whet their teethe vpon sugred deinties: & some are pined away with famishment: some bury their riches: & some a∣gaine, set light by that which they possesse, lifting vp their mindes to the benefite of greater affiaunce: some are past shame and honestie: some are pinchpenies & notable nig∣gards: some are always gleaning, and neuer make an end of haruest: some are drousie dottrelles: some are lasie lub∣bers: some are stately and insolent: some looke as bigge, as if they had eaten bulbeefe: some haue a conceite, that they are lustie gallantes: some take pleasure in hunting: some in hauking: some in riding: some in pictures: some in pearles: some in writing: some in bearing embassage: some in figh∣ting: some in religion: some in triumph: some in bloudshed: some in spoyling, which the moste part make their accusto∣med trade of liuing. Al these being led perforce with a cer∣taine violent motion of minde, haue their seuerall exercises: one runnes to battell on sea: another to skirmish on lande: another to husbandrie: another to courtes of plee: another to be an oratour: another to be a iudge: another to be a plai∣er: another to intemperaunce: another to slouthfulnes. &c. These and such like péeuish practises of men, when I do be∣holde, as they are voide of reason, and full of folly, so I can not but laugh at them accordingly. Besides all this, the pro∣fession Parcially spoken: for he himselfe was a physician, and therefore this complaint might seeme lesle to be re∣garded. of Phisicke is with them in no reputation: for they are too too curious and delicate of hearing. They call wise∣dome madnesse, and sobernesse outrage. I haue heard my selfe by report, of diuerse that beeing in sicknesse, affirmed with open mouthe, yt the art which you professe and practise wrought them very great annoyance: whether they spake this of maliciousnesse, or of vnthankfulnesse: these wordes they vttered. For suche as bée disseased, if it so chaunce that they recouer, and be set at libertie from the daunger of their sicknesse, they doe either giue all the thankes to the Gods, or else to fortune: moreouer, many a one being of an o∣uerthwart and peruerse inclination, repine at them wt hate∣ful hartes, at whose hands they haue receiued many a bene∣fite, and they take the matter heinously, that it should be thought, that they stand in néede of anothers help & succour. Some there be that lie lulling on the softe pillow of slouth,
being farre from cunning and knowledge, as Meaning, heauen from hell. Iupiters king dome is distant from Plutoes dominion, fall at variaunce neuerthelesse wt suche as excell them by as many degrées of Arte and experience, as the bright beames of the Sunne, passe the dimme and dazeled light of the Moone. Their iudg∣ment dependeth Which the brute and vn∣reasonable beast doeth partake in like manner. vpon sense onely, although they will not be wonne, to bewray so muche by motion of minde, nor con∣fesse themselues to be of that secte: and this springeth from enuie principally. Neither are you ignorant, that such toyes beare a swinge in the world, and which you your selfe haue isued, through the force of certaine affections of the minde, that are not to be dissalowed. Fashion In considera tion of the ex∣treme follies and vanities, which I haue rehersed. and frame your selfe therefore to laugh with me, sithence true knowledge is not to be found among mortall men, sithence it is driuen in∣to irrecouerable banishment, and sithence they are suche fréends to follie, wherin let them continue to their own con∣tentment: & hauing spoken these wordes, he fell into a soudē laughter. Now vndoubtedly, (déere Damagetus) the man sée∣med to mée like an Angel, or rather like a God: and I being obliuious, or not remembring his former shape and resem∣blance, said thus vnto him. Most courteous Democritus, my singular interteinour, I wil carie into Cos my countrie, pre∣sents of great excellencie, which I haue receiued since mine abode with you, in this your blessed bowre. For, according to the ful measure of your wisdome whiche is maruelous, you haue receiued mée honorably, sumptuously, and delicatly. I wil now returne, sounding with the trumpe of reporte, your incomparable praises, who following y• infallible footsteps of thy forerunner By whose directiō who∣soeuer is lead and guided, he  not erre, he cannot sware Nature, swaruest not frō the truth, neither in déed nor in word: And sithēce mine inclination, is (by you) discouered, in such sort as I perceiue what in mée is to be re∣fourmed, I wil alter and chaunge my qualities, and become of a contrarie disposition. For, both y• houre exhorteth me, & the regard of your body counselleth me therunto. To mor∣row I am determined to visit you againe in this same place. Thus when I had spoken, I arose, he being in a readinesse to folow after me. Upon this, there approched toward me, a cer
taine man, I wot not from whēce, to whō I gaue my noting tables, & so went my ways, making al the spéede that I was able to the Abderites, who awayted my returne, beholding all this while, the aboue named behauiours, from a loftie place, as if it were from a turret, or a castles topp. To whō when I was come, thus I spake: The reporte of Hippocra∣tes cōcerning Democritus, after confe∣rence had to∣gether. You Abderitish citizens, muche thankes is giuen you, for this your embassage: For I haue both seene, & also had conference with Democritus, a man so furnished with knowledge, and inriched with wise∣domes wealth, that he alone, can make men sober, moderate graue and continent. These things had I to write touching Democritus (déere fréende Damagetus) which I giue you to vnderstand, with towardnesse of will, no doubte to the con∣trarie. Fare you well. Diogenes to Hipparcha. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He writeth to Hipparcha, a fauourer of his secte and profession, wil∣ling her to continue vnuariable, euen to the end, in those pre∣ceptes of Philosophie, which she had learned: shewing her wayes and meanes to keepe her from doing the contrarie. I am muche delighted in Hipparcha: a woman of hi acqnain∣taunce, giuen to the studie of Philoso∣phie. you, and the ioy whiche you mi∣nister vnto mée excéedeth measure: and why? because you, being a woman giue your selfe to the knowledge of Philo∣phie, mainteining our opinion, with the precisenesse wherof the mindes of men are amased. As therefore your beginning is praiseworthie, so do your vttermost endeuour to make an answerable ending: which vnto you shall not séeme so hard to compasse, I am well assured, if you frequent the compa∣nie of Crates, a man indued with rare wisdome, and swarue not from the documentes and preceptes of vs, the authors of Philosophie. Write often vnto vs, for letters haue in thē muche force and vertue: yea no lesse effectuall be they then present reasoning and conference.
Diogenes to Hipponi. THE ARGVMENT. He writeth his opinion briefly touching death: sheweth that as a man is before he is begotten, so is he when soule and body bee separated, wherupon he exhorteth Hippo not to be touched with any terrour of thinges to come hereafter, adioyning his reason: lastly, he concludeth with his owne phantasticall determination. YOur will is, that I write somewhat vnto you, touching death and the graue, after mine owne iudgement, as if you should not proue a perfect Philosopher, except we teach you, as our scholer. I am therefore of this opinion, that it is enough for vs, to leade our liues according to the prescripte rule of nature and vertue, whiche thing is not beyonde our capacities to comprehend. And as for thinges after deathe, I thinke they are then, euen as they were before their life. For, as a man is As is he had said: man be∣fore he was in∣dued with life, was nothing: so, after deathe he is (in like manner) no∣thing. before his byrthe, so is he after his death. Let not the feare of any thing to come, turne you to disqui∣etuesse of minde, sithence you shalbe senselesse and quite voide of life and féeling. As for mée selfe, I haue determined, when I am dead, to haue my staffe lying close by my car∣kasse, that what beast, byrde, or vermine so euer come to do me harme and annoyaunce, I maye ehace them away. Phalaris to Pythagoras. THE ARGVMENT. Writing to Pythagoras, the Philosopher, to come vnto him, he be∣ginnth first, with the difference of bothe their estates, shewing that daily keeping companie, and vse of conference, will make thinges that be contrarie to growe to agreement: he seemeth also, to excuse himselfe of suche reportes, as were blased abroade touching his vnmercifull tyrannie: and so, wishing to be with , concludeth.
THe principalitie of Phalaris, differeth many degrées from the Philosophie of Pythagoras: yet notwithstan∣ding there is no cause to y• contrarie, but (though things be in such case) we may take triall & experience of our selues For, it may so fall out, that conuersation and daily keeping com∣panie may drawe those things into an vnitie, wherein there is excéeding great contrarietie. The opini∣on o Phalaris concerning Pythagoras the Philoso∣pher. We, (according to the re∣port that is noised abroade of your worthinesse,) take you to be a man of rare knowledge, and in your facultie most ex∣cellent, neither will we otherwise be persuaded. I woulde not haue you giue iudgement of our dooings, till you be fur∣ther instructed. For, the false opinion whiche is conceiued of mée, dooeth so moue mée, that I am not a litle offended. I cannot haue safe accesse vnto you, because of the tyrannie, whereof I am accused. If I should come vnarmed, & with∣out defence of Guarde, I were easily taken of mine aduersa∣ries: if I should come furnished with harnesse and weapon, and a band of souldiours attending on my person, I shoulde be suspected. As Persuasions to moe him to come vnto him. for you, the case standeth in no doubt or daunger: For you may haue passage vnto mée, and suffer no annoyaunce: you may leade your life in my companie, with out occasion of terrour: and of my dooinges you may take due trial, no maner of inconueniēce vnto you redounding. If you beholde mée as I am a tyrant, you shal rather finde mée a priuate commoner, then one aduaunced to such a kinde of gouernement: and if you consider of mée, as of a priuate per∣son, yet so shal you finde mee, as hauing somewhat incident of necessitie to a tyraunt. For, I can not by an meanes, pos∣sesse this principalitie, His people and subiects were so intrac∣table, so  and so rebellious. without crueltie. And surely, if hu∣manitie and gentlenesse, may (without perill) accompanie tyrannicall regiment: then, not onely in consideration of o∣ther circumstances, but for this cause also, do I wishe to bée with you. For by your admonitions, I shall attempt a way to rule with more clemencie, if, together with the preceptes of Pythagoras, trueth be so vnited & lincked, as I may haue promise to lead my life in quietnes, & assuraunce of safetie.
Phalaris to Locrito. THE ARGVMENT. This letter of consolation is written to Locritus, whose sonne wa slaine in battell. The comfort whiche Phalaris doth minister vn∣to him, is drawne from three seuerall reasons: The first, from his valiantnesse: the second because his death was honourable: the third, from the integritie of his life. Finally, he exhorteth Locritus not to be ouermuche grieued for the losse of his sonne. IN that you take the death of your sonne, so sorrowfully, you are vndoubtedly For the Fa∣ther is tou∣ched with na∣turall pitie to complaine for the losse of his childe, be∣ing the fruite of his owne bowels. to be pardoned: Yea, I my selfe pity your case, as much as may be, and considering the same, am no lesse gréeued then any other of your fréendes what so∣euer, although I séeme in a muche harder condition, for this cause, y• I knowe this to be true, that with such as be ouer∣whelmed in Seas of anguish, and suffer extréeme torments of aduersitie, bare wordes are not auailable. Neuerthelesse you ought to be comforted, and this should be a Souereigne consolation vnto you in this calamitie. First, because your Sonne died in the quarel of his countrie, like a valiant Mar∣tialist: secondly, because in the very triumphe and victorie, his death, was moste honourable, according to the appoint∣ment of his destinie: and lastly, because his life was so vp∣right, y• the same was blemished with no stain of filthinesse,  Deathe mking an  of his ver∣. his death in soughten fielde finishing his noble vertues. For, it is a thing very vncertaine, whether a good mans life may be chaunged to a woorse: For in thinges belonging to man, Fortune (for the most part) and not their owne willes, hath Dominion: Whosoeuer, therefore, dyeth without re∣prehension, his estate is moste honourable, moste glorious, and triumphant. Persuade your selfe so, that you haue re∣ceiued of him recompence sufficient, bothe for the benefite of his generation, and also for the gyfte of his education, A ful & a no   ac∣  our   si∣thence he perseuered in vertue and honest behauiours, euen
to the laste day of his life: and let this be your requitall, to to take his death in suche sorte, that you fall not into extre∣mitie of passions. Phalaris to Polydeuces. TH ARGVMENT. The state of a Tyrant is in this Epistle plainely expressed, wherein Phalaris complaining of his vnruly people, chooseth rather to liue in solitarinesse, then among suche subiectes, whose delight is in disquietnesse. YOu séeme to meruaile (as it appeareth by your letters) at the alteration and chaunge of my life, in that I here∣tofore excéeding in courage and bouldnesse, farre beyond the custome of Tyrants, mistrusted no companye, but put my life in all mens handes, as doubting no daunger: nowe con∣trariwise, such a mutation to folowe, that my very fréendes, and néerest kinsfolkes, may not haue accesse to my person. As for mée selfe, so Because eue∣ry one was ready to cutte his throte or to haue a slash at his slshe: for he was had in wonder full detestati∣on among his people. fearefull am I, and so attainted with ti∣mourousnesse, that I am persuaded to liue in solitarines, as an Hermite wandring in the wildernesse. For we finde faith (sound and assured faithe, I meane, and not such faith as be∣ing cloaked with dissimulation, prooueth plaine treason) not onely fainting in all men, but failing also in suche as wée ac∣counted our fréendes and fauourers. In consideration of which premisses, perceiuing my self wrapped in labyrinthes of troubles, and hauing to the vttermost, taken triall of all things tending to mine auaile, I haue now at the last, made mine election and choice, preferring the inhabitable woodes and comfortlesse caues of the People of Africa, called by the name of the coun∣tries whiche they inhabite: Lbya & Nu∣midia: of them Geographers write largely. Libyans and the People of Africa, called by the name of the coun∣tries whiche they inhabite: Libya & Nu∣midia: of them Geographers write largely. Numidians, before a life led in companie, and common concourse of peo∣ple. For, as the present state of thinges is, I sée muche more safety to insue a life led among Lions: more swéetnesse to so∣low  taken among serpents, then among people of this
age wherein we liue, whose delight is chiefly in tumults and vpprores. We haue taken triall, euen til we be wearie, by many and diuers alterations of fortune. Phalaris to Polycleto. THE ARGVMENT. To Polycletus a famous Physician, vnto whome hee did write of∣ten, is this letter directed, wherein he commendeth the mannes knowledge and honestie (hauing good cause so to doe: for hee dealt in suche sort with him, when hee had him in cure, that hee escaed dauger whereunto he was two wayes in subiecti∣on, that his  ws preserued:) to whom he sendeth large gyfts, of his  , supposing them insufficient to requite  his desertes. I Am in doubt (Polycletus) whether I should rather won∣der at thy At his cun∣     ,  . Phala∣ris  his  : whiche was brought to a very low ebb: At his faith∣fulness, bee∣caus he being tempted with large bribes and rewardes to dispatch & make away the king in his sicknsse, yet would not committ such a horrible vil∣lani against his patient. cunning in the practise of Physicke, or mer∣ at thy  and honestie in behauiours: For, by the vertue of thy Physicke, thou didst restore the health of a  that was muche empaired: and thy manners ouercame the rewardes of a bloudy slaughter. By the benefite of these two singular ornaments, florishing in thée, & grounded vpon istice, thou saudst mee from two shrewd shippewrackes, namely, from the violence of a disease in∣curable, and from mine enimies, whose conceiued malice is vnappeasable. For, it lay altogether in thy handes, to haue dispatched a Tyraunt in his sicknesse: But it séemed that thy meaning was not to play the manquiler, sithence, what medicines so euer thou ministredst vnto mée, made much for the restitution of my healthe and safetie: albeit thy faithful∣nesse in fulfilling the office of a Physicyan for thy patientes aayle, empaired thine owne profite and commoditie, which should haue béene very greate. But, suche was the good∣nesse of thy nature, that thou wouldest in no wise preferre an vniust reward, before iustly deserued praise: sthence,
peraduenture, that occasion of time, had fitt cause of due dis∣patche and working my deathe, by reason of that sicknesse. What commendation therfore can I giue thée, that is coun∣teruailable with the singularitie of thy vertue and , considering thy vsage towardes me, (when my life lay in thy handes, to aue me, or kil me, at thy wil and pleasure) so faith fully testified. Of this one thing I am assured, that thou haste attained to that ripenesse of vnderstandinge, and perfection of skill in this thy facultie, whiche may wel e∣féeme that God, by whome the Art of Physicke was first in∣uented and put in practise. But, I hau sent vnto thée, (to∣gether with the commendation of thy knowledge, and the praise of thy faithfulnesse) certaie pledges of my good will towardes thée inclined: namely, The gyftes and rich re∣wes that Phalaris sent to Polycleto his Physician. a    made of pure Golde, two standing cuppes of   from the fashion of this time: tenne couples of  cru∣ses: twentie young Maydens whose   neuer stained: and fiftie thousand peeces of Athmen . fur∣thermore, I haue written to Teucer, that in the dispensati∣on and ordering of mine affaires, he should pay you the sala∣rie and wages, that is giuen to the gouernours of my fléete, the guarde of my body, and a Captaine euer hundrethes. A small and lender recompence (I confesse) for so singular a benefite: but thinke vpon this, that to my small significa∣tion of thankfulnesse, this mine owne confession is to be ad∣ded, that I am vtterly ignoraunt, howe, or by what meanes I might bring to passe, that my rewardes should counter∣peise thy merites. Phalaris to Perosthenes THE ARGVMENT. He pardoneth (of his lemencie) twoe women, the wyues of two men that were rebels and Traitours, vpon the viewe of their valiauntnesse: wherein he quiteth himselfe of the name and pro∣pertie
of a tyraunt: for, in a tyraunt what sparckle of pitie res∣teth, ater the apprehension of an offendour against his person. YOu haue sent vnto me women prisoners, condēned wret∣ches, being the wiues of Eubolus and Ariphantus, rebels against our person: whome although I was determined to haue committed to the executioner, that he might do with thē according to y• definitiue sentence of iudgement: I haue yet notwithstanding, altering my former appointment, par∣doned them, and vouchsafed them their liues: you meruaile, no doubt y• I could quenche the coles of mine anger kindeled against them so extréemly: but if you once heare the occasiō, of this change in mée vpon such a souden, issuing frō an The vali∣ant hearts of two women, being, pri∣soners, ouer came his , and tuned his ty∣nie to py his crueltie to clemencie. &c. in∣credible noblenes & valiauncie of their mindes, you shal haue greater cause to wonder. For, when I demaunded of them, whether they were accessaries & of counsel with their hus∣bands, to worke me mischiefe: they answered with bolde af∣firmations, that they did not onely giue their consentes, but that they were fully intēded also, to take vp weapon against the tyrant, & in their owne persons to offer him violence. A∣gain, when I asked thē, what iniurie I had done them, either litle or great, wherby they should attēpt such an enterprise. Their answer was, that they knewe no priuate wrong that shold icite them to such a déed: but a publike & vniuersal in∣iurie they anouched, wherby they found thēselues so stoung, and pricked, that they could not refraine from séeking reme∣die▪ This publique, or open iniurie, this wrong that was vni∣uersall, and touched the estate of euery man, they said, was this: A forceable cause to kin∣dle coles of rebllion. Because a free citie was forced to serue. Againe, being demanded, what punishment their hatred & hostilitie which they shewed against mée with such outrage did deserue, they made this answer: that they thought deathe a fit reward for their offence. In consideration of which circumstances, & perceiuing also their valiant harts, & souldierlike stomaches, how litle they regarded to dye, I déemed thē worthie to liue, and therefore spared them, and gaue them bothe pardon.
Wherefore, whatsoeuer you haue in your handes, that you tooke from them, at suche time as you sent them vnto mée, like prisoners, restore them, vndiminished: that they may haue no occasion of iniurie offred them, wherby they should, against vs and our dealinges, raise any complaint. Synesius to Anastasio. THE ARGVMENT. Hee writeth vnto one that neglected the duetie of a reende: therein shewing the course of the world, that in a mans welfare he shalbe fauoured, but in his miserie quickly forsakē. Lastly, he seemeth not to disalow mutual sufferance of sorrow (an opinion mainteined, in manner, of the moste: for that it is naturally in∣graffed that one man, muche more one freende should bemone another freends yll fortune, or else what place is left for compas sion?) in saying that the one halfe of his sorrowe is diminished, if his freend be merrie. NOt Two very freendes that wished well one to ano∣ther. Amasis doubtlesse, (who whites he shewed himself very loathe to lament the calamitie of Two very freendes that wished well one to ano∣ther. Polycrates, to whome he wished happinesse) sent vnto him an assurance of fréendship, at suche time as he was forsaken of fortune: but euē then, wh he was in the pere of his prosperitie. Wher∣by he gaue a manife testimonie, y• his hart would haue béen heauie, & his eyes readie to gushe out brakish teares, if mi∣serie had preuented so comfortable a message. But, in you y• contrary appeareth: who, so long as fortune vouchsafed vs her fauour, remained with vs, as not discontent with our cō dition: but so soone as she withdrew her , & unged her smiling countenance into a sower visage, then did you leaue vs sticking in the myre, as forlorne and forsaken. For, suche as haue come out of A countrie in Europa, bor∣dering vpon Macedonia. Mela. lib. 2. & Plinie. lib. 4. cap. 11. Thracia, hauing had resorte vnto vs, & some cōmunication also vpon occasion inerchaunged, haue made vnto vs this reporte, y• such is your dealing now in absence, as that you cannot afforde  word, no, not so muche as a good thought. What is this else, but to be at
defyaunce with fréendshippe, and to take vp weapon against vs, as a souldiour of hatreds hoast. It had béene sufficient, not to be touched with compassion in our miserie: but to ag∣grauate and increase sorrow, where griefe should rather be assuaged, is a token of no relenting nature: Amasis might not alow it, nor any man else like wel of it, sithēce it is against al humanitie: but peraduenture in this dooing, you sée bet∣ter to your owne commoditie. Well, do what you wil, so that your dooings be not destitute of delight & a merrie motion of spirite. For, the one halfe of my sorrowe, shall seeme to be di∣minished, if you do not languishe, as I waste in anguishe. Synesius to Theotimo. THE ARGVMENT. To a singular Poet named Theotimus, this letter is written by Sy∣nesius, wherein is first signified, (by comparison of Simonides & Hiero) that commoditie did spring from the acquaintance, which was between him and Authemius: he endeth with a commenda∣tion of the same Theotimus, for his excellencie in the Art Poe∣ticall. Hiero King of Sy∣acuse: of whō Aelianus, in Var. histor. lib 6. of the same there was ano ther, an Athe∣nien. had more commoditie, by kéeping companie with Simonides, then This Simo∣nides was the first inuenter of the Art me moratiue: Cic. in Ora. he de∣uised also these double letters in the Greeke Al∣phabete (namly  as saith Eusta∣thius. &c. Simonides had by vsing the familiari∣tie of Hiero. Euen so (by the heauenly vertue whiche go∣uerneth the fréendship wherwith we be vnited, I sweare) thou arte not more happie by béeing acquainted with Au∣themius, then Authemius is, by the benefit of knowing your person. For, what maketh more for the honour of a man in highe aduauncement, and supported with power, then to haue suche a fréend, as is faithful and vnfeigned? such a one, I am certaine, Theotimus is, a man passing courteous, and with God most acceptable. But in this point you do excéede & goe beyonde Simonides: in that Simonides measured his seruice by profite and aduantage: Againe, in this you agree, & séeme to shoote both at a semblable marke: in y• This Simo∣nides was the first inuenter of the Art me moratiue: Cic. in Ora. he de∣uised also these double letters in the Greeke Al∣phabete (namly  as saith Eusta∣thius. &c. Simonides
commended Hiero to euerlasting memorie: and in that also the Poesies of Theotimus, so long as any Grecians shall be left on liue, haue made Authemius famous by the report of euery mans mouth, famous I say in the eares of al, that shal heare of his person. It is his part to seeke the increase of the Romanes renoune: & it is your duetie to extoll his name with the instrument of your profession. For, to the practise of Poetrie, is graunted (as it were by diuine influence) the wreath of worship, & the garland of honour, the excellencie whereof, moste euidently in you appeareth. Dionysius to Philoxeno. THE ARGVMENT. He declareth how glad he was, when he receiued a letter from his freend Philoxenus: adding moreouer, that his ioy would haue beene the greater, if (as he wished) he might enioy his presence. Furthermore, to winne the more credite of freendshippe, he vseth a comparison of two louers, whose delight is to see and talke one with another. Lastly, hee concludeth that tokens are a fitt thing to keepe acquaintance in custome. THe letter whiche you sent vnto mée, was bothe wished & welcome: and I woulde, that as I sawe the Or, that as I sawe & read the letters of your running penne, so I might also heare your liuely voice. characters of your hande, so I might (to my full contentation) heare your liuely voice. For, if I might once obteine my desire in that case, I should reape pleasure in more plentie: like to a yong man, whose comfort is then passing great & swte, when he séeth & talketh with a faire damsel whom vnseignedly he lo∣ueth. And this fruite of delight we do also reape, that when absence of person, and distaunce of place, hindereth vs from visiting and kéeping companie with them, whom hartily we loue: to haue their Which re∣presenting them whom wee loue, wee might still haue them, by cōtinual view of their pic∣tures, in freshe remembrance pictures in our sight, that by one meanes or other (though somwhat slēder) we might suck some solace: and gather, though not the whole & perfect haruest, yet some gleanings of pleasure, in our beloued. And surely, tokens
are méete thinges for this purpose, in mine opinion: whiche I estéeme so much more in value and price, as I do your per∣son, from whom they were receiued. Dionysius to Abramio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He declareth the occasion of his long lingering, before he did write: excusing himselfe by the allegation of two circumstances, name ly, opportunitie of time, and good order of inditing. He signi∣fieth also, that his minde continueth vnchaungeable, so that there is no cause of fainting in freendshippe to be mistrusted. IT is a thing necessarie and conuenient, that such as write to vertuous and honourable personages, should haue a re∣gard both To oppor∣tuniti of time because it is a circumstance of euery wise man to be ob∣serued: of a decent and conuenient order, least want of dis∣creton be de∣tected. to opportunitie of time, and also to a plausible methode, or good order of inditing. For, it is an offence vn∣sufferable, to take a thing in hand, wherein not onely rash∣nesse and want of aduisement is bewrayed: but vertue also with homelines of style and basenesse of phrase is abused. In consideradion wherof, we haue béen constrained to make de∣layes, and finde occasion of doubtfull conceipts. We séemed as though we had quite cast off all remembraunce of fréend∣shippe, in that by the mutuall recourse of letters, wee did not visite one another. The cause therefore of this impedi∣ment, being vnderstoode, you haue not to suspect, but that our fréendshippe remaineth stil stedfast, and that I (for my part▪) am in minde vnuariable. I thinke you il not mis∣like of my dooing in this case, nor suppose my delaye worthy of rephe hension, hauing in it so slender a shadowe of securitie an carelesnesse. Wherefore be mindefull of vs: For, so to doe, Or, is bothe to you and al∣so to mee, not profite onely, ut pleasure also. is to mée both acceptable and pleasant: and to you also profitable and requisite.
Libaniu to zalo. TH ARVMENT. He commndeth Izalua for certain behauiours of courtesie, which e reckoneth vp by  office: hee findeth fault with him for too much libeie of tongue, exhorting him to amende that misdemenour. Lastly hee acknowledgeth himselfe thanckful for the receipt of rtaine benefites▪ THe trade of life whervnto you are accustomed, as it is sim ply the bet, so for the profession of Philosophie it is the fit∣test: For Necessarie lessons, for all such to learne as intend to at taine the true knowledge of Philosophie. yo doe what you can, to liue prightly, and accor∣ing to the rule of wisedome. You entertaine strangers: you succour the néedie▪ you giue true sentence in deciding contro∣uerses: you kéepe your conscience frée rom the corruption of brtherie. Neuerthelesse, as you are in y• premisses to be prai∣sed, so in this folowing circumstance you are to be rebuked, in that you haue not the abilitie of reasō, wherby to bridle your toung▪ which oftentimes is busied in vaine talke, too too abu∣suely. In this case therefore, you annoy your friendes, who féele themselues grieued, thorough your fruitlesse and immo∣derat tatling. Wherefore, these are to admonish you, to frame your self to an amēdment of this A tōgue gi∣uen to vaine talke & nede∣lesse lāguage▪ a foule fault▪ and here rebu ked in Izalo, in whome o∣ther honest be hauiours were not wanting. foule fault, that you may become méeter metall for the image of Uertue, & more apt to receiue the preceptes of Philosophie. You shall not ceasse to write vnto mée, touching al things, whatsoeuer you please: because it is my wonted fashion, to certifie you of all affaires and busines done among vs, which I perceiue neces∣sarie for you to vnderstand. I am fully persuaded hereof, that as I haue a regard of your commoditie, so you are touched with a consideration of my profite: For, you are the man, of whome I haue receiued many benefits, in recompence of the which I render thanks immortal. Bée carefull of your owne health from day to day, let your minde bée discharged from al cumbersome cogitations: and possesse all pleasure after your owne heartes desire. Fare you well.
Libanius to Rupino. ¶ TH ARGVMENT. This Epistle is made by Libanius, and of him inuented or imitation, & exāple, to make the like: not left as a testimonie, ether of his owne, or of his friēds misfortune: so the name of  i surmised. ALas, with what waues of wretchednesse, are wée ouer∣whemed, by kéeping companie with that vnhappie Her∣mogenes. By these ex∣clamations & pitifull com∣plaints, he she weth what a sore plague it is, for any mā to keepe ill companie. In what gulphes of mischiefes are wée drowned, into what dangers are wée brou ght, by acquainting our sel∣nes with his execrable conditions. Better had it béene for vs to haue rolled the stone of Sisyphus, with wearinesse: better to haue béene tormented with Prometheus, een with the gawing of a gréedie vulture: better to haue thyrsted and fa∣mished in abundance of toothome deicates, and pleasaunt streames of liuely liquor: better to haue pitched our tentes next to Plutoes pauillion, then to haue vsed the  of such an infamous fellow, who is to the earth a , and an ydle burthen, and one whome y• heauenly habitants (the immortall Gods I meane) are offended withall, and ac∣compt accursed. Then so, in what labyrinthes of wes are wée loste, in what seas of inconueniences wée saile, to the vtter shipwracke of our honestie and honour: in what pitts of perplexities wée bée plunged: in what snares (almost ineuita∣ble) of vnluckinesse we be intangled, except that by the dire∣ction of vertue (as it were by Ariadnaes line) we be rescued. This it is to touch pitche: this it is to taste wormewood: this it is to posse in puddles. Wherefore, I would wishe, that vp∣pon the perusing of this epistle, you bée circumspect: not te▪ merous and rash to intrude your selfe into any company: but deliberating with your selfe, how you may ioyne in fellow∣ship, and saue your selfe from preiudice. Fare you well. Seneca to Lucillio.
THE ARGVMENT. This  doeth partly admonish, and partly disuade: for he ex∣hoteth to constancie of minde, and to sticke to certaine exercises of learning: hee disuadeth also, from reading the workes of diuers : which counell is proper to young beginners, sithence it is a kinde of  tender , to bee medling with many wri∣ters. He exhorteth also to studie approued bookes, and such as a∣bound with the pleasauntnesse of the latine tongue, out of which  must bee lerned, and committed to memoie. He that i well moned is not thought to be rich, but hee to whom a li∣tle is enough. BY the cyrcumstances of your owne letters, and by the re∣ports that I heare of you, I conceiue good hope of your do∣ings. You shit not from place to place, neither doe you trou∣ble your selfe with chaunge of readings: this turmoyling is the token of  minde disquieted. The chiefest argument of a settld and well ordered mind▪ is (as I thinke) if it can stand fast by it selfe▪ and bée not subiect to alterations. Haue a re∣gar (in any case) that th Reading ma ny ēs works without order breedeth varia blenesse. reading of many authors, and tū∣bling ouer the valumes of diuers writers, drawe not after them the discommoditie of ckle headinesse & variablenesse. If you bée  to reape some fruite of your labour, which may continue and rest in your mind vnremouble, you must tye your self to certaine studies and exercises, choice & change béeing auoyded, which  in disorder and confusion. Hee is no where, that is euery wher. The life of trauelrs is strage to consider, for they be such as euen nowe wee named▪ they haue many harbours, but no friendships: euen so, it areth wt them, that acquaint their witts with all writers, not apply∣ing their mindes to certaine that bée speciall▪ Neglecting in the mean space, thir owne commo ditie & bene∣fi: whereof they should o therwise taste the swenesse▪ f they vsed leasure i the labour. but with post hast a it were, pass ouer what soeuer ▪ vnder their  gers. That meate is vnprofitable, & ministreth to the bodie no measure of nourishment, which so soone as t entreth in to the stomach, is  & prsently  out aaine. Nothing is more noysome & hurtfull to the bodies of mn, then the often chaunge of  and curing remedies. That wound neuer groweth to a skarre▪ which is not ply
with playsters. That young plant doeth not prosper, which is alwayes remoued. Nothing is so profitable, as that it doeth good in a moment or the turning of a hand. The much med∣ling with many bookes, is a spoyling of the witt. Wherfore, sithence you may not read as much as you haue, it is suffici∣ent if you haue as much as you may read. But, mée thinkes I heare you say: A supposed question. Due while I wil be dooing with this booke, another while with that, and thus I will frame mée selfe to choice and varietie of writers. The answere or resolution. It is the point of a loathing stomach to tast diuersitie of dishes, which are so farre from nourishing the body, that they fil it with cruditie and rawe humours: Wherefore if you reade, read such authors as bee notable and approued: & if you be desirous of choice, then haue backward recourse to those bookes which you did first peruse. Bée not without some  against pouertie: and of remedie against death, bée not tterly : nei∣ther would I haue you vnprouided, it happly   disperse their infecting properties. And▪  ouer ma∣ny leaues and lines, learne one goo  for thi owne co∣moditie. This is a practise of mine owne, omething to hold fast, among many thinges that I haue read. For, I m wot to enter int others tents, not as one y• wou rue away, but as a spie for aduauntage. Merie  (aith ) is a goodly treasure: but uch kind of  (ay I) is not po∣uertie, howbeit merrie it is notwithstāding. For But very fewe or none, bee there that can away with want: & ther∣fore, where i Seneca his sup posed wealth? whosoeuer can agrée wel with pouertie, y• mn doubtlesse is rich & weal∣thie. Who is poore? not he that hath little, but he that coue∣teth more to that which he hath, he is needie: For what auai∣leth it him▪ how he hoord vp in his coers▪ how he repenish his garners, how much he rae together by extortion, howe much he poll & pill by vsuri and loaning, if that which he yawneth after be another mas goods: If he make reckng of that which is to be gotten, & not o that which he hath alrea∣die in possession? You aske me a queion, namely, what mea∣sure* A demaund answered. there is in riches. I aunswere you, that the first is to haue no more thn is necearie and the second is, not to bée without that which is sufficient.
Seneca to Lucillio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He teacheth that it is an vndecent thing, for an aged man to waxe childish, and to growe againe into infancie: moreouer that death is not to be feared, sithence, wee see very many, that set light ther∣by, through the orce of their perturbatiōs, as through the passion of timorousnesse or feare: & through the concupiscence of carnall pleasure. Lastly, hee setteth downe the common course of mannes nature, together with the lawe whereunto wee are tyed, euen in our byrth and natiuitie. AS you haue begon so continue: make spéede to the vtter∣most of your abilitie, that you may enioy the benefites of a wel ordered and disposed minde: which you shal te longer enioy, as you are For nothin doeth more peruert the minds of mē▪ then wicked∣nesse and vice. lesse subiect to the infection of vice. Incom∣parable is the pleasure, which is purchased by the contempla∣tion of a perfect and pure mind, of a mind (I say) frée from all staynes & blemishes. You remember with what gladnes of heart you were surprised, at such time as you, hauing cast off your When you had outgrown the age of a child, & came to mās . childes coate, put on your long side gowe, and were wayted vppon to the common place of plée: looke to reape ioy in great plentie, when you leaue your childish conditions▪ and when Philosophie admitteth you into your manhoode. Euen yet to this present day, not onely childhoode, but (a thing somewhat greeuous) childishnesse remaineth in vs, and hath an abyding: and surely, it is so much the worse, because wee beare the countenaunces of olde gray beardes, and yet haue rigning in vs, the vices that bee proper to children: and not proper to children onely, but also to very infantes. Children feare light toyes, infantes feare counterfect follies, wée feare both. Consider I pray but a litle, & you shal soone vnderstand this matter: ome thinges are lesse feared, because in other thinges, greater occason of terrour is offered. It is (say you) a Yet many cast away thē∣selues vppon light occasiōs (as hee saith himselfe) and what is that but to con∣temne the be∣nefite of life▪ hard peece of worke to persuade the minde of man to cō∣tempt of life. Do you not sée, vpon what trifling causes, death of diuers is despised? One hanges himselfe vnder his swéete
hartes windowe with a twyned haulter: another throweth himselfe headlong from the topp of an house, & breaketh his necke, because he would no longer heare his angrie masters bralling. One cutts his owne throat, least he shold be brought back againe to seruice, after he hath plaid the runnagate: and another leapes into ye water, not to swim, but to be drowned, because he is picht with pouertie &c. Now, thinke not you, y• the noblenesse of vertue will doe as much, as too much timo∣rousnesse hath done? Let your daily & cōtinual meditation be, According to the counsel of the woord witten: Me∣morare nouis∣sima, & non peccabis in e∣ernum: Re∣member thine nd, if thou wilt not sinne eternally. &c. to forsake this wretched life with a wel willing hart, which many hold in as much assurance and certaintie, as a running streame is stayed by wéedes and shallownesse. Some wauer betwene the feare of death, and the torments of life: liue they would not, & die they cannot: wherfore, so rule your life, that the same may be frée from such kind of carefulnsse: so mode∣rate and dispose it, that you may bée able to shake ff al com∣bersome cogitations. No good thing is a comfort to a man, ex∣cept his mind be prepared willingly to susteine the losse ther∣of: and nothing that is lost, bréedeth lesse anguish, the y• losse of y• thing, which when it is lost, cannot be recouered. Wher∣fore arme yor selfe This force must be wise∣dome, where∣with whosoe∣uer is furni∣shed, the same is able to with stand and in∣dure all mise∣es whatsoe∣uer. with force sufficient, to withstand all assaults of miserie whatsoeuer. Trust not quietnes to farre; and of prosperitie be not too bould, through the baite of vain cōfidence: least you afterwards tast the bitter bane of repen∣tance. The sea is not alwayes calme, in a moment of time it rageth with a storme. Call to remembrance, the examples of such, as in their owne houses haue béene dispatched, as with open violence haue béene murthered, as by priuie deceiptes haue perished: and you shal find, that as many maisters haue béene slaine by the handes of their seruauntes, as there haue béen offenders put to death at kings comaundements. These and such like circumstances ought to occupie a place in oure braine, vppon these things we ought to studie and deliberate, if wée looke to liue, till our last day and houre, without trou∣blesome thoughtes: if we wish the approching of death not to be terrible, the feare wherof filleth all our life with disquiet∣nesse and vexatiō. But, to finish mine epistle, take this poesie▪
of floures gathered out of other mens gardēs. Pouertie vsed according to the prescript lawes of nature, is great riches: and what limits nature hath assigned & tyed vs vnto, you are not ignorant: namely to hunger, to thyrst, to sweate, to ware chill, against which infirmities she hath also appointed reme∣dies. It is a bootelesse toile, to aduenture the seas: it is lost la∣bour to follow the campe: that which nature requireth is ea∣sie to be gotten, and is bought for a small price: but things su∣perfluous require tedious traueile. Fare you well. Seneca to Lucillio. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He cōmendeth Lucillius for continuing at his booke. He  out true life Philosophicall, that is, the life of such as liue more spa∣ringly & baely then other: that they may performe that in behaui∣ou▪ wherof they make an out ward hew, and representation. IN that you continue so earnestly at your booke, setting all thinges aside, and irecting al your thoughts and actions to this one marce, namely to become better day by day, as in yeares you do increase, I allow it, & I cannot but reioyce: In which your approueable procedings, I do not only exhort you but also beséech you, to perseuere. Hereof I admonish you, y• you do nothing after y• maer of them, whose desire is not to do good, but to be gafed vpon, si hence such actis Because they be (commōly and for the most part) le∣uened with vaine glorie. deserue due reprehension. Let not your haire growe out of order, to ye dis∣figuring of your head, nor your beard be vncombd & rough, to the marring of your fauour & conntenance. The verie name of Philosophie, although it be moderatly vsed, is much enuied among a great number. Let not your gone sitt vppon your backe Which cu∣riositie might be left to wo∣men, in whose apparel and garments, not so much as a plight must stand amisse. too nicely, nor yet weare it too slouenly. Let vs not conceiue this erronious opinion, that y• iudgement of fruga∣litie or thriftinesse, consisteth  gold, suer, or the muce of this vading world. Let vs bée so occupied, as that our actions may tend to a better life▪ then the common sort of people doe inse: howbeit, not a lie cntrarie to theirs: for in so doing, wée shal driue away from vs such as  would awnd, that they will be loath in any thing, to take vs for an example.
Let vs haue a regard, that the thinges▪ whereby wée would growe in admiration among men, bée not ridiculous, trifling toyes, and frutelesse. Let the scope of our determination bée, to frame our liues according to the For that is a ready way to anoyd errour and offence, which other∣wise, by not re garding her rule, wee are like to incurr. rul of nature. To desire delicate & nice vanities, is the point of prodigalitie. Philoso∣phie requireth thriftinesse, and not lauash spending. Let our life be gouerned, betwéene good behauiours & vsual maners. Let our life bée in sight of al men, and from the knowledge of any man, let it not be kept it secret. Shal wée do as other do? Why, then betwéene vs and them there shalbe no difference. Let them haue occasion to wonder rather at our persons and vsages, then at our store and prouision. A wealthy man (no doubt) is hée, who applieth earthen vessells to semblable ser∣uice, as he would pottes of siluer metal: and hée is altogether as rich in like maner, who vseth siluer plate as hée would vse vessels of clay clodds. It is an argument of an As sayth the Poet: Th'enuious hart doth boil in hate To see another happie state. enuius hart, not to abide y• another should haue riches. But, to the ntent that I might communicate with you, ths dayes duadntage, I haue, in our Cato his short sentence, found the end of our desires. Thou shalt ceasse to Or▪ to mi∣strust. feare (saith hée) if thou ceasse to hope. How can these twaine, say you, being of such diuersitie, agrée in equalitie? It is euen so (friend Lucillius) although they appere to haue in them cōtrarietie or difference, yet are* Or to doubt they ioyned together, like two coupled with one and the self same chaine. And as the shadowe doth followe the body rom place to place: euen so these two, how soeuer they séeme dis∣crepant or diuerse, kepe one another cōpanie. Hope followeth feare, and feare followeth hope. Mauy of our owne goods worke our annoyaunce. Fare you well. Seneca to Lucillio. THE ARGVMENT. That Philosophie reiecteth none, but offereth it selfe to all indifferly▪ and without exception. He speaketh somewhat touching true noble∣nesse: & declaeth who he is that deserueth th name of a right no∣ble gentleman.
YEt againe you make your selfe of no account nor calling: and you complaine that your lucke is ouerthwart. I tell you that Philosophie hath not respect to the person of any man: she offereth her selfe indifferently to euery ones em∣bracing. Socrates ruffled not in his robes of magistracie. Cleanthes was a water drawer, Cleanthes playde the gar∣dener, Cleanthes let out his handes to hire. Philosophie made Plato famous and honourable, being before but base in degrée. Why then should you cast doubts of despaire in your minde, as though there were such impossibilities, that you should neuer aspire to the like worthinesse? Who is a Gentleman? Who is a Noble man? Euen he, who of na∣ture, is applyable to vertue. The court replenished with vaine shewes of brauerie, maketh not a noble Gen∣tleman: but the mind which wrestleth and ouer∣commeth fortune, in what condition of life soeuer, perfrmeth that function, ma∣keth (I meane) a right noble Gen∣tleman. Fare you well.
The extract of Epistles out of Paulus Manutius, and other late writers, most meete for imitation. Paulus Manutius to Francisco Vargae Oratour to Charles the fifth of that name, Emperour. &c. and Philip his sonne king of Spaine. ¶THE ARGVMENT. Hee complaineth of his present occasions of sorrowe, namely, the sicknesse of his wife, his children and his brother at one instant, He commendeth the vertue of reason, which so ruled him, as that he was an able man to moderate and measure his passions of sor∣rowe. He praiseth Francisco Varga, for sundrie peculiar and spe∣ciall properties: touching whose person, and the person of him selfe, he vseth many wordes, euen to the conclusion of his epistle. THE remembraunce of youre singular courtesie, and excée∣ding great gentlenesse, doeth put me oftentimes in mynd of my duetie: this duetie which remaineth in me towards you to be performed, in considerati∣on of distance of place, and ab∣sence of body, is writing & sen∣ding letters: whiche long since I had procured vnto you to haue bene directed, but that I was intercepted and hindered with most grieuous and sor∣rowfull thoughtes. For, A cōplaint conteining a catalogue and briefe summa rie of his ca∣lamities. in those same things which you knowe to be most déere and right precious vnto vs through the whole course of our life, and with which none are to be compared: euen in them fortune hath begunne rigorously to afflict me, namely, my wife, my children, and my brother, at one and the selfe same pricke of time (in manner) being sore inuaded with sicknesse: and as for me self, I am not frée from anguishe, but am a partaker with the rest, in my portion of
trouble. For An argumēt ground ed vp∣on necessitie. my mynde being srprised with sorrow, and hewed with heauinesse, howe is it possible that my body shoulde continue in healthfulnesse? Neuerthelesse, sor so muche as your counselles of comfort sticke in my memorie, heauenly hope, (wherevnto you referre all thinges,) maketh me valiaunt, in suffering the miseries of this mortalitie: and (surely) except I had followed you my good guide & captaine, and haled in my leaking barke into the hauen, at ase (a while) to harbour, no doubt, the maine seas of mischiefs, and souden tempestes of sorrowes, wherewith I was miserably ossed, had quite ouerwhelmed me, and wrought my reme∣dilesse dispatch. That ira∣tion of one word▪ signifi∣eth the vehe∣ment passion▪ of his mynde. Sée, sée, howe vncertaine the successe of our purposes be, and howe those things which w immagine & persuade our selues, wil chance none otherwise th we are in expectation and desire, fal out ouerthwartly, yea, chaunce cleane contrarie to our account and reckoning. I tooke vpon me▪ a iourney, into the coastes of this countrie, not without great expence of charges, not without sore burthens of la∣bour, in hope that I shoulde recouer my health, which sick∣nesse had empayred: I forsooke I thinke he meant Rome, for there hee lead a great portion of his life. a faire and famous citie, I gaue ouer my necessarie affaires and weightie businesse, I was content to withdrawe me from your companie, where∣on (I am persuaded) the chiefest and worthiest portiō of mine estate dependeth: these incomparable commodities, are so farre (notwithstanding) from being recompenced and coun∣terpeised with other aduauntages, that many crooked chaun∣es haue succéeded, which if they were referred to the sense of féeling, might (not vndeseruedly) be called by the name of misfortunes, torments, and inconueniences. But, bicause rea∣son ruleth the inward passions of my heart, when outwarde smart doth sting me, and worke my great griefe: I am so much the lesse discomforted. This The bene∣fites whiche reason yeal∣deth to suche as loue and im brace reason reason instructeth me, that nothing is to be counted euill, but that only which fal∣leth on vs through our own default: this reason techeth me, that iudgement in thinges incident to this transitorie life, is doubtful and not assured: this reason instructeth me, that nothing in this world continueth in one state, but is sub∣iect
to ebbes and flowes of chaunge: this rea resolueth me, that euen aduersities, miseries, calamitie, ough they drawe vs nighe the gulfe of despaire and destruction, suffer a soudeine alteration, and that from them flowe flatte con∣trarieties, namely, prosperities, happinesse, and choice of cō∣modities. Againe, that those things which put on a preten∣ded shewe and visard of felicitie, (to speake more familiar∣ly) which in our opinion are embalmed with blessednesse, turne into most bitter extremities of vexation and wret∣chednesse, that is to say, banishment, pouertie, beggerie, shame, reproch. &c. In this cogitation and cōsideration, whē my mynd is occupied, I féele my selfe inwardly somwhat re∣freshed, & as the measure of my abilitie wil giue me leaue, I take vnto me that kind of courage, & valiantnesse of stomach, which in time of Fortunes frowning, & glooming cloudes of ouerthwart chaunce, doth most gloriously shine and glister. Touching which vertue, as many traditions are lefte re∣gistred, by the pennes of most excellent philosophers in wri∣ting: so none of them al are to be compared with C. Iesus the pledge of our redemption, the prince & Christ Iesus an especiall patterne of fortitude and valiantnese. patterne of heauen∣ly philosophie, the authour and welspring of true and perfect godlynesse, who was (him selfe) a most liuely example and ex∣presse image of the same: whom if we be content to acknow∣ledge our maister, & to his teaching (as scholers) submit our selues, we shall soone learne and vnderstan, what valiaunt∣nesse is indéede: and we shall Who would not then (ex∣cept e bee wholy and al∣together a wretched wor ldling) bee glad of so gra cious a guide. quickly perceiue, where lies the plaine and infallible pathway which leadeth to the true and perfect attainement of all right commendable Arts, and praise worthy professions. And (vndoubtedly) my good friend Francisco Varga, in that you account all other studies but lost, in comparison of this whereto you giue all the prefer∣ment, I can not but for this speciall occasion, haue you in sin∣gular reuerence, countenance and estimation: ye, I muste néedes thinke of you more honourably, for the cause aboue cited, then for the office of your Oratourship, by the vertue wherof you deale in all the affaires and businesse of Caesar, the most ictorious and noblest emperour that hath liued in
wealth of th Venetians,     . For, A singular commendatiō giuen to Fran cisco va. by P. . in the sele   , ich you t ths resent ioy and possess, oher  ntlemen (in   yur ualt▪ bu I aue  hear o much a o one, that hath bene yur supeur▪ , after my departing from you, yo will not thine no bele, owe often my art, By this phrase of spea che he testifi∣eth the vnsei∣nednesse of his affction.     your words, and the    ▪  , though  thngs here where I do now , ere  to myne wn wish & wil, yea, if I were  at   , as by the  & ac∣cesse    (  and ) it could not be made better▪ If I say, I sayled with full sayle  the  of felicitie, as I am almost drowned in the depth of irrecoue∣rable daunger and distresse: yet notwithstanding, my life    ith  of ioyfulnesse and de∣light, bycause I beng absent from you a great distance, taste the swéetenee of yor excéeding gentlnesse, finde my selfe inwardly comforted, with the memorie of your prudent and hoalsome counsels, reape maruellous fruit and aduauntage, by the preceptes and admonitions which you hae vttered, vry auailable (no doubt) and necessarie, for the leading of my lif  Not as tho∣ugh his beha∣uiours were to be amen∣dd, but that in uffering sorrowes, hee should shewe him selfe a wise man: for i is vndecent, and vnseemly that a man should be o∣urtrodē wih gef and such like csualties▪  and séemelinesse, in health and safetie. I be∣gie  o   greater iking, thē I haue , ,     an improue my former ,  my welling and house kéeping in Brnacum mare. Your ngular adertisements, your friendly forewarnings, your honestie and your good will, call me home againe to kéepe house in the citie. As for fnnie ,         seruth, ,      tme tht place is      ) if I be troubled with    ,    to resort for my
pleasue. In the meane while, I will so sée to , with due obseruatio o dit and abstinent , as shall make best for my commoditie: and peraduenture it will  fall out in trat of time, bycause All thinges depend vpon Gods prouidence, that I may waxe lustie againe, and reco∣u my health in Where I am nowe resident and abiding. Venice, within the walles of mine owne dwelling, hauing my friendes round about me, with whom I may reioyce, and lie in such sort, as to my contentation is most agréeable, that no necessitie of the weather, no occa∣sion of season, shal constraine me to remoue: which if I may obteine, you shall finde me (if it please yo to admit and like wll of my presumption, and hope of your humanitie and gentlenesse, as I knowe you doe not thinke it ) a familiar companion, in manr n ordinarie guest, and a con tinuall chamberfellow: and (doubtlesse) with this confidence I am wonderfully comforted, succoured and supported. Fare you well. P. Manutius to Hieronymo Faleto Oratour to Hercules Duke of Ferraria. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. ing muche moued with angrie passions, against one (belike) of whome he was bused, and iiuriously dealt withall, he  to Hieronymo Faleto the Duke of Ferraria his ratour, wi whome he was wll acquainted, desiring him to be hi sccourer and assistant, otherwise, he sayth, his lucke will be but : lastly▪ he maketh mencion of a booke whiche hee wrote conceing foure kindes of common wealthes, and so concludeth with   farewell. THe wordes which (not long agone) you vttered, haue t∣ken roote in my remembraunce: and howe muche the more diligently, I call the matter into screte consideration: with so muche the more earnestnesse and spéedinesse, I haue
al  , al my ,   and   newe  nd , . For, He was cr∣ried away with the streame of his  ons &  motions, wh h did idite this Epistle. I am , tornien, and  dealt withall,  the handes of a nghtie varlo, yea, a te handes of suh a wicke ellow, a in  (I ) is matchless: He i ot content to   of a  , but e  me in such , despigh,  ,   coteth me a vie person, an suh a on s i   o   A defence of his,  ad vpright∣. shoe leaher, whn he   fo an   come vnto . Surely Note his modstie and mildnsse: for he was desti∣tute of ney∣ther of both. I  nothing to y selfe: I playe not th part of an ,  ta not  any thing contrari to custom an order: I hau noing in my self, neither of , nor yet by  ( must  confesse) whereo   ,  swel. with vaine glory Neuerthelesse,    eue  away, with the  of right  and honourable men, that haue dai ly ecourse nto me, and thinke not  to step oue and   my  Eun yu, riende  (you I say, bo   Hercules Duke of Fer∣raria: o whō Mrcellus Pa∣lingenius did ddicate his zodiak of lif. most  , an ne of     amog te Nobl, to whoe   of speciall   importance re committēd▪ whse penne i ocupied in writing histori∣all ,   the nowledge of lawes, most ,  well hose that were mad long since in aunci∣ yeaes,  those als whche haue béene encted of la )  me the courtee, to repayre vnto my huse, (which I   ascribe o your good and gentle spo∣sition) and that not : there to spende the time awaye in sweete an  counication. A suppositi appliable to his purpose. You will, per∣, say, It is a  thing to be conted, t be    , of a aughtie and ewdly inclind erson▪ I  no lesse (vndoubtedly) then you say: but it is  farre worsse , for a ma o loose that whiche is his owne, and to be (in manner) obbed. If your wisedome, deal not in this matter, & prouide a playster for this  sore, all the frite, all th profite, all the aduauntage of your  hath suffered  wracke, & is lost without ▪
For, By this pro∣uerbial speach he giueth to note, with what a naugh tie and ouer∣thwart mā he had to deale. I may sooner▪  Hercules his clubbe  out of his , then get mine owne monie out of the  of this  holdfa. Wherefore let the commoditie whiche I hoped ofter, through the benefite of your labour, be restrai∣ned to my vse and serui or else, let him, that gapeth grée∣dily after our vndoing,  off the sauce of sorrewe which we , and let all fellowship  , with the ouerthrow of many. Howbeit, when I  the eye of my consideration vpon the goodnesse of your nature, when I examine in my se∣cret conscience, your authoritie, and the passing beneuolence Or, whereof I haue bene a day partake whereof I haue bene a  communicant, I féele my selfe fastened vpon the infallible anchor of affiance: I do as it were vnderprop my mynd with piller of promises, making due account, that all thinges will  to my quietnesse, to my commoditie, & to myne inriching▪ It shall be your good déede, onely and alone, to restore our aeted estate, to a∣mende and repaire that whiche is in decay, to comfort that which yfortunes stormes hath shaken: and The iniurie which he suf∣fered was (he∣like) intollera ble: and that made him so hote and cho∣leriqu. as for this pet∣tie fogger, this false fellowe that is in no credite or ▪ being a man of the meanest degrée, a very lot, and fraught with all kinde of vile vices, suche a one as is most vnworthy to be partaker of our fellowship, & deserueth not so much as to come in our companie, no not to heare our cō∣munication, we will thrust him out as a wrangler, y• he may  him cotes of mischiefe with whom to be conuersant hereafter, and with like lewdly disposed persons leade his life, walwing in the filthy puddles of wickednesse, being se∣perated from vs, that haue humanitie and honest behauiour, courteous vsage, and friendly fashions in reuerence: that Which eue∣ry vertuous man will doe, without grud ging. pferre (I say) vertue before all aduauntage. In the meane season, exerce your selfe in reading that which so often and so iustantly yu required. A part of our booke intreating of foure common wealths, which I wish to be by you authori∣sed and allowed, when I am at leasure (whiche that I may be I will do what I can) my purpose and intent is, to finishe the whole volume (if else where I can not) in your Manour of Bellombra. From our house. &c. Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Christophero Madrutio, Cardinall. ¶THE ARGVMENT. He is altogether in praise of Christophero Madrutio, whome hee commendeth, not so much for his good fortune, as for his singu∣lar vertue: he extolleth him for sundrie circumstaunces, and a∣mong al the rest for this one, bycause he doth not him selfe alone highly esteme of vertue, but also sheweth his liberal nature in ad uancing and furthering such as be of a vertuous disposition: last∣ly, he giueth him thanks for the good report that he giueth him, wherevpon hee inferreth the gracious offer of his friendshippe, wherof he promiseth to shew him selfe a receiuer not vnworthy. IT is reported vnto vs, that you doe both speake, and also* Which ou∣ght to mini∣ster greater cause of ioy and gladnesse, for how much more is the excellencie of the person cō∣mending: so much more is the comfort of the person commended. thinke of vs passing honourably. It is an excellent thing to be praised of a princes mouth, yea, and of suche a prince, with whose fortune vertue is so worthily coupled, y• in ey∣ther of thē he is to be counted péerelesse. As for my selfe, thus much I confesse wt out dissembling, that I did alwayes reue∣rēce your person, yea long before I had either spoken wt you, or séene you. I was much moued wt your excellent exercises, and with the certaine rumours of the people spread abroade in all places, touching your incomparable commendation. I did not so much wonder, if any man praised you for your ri∣ches, for your noblenesse, for your : these thinges are common to a great number, and ore to be desired then to be extolled. But whē I heard of those ornaments of an in∣ualuable price, being your own in proper possession, Which opi∣niō I cōceiued vpon necessa∣rie reasons. I coun∣ted Christophero Madrutio, suche a man, as had vertu in high estimation, and singularly honoured the same himselfe: besides that, so bountifull of nature, that he bestowed moste large and rich rewardes vpon such as he perceiued sembla∣bly disposed: Special prai∣ses ascribed to cardinal Chri stophero Ma∣drutio. an intertainer and harbourer of the sciences liberall, a mainteiner of thē, & as it were, their fosterfather, at such time as (I can not tell whether I may iustly say, by y• ruell dealing of destinie, or through the iniquitie of the time,
or else through the proferred iniuries of naughtie people) it suffered vncomfortable banishment: finally, a searcher after the sound substance of glorie, and not after vaine shadowes of temporall renoune, which many hunt after with insatia∣ble desire, but he contemneth as trifles and transitory toyes. At what time I heard The conside ration wherof could not but kindle reue∣rence in the mind of a mā vertuously in∣clined. these thinges, I was inflamed with an earnest affection, to declare my speciall dutifulnesse, and to present you with a manifest and most assured testimonie of mine obedience vnto your highnesse to be exhibited, for the fruits of your goodnesse which I haue oftentimes, and diuers wayes digested. But to trouble so noble a Gentleman, with vaine and vnnecessarie letters, (who doth not onely with po∣wer and maiestie, but also with iustice and vprightnesse, go∣uerne the chiefest cities in Italie, and the sundry estates of many people,) I suspected that it was the part of a man be∣witched with extreme foolishnesse: or else of one y• is drowned in the whirlpoole of shamelesnesse. But▪ thence your talke touching me, hath ben vttered in my praise and commenda∣tion, I am ready to catch occasion whiles it is offered, and I tender to your highnesse, great & infinite thankes, both with my heart and also with my voyce: as well for that it hath pleased you to vouchsafe me the worthy witnesse of your iudgement, which none, I am certaine, doth improue and disallowe, sithence among all men it winneth great authori∣tie: as also for that through the vertue of this your courte∣sie and vndeserued gentlenesse, yon doe as it were, set a doore wide open vnto me, to enter into possession of your auour and friendship: wherof that I may séeme worthy, howsoeuer in other respectes I am insufficient, yet notwithstanding I will doe mine indeuour, with all singularitie and dutiful∣nesse to deserue the same, sounding abroad the report of your vertues incessantly, that I be not thought altogether an vn∣worthy receiuer of such a notable benefite. Which thing, al∣though in times past I haue neglected, being therevnto pro∣uoked through the force of mine owne iudgement: yet not∣withstanding, I meane hereafter to do it with more courage and diligence, being constrained there vnto by the operation
and working of your excéeding gentlenesse: which to conti∣nue vnuarible from this day forwarde, and so for euer, not only your accustomed constancie, but your natural goodnesse holdeth me fully persuaded. Fare you well. From Venice. P. Manutius to Jo. Sambuco. THE ARGVMENT. After hee hath made mencion of his inwarde sorrowe conceiued through the death of his yong sonne, be beginneth to be cōfor∣ted with the remembraunce and consideration of his friendes counsell: hee declareth his infallible affiaunce, touching his ioy∣ful estate of heauen, after his transmigration out of the labyrinth of this life: he sheweth what kinde of life true wise men do im∣brace: he signifieth what great oddes there is betweene Sambu∣coes his condition, and his owne estate: hee complaineth of the benignitie of princes, which in olde time flourished, but is nowe banished: crieth out against the vanities of men and their inordi∣nate vsage: lastly, hee lamenteth the miserable case of learning, detecting therewithall the hypocriticall dealing of diuers men, and their notable dissembling: this being done, hee maketh an abrupt conclusion. AFter that the heauie and ruthfull newes of my sonnes death, had pearced into mine eares, I was so ful of grief, sorrowe, and anguish of heart, that I remembred myne own mortalitie, and considered also that his entraunce into this wretched worlde, was like the state of a soiourner in a com∣mon Inne, that when so euer it pleased God, to call him out of this painful pilgrimage, he might passe into the paradise of heauenly pleasure, the ioyes whereof are not subiect to cor∣ruption, but coupled with euerlastingnesse. And thoughe this lamentable lucke, had so wounded my heart with wea∣pons of wofulnesse, that I shoulde haue fallen downe, as one ouerthrowne and vanquished: yet notwithstanding, I shoulde haue recouered, tasting the prudent preceptes of your learned letters, wherein you discourse right wor∣thily, how lamentations shoulde bée allayed, and heaui∣nesse of heart assuaged: wherein whiles you occupie Your braine or your wit, and your pen, the one to in∣uent and de∣uise: the other to write and set down your meaning. youre heade and your hande, you giue manifest declarations of your good and vertuous disposition, wel beséeming a true and
vnfeined christian: and towards me, you shew most assured warrants of beneuolence and heartie good will. But (friend Sambucus) by the experience of many foule misfortunes, I haue learned to contemne and to be at desaunce with blinde Fortune her self, who shall neuer haue the power to depriue me of those things which she can not giue (wel may she dis∣possesse me of Bycause all outward thin ges (the exter∣nall ornamēts of the bodie, and the a∣bilities of the same, whiche are called cor∣porall facul∣ties, excepted) are saide to be the giftes & goods of For∣tune. trāsitorie vanities) neither is it in her abilitie to bestowe vpon any man, an vpright mynde, a true mea∣ning conscience, honest and vertuous purposes, loue and re∣uerence towardes God, and such like precious ornamentes. I despaire not of my sonne, he is in excéeding good case, I am not otherwise persuaded: he enioyeth the companie and fel∣lowship of angels, of holy men, blessed martyrs, and innocent soules: the cares of this world do not choake him, wherwith a great number are stoung and strangled. He is not carried away with vaine hope, as many be in their miserie: he is not a slaue to feare, wherwith innumerable multitudes are tor∣mented in the flowre of their felicitie, least it should wither, and then they to incurre the inconueniences of alteration: He is frée from all these molestations, they touche him not, they haue no power to inuade him, or do him violence. But, we wretched people, that are sayde to be aliue, in whose eyes nothing appeareth more glorious, then the inioying of a counterfet and deceiuable light, which is nothing indeede but a very vapour and the shadowe of a vapour, and hath a time assigned wherein it shall vanish, with how many myl∣lians of miseries are we tormented, tossed, and turmoyled to and fro, not vnlike a ship vpon the sourging seas? we labor, we take care, and what though we obtein the end of our de∣sire, and the scope of our trauel, our life must haue a time to cease. Wisemē, I mean not such as be worldly wise, but those that be wise to God warde, are wont to wish, what? a long life? nay, but a good life, and such a life as is not repugnant to vertue, wherevnto I (in semblable manner) contende and doe what I can to aspire, hoping that I shall in the ende obteine it, to my full contentation and heartes ease. For nothing doeth so muche occupie my mynde, and drawe
away my cogitations, then the desire to frame and fashion myselfe orderly in that trade of life, wherevnto I am ap∣pointed, and in such due and conuenient sort to continue the course of my yeares, that I may be able thereof both to God him selfe to render an account, and to men also to giue a rec∣koning: this is my meditation: this is the marke whereat all my purposes and intentes are leuelled. Wherefore, in that you call vppon me, not to withdrawe, but rather to apply my penne to writing, (I must néedes say the trueth as it is) my determinations and counselles, are established with your iudgement: and you (vndoubtedly) in giuing me this exhortation, doe as many more besides, to whose desires I could (peraduenture) shewe my selfe satisfactorie, if I were not otherwise, with the burthen of my priuate and domesli∣tall businesse, hindered. But, I beséech you, measure not my leasure by your vacations and times of pausing: conside∣ring the estate of vs both: you haue all things readie at hand, you néede not doubt of their vncerteintie, you haue them at commaundement and seruice, without cumbersomenesse: as for me, myne estate is farre otherwise, myne owne industrie is my prouision and maintenaunce, none other succour haue I: that is my only and alone supportation, the staffe and stay of my children, the prop and maine poste of all my housholde and familie: thus to doe I am constrained, and if therein I shew my selfe dissolute and negligent, I must néedes forsake all humanitie: and if I be as carefull, diligent and circum∣spect in séeing to the charge thereof, as I am bound in consci∣ence, then must my exercises at my studies cease of necessi∣tie, whiche require a mynde frée from all kinde of worldly thoughts, and not a mynd clogged with cares, & quite ouer∣yed. A supposed obiection, whervnto fol∣loweth a full answere, touching his owne estate. But you wil say (peraduenture) your owne studies will be your aduauntage, they can not but affoorde some pro∣fite, they will be your sufficient purueyance. Sing this song to others, that doe neyther knowe maners of people, nor sea∣sons of time: the sound thereof should not so sinke into myne eares, I will not be persuasible thervnto, sithence I am one, that in eyther of both haue not wanted experience. The
bountifulnesse of princes, which in auncient time most pros∣perously flourished, it is nowe wasted and withered. The greatest part of men, what doe they? euen folowe vaine fan∣cies, toyes, and transitorie shadowes: they loue nothing that hath in it * sap and substance: they set not their affection vpō that which is renouned, they care not, neyther haue in any account, that which is honourable & excellent. You shal see some, Telluris inu∣tile pondus: as the Poet saith. Greate burthens to the ground, That doeth their life maintaine: No good in them is found, But vices fond & vaine. good for nothing that is vertuous and honest, much like vnto Caterpillers deuouring the reuenues and increase of the earth, being thervnto, euen from their byrth, appoin∣ted and ordeined: spending and confuming, wealth, riches, treasures, landes, possessions, hereditaments, &c. in excessiue bellie cheare, and pampering the paunche, farre beyond the boundes of Epicurisime. You shall see othersome, so marri∣ed to mischiefe, and wedded to most detestable wickednesse, that they do not only wast their welth & al that they haue, in consuming the increase and crop of the ground, by mea∣nes immoderate, but also (which they count noblenesse and valiancie) in committing that which tendeth to the destruc∣tion of people, in preparations for battell and bloudshed, which drawe after them most miserable and manifolde cala∣mities, wastefulnesse and spoyle to arable landes: setting on fire whole townes and cities: and to one man wrapped in wofull wretchednesse, by anothers want of wit, losse of life, an irrecouerable casualtie. Thus whiles the mindes of men wander in wildernesses of enormities, the By Muses in this place, speaking figu ratiuely, he meaneth lear∣ning: For the Muses were the Ladies of learning, as not so muche as the most ig norant, but knoweth. Muses famishe, they starue, they perish with want of mainteinance, they are thrust out of house and home, and turned (as it were) a beg∣ging, from post to piller, through their cruell vsage, who as they ought principally, so they might most liberally haue seene thē succoured. Furthermore, what a shameful and de∣testable thing is it, that some vnder the pretence of a liberal hart, hunt after their owne honour and aduauncement, ha∣uing in their mouthes that vertue wherof they haue no por∣tion, so common & familiar, as though they did highly loue it, esteeme it, and had it in reuerence. But thus far sufficient, and too much peraduenture. From Venice. Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Benedicto Accolto, Cardinall. THE ARGVMENT. First he complaineth of his tedious iourney, and also of his sicknes, both whiche turned him to trouble, and made him prolong his time of writing. The greatest part, and in manner all the Epistle, conteineth a commendation and an acknowledgement of Bene∣dicto Accolto his curtesie, with certaine professions of his owne thankfulnesse: both which, the one in his friend, the other in him selfe, he continueth euen to the last line of his letter, and thervp∣on (immediately) inferreth his farewell. SO soone as I returned to Venice, although I was some∣what wearie with the Two great occasions of intermitting the writing of letters. tediousnesse of my iourney, vexed with the Two great occasions of intermitting the writing of letters. sicknesse which afflicted me, grieuously enoughe, when I was at Ferraria, being not yet deliuered and set frée from anguish: yet notwithstanding, the Two force∣able prouoca∣tions to take pen in hande∣and fall to in∣dite epistles. excéeding great∣nesse of myne obedience, and special dutifulnesse which I ac∣knowledge to your highnesse: and Two force∣able prouoca∣tions to take pen in hande∣and fall to in∣dite epistles. the remembraunce of those benefites whiche to my profite and comfort, haue had issue from your goodnesse, constrained me to write an epistle to your worthinesse: which kynd of seruice, how often I am bound to shewe and to discharge with diligence, I am not ig∣norant For, in somuch as it pleased you, euen the very same day, that I had accesse and entrance to your fauour & friend∣ship, not only to be careful of my commoditie & furtherance, but also buse and painfull in procuring my promotion if my wil be no lesse towarde then it ought to be, if I am loth to be thought vnworthy of those honest studies wherevnto euer since I was a child, I was addicted, then must I circūspectly cast mine accounts, that I may be able and sufficient, to giue manifest and euident assurances of your readinesse to do me good, & deliuer testimonies of certaintie of your forward wil to worke my preferment: to comprehend which enterprise,
that my desire may be somwhat satisfied, I sée none other re∣medie at this present time to be vsed, then to deuise and to direct Which may deliuer vnto you, the true message of mi minde. my letters vnto your person. If euer myne abilitie be answerable to my desire, I wil do mine indeuour to make full recompence: and yet neuerthelesse, I will let slip no time wherein I may giue some tryall of acquitaunce. In the meane season, I will not onely confesse my selfe to be your debter, and that vnfeinedly: but myne owne tong shal beare witnesse of the same, with my conscience in al places and in all companies, and that not vnwillingly. He maketh it a matter of great account to haue the friendship and fauor of such a one, as is not only in au thoritie, but also furnished with the preci ous ornamēts of vertue, and learning. For what can re∣dound more to myne honestie, and to myne honour, then that you, being a man furnished with all vertuous ornaments, possessing a stately roome of authoritie and excellent dignitie, discerning the secrete dispositions of mens seuerall natures, by the soundnesse and certaintie of your iudgement, shoulde pretermit and let passe, no kinde of courtesie, no kynde of friendly vsage, which might tende either to my commoditie, or to my cōmendation? Now vndoubtedly shal I disclose the truth wtout hypocrisie? there was neuer any thing so auail∣able as this, to make vs grow in credit among men through this praise worthy opinion of learning and honestie. Wher∣fore, as mine intent was to treade in the same path, whiche my father before me had passed through, and worne with his frequent and often going, leading directly to the triumphant tower of renoune, as (I say) I framed my selfe by my fathers exāple; to be thus exercised: so now, through the incitation & incouragemēt of your courteonsly conceiued opiniō, I wil be y• more earnest, & aduised, to make it mine accustomed prac∣tise: vnto which opinion, I feare greatly, that I shall not be able to affoorde answerable seruice: and thus much I know∣y• it is no easie thing, nay, it is as hard a matter as can be, to sée the same satisfied, with such measure of dutifulnesse, as is requisite. Neuerthelesse, bicause I leade my lingering life in such order, that so much time and leasure, as my weakenesse of body doth permit, I bestow at my booke, and (as it were) de siring to quench y• continual thirst wherewt I am attainted, draw liquor out of y• self same springs & riuers, from whence
euen y• chiefest and the greatest instruments of your renoune tooke their beginning. I build vpon sure hope & stedfast con∣fidence, that all men shall thinke your benefites well besto∣wed: and that you your selfe (in like manner) shall perceiue (thoughe it bée somewhat longe) that the amendes which I am to make, are not to be contemned, nor lightly to be re∣garded: till the accomplishment and performance whereof, it is my duetie, Which is the duetie of a thankful man and vpon such a one a bene∣fite cannot be ill bestowed. to remember your singular beneuolence, yea so to remember it, that I neuer forget it: and it shall béelong to your courtesie, to continue for euer that goodwil which of your owne accord you haue applied to the procurement of my profite, that in the same, by the same, and through y• same, I may not be destitute of my desired succour: y• one of which, I meane to the vttermost of my power, to sée accomplished: and touching the perfourmance of the other, (such is the in∣credible bountifulnesse of your noble nature) you are not to be admonished. From Venice. Fare you well. P. Manutius to Hieronymo Capilupo, Bishoppe. THE ARGVMENT. This epistle differreth very litle from the former: for thoughe in words it varrie, yet in sense it doth very litle disagree: the summe and totall effect thereof, consisteth in the acknowledging of be∣nefites receiued: whereunto are annexed certaine significations of his owne thanckfull heart: In the conclusion of the epistle, hee promisseth to shewe himselfe recōpenceable to his power, though not with like recourse of benefits, yet with giuing thankes. THe Hee be gin∣neth still with the consession of a thankfull heart. auncient duetifulnesse, which I owe to your reue∣rence, taking beginning and roote, srom the gratious or∣namentes of your noble nature, required (vndeubtedly) to write some thing vnto you in an epistle: but there were hin∣draunces alwayes in these purposes, whereby I was both a∣mased as mistrusting, and discouraged as not daring to take in hand such an aduenture: namely, the dignitie and worthi∣nesse
of your calling, and the excellencie of your person. For, I was carried into thoughtes of vncertaintie, and conceiued an inward reuoking feare, least in sending vaine and trifling letters, to such a man, vppon whome continuall burthens of great and weightie buisinesse doe attend, I should shewe and bewray the pointe of an impudent and shamelesse fellowe. But nowe I will declare my minde truely and vnfaynedly: I finde fault, and doe almost euen accuse Which is in some so aboū dante, that it turneth to their discom∣moditie: wher fore modestie in measure & with reason, is commendable and also pro∣fitable. my modestie: be∣cause, whiles I am consulting and deliberating to write to your reuerence, and yet bring not the accompts of my deter∣minations to perfourmance, it commeth to passe (in the meane season, these delaying causes béeing vsed) that your Which is in some so aboū dante, that it turneth to their discom∣moditie: wher fore modestie in measure & with reason, is commendable and also pro∣fitable. humanitie outrunneth, and recouereth much ground of my duetifulnesse, althoughe I am full loathe, that your beneuo∣lence, should suffer further triall (whome I knowe, to bée a man for the excellencie of your vertues, right praise worthie, whereunto I may not, neither canne aspire) considering that euen in this which you haue alreadie done (béeing a principal pointe of your good will towardes mée, & then the which I e∣stéeme nothing more precious,) no ydle proofe of your boun∣tie, (in partile requiting whereof, I remaine a debtour,) ap∣peareth. Wherefore, as I am ashamed and repent mée of my bashfulnesse, in that I had not the audacitie and bould∣nesse to write to your reuerence, no not euen then, when my will and desire was in excéeding great towardnesse: euen so I féele my selfe meruayloufly delighted, in this comfortable & ioyfull declaration of your woonted kindnesse, together with the commendations which it pleaseth you to bestowe vppon mée, in your praysing Epistle. And surely, I would not you should thincke, that I haue either attempted, or ac∣complished any thing without mine vnwearisome labours, and incessaunt watchinges (which deserued well lyking, and not controlling contempt) that I was in hope to reape any other aduauntage, or to obteine any better reward, then I haue already recouered, through the iudgement and testimo∣nie of you, and such as bée like you: Prelates (I meane) of
highe calling, and for their vertue most renowmed: which if I haue gotten, I thincke mée selfe wel recompenced, and I triumph therin, and reioyce. But if you do so commend mée (which indéed I may suspecte) as if by your words you would incourage mée, fainting (as it were) and waxing wearie in the race which I haue to runne: yet notwithstanding, e∣uen thereby, as with a principall benefite, you binde mée to haue you in reuerence: fythence, if any thing in the worlde bée forceable and effectuall, to persuade and prouoke mée, it is your authoritie, wherein that working chiefely consisteth. Wherefore, I wil so order my doinges, and therein vse such diligence, that I may bée thought, truly to interprete and expounde the meaning of your epistle. For, I will bée more industrious, more circumspect, more earnest and painefull, to obteine those thinges, which whosoeuer doeth purchase and possesse, he cannot but enioy the pension of perfect praise. And to turne the residue of my talcke to your highnesse, whom it hath pleased courteously to visite mée with the em∣bassage of a most louing letter, and voluntarily (without the helpe of any mediatour) to graunt mée frée passage and ac∣cesse to your friendshippe, which a long time I desired, and now at lengthe to the full delight of my heart, I haue obtei∣ned, if I bée not able to make sufficient recompence for such speciall benefites as I haue receiued, (sythence I owe more to your goodnesse, then it is possible for mée to discharge, and sée fully payed) yet will I (at least) not shewe my selfe Lest all that you haue don for my weale, should seeme vtterly lost & cast away. vn∣thanckfull: and I am content, in consideration of abilitie, to remaine your debtour, but in respect of my will and desire, I will doe what I can, that my duetie be not vnsatisfied. From Venice. Fare you well.
P. Manutius to Francisco Commenduno, Cardinall created. THE ARGVMENT. Writing to a certaine Cardinall, a friend of hi, whose name is Fran∣cisco Commenduno, hee beginneth his letter with an interiection of ioye, or a kinde of speache importing his inwarde gladnesse, through the honourable estate of F. Com. conceiued. Hee giueth a short note (by the way) of such things, wherby men ostentimes are aduaunced: among which hee maketh mencion of vertue, which being lest regarded, is also lest auayleable to preferre such men, of whome shee is possessed: hee praiseth P. Pius the fourth of that name: sheweth that rewards & punishments are the main∣tenaunces of all well ordered commonwealthes: praiseth him, for sundrie considerations, to whome he writeth this epistle: profes∣seth that hee was exceeding glad, when he was infourmed, that he was made Cardinall, and so concludeth. O Most happie and glorious day, which hath ministred vn∣to vs perpetuall pleasure, comfort knit to continuaunce, and euerlasting ioyfulnesse. O most blessed day, being the On which day hee was created Crdi∣nall: for which aduancement, hee had to thanke P. Pius the fourth. fourth of the Ides of March. For, vppon that day it pleased our Gratious Lord, and high bishop, with other worthie Pre∣lates and excellent men, to nominate and create you Cardi∣nall, which thing all good and vertuous men most hartily de∣sired. Let vs now stopp the course of our complaintes. Let vs not saye that vertue is vnprouided of a place, which hereto∣fore hath béene the lamentable song of a great number: and surely, not wichout iust occasion. For some haue béene ad∣uaunced to degrées of statelynesse, through the noblenesse of their byrth: othersome haue growne in countenaunce by the meanes of their riches and possessions: and some by one thing some by another, haue crept vpp to authoritie: onely Uertue hath béene to a verie fewe an instrument and helpe to prefer∣ment. This blemishe and offensiue inconuenience is nowe abolished, and the auncient custome of high Bishopps, which verie fewe haue obserued, that long hath béene desired, by
and through y• wysedome of P. Pius (the fourth of that name by succession in the seate of supremacie) which is so excellent, that it can neuer bée sufficiently commended, is renewed. Which béeing come to passe, I am assured, that according to the ful measure of perseuerance and knowledge, wherwt you bée stoared, you are not to be taught, what belongeth to the function whereunto you are called, nor yet what things your present dignitie requireth, or to your life past vertuously go∣uerned, is agréeable. Thus much I haue to say, and I may bouldly affirme it, that with one heart toung & voyce, al good men throughout the whole cōmonwelth, reioyce & are excée∣ding glad, for this your aduancement: & that they giue infinit thankes, with al reuerence, to our Gracious Lord and chiefe bishop, for that it hath pleased him, in these troublesome and daungerous dayes; to choose such a sure prop and substantiall piller (as you) to stay vpp the Churche, when it was like to fall, and ready to runne to ruine: offering vnto you this ho∣nourable roome, whereunto you are now elected, of his owne voluntarie motion, not being required: bestowing vpon you (I say) this place of preeminence, which Francisco Cō menduno, pre ferred before many gentle∣men of a good house, to the dignitie of a Cardinall. to diuerse noble Gentlemen, earnestly labouring and making great suite for the same, hée thought more méete to bée denyed, then to bée graunted. You know that vertue hūteth not after rewards, neither doeth it arrogate and take to it selfe any externall thinge, wherewith to bée adorned and beautified. Neuer∣thelesse, if in y• due administration of two specialties (name∣ly Punishment and Recompence) the safetie of the common∣wealth consisteth, as Philosophers & men of excéeding great wisedome and learning, haue left witnessed in writing: good cause then (no doubt) there is to reioyce in both, sythene to vertuous men the verie best aduauncementes that bée, are largely giuen: and that wickednesse is so noted and reuen∣ged, that none hath to vaunt himselfe of his ill doing, nor yet to make reckoning that in offending hée should escape vnpu∣nished. In consideration whereof, you, as well as other, haue necessarie cause greatly to reioyce in this your honour, and not to make light accompt of such a benefite, deserued, & yet
Wherein a testimonie & proofe of your worthinesse appeared. not desired, though for the commoditie of the seate apostoti∣call, you refused no labours, albeit passing burthenous: you withdrew your selfe from the aduenture of no daunger. You cast all your care, fixed all your thoughtes, had your minde wholy occupied, and your trauell altogether employed, in the maintenance and preseruation of all, none excepted. So soone as it was aduouched vnto mée for a veritie, that you were chosen and created Cardinall, I was immediately swallo∣wed vpp (as it were) in a gulffe of gladnesse. My hear was so inflamed with ioyfulnesse, that it triumphed: yea such was the plentie of my pleasure, that it is not possible with penne to bée expressed: howbeit, thoughe it bée so abundaunt, as the tongue séemeth an insufficient instrument to testifie it: yet notwithstāding in Which is a∣ble to compre hend that, that neither toung nor penne can expresse. thought and immagination it may be cō∣prehended: if it would please you to call in examination, the greatnesse of my goodwill, which remayneth at all times vn∣diminished: and the reuerence I haue of your person, daily in∣creasing, as your honour is inlarged, through the brightnesse of your vertue. Which that you would doe, I beséech you most instantly. Dated at Rome the xii. of the Kalends of A∣prill. Fare you well. P. Manutius to Carolo Bor∣romeio, Cardinall. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hauing a certaine petition to Carolo Borromeio a Cardinall, which hee is desirou to haue furthered, he renueth his suite: wherunto hee seemeth to bee drawne by necessitie, not being so venturou, by reason of his bashfulnesse & modestie, to moue it to memorie. Howbeit taking stomache and (as the Prouerbe saith) heart at grase, after many thinges vttered in the Cardinals commenda∣tion, he proceedeth in his petition, which is nothing else, but that hee might liue quietly in Rome: for (bee like) some there were that sought his disturbaunce.
SUch is your bountifulnesse vnto mée plentifully testified, and the perfecte experience that I haue of your condi∣tions, that I cannot put you in minde, or rather, that I may not clayme perfourmaunce of those thinges, which vnto mée, not once nor twise most courteously you promissed. And surely, Hee confes∣seth the soft∣nesse of his owne nature and his excee∣ding modestie such is my nature, that I am ashamed to craue that the second time, to the attainement whereof, I haue once al∣readie plaide the parte of a suppliant, althoughe it touched mine estate so narrowely, that thereuppon my making and marrige séemed to depend. Neuerthelesse, I labour not in mistruste, that the renewing of an olde suite, wilbe tedi∣ous in your hearing, sythence it is the suite of such a man, specially, as doeth exhibite vnto you singular reuerence: bée∣sides that, as sheweth himselfe, according to the measure of his imbecillitie and weakenesse, not vnmindefull of your surpassing praises. A reason fol∣lowing of veri∣tie, but ot of neceitie. It is a thing much to bee wished, that such as couette principall benefites, should either haue in themselues, a sufficiencie to serue their contentation: or else should be in great credit and fauour with such princes, no∣bles and Gentlemn, whose woordes and authoritie are most effectuall, for their poore suppliants furtheraunce. In the want of which two thinges you doe not wade, as wise men hould opinion. For you are by nature, meruaylous proane and inclinable, to those thinges which are most precious and honourable: besides that, this your readinesse and aptnesse, béeing coupled with singular policie, and not seperated from vertue, doeth so purchase the fauour and well lyking of your Unckle, our * Metropolitane, a man fraught and furnished with all wisedome and vnderstanding, that hée thinketh no∣thing to good to bestowe vpon you, but doeth, as it were, loade you with burthens of benefites: and hath committed to your charge and credite, a great par of his weightie affayres, (such is the opinion and good lyking that hée hath conceiued of your singular worthinesse) to the intent that by the com∣municating and imparting of them, vnto you, hée might bée some what eased. Wherfore, imbrace and make much of this
acceptable time, as best beséemeth your grauitie, or rather so kéepe it, that you lose it not, sithence it is your good and gra∣cious luck, therin to haue interest. The these words are to be mēt of himself: for e was belike in some trou∣ble, wherwith he was so dis∣quieted, that e forgatt (in maner) accu∣stomed ser∣uice & dueti to his benefa∣ctours. miserie of the tie, hath wéeded out all woonted well deseruing: which if it shall please you to plant a new, and to sée that restored, which you haue alreadie attempted, and wil (I hope) also accomplishe, you shall mount vp to the heauenly Olympus, euen by the selfe same steps, that your predecessours before you haue as∣cended, leauing behinde you such a monument of honour and worthinesse, as no age, no succession of yeares shall wast and confume. And as touching mine owne person, thus much I am to say: that if it bée my happie chaunce to obteine that by your meanes, which doth wholy rest in you, or wherein (at least) you may doe much to the purpose, namely that I may liue at Rome to the cōtentment of my minde: (for what man would willingly leade his life in such a place, where thinges are so preposterous and ouerthwart, that disquietnesse, and a worse inconuenience followeth?) I will doe the vttermost of mine endeuour, yea I will peraduenture bring to pass, that such a singular benefite shal be throughly acknowledged: and though for lacke of abilitie answerable to my will, I might seme accusable of ingratitude: yet daily & continual remem∣braunce of your goodnesse, from which I will neuer reuolt, shall pleade mée excusable of vnthanckfulnesse. Dated at Rome the 4. of the kalends of Nouember. Fare you well. D. Erasmus Roterodamus to lermo Burbanco, Secretarie to the right reuerend the B. of Yorke, and Cardinall. ¶ THE ARGVMNT. Hee beginneth his epistle with a sentence, touching friendship: cō∣mending Ilermo Burbanco for his courtesie and kindnesse, which ee professeth on his behalfe to bee vndeserued. Reckoneth vpp
by name diuerse Gentlemen, with whome he was in fauur: where, by the way, he calleth him selfe happie, and riche, becaus he hath the goodwilles and freendeship of such as he : commendeth (by the way) the Lord Cardinall, in tht he vouch∣safeth to make wise men of his counsel: Then toward his con∣clusion, he saith, that as he hathe welwillers, so he hath aduersa∣ries, noting also that he had rather haue a very fewe (so they be ertuously disposed) to be his freendes, then to haue the hearts of many, being viciously inclined. For end, he wisheth malicious and enuious persons a better spirit then they  to possess and so wrappeth vp all with commendations. TRue is In the ac∣knowledging of thankful∣nesse, this, or the like begin ning is vsuall with  of Epistles. his loue and vnfeigned, that measureth not his good will with rewardes: but loueth freely, not loo∣king for recompence: but you haue loued Erasmus, whose desartes are not to make any challenge to kindenesse, with suche constancie, with suche zeale and earnestnesse, that it is not possible to picke out one man from among a great mul∣titude, that loueth him more sincerely, more hartily, or more faithfully, whose merites might make iust claime to suche excéeding kindenesse. Howe singularly did you loue mée when I was resident in Rome, giuing you no occasion of exhibiting suche courtesie: and therefore, béeing so muche the more bounde vnto you, in speciall dutifulnesse, I haue not suffered your vndeserued humanitie, to waxe colde in mée, no not a litle to languishe: sithence betwéene vs there haue béene, these many yeares, often and sundrie re∣ses of fréendely seruices, whiche once ceassing, fréendshippe must néedes be in daunger of a consumption, O This is som∣what ▪ mently spokē & may here∣fore  to  ith  the  credt f ki∣nesse. hear appointed euen from thy creation to harbour kindenesse, to∣wades whome if I should not shewe some  of goodwil againe, then doe not I desire, that men shoulde say of me, howe I beare my frd and beloued, about me in my body. And here by the way the olde age or prouerbe must not bee vnremembred, whie sayeth, that Mnus ma∣num  so  the proerb one good turne requireth another. My fréende Montioy
hathe made you priuie, what good will he doeth beare me, and the desire of you bothe, inclined to doe mée good, hathe procured mée many fréendes and fauourers in oe fami∣lie. For what shoulde I else coniecture to be the occasi∣on of so gracious a benefite? and what is there in mée that  hae in it suche force and effectuall woorkinge, tht it  kindle the affection of He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours an fa∣uourers. M. T. Louell, the moe wise and learned Ciuilian, towardes mine vnwor∣tie person? Or that He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours an fa∣uourers. M. R. Tonicio, a man of rare , should proesse and put in practise, suche ap∣paraunt tokens of conceiued kienesse? Or that He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours an fa∣uourers. M. F. Philppo a young Gentleman of great hope and toward∣nesse, shoulde affoorde mée suche singular fauour? What shoulde I stand eckoning vppe in the number, He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours an fa∣uourers. M. Fran∣cisco, the Physician, whose courtesie, is not newely kin∣deled, but hathe béene long a burning? What shoulde I make mention of He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours an fa∣uourers. M. D. Samsono, a man of incompa∣rable knowledge, then whome a faithfuller and fréer heart can not be wished? What néede I repeate He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours an fa∣uourers. M. Gonello, hm whome I account, not as a fréende, but estéeme euen as the halfe of my life. Among the rest, what shoulde I  to name He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours and fa∣uourers. M. Clemens, to whome He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours an fa∣uourers. S. T. Moore hathe discouered a fewe sparckles of his beneuolence to∣wardes ? What shoulde I stande adding further to tese whome I haue recited, He rehear∣seth the names of  gentle∣men that were his ▪ tours an fa∣uourers. M. R. Pacaeo, who both in pro∣ming and also in perfourming, proueth himselfe a moste trustie & faithfull Pylades▪ What should I setdowne in this rgister, the Right Reuerend Sometime Byshop of Dyrham. C. Tonstallo, whom I may compare with the best of them, that in auncient time haue beene highly commended for the synceritie and vnfeigned∣nesse of their fréendshippe? O happie man that I am, bles∣sed with aboundaunce of richesse: O moste honourable familie throughe whom I am made a communicant of such speciall benfites: O right Noble and renoumed He meaneth the Byshop of Yoke, to whō thi Bbanco was . Car∣dinall, whose wisedome admitteth suche men to bee of his counsell: whose table is furnished with suche starres that
cast so glorious a brightnesse. But (good God) howe en∣tierly doe they loue Erasmus, in what account and rep∣tation they haue the man, considering that his meries haue not beene suche, as that they shoulde purchase this vn∣measurable good will. Howbeit, as these men are my fauourers and loue mée (I thanke them) excéedingly, so E∣rasus is not without many an open and a secrete enimie, He excu∣seth himselfe by reporte of his owne me∣rits and be∣hauiour. althoughe his vsage hathe not deserued suche doggishe dealing: and I pray God, these séedes of enuie b not fur∣ther scattered, and so taking roote, increase to greater incon∣uenience. I am at this point, for so I thinke it best, to please a fewe and let the multitude alone, and these fewe whome I woulde gladly please and so enioy the aduantage of their fauour, I wishe them to be suche as are vertu∣ous. This done, I rather desire as I say, to haue the fa∣uour and goodwill of a fewe, so that they be commendably disposed, then to haue the fréendshippe of an infinite num∣ber, whose malice is infected with many The wordes folowing, next and im∣mediatly, ex∣pounde those wordes plain∣ly. a foule and oug∣ly disease: as for example, with grudging hatred, the very canckar and Caterpiller of all kindenesse: with froward∣nesse and wilfull follie, the aduersarie of wisedome and aduisement: with backbyting and slaunder, the professed enimies of honestie: wher with whiles they acquaint them∣selues, wishing well to none, they indaage themselues, they wounde themselues with their owne weapons: but to suche malicious people wée wishe a better minde, and a more tractable nature. Be you my deputie in mine ab∣sence, and commend mée to euery one of my fréendes, by name particularly. Dated at Louane, in the Calendes of September. Fare you well.
D. E. Roterodamus, to S. T. Moore highe Treasurer to the Kings Maiestie. THE ARGVMENT. Hee commendeth to S. T. Moore, Lorde Treasurer of England, a sreende of his, named Conradus Goclenius, a man (by his re∣porte) of singular learning and praisewoorthie poperties: who hauing but a bare maintenaunce, in consideration of his worthi∣nesse, whiche deserued farre better, Erasmus is moued in minde to write for his preferment, hauing suche a speciall regarde of modestie, troughout the whole course of his letter, whiche is in deed peitorie, that he seemeth not to craue at all, when he cra∣ueth moste earnestly. I Can not This Epis∣tle in the for∣mr part ther∣of, commen∣deth S. Tho∣m Moore , for his courteous &  na∣ture. but highly commend (Right noble & Honoura∣ble) this your well disposed minde, in that you séeke to in∣riche your selfe with nothing so much, as with fréends faith∣full and syncere, on whom the most part of your pleasure & hearts delight, you are persuaded (and that not amisse) doeth depend. Some there bee, that are maruelous cir∣cumspecte, least they should be deceiued, with counterfet pearles, precious stones, and metals of value: you contrarie wise making none account of the admission of suche tran∣sitorie richesse, thinke your selfe to be (as you are in deede, who calleth it in doubt?) wealthie enoughe, yea to swimme in aboundaunce of all necessaries, if among all o∣ther your possessions, you haue one faithful freend and vn∣eigned. Neither is there any man to be found, whose minde conceiueth more pleasure in casting a paire of dyce, in play∣ing at tables, in riding and running a hunting, in the swéet and comforable sonde of musicall instrumentes, then you
reape pleasure in hauing frée talke and liberall communica∣tion with one that is learned, and indued with vnderstan∣ding. And although you haue plentie and store of this kinde of substaunce, yet notwithstanding, because I knowe thus muche, that Those wor∣des are not to be taken in an euill but in a good sense. the couetous mans heart is alwayes greedie and euermore vnsatisfied, and for that also I consider, that you and I haue had (oftentimes) passing fortunate success:: I thought it not amisse to commende vnto you, and as it were to deliuer into your possession, one speciall man, whom you might loue with all your hart, and to haue him in singu∣lar estimation: the man, whō I meane, is named Conradus Goclenius a Westphalian: which kinde of countrie people, as there be of the common sort, very many that be ignorant and vnciuil: so there are to be found among thē (as we haue had experience) many that be of a noble nature, fraught with all manner of learning, and in knowledge moste excellent. There is no kinde of people more painefull, able and wil∣ling (I meane) to susteine labours, none in manners and be∣hauiours more trustie & deseruing credit, none for simplici∣tie plainesse & vprightnes in dealing, more to be cōmended, or at least wise, they principally praise worthie. You are not ignoraunt that in Louane there is erected & founded a Col∣lege, wherin Whereupon it was named Collegium trilingue, the three tounged College. three seueral toungs or languages are profes∣sed: in that College it was his happie lucke, to reade in the open schooles in Latine that thereby he purchased to him self passing praise and commendation, and procured to his hea∣rers excéeding great profite by his learned lectures: yea the whole Uniuersitie hathe reaped singular aduantage, by his readinges. Besides that, he is a man of suche a minde and gentle spirit, so honest and vpright in conuersation, and not destitute of any thing that is requireable in humanitie, that the same concurring, and as it were running hand in hande with his wonderfull knowledge, that he maketh A thing de∣seruing singu∣lar commen∣dation. suche to loue learning excéedingly, and to haue it in reuerence, as before coulde by no meanes digest it, by reason of their continuall loathing. He hathe (moreouer) a pleasaunt inuention and a subtile, whereof he hath giuen substantiall
significations, yea, in those exercises, that are vsually prose∣quuted in the cōmon schooles. He hathe in him also very ma∣ny, (and the selfe same approuable) merrie conceites, sauou∣ring altogether of Athenien delightsomnesse: and for plea∣saunt hystories, pretie fables, and suche like gyftes in times conuenient not vnnecessarie, hee may contende and striue euen with you, for the maisteries. In versifying, he hath a peculiar maiestie, and grace: his deuises are not darkened with mystie cloudes of doubtes, the conueiaunce of his mat∣ter is manifest and perceiuable: to conclude, the soyle of his inuention, memorie, and iudgement, is so ordinarily plough∣ed with practise and experience, that in all his dooinges hee is plentifull and delectable. There is no Argument, no matter (I meane) so barren, so to be misliked, so vndispu∣table, but if he haue it in handling, it shalbe bothe pleasaunt and profitable. In writing proese, he is so like, or rather so vnlike him selfe, that a man reading and marking his methode and style therein, would thinke that in versifying he is but a smatterer, and not that scarcely. As for fréende∣ly behauiour, he is of the right moulde, none to receiue so woorthie a stampe more appliable: and surely, if you doe enter acquaintaunce and familiaritie with him, thus muche He had full expeence & proofe of his qualities in freendship, or else he woulde not haue vsed suche earnest wordes, speci∣ally, to a man of so high a calling. I dare able, that you néede not to feare the vio∣lating and breaking of the same, through any kinde of casu∣altie: thoughe we see it doeth chaunce moste commonly, that suche as are of a faithlesse nature, beeing hollowe hear∣ted, and in subiection to the frce of their vnbrideled and es raunging affections, for euery light occasion runne in∣to an apostacie or reuolting from fréendshippe, cracking in sundr the conditions of that couenaunt, whiche with the seale and subscription of faithfulnesse, was neuer con∣firmed: and yéelding themselues in obedience, to their owne vaine mindes, and deceiuable desires. But in the behalfe of him, thus muche I am to auouche, that hee is constant, that he is not ambitious, that he is not gréedy of vaineglorie, that hee is no reuenger of suffered iniuries, and that there
is no pleasure, but he knoweth howe to vse the benefite thereof with measure: so farre is hee from surfetting in ex∣cesse: His forbearing an inward hate and enuious minde against any man: he is so farre from vnderstanding & bée∣ing acquainted with the mischéefes of suche a monster, that neuer so much as once dreampt of the shadowe of the same: suche is the goodnesse of his nature, in all pointes moste woorthie commendation. As for kéeping companie with him, somewhat I can say, that he is gentle, louing, easie to be dealt withal, farre from frowardnesse, and suche lyke rebukeable conditions, so that his fréendshippe can not but bée alloweable. Furthermore, he careth not for gaine, he setteth light by lucre and aduauntage, though his estate and calling bée but indifferent: and haueing (in deede) no∣thing beside bare findeing, apparell, and bookes. Nowe, Syr, if our Lordes, they of the Temporaltie, and they al∣so of the Spiritualtie, had learned to exhibite vnto learned men due and deserued honour, as The Itali∣ans make muche of lear ning and lear∣ned men: wher in they deser∣ue greatly to be praised. among the Italians it is not nprouided, then (no doubt) Goclenius our fréende had wanted no manner of wealthe, but should haue had in present possession mountaines of Golde and Siluer, and a∣boundanuce of all other necessaries. But nowe, after their long sléepe and slugging, they are awaked, and euery noble man, is desirous and carefull, to haue his children trained and brought vppe in learning, albéeit among gallant cour∣tiers, there is none that is learned in déed, but M. G. Hallo∣inus, who is so farre frō reaping any profite therby, that he hath had none other rewarde for his labour, but enuie and grudginge stomaches: Neuerthelesse, ere it belong (I hope) hee shall gaine by the bargaine, and recouer great commo∣ditie and preferment. Nowe, I haue this considencein you, that hereafter, when you are better acquainted with Goclenius, there shalbe occasion on bothe partes, as well yours as his, sufficiently offered, to giue me hartie thankes for this my Because spe∣ciall benefite is like to in∣sue thereupon. good motion: as chaunced but of late in M. Francisco Craneueldio, who is so déepely in your bookes
of accountes, and with you all in all, that after a sorte I doo, in manner, beare him an inward grudge. Fare you well. D. E. Roterodamus, to the Right Renoumed, King Henrie the eight, King of England. &c. THE ARGVMENT. In this letter are specified three principall pointes: in the firste hee commendeth learning and knowledge, but specially that lear∣ning and knowledge wherein Christe is glorified: in the seconde he praiseth the kinges highnesse, for refourming religion: in the third is mentioned an aduersarie of his, against whome he com∣plaineth, and sendeth a booke to the Kinges maiesti, written a∣gainst the same his aduersarie▪ Finally, he wisheth good success to the Kinges proceedinges, and concludeth with a petition to his grace, for the continuance of his wonted fauour. MOste high and mightie King, sithence a greate parte of the life of man, and of the felicitie therupon attending, consisteth in learning and knowledge, which howe muche in this blinde time of ignoraunce, Learning & knowledge. they are sought to bee defaced by a companie of bussardly pezantes, so muche the more are they to be supported by the fauour and coūtenan∣ces of Kings, Princes, and Nobles, towards whome, therby, in processe of time, singular aduauntage is like to growe. And because there are diuerse kindes of exercises belonging to learning, of which not so muche as the least is to be neg∣lected: so principally and aboue all other, those About the de of this E∣pistle, resour∣mation began in the English Churche. studies are chiefly to be séene vnto and regarded, whiche are necessarie for the aduauncement of godlines, and auailable for the in∣crease of Christes glorie, our souereigne Lord and Monarch full of maiestie: in this respect, I wishe with all my harte, ea in the feruentnes of my zeale I desire it, that all other Kinges, Nobles, and Peeres, would followe the example of
your puisaunce, and make your dooinges the patterne, to frame all their actions and inuentions accordingly. Some there bée that do so, and I hope the number of them hereaf∣ter, will multiplie, so that you shal not want disciples, you being so worthie a schoolemaister. Small is my knowledge (I must néedes confesse) and litle (yea whose so euer is least, mine is lesser) is my learning: neuerthelesse, howesoeuer bee the measure of mine vnderstanding, so God be my good guide and gracious comforter at al times, and in my neces∣sitie, as I referre all my dooinges to the glorifying of his name, and make his honour and praise the ayme whereat I leuell, all that I haue hitherto written, or hereafter shall write, whiles I am able to put penne to paper. Undoub∣tedly, euen til this day, al godly minded men allowe and wel like of our dooings: and among all other, the P. Grace doeth count them worthie acceptation. How be it Such there bee in the world, at this day, that haue their close cor ners to lurke and lye in. some priuie nippers there be, and close whisperers in the worlde, who taking their pleasure of custome in olde léeze & thicke dreggs, can in no wise frame their stomaches, to the digestion of this our newe and holsome wine. There are not many of these malicious men, that are thus fettered in extréeme folly and blockishnesse: neuerthelesse, thoughe there be of them but a very fewe, yet with moste accursed & execrale hartes they haue conspired against learning and religion: yea, they wishe, thoughe it were to their owne harme and detriment, that the reformation of things amisse in the churche (at the prosperous flourishing wherof they grudge and are aggrée∣ued) might come to naught, and haue no good successe. The suggestions, and vehement persuasions of these men (as by coniecture I gather) haue drawne one Ed. L. to raile against vs with outragious language: and they them selues not ha∣uing the audacitie and bouldnes of spirit, to come vpon the stage, haue gotten this youngman, beeing desirous of vaine glorie, to play al the partes throughout the whole enterlude: I would he had otherwise set him sele a worke, in writing & deuising: or else I would it had béene his fortune to haue béene borne in another countrie, and not within the coastes
of England. I owe nothing to the man: howbeit, Erasmus gi∣ueth an exam∣ple, in himself, o Christian charitie. as it is the duetie of one Christian to another, I wishe him well, thoughe he wishe mée ill, and worse to himselfe. I owe to the Englishe nation, more then I doe owe to any other Region. I present to your highenesse a litle booke, wher∣in I make him answere, ye voide of reprocheful spéeches, taunting termes, and all vnreuerend vsage of the tounge: whiche booke if hee peruse and examine, he shall soone sée, howe with him selfe hée is at contrarietie and disagrée∣ment. I woulde not haue him turne to the filthie vomite of his contmelious and shamefull language, if he loue his owne honestie and honour: and as for argument, to replye vppon mine assertions, to bring any, I knowe hee is vna∣ble and insufficient. In the penning and compiling of the same, I haue bestowed almost fortie dayes: He seemeth sorie & grie∣ued, in occu∣pying his pen (as by the course of his wordes, is to be coniectu∣red) so vnne∣cessarily. whiche time, I woulde I had spent, either in the extolling of your incom∣parable noblenesse, and encounterable valiauntnesse: or else in the aduauncement of the glorie of my Messias Christ: so might I (in déede) haue béene better occupied. I bée∣séeche Christe Iesus, the moste mightie, to fauour and fur∣ther your maiesties godly and religious procéedinges, to giue them fortunate and happie successe, and that it woulde please him, to graunt me the vse and benefite of this life, but till I haue giuen some signification and testimonie, how muche I am bound to your highnes, for your vnspeakable goodnesse: whome I beséeche, like an humble Suppliant, to vouchesafe mée your Graces poore Client, with your accus∣tomed fauour. Dated at Antwerpe.
D. E. Roterodamus to King Hen∣rie the eight, King of England. &c. THE ARGVMENT. After his duetie done in moste obedient manner, by way of gree∣ting, he declareth what pleasure he tooke in the gifte whiche the Kinge bestowed on him: in the commendation of whome, hee spendeth the best part of his Epistle, praising principally his libe∣ralitie to learning: this being done, he reporteth honourably of the kinges courte: wisheth the King a long and a prosperous reigne: toucheth briefly, in how short a time he is constrained to set out the newe Testament, whiche he turned into Latine: & lastly dequeatheth him selfe and his seruice to the kinges com∣maundement. GRéetinges and immortalitie moste gratious King. &c. Your maiesties gifte, for diuerse considerations, was moste woorthie acceptation, either because in respecte of it selfe, it was of great value and price: or because it came from a king, By iterating that same one speeche, he no∣teth the wor∣thinese of the Kings maies∣ti. yea, frō such a king, whose noblenes is passing famous, both for the loue that he beareth to all honest & ver∣tuous exercises, and also for his inualuable treasure and a∣boundance of all kinde of riches: in whose opinion & iudge∣ment to be allowed and liked, it is farre greater honour, thē to be made Lorde and possessour of muche golde and siluer. Neuerthelesse, I had it in high estimation and reuerence, for this cause principally, that I accounted it to be, as it were, a certaine pledge or assuraunce of your Graces woonted good wil, neuer declining from Erasmus, whom as your ma∣iestie moste bountifully intertained into fauour, so moste honourably your highnesse hath inriched him with many re∣wardes. And as though this seemed, but a thing of small reckoning, to the intēt y• your affection & loue towards lear∣ning,
might bee more manifest and apparaunt, it pleaseth your highnesse, By that Alle gocal clause, he magnifieth the King for his loue and libalitie to learning. to open the sluses of your gracious good∣nesse, that the riuers of your liberalitie running abroade, many a drie and simple soyle, is thereby abled, to yeald plen∣tifull fruite: I meane, that your maiestie, of your owne accorde, giue many pensions to the maintenaunce of lear∣ning, and not onely many, but the selfe same also very large: among which number of them that haue tasted the swéete∣nesse of your Graces liberalitie, I am one, to whome your highnesse hathe offered a yearely liuing, the profite where∣of I might enioye for terme of life: whiche sithence it is so fréely giuen, I may not séeme thereof to make a refu∣sall, beeing the gyfte of suche a Noble and Renowmed Prince, within the compasse of whose dominion I coulde finde in my heart, to liue and dye, (thoughe I were not re∣warded:) vnder such a Prince full of valiauntnesse, I would gladly employ my seruice, without hope of pension: with whome there is suche respecte of persons in their woorthi∣nesse, that howe muche one excelleth another in learning and knowledge, in vprightnesse of life, and vertuous conuer∣sation, These words giue to note, that the king, had a respect and considera tion, where, & towards whō, he shewed fa∣uour & good liking. in so muche the more fauour is he, in so muche the more credite, countenaunce, and estimation with his Souereigne: whose court being replenished with famous men, furnished with all kinde of vnderstanding, is a liue∣ly example of Christian discipline, in so muche that euery Uniuersitie repineth at it, that it should so flourishe out of measure. I beséeche the moste mightie Monarche, whose kingdome is eternall, and power infinite, that it woulde please him of his goodnesse, to continue this your well dispo∣sed minde, that it neuer become subiect to alteration: to blesse you with the long possession of your kingdome, in health, wealthe, and all happines, that vnder the sceptr and gouernment of so excellent and Conquerous a Prince, it may flourishe in all true felicitie. Wee are constrai∣ned to publish the translation of the new Testament, with in the space of a foure monethes: that worke being dispat∣ched and rid out of my handes, I and my labours are all
and wholy at your Maiesties commaundement. Dated at Louane, the seuenth of the Calendes of Maie. Io. Rauisius Textor, to N. L. Maluerino. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This letter, not being sent of Textor to any manner of person: but made and inuented for the behoofe of young scholers, runneth altogether vpon the dispraise of idlenesse: the whole cope of the ame may serue for Imitation, and may rather be called a Theame, then an Epistle (as many more may be of his making) though he giueth it that name and title. After he hathe shewed (to the supplanting of idlenesse and slouthe) howe all creatures, as well heauenly as earthly, attend on their calling, and do such seruice diligently and ordinarily, as is to them appointed, hee draweth toward an end, vsing reasons of persuasion to auoid such a vicious annoyaunce. Lastly, he writeth in that sort, as if one young scholer were incouraging another young scholer, to some scholerly exercise, & immagining that audience is present o heare what they haue to say, e feigneth to one of them a de∣clamation, whereof he setteth downe a methodicall and proper beginning. THe statute enacted by Amasis, a king of E∣gypt. There was also be∣sides him, ( Herodotus w nesleth) ano∣ther of the same name, who was cap∣teine generall of Dius his armie of foot∣men against the Cyene∣ans.. Amasis the Egyptian king, and at his comaundement solemnly proclaimed, is most com∣mendable and praiseworthie, whereby it was prouided that all, and euery one, lining within the limittes of his lands, should be called to a yearely account, and giue a true recko∣ning to the magistrate of the Prouince, where they liued, howe they spent their time, and whereupon they were mainteined: whiche who so did not, he was  to suffer sharpe and extréeme punishment. Unto which singu∣lar lawe and moste politique ordinaunce, the custome of the Wise men of India. Cic. Tuscul. quest. lib. 5. Gymnosopstes of India, séemeth  agréeable, among whome suche as by their dayly labour, brought to
their Parentes none aduauntage, shoulde looe their mid∣dayes meale for their negligence and ydlenesse. With certaine Ilanders in Spaine, named Of them, Plinie. lib. 3. cap. 5. Silius. lib. 5. Flo. lib. 3. cap. . Diod. sic. lib. 6. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 55. Balares, this was a vse and receiued order, that the mother should shewe the sonne a marke to shoote at, which if he did hitte with his ar∣rowe, then had hée for his desarte, meate measurablie ministred: but if he failed, and was either short, or gone, or wyde, in directing his shafte, then was fasting the pe∣naltie of his amisse. For, as in the common games plaide and practised at Olympus, none is to challenge the garlande of victorie, but he that is called lawfully to giue a testi∣monie of his actiuitie, and passeth all the rest in the triall and proofe of those exercises: Euen so, hee is not woorthie to liue, who like an ydle and outhfull Droane, doeth no∣thing that deserueth life. In all the Elementes and other celestiall bodies, God or Nature hathe set them in suche estate, that they are neuer ydle, but still occupied in the ffices, whereunto by and through diuine prouidence they are aigned. The Heauen it selfe, whiche incompasseth the whole worlde, moueth it selfe orbicularly, that is, in circle. The The two comortable lightes of the worlde. Sunne and the Moone, haue their distincte seasons, wherein they runne their course turne by turne, according to eternall appointment: to the one is commit∣ted the gouernement of the day: to the other appointed the guideing of the night. The windes, kéeping conuenient places and regions, blowe with continuall blastes. The signes of the Zodiake, one with another, obserue their pre∣script times of circular mouing. The Sea, when the windes ceae puffing, is allaide with calmnesse: when they cast out blustering blastes, it is stormis and full of roa∣ring outrage: it giueth increase of fishe, for the foode and sustenaunce of man, without intermission. The earth ly∣ing barren and fruitelesse, in the comfortelesse time of Winter and Summer, con∣trarie seasons. Winter, maketh a large amendes of that ydlenesse, with yéelding a goodly and gallant  in the pleasaunt sea∣son of Summer. Trees and plantes, so soone as they
féele the time of the yeare approcheing, whiche serueth to bring foorth fruite, they conforme themselues to the na∣ture of the time, and yéelde their increase accordingly: they receiue sappe through out all and euery parte of them, they hoote foorthe their blossomes and buddes: their Peares, their Apples, thir Cytrons, their Pomegranats, their clus∣ters of Grapes, and euery trée in his peculiar kinde, their se∣uerall fruite, in due and conuenient order Persuasions to moue men to shake off vnprofitable ydlenesse: and to frame thē∣selues to bee thristily occu pied. The Oake yéel∣deth akehornes: the fylert yéeldeth Nuttes: the Haw∣thorne, the Iuie, the Baytrée and the Oliue, yéelde ber∣ries: the Seruice trée, the Medler trée, yéelde their fruite accordingly. Not so muche as the pricking Blackthorne, the hedge bushe, the Bryer, the bramble, whiche are wilde, but giue their increase, as nature hathe ordeined. But among all other trées, Plantes, and Hearbes, let vs bu∣sie our braines aboute the marking and considering of the spreading Uine: let vs occupie our cogitations and witte, in the weighing of the precious Pearles whiche it dooeth yéelde, to the singular comforte and delectation of mannes heart. Let vs prudently ponder with what faithfulnesse, and trustie seruice, the earthe, béeing the moother of all thinges, imbraceth the séede caste into her bosome, nouri∣sheth it with the milke of her owne pappes, ministreth con∣uenient fustenance vnto it, that it springeth vppe and grow∣eth gaily: whereby it turneth to the succour of man in due season, haueing receyued ripenesse: and thus doeth the earthe applie her selfe to the maintenaunce of all creatures: for without it, where shal the créeping things of the ground, vermine, and suche like, (that we may beginne with those creatures, whiche in our estimation ad thinking are most vile and yrksome) haue ? where shall the birdes of the Ayre finde their necessarie nourishment▪ where shal the fishes of the Sea be succoured? Or what should become of the water, if it were not imbancked with the earth? should not all kinde of cattell, that liue by the benefite of the ground perishe, and be hungerstarued? Finally, shoulde
not a creature moste excellent, for whose commoditie all these forecited graces were giuē, consume with famishment: Howe bountifull a seruitour is the earthe, to the husbande∣man? what vsurie doeth it pay for that which it borroweth? Howe doeth it inriche the husbandman with all manner of increase? with Wheate, with Rie, with Dates, with Barlie, with Beanes, with Pease, with Lupines, with Lintelles, with Uetchesse, with Millette, & all other kinde of pulse in great plentie and aboundance? What Reasons of experience to proue his pur∣pose. shall we say of the yeare it selfe, and the foure quarters of the same, whiche we knowe to be the measurer and meater of our life and all our dooinges, when hathe it reuoulted from the qualities wherewith naturally it is indued? what man is able to affirme, that he euer sawe the Spring tide without Marche Uiolettes, Primeroses, and other pleasant floures? What man can say, that euer he sawe Summer without Graine, Berries, and quickening heate ful of comfort? what man hathe so impudent and shamelesse a countenaunce, as to affirme, that euer he saw a haruest vnfurnished of fruite? what man can say, that euer he sawe a Winter season with out ysickles, without hoare frostes, without snowe, and such like colde Vnder that word: lighte∣ning, thunder, fiers in the ele ment, raine, winde, snowe, haile, deaw, & suche like thinges, my sts fogges, earth∣quakes. &c. are to be vn∣derstoode. meteors? Do not the very Monethes throughout the yeare, successiuely and in due order, perfourme their se∣ueral offices? who at any time can proue the contrarie, and dares say that this inuielable ordinaunce and euerlasting appointment hath béene broken? wherefore, if so be that al these creatures, some béeing of most excellencie, other some of basenesse, and some againe of indifferencie, shewe suche obedience and dutifulnesse, in accomplishing the lawes and statutes, whiche nature (not with out singular prouidence) hathe made, and from all beginnings enacted ratified, and established, all & euery one of them in their kinde, some to yéelde increase, and some againe to other seruices not vnne∣cessarie, were it not an intollerable shame, that Man, the Lord & King ouer all crea∣tures. Man (whō God hathe made Lorde and Owner of all these speciall be∣nesites) should lye tumbling vpon the bedde of ease, and
shrowde himselfe, head and eares, in : that hée should (as it were) putrifie and ott in ydlenesse, and teare out the tearme of his yeares, till bée enter into olde and croo∣ked age, in occupying himselfe about nothing that is profita∣ble? to runne ou his race, not reaping any aduauntage, be∣cause labour is too hard meate for his nyce stomach to digest? Finally, that hée aloe, among the rest, whome hée should so farre excell, as God surpasseth him, should dye like a beast in dishonour, not leauing behinde him, of his former life orderly lead, any commendable testimonie? What man is there, that will thinke this allowable: who can like of it? but such béetell headed lubbers, as neither haue in them discretion, reason, wysedome, iudgement, nor any other propertie praise∣worthie sythence brte beastes, that bée estranged from rea∣son, and other creatures indued with life, leaue vnto vs cer∣taine testimonies of their susteined labours, which are in our sight as it were looking glasses, wherein to vewe and behold the fowlenesse of our slouthfulnesse. What beasts they bee, none can be so igno raunt & bloc∣kish, but may perceiue and testifie. Some beastes there are, which vnto vs are most profitable, by yéelding the in∣crease of their bodies, for our succour and maintenaunce: and as they are vnto man principall benefites, so to themselues and to their kind, they are most louing and tender: very fewe or none at all, are there to bée found, so barren and fruitlesse, which yéeld not some commoditie or other for our behoofe. If wée séeke a proofe hereof in fishes, that liue by water, wée shal sée a manifest example. The fishe called Balena, nourisheth her younge with milke: the fishe called Cephalus bringeth forth egges: the Dolphine féedeth her young with milke in like maner, and that abundantly: when the Springtide ap∣procheth, they couple, and they bring foorth in the Summer season: the fishe called Echinus, bringeth foorth egges: the fishe called Hippocampus, is a present and souereigne reme∣die, against the byting of a madde dogge: and as all these loue their owne kinde tenderly: so they are by one meanes or another, seruiceable to man. Now let vs sée the kindnesse which resteth in the fowles of the ayre, which is wonderfull: and let vs marke their qualities, for they are straunge. The
Eagle ryeth her young oues against the bright sunne shine, which cleare light and  , if they cannot abide, shée forsaketh them, and accompteth them no better then of bastard byrds. Pigeons bring foorth two egges, the first a cocke, the second a henne, in fortie dayes they conceiue and bréede. The cocke bringeth forth lng egges, the henne round egges: the cocke also bewrayeth the breaking of the day, by his crowing, and awaketh the  headed lubber to his daily labour. The Peacocke doeth sitt abróode of twelue eggs. The A straung propertie of naturall affec∣tion described in the swal∣lowe. swallow bringeth foorth foure young ones, whom shee fostereth and féedeth in true measure of equitie and loue, beginning with the eldest, and so kéeping order in the residue. Now I will descend to other liuing creatures, and what is to be said in this case, concerning the beastes of the field, you shall likewise vnderstand. The Ore is a fellowe labourer with his maister, hée aswageth the tediousnesse of his swea∣ting trauell: they are husbandmen, for they till the land, they drawe the plough, they furrowe the soyle, they carrie the croppe of the ground into the Barne, and other seruices doe they, so that wée finde speciall benefites redounding to vs, by and through the vse of their ministerie. The shéepe is sorne and yéeldeth her woll, which is wouen & wrought to make vs wearing garmentes: they are eade and slaine, that their flesh might turne to our nourishment: they loue their young bleating lambes, to whome they giue sucke most tenderly. The Bée flyeth about the fragrant féeld, and the swéete gar∣den, gathering of euery flower somewhat, to carrie to her hiue, where shée laboureth in making honie. The hogge is fatt fedde, with oakehornes and other meate, of purpose to become our sustenaunce. Iohannes Ca ius, in his let∣rer sent to Cō radus Gesne∣rus, sheweth at large the pro∣perties of dog ges, their seue∣rall kinds and seruices. The dogge is a diligent dorekée∣per, a circumspect watchman, a necessarie seruaunt: driueth away the rauening. Woolfe from the flock, least there should bée a spoile and flaughter committed: they kéepe, preserue, and defend our houses from théeues, vagaboundes, lewde fellowes, robbers, and false knaues, who watche opportu∣nitie, leasure and time conuenient, when they might (to their
contentation and fulfilling of their desires) put their mis∣chefous deuises in practise. The Catt frayeth away rat∣tes, myce, and noysome vermine, and haunteth euerie cham∣ber though it bée neuer so secrets. Thus whiles I looke before mée, behinde mée, béeside mée, nowe on this hand, and then on that hande, I finde nothing, but is occupied and that most diligently, in perfourming those thinges wher∣unto by Nature they were appointed. I finde What a shame is it then for man being indued with reasō, (or at least ought to bee) know∣ledge and vn∣derstanding &c. should giue himselfe to ydlenesse? nothing that loueth slouth, that is inclined to ydlenesse, but eue∣rie creature in his kinde, dooing their duetie, in that ser∣uice whereunto they are alotted accordingly. What then, (that I may yet at the lengthe come to my purpose) should wée doe, to whome the light of reason so graciously is giuen? What (I saye) should wée buisie our heades and handes about? Wherein should wée bée exercised? Are wée brought to so lowe an ebb of discretion, and to so highe a floud of fol∣lie, that wée are content to bée ouercome of brute beastes, whome wée ought to excell (for howe doe wée passe them, or howe canne wée bée better then they, vnlesse wée haue the vse of those benefites which wée are uriched withall, in such conuenient order, as it bée commeth our calling and conditi∣on?) in reason, vnderstanding, maiestie, worthinesse, noble∣nesse: Finally, in all other thinges belonging to oure Na∣ture? Let vs not so wallowe in the waues of ydlenesse, that at lengthe wée bée ouerwhelmed. Let vs not vse the socie∣tie and fellowshippe of lazie slouthe, with satietie and excesse, least at laste wée bée so intangled in her snares, that wée finde no way to vnwinde oure selues againe. Nay rather, let vs followe the example of painefull Apelles a no ble painter of the countrie Cos, an Iland in the Acgean sea: of him Quint. lib. 12. de instit. orat. Plin. lib. 35. Apelles, of whome Plinie maketh mencion, who was such an enimie to ydle∣nesse, that his pencill was neuer drie, but still drawinge a line, in one colour or another. Let vs abhorre to resemble that slouthfull slouen, who lead all his life in the countrie in such order, that hée differed nothing from a dead car∣kasse, lying in the graue. The yeare hath runne his course. The ground hath yéelded her cropp. Ortchardes haue giuen the increase of their fruite.
The Garde hath giuen Uioletts, Roses, Marygolds, Gilli∣flowers, Cornashions, and whatsoeuer else is pleasaunt in sauour and smelling. The Uinetrée hath yéelded her pur∣ple grapes, by clusters: and all trées haue affoorded their fruite, in abundaunce: onely wée miserable wretches, are behinde hande, and haue not payed our yearely rent, which if wée pay not, then are wée not like to make any clayme or challenge for a quittaunce. Hauing delt before with exāples: Now hee falleth to admonitions, exhortations, persuasions, &c. Let vs (for shame) start out of the cabbine of this carelessnesse: Let vs shake off this slouthfulnesse, and nowe at lengthe (though somewhat late, yet Better late then neuer,) call to remembraunce, what re∣proche and infamie doeth flowe from ydlenesse. Let vs call to consideration, what an ignominious name, wée are like to purchase, if wée wincke at such a foule and loathsome vice: if (I say) wée will not sée it in our selues, and doe what wée may, to haue it redressed: let vs call to memorie, what ha∣zardes and inconueniences hang ouer our heades, béeing readie to fall vppon vs, for this our dissolutenesse and neg∣ligence. Let vs spring out of our nastie nestes of sluggish∣nesse: Let vs leaue sleaping in ydlenesse: Let vs catche the ploughe by the handle, and fall to furrowing: Let vs take it by the tayle, and thincke no scorne to toyle: Let vs lift vpp lustily the mattocke and the spade, and fall to deluing: Let vs take the axe, the wedge and the béetle, and settle our sel∣ues to cleauing and riueing: Let vs gett a hedgebill and fall As well in bodilie exer∣cises, as in thē also that beelong vnto the minde: for in so doing wee shall reap singular com∣moditie. to repayring broken fences, about fieldes and pastures: Let vs play the practitioners within our owne houses, in declameing, reasoning, and discoursing, about questions and causes of learning, that wée may bée able to speake in the Se∣nate, and to defend Milo against his aduersarie: to preuaile against conspyring Catiline, and to thrust him out, and his fardle of troubles, that hée bréede no more annoyaunces to the Common wealthe: to supporte and maintaine Cluen∣tius, that hée bée not abused with too much iniurie: to fur∣ther the cause of the Orphàn and fatherlesse, that they may not vtterly bée forsaken, as forlorne and succourlesse: to ex∣pell oppressours, extortioners, vniuste personnes, whose
whole delight is in deuising mischiefe, and putting the same in execution: to bée profitable members to the bodie of oure naturall countrie, within whose vowels wée are so tenderly and louingly included and clasped: to resist the vsurping po∣tentacie, and outragious rule of thundering Tyraunts. Let vs try what wée can doe, a fewe of vs gathered together, not contemning one anothers infancie and young knowledge, but alowing one anothers weakenesse of wit, which, though it bée but rawe, yet in tracte of time, (there is no doubt) it wil waxe riper. Let vs challenge one another, who can doe best, for the obteyning of victorie. Let vs stretch our inuention, and search euery corner of our braines. Let vs rub off the rustinesse of our tongues, that our vtteraunce may be plea∣saunt and eloquent: this let vs doe before wée come in place and presence of stately counsellours, of subtile headed Law∣yers, of curious attourneis, and such like fine fellowes, that bée Curiositie  speaking, or sine and affec∣ted speach, not wanting in manie. verie deintie and circumspect in speaking, least any word should escape them, vnaptly and vnproperly placed: and to whose eares, it is a thing, then which a worsse cannot bée na∣med, to babble beside the booke: considering that what soeuer is vttered in such mennes hearing, must bée done in printe, as wée say in oure common Prouerbe. Behold, the head maister of the schole lysteneth what wée haue to say: he wai∣teth when wée will buckle our selues to our buisinesse: his eares are readie to receiue our reasoninges: his handes are prepared to take our written papers: hée refuseth not to be∣stow vppon vs his present seruice and loue. The Usher, with as much modestie on the other side, is willing to giue vs the hearing, and to determine the controuersie. The rest also of oure instructours, are in a readinesse to lysten attentiucly: men of great learning and singular vnderstāding: they looke vpon vs with a fauourable countenance, and with a smiling face promise vs their beneuolence. Wée must not bée af∣fraid to take vppon vs this aduenture: why shoulde wée a∣uoide so profitable and so commendable an experience, ha∣uing at this present so gentle an audience. Wée haue no cause to suspecte, that-they will scoffe and mocke at our do∣inges,
though wée should speake scarse eloquently, smoothly, finely, plaustbly, pleasauntly, artificially, and Oratour like. Let vs giue the onsett to this exercise. ¶ The Proeme of a De∣clamation. MOst learned audience, you are not ignoraunt, that euen* The decla∣mation: or ra∣ther the pro∣eme and be∣ginning of the same, worthie to be marked of young scho lers, & fruitful to be follo∣wed. knowledge it selfe, hath a kinde of infancie, and that Marcus Fabius beganne with his first elements aud princi∣ples, before hée had that name and title, which in processe of time, he deserued. The stronge Captaine and valliaunt war∣riour, was once wrapped in swathling clowtes, and lay cry∣ing in a wicker cradle. Those graue and wise counsellours, that are propps and pillers of Princes places, and the co∣lumnes or maine postes of the weale publique, though nowe for their knowledge and policie, they drawe the mindes of people into an admiration: yet the time hath béene, wherein they had their first beginning, going to schole, and learning their Alphabet or A. B. C. Wil you require that at the hāds of a simple childe, (whose witt is but weake, whose vnder∣standing is slender, whose iudgement is rawe) which besée∣meth Cicero that incomparable Rhetorician? Will you lay a heauie and weightie burthen, vppon the neckes and shoul∣ders of a young beginner, of a weakling, of an infant, which is able to make Demosthenes sincke vnder it, and falter to the grounde? No, but you must haue due regard and consi∣deration of yeares. For The first mē ber of the clause follow∣eth of necessi∣tie: but the last is not alwayes grounded vp∣pō certaintie: for we see the contrarie pro∣ued by daily experience. olde age is not indued with the strength and lustines of gallant youth: neither is youth fur∣nished with the wisedome, counsell, grauitie, and experience of sober old age. &c. Fare you well.
Macropedius to Chrysogono. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This epistle conteineth three parts in respect of the persons, namely, him to whom it is written: him by whom it is written: and him in whose behalfe it is written. In cōsideration of the matter, it cō∣teineth foure partes: in the first is comprehended the seeking of goodwil, by circumstaunces: In the second the causes that moued him to write, &c. In the third, hee praiseth Gualtero, whome hee commendeth to Chrysogono, &c. In the fourth hee toucheth the matter it selfe, by circumstances, well worthie of reading▪ mar∣king and learning. BUt that I knowe of a certaintie, your singular beneuo∣lence, not tēding to mine auaile alone, but fréely testified to the profite of al such as loue learning, albeit they bée méete straungers: I should bée in doubt (friend Chrysogono) to in∣terrupt the quietnesse of your studies, through my temeri∣ritie and rashnesse. Neuerthelesse, sythence I am not igno∣raunt, that for the renewing of old friendshipp, your desire is rather to be sollicited, then, to the vtter vanishiug of acquain∣taunce, not at all to bée visited, I armed my selfe with auda∣citie: and in my friends behalfe, I confesse mée your suppli∣aunt. My welwiller Gualtero, at whose hands you receiue these my letters, is one whome I do most ardently loue, and (for his singular kindnesse vnto mée alwayes professed) ex∣céedingly fauour. For, Which good nature in him so apparant & plentiful, kin∣dleth in mee the more lo∣uing affectiō. euer since the time of his infancie, hée hath exhibited vnto mée, as to his father naturall, passing re∣uerence, duetifulnesse, and obedience. This man, vnderstan∣ding vndoubtedly, that I was one of whome you did well thincke and estéeme, and hoping also by the mediation of my letters vnto you, to gett your fauour and furtheraunce, bée∣sought mée instantly, to write vnto you in his cause, that his suite might bée satisfied: althoughe I mistrust not the modestie of the man, his honestie, and vertuous behauiours,
but that, without our commendable certificate, hée is like enoughe to please and preuaile. For, hée is a proper youthe, descended of well disposed parentes, though somewhat base in degrée, and with substaunce not so well furnished. His edu∣cation and bringing vp was so good, as it cannot bée misliked, and from his tender yeares til this present day, he hath béene not onely inclined to learning, but  ben y• way, with a esire (in maner) irreucable: insomuch that, thorough his owne diligence, employed in exercises of knowledge, and the good successe which the Gods haue graunted him, in his procéedings: hée hath reaped such prote, both in poeticall cō∣ueyaunce, and also in the faultie of Retorique, that there is not so much as one comparable to him, among al our scho∣lers. For, As who said: there is no∣thing so hard and difficult, which passeth his capacitie. what is too hard for him to compasse (as you shall perceiue quickly if you take experience) whose witt is s quicke, and of so readie a capacitie? His maners deserue cō∣mendation: for, no man hath séene him ioderate a eate and drincke: no man hath taken him playng any ranck of lwdnesse, like a wanton: no man hath  him  or fighting: no man hath taken him quarellng and cōplay∣ning: but he hath alwayes béene obedient to his parents: du∣tifull to his friends: tractable towards his teachers: gentle to al his companion, and therefore beloued: hat éedes mul∣titude of woords in this matter? Such a young   is, as good men doe oth loue and laude. , at such  as hée left our scholes, & prouiding to studie in your Uniuersitie, ha∣uing none acquaintance in Louane, whose friendshipp & con∣ference hée might vse, was desirous, that through mine indu∣strie and labour, meanes might ée made, o  uour with one or other, to whose wisedome, counll, elpe and as∣sistance, hée might committ himselfe: and aboue all other, did choose you, whome hée knewe but by report, to ée to him in stéede of a father or gouernour: Which thing, sythence you want no abilitie (frend Chrysogonus) to perfourme sythence (I say) you may wtout any discōmodiie redoung to your owne person, take vpō you this chare, execue this office sim ply, iustly, and according to the rule of a rght cōscience, to the
greater increase and aduauncement of your vertue, What could he say more, in the behalfe of Gualtero to Chrysogo∣no, thē in this present  is comprisd. I be∣séech you heartily, that you wil ouchsafe this young man, y• benefite of your patronage and countenaunce, in penurie, in plentie, in prosperitie, in aduersitie, in weale and woe, final∣ly, in all chaunge and chaunces, euen as you would doe to my  and kinsfolkes, if necessitie required, that they should haue recourse o your assistaunce: that in so doing, he may vnderstand, howe the friendship betwéene vs is not so frusrate, but that the commendable report whche I haue sounded in your eares, touching his credite, hath had verie good effect. I, on the other sde, will straine myne abilitie in such sort, towardes the requiing of so singular a benefite, on vs both bestowed, tha of your well doing, repentaunce shall not be the reward: but one day (albeit, to tye friendshipp to promiss of dutie, séemeth a thing not to be allowed) to reape such fruite, as shall not be vnworthy of your benelence. For, I will be your debter, and Gualtero shall be as déepe in your bookes of reckoning. Fare you well. Macropedius to Hieronymo. TH ARGVMENT. This Epistle is a persuading Epistle, and it consisteth of fiue necessa∣ri partes. In the first is conteined, the person of him, whom Ma∣cropedius doth peruade, with the circumstaunces therevnto be∣longing. In the second, his narration, which is short and compē∣dious. In the thirde,  & arguments perteining to his  urpose. In the fouth, a confuttion of contrarie allegations. In he fith, the conclusion, wherein he endeuoureth to winne the mynde of Hieronymo, to the accomplishment of such thinges, as are comprehended in his Epistle. ALthough (wel beloued friende) there is no doubt of your wisedome, which floweth in you aboundantly: yet I can not choose (if I haue any desire at all, to satisfie The conide tion of whi∣che two cicū∣stances, con∣raine me to cease from ∣lence. myne owne thankfunesse, for your singular courteses, plenfully on me bestowed) but
fréely declare vnto you, such thinges as tende both to your worship, and also to your safetie. And for so muche as, we consider the estate of others, more precisely then we do pon∣der oure owne, I am bounde of duetie, to minister some counsell, (though homely, yet hoalsome) vnto you (my wel∣beloued friende) by whose wordes, seasoned with the salt of wisedome, I haue bene comforted. Your brother Theodo∣ricus, not many dayes since, tolde me, not without great heart grie, that you haue forsaken your booke, applyed your selfe to an occupation, and that you will not be wey∣ned from that vntowarde purpose of your owne, neyther by parentes admonishment, neyther by friendes exhortation, neyther yet by any inwarde motion of care touching youre owne honestie, your owne commoditie, their present condi∣tiō, or y• greatnesse of their former expences, layd out in hope, that in sudie you would haue made continuaunce. Where∣fore (my Hieronymo) if my counsell may winne with you any authoritie, then woulde I wishe you to chaunge this preposterous determination, and forsaking all laueishe hadicraftes and drudging trades of occupation, sticke still to your tackling: and as you haue begonne, so procéede, so likewise ende, in the studie of humanitie I meane, in the knowledge of liberall sciences, whose commendation haue no limitted measure, but surpasse all the prayse, that can, eyther be ascribed, or deuised: and which, next and imme∣diately after vertue, deserueth before all thinges in the worlde, souereignitie and preferment. To the imbracing whereof, you ought to be applyable, not onely in respect of Though those wodes e poken in , yt may they sere for a ge∣erall . your parents, to whome (euen by the lawe of Nature) you are streightly ounde to be obedient: or for that you are intreated so to doe, by such as beare you good will, being in∣déede your verie friendes, whose requestes you ought not lightly to regarde: but in consideration of honestie, and dis∣charging of your owne dutifulnesse, then which nothing is more to be approued, nothing more profitable, nothing wher∣in you should be more delighted. For, if hoestie moe you▪ which in all well disposed persons should worke singular ef∣fectes,
what thing then can be named, Nothing is to be compa∣red with lear∣ning and ho∣nestie. comparable to lear∣ning & honestie, which al wisemen, many yeares agoe, had in great price and estimation, although in excellencie they were matchlesse, and had, euen from heauen aboue, their original? what thing can be more honest then that, whiche maketh a difference betwéene you, and such as are soed in sensualitie, in blockishnesse, in vnciuilitie, and méere barbarousnesse? what is more honest, then that, which if it want in men, they are no better then brute beasts, carried away with the force of their appetites, and not lead by the rule of reason? what is more honest, then that, which bringeth you to the cntem∣plation of celestiall spirites, of the true and The maie∣stie of God, which the rea∣son of man can not reach vnto: but in spirite it is somewhat ta∣sted and per∣ceied. incomprehen∣sible eternitie, to the vnderstanding of thinges supernatu∣rall, and to the moste comfortable imbracing of vertue, wherewith what man so euer is not furnished, he maye be compared o a filthy swine, whose seruice tendeth to the filling of the paunche, praying vpon worldly vanities, and gaping after the gaudinesse of this transitorie earth, heauen and heauenly riches, in the meane season, had in contempt? If you séeke pleasure and delight, you shall finde the same so lincked to learning, that I am much in doubt, whether there be in learning, more honesti or swéetenesse. For, what can there be, which is tempered with more deltation, then to kéepe continuall companie with the Muses: and to enioy thy pleasure (as it were in a bedchamber) with chaste Ladi learning? what can be more fraught with ioy, then to haue their friendship, that neuer flit, but followe thée, or rather, goe euen hande with thée, and treade foote by foote? If you are in the fielde, they offer talke: if you are within the house, they are at your elbow: they rest with you: they take paines with you: heauinesse shall neuer haunt your heart, whiles your mind is marching with the Muses. In their con∣uersation is no tediousnesse, no , no vnswéetenesse. If you consider of thinges profitable, (which many doe nowe and then) more then such thinges as sauour of honestie, or be tempered with delight: then would I know, Which is so excellent, that nothing ther∣with is coun∣terpeisable. what thing in worthinesse cā coteruaile learning: nay, what thing is more
requisite and necessarie? For, the want of this, bringeth ig∣noraunce of vertue, ignoraunce of philosophie, ignoraunce of things diuine, ignoraunce of things deuised by the head of man: and what but ignoraunce doth the lacke of learning bréede in so much as, in whome this fayleth, he can neyther vnderstande, teach, nor interprete. Take learning from a∣mong men, and what insueth but disorder? what followeth but meere confusion, and a hotch potche o precious Iuells▪ with vadeing shadowes, and vncertaine vanities? Take awaye learning from among men, and howe shall the common wealthe bee administred? Take awaye learning from among menne, and howe shall your house and familie bee gouerned? Take awaye learning from among men, & how shall trades mechanical, occupations (I meane) be mainteined? take learning from among men, and shall not domesticall rule suffer ruine and decay? what shall be∣come of all things else, incident to so religious a profession? howe shall consolation be ministred to the diseased? howe shall the offender be reprehended? howe shall the vertuous and vpright liuer be rewarded? how shall these duties, and insinite more, be accomplished, if among men, no place bee left for learning? If you séeke riches, (which a vertuous mā should contemne) what man hauing bene learned, hath lac∣ked? If Hee lieth in his contrie, That hathe an ocupation: Whe reason∣able botie, to his contentation. as sayeth the auncient & vs∣all prouerbe. . euery countrie main∣teines the craftes maister, then why shoulde you otherwise thinke, but that your learning, is of sufficiencie, to supply your necessities, wherewith, farre beyonde any artificers a∣bilitie, you may profite and preuaile: but not without labor, say you, not without sweating, not without wringing, not without paines taking. For, say you, The condition of men, euen from their generation, is, in their owne sweate to earne their owne meate: the lawe of Nature, or rather, of God, in this case so prouided. I graunt, your wordes do agrée with truth and reason: neuerthelesse, shall I thinke that your wit is so chldish, that your discretion is so féeble, and your vnder∣standing is so base and grosse, to take this for the meaning of that diuine ordinaunce, namely, that in bodilie sweate and
labour only, men are borne to prouide for their liuing? doth not Labour and learning ind solubly lin∣ked: wherfore tryants and loyterers that loue not la∣bour, can ne∣er obteine learning. exceeding great labour accompanie learning? is stude without paines? did you attain the knowledge, whiche you haue already gotten, without idustrie and trauell? No: labour followeth learning, as the shadowe doth followe the body, and yet in that labor is no lothsomnesse. Are men idle, and like vnprofitable droanes, are they frée from paines ta∣king, neglect they labour, after they haue lodged learning in the castles of their memories? No: they are still occupied: they are in one exercise or an other delighted: One instruc∣teth the people in things whereof they be ignorant, another teacheth childrē their first elements, their A. B. C. (I meane) the séede of all sciences: and the principles of sundry profes∣sions: One giueth counsell to the distresed, and is arnest in pleadable controuersies of lawe before a Iudge: another employeth his labour in curing the sicke, in searching woun∣des, tempering o plaisters, coniecturing of vrines, opning veines, and such like offices belonging to physicke and surge rie: Thus you sée, labour and learning are indissolubly lin∣ked, wherefore (friend Hieronymo) nowe at last to ede my long letter, considering the weake disposition of your bodie, when but a litle labour is more then you can suffer, I passe it ouer with silence: and sithence, there is within the whole compasse of the world, no special thing counterpifable with learning, nor valuable with wisedome and knowledge, ey∣ther for honestie, profit, or yet for pleasure & delight: you shal reuolt from your vnaduised and rash intent, not so much for my counsel in this behalfe ministred, but for the verie truths sake, which at this present in my letter, I haue discouered: and Drawing ∣wards the cō∣clusion of his epistle, he fal∣leth to exhor∣ting, wherin he vsth po∣per reason. you shall according to the ablenesse of your discretion, and the ripenesse of your iudgement, frame your self to lear∣ned exercises, whre to your capacitie is readie, and from one cience to an other you shall procéede, as it were by degrées, as well to the increasing of your knowledge, as also to the confirming of the same. Let not your fthers desire, in this case, ly frustrate: let not your mothers moist teares be fruit∣lesse: let not the inteataunce of your friendes, and wel wil∣
be vnregarded, & let not the considence of your friends in general, be deceed. You can not (for hnestie) I am sure, denye to do as we giue you counsell, but you must néedes set our persuasions at nought, and accunt of vs as of persons nt eséemed, & (as I may wel say) contemned. Fare you wel. Macropedius to Mossellano. THE ARGVMENT. A fourme of an Epistle called, Conciliatorie, wherein he craueth ac∣quaintaunce with one whome he neuer knewe, but by report: it consisteth of three special members. In the first is conteyned an enumeration or rehearsal of his vertues to whom he writeth &c. In the seconde is conteined his petition, wherein he craueth ac∣quaintance. &c. In the thirde, is conteined certaine circumstan∣ces touching his owne person, which tend to his purpose, al which are mencioned in such order, as arrogancie is auoyded. I Can not tell (syr) how it commeth to passe, that men excel∣ling in vertue, in wisedome, and in learning, drawe (as it were) diuers into an admiration of them selues, and are so déepely planted in the fauour of some, that So great a desire bredeth in thē of their compae, for their learning sake. they will neuer be in quiet, till they haue taken vp a lodging, lying somwhat neare them, notwithstanding the distaunce of place is verie great, whereby they are seperated. I receiued your exerci∣ses, your verses I examined, and surely (I speake without flatterie, I would not haue you otherwise to thinke) I haue not read any thing wherin more learning is shewed, or more loquence vsed. I haue heard great report of your myldenes, of your modestie, of your gentlenesse, of your honestie, final∣ly of other the excellent ornaments, and inesimable iuels of your mynde, in so muche that I can not, but (as it were) of∣fer my selfe impudently and without shame, to Or, to be ac∣quanted with you. your ac∣quaintaunce and friendship, of a méere voluntarie motion. I craue thus much therefore at your handes, that it woulde please you to admit me (thoughe an vnprofitable friende, though vnlearned and ignoraunt, though a stranger to you, and vnknowne) into the number of your friendes, and to en∣ter my name into the register of your acquaintaunce, that I may not be destitute of one, so long as I haue you, with whome I may vse familiar conference, and reason pleasant∣ly.
I dare not promise you any benefite of great learning, to be looked for on my part. I Speaches of much mode∣stie and milde nesse. dare not make any vaunt of vertue remaining in my mynd: I dare not put you in hope, of any rare riches of knowledge and vnderstanding, to make account of: (none of whiche I acknowledge in me to be har∣boured:) but I promise you perfect loue, I promise you a faythfull heart, I promise you mutuall good will, and this I offer fréely. You shall finde me such a friende, as slatterie shall not attaint, as hyporisie shall not seduce: suche a oe shall you finde me, as to whome you may be bolde to commit most secrete counsels: such a one (I say) as is no Which is an insa lble proofe of vn∣feigned friend ship. lesse care∣full for your commoditie, then he is circumspect for his owne aduauntage: Fare you well, and to him that loueth you ex∣céedingly, make recōpence with a liuely requitall. Macropedius to Theodoro. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle is expostulatorie, wherein he calleth Theodorus to rec∣koning, why he writeth not to him: considering, that for tee ltters, hee deserued one. It consisteth vpon three prtes, by∣cause it passeth from friende to friende. The first controuleth him for negligence of dutie. &c. The seconde sheweth reasons, why he ought not to be insolent. &c. The thirde conteieth an excuse of his doinges, with an exhortation that hee shoulde not neglect auncient friendship. WHat impediment was here (my friend Theodorus) that you haue not written so muche as one letter vnto me, ince Christmas, considering that I haue sent you halfe a score by my friende Tribonius? Is that olde acquaintaunce which did knit vs twain in an vnitie, so frosen and consumed in you, that you can scarse vouchsafe a frendly gréeting? If I As if he had saide: I haue not bene be∣hinde hand in any office be∣longing to  friend. had bene behind hande in duties of courteie, if I had not vsed meanes to mainteine our acquaintance, if I had omit∣ted intercourse of letters wherein you were named, and (not a fewe times) remembred: inally, if whatsoeuer I did, con∣cerning you, had not made for your auaile: thē could I be wel content, that you should waxe straunge, and it should not so muche make me muse, that I growe out of your acquain∣tance. * Haue not I (euen from the verie swathling cloutes)
nourished thée, and séene thée well brought vp in the yeres of thy youth, haue I not thought of thée, as of myne owne bro∣ther: nay rather, haue I not loued thée as dearely as the sonne of myne owne body? what then shoulde be the cause that I am blotted out of the booke of your remembraunce, & that my name is raced out of the register of your acquain∣taunce? howe commeth it to passe, that for my good déedes, I reape such yll pay? doeth nature allowe this dealing? doeth honestie dispense with it? doth conscience account it vncon∣troulable? What lawe, eyther holy or prophane, what com∣mendable custome among men, what yll disposed persons o∣pinion, and corrupt iudgement, can excuse this your silence: nay, can not but condemne this your insolencie? at As if he had saide: youre protestations in times past differ muche from your practises present. what time you parted from me, you made an other couenaunt, contrarie to this your present vsage: you promised (indéede) that which you haue not perfourmed. But, for as much as I can not, for all this, be persuaded that I am forgotten, or that of very negligence you passe not for my friendship, but rather that some infirmitie, or some thing hapening against your hope and expectation, restrained you from writing: I am to request thus much at your handes, that yet nowe at* Meaning the suspicion of ingratitude or vnthankful nsse, which among all o∣ther vices, de∣serueth the name of a . length, once after so long an intermission, you will vouchsafe to visite me, though but with one Epistle, seruing as an an∣swere to those many that I haue sent you heretofore: in so doing you shall disburthen my mynd of a great and foule sus∣picion. Fare you well. Macropedius to Sadoleto. THE ARGVMENT. To Sadoleto is this Epistle written, wherein is conteined an accusa∣tion, by way of friendship intended. &c. a commendation also of Sophonius, who for good will in admonishing a lewde fellowe of his vnthriftinesse, was but yll rewarded for his labour: an in∣ectiue (the same being short and somewhat sharpe) against him that is accused: lastly, an exhortation to him in whose handes it
lyeth, to see the yll behauiours of his sonne refourmed, and punished: This Epistle consisteth of foure parts in respect of the persons. First, him that cōpleyneth: the second, him to whom the complaint is made: the third, the partie accused: and the ourth, he partie abused. &c. FOr as much, as I haue learned by common voice, that you are a man not onely indued with wisedome, but also of a very good and vpright conscience, besides that of a rare dispo∣sition to vertue and vertuous exercises, I hope you will not be offended, if I, being touched with a certaine brotherly kindnesse, discouer vnto you the crimes of such as be of your affinitie and consanguinitie (notwithstanding I am vnkno∣wen vnto you, and a méere straunger) to the intent that he which hath done amisse, may be allured to amendment: or that you (if by any meanes it maye be brought to passe) may (yet in time) saue your good name from the blemishe of rebuke, and your worship vndamnified. For, it is the du∣tie of a good man, to winke no more at the faultes of his kinsefolke, then at the misdeedes of suche as are neyther of his alliaunce, nor yet of his acquaintaunce: and no lesse to punishe such as are neare to him by degree of bloud (so farre foorth as lawe pronounceth sentence) then such as vnto him bee altogether. vnknowne. We are inioyned by a precept from the supernall prince, to haue a regard of our honest re∣port: for that (sayth myne authour) shall continue with thée, when thousand treasures passing precious, shall vanishe and consume. Not many dayes agoe (as it was tolde me of a cer∣taintie) which word beeing engli∣shed, noteth a man of tem∣perance, conti nence, wisdom knowledge, honestie, and much vertue: such aone was that Sophro∣nius, of whom he writeth. M. Sophronius (whether he be your sonne or no, I can not directly affirme) a young man, out of question, very well disposed, and one whose behauiours are answe∣rable to his name, for he is wise, discrete, sober, and courte∣ous. This yong Gentleman, rebuking some what sharply (I pray you let not my wordes styrre you to anger) your sonne for diuers abuses, after sundry admonitions & friendly war∣nings giuen him, for the auoyding of vicious annoyances, and among al other his misdemeanours, for the filthy abusing of his body with courtesans and common strumpets, for his in∣ordinate
belly cheare, and beastly surfetting, to the intent that he and all his friends might escape the gulfe of infamie, and kéepe their estimation from staines of reproch: procured vnto him selfe, by speaking the truth without dissimulation, a doubtfull inconuenience: namely, malice and mischiefe. For, anon after he had rebuked your sonne, with mild words and humilitie of spirite, (wherewith neuerthelesse his cho∣ler extremely boyled) to the ende he might appease this out∣ragious perturbation in your sonne, he made a supper which might content any honest man (for the cheare was not so homely) albeit, the fare (peraduenture) was not fine enough, but ouer grosse, for the mouth of suche a delicate ruffian: to this supper your sonne being inuited, came accordingly, and like a malicious villaine, dissembling his canckred sto∣mach, and poysoned hart, with hypocritical pretences, when the table did (as it were) sounde with pleasant merriments, when the cuppe went from hand to hand in most friendly fa∣shion, and when the guestes, at that instant▪ gathered toge∣ther, were in the middest of their pleasantest conceites, what doth the varlot your sonne, but (euen like a théefe that vseth violence for his auaile) Goodwill & courteous in∣terteinmēt cur rishly recom∣penced. with naked sword in hande, falleth vpon Sophronius suspecting no harme▪ as he was putting the pot to his lips ready to drinke, and wounded him to the very skul: yea, he had cleft his head in two péeces, if the pew∣ter pot which was betwéene the sword and his head, had not broken the force of the blowe as it fell. Thus much I tho∣ught it good to certifie you of, that in perusing this Epistle, you may sée the shamelesse vsage of your sonne, and so pro∣uide in due time, that to him selfe he bring not destruction, & to his kinred an ignominious name▪ Fare you well. Macropedius to Nicasio. ¶THE ARGVMENT. Hee writeth to Nicasio, a friend of his, vpon occasion of his young children, whome he is verie desirous to haue vertuously and lear∣nedly
brought vp, and that hee may make his matter good, wherein the whole summe of his letter consisteth, he beginneth with the commendation of learning: shewing howe necessarie it is in the life of man: and what inconueniences insue the lacking of so singular an ornament. Lastly, he concludeth with an exhor∣tation to the saide Nicasius, whome he moueth with diuers rea∣sons, to satissie his minde, in that whereof he writeth. AMong all things that be in the vse and possession of man, deseruing commendation, Learning described and set out accor∣ding to her ex cellencie and noblenesse. Learning (in myn opinion) is worthy of the chiefest prayse that can be giuen: by the be∣nefite whereof, he in whome it is lodged is so lightened, that the darkenesse of ignoraunce can not make him stumble: besides that, it is a speciall helpe vnto him at all assayes, an excellent ornameut full of worship and honour, and suche a purueyaunce as shall neuer be spent or wasted. This noble gift of learning, euer since the foundation of the worlde, was bestowed on men, among whome it continued in degrées of ages & posterities, neuer loosing any part of her brightnesse, but euen to these our days and times, hath reserued the same vndiminished. A thing it is, so necessarie in the life of man, that it can no more be missing, then can meate, whereby the body is nourished. For, if man representing an heauely fi∣gure, be not beautified with the Iueis of learning, nor inri∣ched with vertue, what little difference (I pray you) is there betwéen him and brute beasts, in whom reason hath no rule? we liue as beastes doe, we moue as they doe, we goe as they doe, we vse our outwarde senses as they doe, we enioy the pleasure of our appetites as they doe, onely learning and dertue, are the thinges that make a difference betwéene them and vs, by the which we beare the resemblaunce of a more worthy, namely a diine, nature. And surely, if we will giue any credite to poeticall inuentions, these twaine, (Learning & Vertue,) are the two virgines of heauenly des∣cent, which promised The sonne of Iupiter & Alcmena: Macrobius saith that Her cules is the sunne: and that by the. 12 abours which he susteined, nothing else is signisied, but the yerely course of the Sunne throgh the. 12. signes Zodiacall. Hercules, being a well disposed young gentleman, if he would imbrace, and haue them in estima∣tion, such honor as neuer should weare out of memorie, such
glorie and renoune as shoulde be ioyned to immortalitie. Betwéene these twaine, there is such affinitie, that the one is abased if the other be absent, bycause the one increaseth the others dignitie, when they be both present, and kéepe continuall companie. And, if I may speake what I thinke without offence, learning is the mother of vertue, bycause from her principally vertue doth procéede: Learning giueth vnderstanding of all thinges, as well of heauenly preceptes and Oracles, as also of all other sciences by y• wit of man in∣uented, out of which, as out of a cleare and hoalesome spring, we can drawe nothing but that which is vertuous, but that whiche is honest, but that whiche in all respectes is allowa∣ble. And, to the intent you may not be ignoraunt, what cre∣dite and worshippe is wonne by learning, the next way is to consider the contrarie, that is to say, what discommodities followe ignoraunce: for the nature of opposites is such, that the one by the other is made manifest. Ignoraunce is suche an impediment in man, from attaining those benefites whiche tende to his speciall behoofe, as a greater can not lightly bée named: this bréedeth suche blindnesse in him, that he is vtterly voyde of that iudgement, whiche maketh distinction betwéene thinges to bée desired, and thinges to bée auoyded: it taketh away the right vse of election and choyce: it maketh him vnacquainted with ciuilitie: it in∣gendreth in him rusticalitie or clownishnesse: it maketh him vnméete metall for the impressions of vertue: it maketh him vnfit for good companie: it doeth kindle in his mynde, forgetfulnesse of him selfe: yea, the greatest duetie of all o∣ther, is, by ignoraunce, withdrawne from him, and that is the knowledge of God, from whome he receiued the incōpa∣rable grace of his creation: finally, what enormities be there,  ignoraunce doth (as it were) pile them vp one vpon ano∣ther, whereby all abilitie, to compasse that whiche is praise∣worthy, and commendable indéede, is brought to naught, and quite turned out of possession. But the commodities of lear∣ning, are not only manifolde and diuers, but they are also sin∣gular and necessarie: sithence, in consideration of it selfe,
it is soone gathered, what a treasure it is, and howe expe∣dient the happye hauing of the same is, not onely for that it procureth priuate profite, but also bycause the whol common wealth, reapeth thereby speciall aduaunatge: in so muche that I am in doubt (I tell you trueth) whether in the worlde vniuersall, there be any thing more requisite in the life of man, any thing of equall worthynesse, any thing so behoofull, any thing more noble and honourable. If you take learning and knowledge from among men, what de you else make of a publique bodye, but a stable of Asses, a wildernesse of Beares, Wolues, and beastes vntameable. Take What confu sion and disor der there is▪ where lerning is lacking. learning away, and what shall become of halsome lawes, whiche are the sinewes and bones of euery common wealth? shall not that foule monster ignoraunce, with her sister confusion, enter in and make spoyle of all goodnesse? if this doe once rule the roaste, learning is as much set by as a bench whistler: lawes, and execution of lawes ceasse, and lye gasping vnder foote. The innocent is not defended. The oppressed persones cause is not supported. Artes and sci∣ences are not mainteined. Finally, nothing that maketh for the profite of the people, is regarded: and these bée the in∣conueniences that ignoraunce ingendereth, with an infi∣nite number more, too tedious to recount. O what In the com∣mendation & aduauncemēt wherof none can speake suf ficiently. an excellent thing, therefore is learning, whereby all these dis∣orders are redressed, all these abuses abolished, and refor∣mation of thinges amisse, introduced, and set in sure pos∣session. By learuing, the common wealth is rightly go∣uerned. By learning, the true vse of lawes and statutes, are executed. By learning, the Prince is taught to fauour his people: the subiectes to bee loyall to their souereigne. By learning, due order is obserued in all offices. By learning, domesticall affaires, housholde matters (I meane) are well gouerned: children vertuously instructed: the whole fa∣milie well prouided and seene vnto. By learning, men of meane condition growe in countenaunce, and by the credite whiche they get by their knowledge, are aduaunced to de∣grees of honour. Learning maketh hard thinges easie.
Learning maketh doubtfull thinges perceiuable. Learning is a comfort in aduersitie. Learning keepeth men from waxing insolent in felicitie: yea, and to be short, then is the possession of learning most pleasaunt and profitable, when a man is solitarie, and (as it were) forsaken. Wherefore, after his pro longed com∣mendation of learning (in the praising whereof, too much is too li tle) he falleth to persuading thence the commdities of learning be suche, as the like vnto them can not be founde among men, I am to giue you counsell, that (for the aduauncement of your owne persent to perpetuall renoune, and the purchasing of perpetuall prayse to your posteritie) you wil, not onely shewe your selfe a good patrone to learning, a fauourer and furtherer of suche as apply them selues to learned faculties, whereby in time they growe to be necessarie instrumentes in the common wealthe: but that you will also, sithence you are a father o children, whose towardnesse in their tender yeares, promi∣seth great hope of singular giftes, hereafter to be shewed, so prouide and see to their vertuus education, that like young plants, vnder the diligent hand of a painefull and run∣ning Gardener, they may spring vp, and fructiie in such de∣cent order, that you their father (through the benefite of the learning and knowledge, whiche by your carefull meanes they haue attained) may haue iu cause to reioyce, at y• hap∣py successe of those labours, which in trayning vp your yong∣lings, were employed: that I say you may in thm be cōfor∣ted: that they may sée and perceiue in what dueties of obe∣dience they are bounde, to such good parents, by whose boun∣tie it is come to pase, that they are enabled, both Which bene fites, learning breedeth and bringeth, to such as loue and imbrace it as we see by daily proofe and expei∣ence. to aspire to preferment them selues: and also to be meanes, that o∣thers be urthered. Thus if you doe, as I haue put you in mynde, persuade your selfe that you can not be more vertu∣ously disposed: that you can not bestowe a more excellent thing vpon your children: or this (though you should dye in pouertie, which hard fortune be farre from my friendes and fauourers) will be a sufficient patrimonie to mainteine them in their youth, and to succour them in their age. Be∣sides that, when your bones are putrified in the graue: yet so long as the pledges of your presence are to be séene and
viewed (your children I meane) the memorie of you shall flourish, and such fame shall followe your name (though your boie be deade) as neuer shall ceasse to sounde your prayses, among people farre and neare: that by the mirrour of your doings, they may be wonne, semblbly to sée their youthes taught and instructed, that for their well doing, they (as you haue alreadie before them) may reape an euerlasting com∣mendation. Forget not, and Fare you well. Macropedius to his Souereigne, N. O. P. THE ARGVMENT. In this Epistle following, it is Macropedius his desire to set downe a perfect platfourme of a prince▪ wherein (vnder the person of Alexander, whome hee commedeth, as well for outwarde as in∣warde qualities) hee sheweth what manner of person, a King or Emperour ought to be. Hee beginneth first of all, with the in∣fancie of Alexander, which ministred manifest and manifold pro∣babilities, of things which came afterwards to passe. He procee∣deth with his yonger yeres, and declareth how he was then dispo∣sed. Lastly, hee concludeth with his estate when hee came to the possession of the kingdome, after his father Philippes deceasse: in al these digressions, and discourses, vnder the example of Alex∣ander, shewing howe a prince ought to apply him selfe, if he in∣tende to be famous, & after his death, yet to liue among people. ALexander * king of Macedonia (whom I haue determi∣ned,Whose name is so noble, & his deedes so renouned, that who hathe heard least of his fame, may sone iudge of his inconque∣rable valiaunt∣nesse. aboue al other Princes and Emperors of his time in the worlde, to praise to your maiestie, my most gracious so∣uereigne, and that in fewe words, least I should séeme too te∣dious, in recounting his worthinesse, whose noble déedes, giue a sounde, lowde enoughe to his commendation,) descen∣ded of the loynes of Philippe, who possessed the Macedo∣nishe Monarchie, nexte before Alexander his sonne, and lawfull successour. His mothers name also was Olympi∣as, a Quéene muche commended in histories, and a passing goodly Laie. But if you estéeme it a thing not so precious, nor so muche sending to the praise of any person, to come of
an honourable house, to haue princes to his parents, to be a Gentleman borne, to haue this title or that of dignitie, by∣cause (as you say) not the place where a man is borne, nor the stocke from whence he draweth his descent, shoulde so muche commende a man, as his owne vertues, and inwarde qualities of his mynde, wherby he is indéede highly aduann∣ced: heare therfore that which you can not choose but praise excéedingly, and not lightly regard like smoake or shadowes. This Alexander, euen in his infācie gaue many and the self same most assured significations of excellent giftes, natural∣ly ingraffed in him: yea, and aboue all other, of prowesse and magnanimitie he shewed manifest proofes, insomuch, that the Macedonish Soothsayers or wisemen, expert in the art of diuina∣tion and fore∣telling things to come. magicians, vpon circumstaunces made a con∣iecture, or rather a prognostication wherin was certaintie, y• he should be a whip or scourge to al Asia. Touching the order of his education, histories most plentifully make sundrie and straunge declarations: For, he was not onely trayned in ex∣ercises of actiuitie, but also in the knowledge of sciences li∣berall, and specially in Khetorique and Philosophie: then which two necessarie stayes, the first seruing the bodie, the second seruing the mynde, nothing for a king or noble man more conuenient. In actiuitie he did excell (considering his person, and his descent): For it is sayde of him that in run∣ning he was singular, and in ryding not to be amended: and though his father Philippe, in this laste qualitie, did weare (as they say) the golden spurres, yet his sonne Alexander did better deserue them, sithence his knowledge in that Art, was (as it séemed) much more assured, and his cunning groū∣ded vpon better experience. As for other properties to the bodie belonging, it is no question to be asked, whether he had them or no: For, it is not an vnlike reason, that he, in whome the greatest and the best thinges were to be founde, shoulde want the lest and the baser. Concerning his person, his com∣plexion, his proportion, and suche like things requisite in a noble man, they did al concurre in him, and nothing did lacke y• might make him amiable. He was ruddie coloured, much like the damaske rose, not only in his face, but throughout al
and euery part of his body: insomuch that whosoeuer looked vppon him, and beheld his countenance, they might wel mer∣uaile at the vniformitie that nature kept, in frameing so goodly a creature. His complexion was of the perfectest, and soundest, & as for his proportion and making, there was no∣thing in him that was out of square, but euery ioynte and limme, both in measure and in place, verie formall, and pas∣sing hansome. This Alexander commended for the orna∣ments of his minde. Alexander, as hée was furnished with externall giftes, beautifying and well beséeming his bodie: so his minde was garnished with all maner of vnderstanding. For, as hée was a Prince of rare renowne, so had hée to in∣struct him, a Philosopher without peere, (Aristotle I meane, of whose fame al places of learning doe ring at this day) who taught him not onely morall preceptes touching humanitie, but other secrete sciences, which hée did impart but to a ve∣rie fewe, the same being special persons, among whom Alex∣ander was one. O happie Prince whose lucke it was to haue such a maister: and O no lesse fortunate Philosopher, in whose lapp the lott fell to haue so noble a scholer. No doubt, this was the Gods foreappointment: For, as He meaneth Alexander the king: and A∣iistotle the Philosopher. these twaine were incomparable, in cōsideration of the ornaments, wher∣with they wonne immortall memorie: so neither of them lost their labour, not Aristotle in teaching, nor Alexander in lear ning, but the one and the other did reape conuenient profite. But what néede I heape vpp so many words in this matter, my penne hath not the power to paint out that puisaunt Prince, in such liuely colours as hee deserueth. For it pas∣seth my capa∣citie to drawe out his por∣trayture in suf ficient liuely∣nesse. Lysippus the cunning ingrauer must be sent for: and Appelles the fa∣mous limmer must be fett, to accomplish this curious peece of woorke. Wee had neede of a Cicero or a Demosthenes, both tryed Rhetoricians, to sett him out with their blasing e∣loquence. Maro and Homer must take in hand to write in heroicall Uerses, y• vertue and noblenesse of him, whose wor∣thinesse when I examine, I see such oddes, betweene the ma∣iestie of his person, and the homelinesse of mine inuention, that I thinke it more auailable to kepe silence, and so auoyde blame, then by saying litle, and y• same superciall, to incurre
reprehension, for attempting that, which I am not able to cō∣passe. Neuerthelesse, because euery man hath knowledge de∣liuered him, as it were by weight and measure, it is my part to employ, that which remayneth in mée, insemblable pro∣portion: and therefore (most Gracious Souereigne) accor∣ding to mine abilitie, I will procéede in commending my A∣lexander, as I haue alreadie begunne, least I should giue oc∣casion to your highnesse, that I haue taken vppon mée a péece of worke, whereof I cannot be the maister. To pretermitte his infancie, to let slippe his yonger yeres, both which were neuer destitute, of most honourable behauiours, and to come to his riper age, to come to that time wherein he gaue singu∣lar manifestations of his valliantnesse, which was neuer se∣perated from policie, it is a world to cōsider y• victories which he obteyned, to recount the countries which he subdued, to number vp y• people whom he drue to his subiection, to make rehersal of his straung aduentures, finally to declare the ma∣nifold wayes which lay wyde open vnto him, to good fortune, and the getting of euery thing, according to his owne will, whereby be purchased that rare title of Empyre, to be called , Magnus, Great and mightie, it would Because an epistle should bee short, and trussed vp in a fewe lines. excéede the due proportion and length of an epistle, drawe the veyne of mine inuention drie, bréede wearisomnesse to you in reading, and séeme rather to sauour somewhat of the nature of an hi∣storie, which rippeth vpp circumstances to the very proofe, leauing litle or nothing vnremembred. What Prince in po∣wer hath euer béene heard off, comparable to Alexander? What king in his aduētures hath had more happie successe? On whome haue the Gods and Goddesses more smiled, that hée should strike such an astonishment of his owne person in∣to the mindes of people, as to be thought and named Iupiter, and not Alexander the sonne of Philippe and Olympias? When hée was twentie yeares old, hée was admitted to the Scepter of the kingdome, and had in his hands the Macedo∣nian Monarchie, after the deceasse of his father, who was slaine of A younge Gentleman, of Macedonia, & a gallant cour tithe occasi∣on why he slew king Phi∣lippe, is men∣cioned in Trog. and o∣ther historio∣graphers, to long here to insect. Pausanias: who being no sooner installed in the seate royall, and wearing the Diademe of empire, was much trou∣bled
wyth commotions of his people, & such as ought to haue béene most loyal and obedient to their leage lord & king, made insurrection and playd the arrant rebells, seeking not his dis∣possession onely, but also his destruction: neuerthelesse, he e∣stéeming these tumults but as vayne shadowes, was so farre from being carryed away with the conceite of fearefulnesse, (the next and readie way to cowardise) that with boldnesse of heart, and constancle, hée suppressed them all, and that in ve∣rie short space, confirming to himselfe the true seruice of his subiects, and winning the fauour of his Peeres and Nobles, that he could not but prosper in all things which he attēpted. He beséeged the citie of Thebes, ouercame it, & did ransack it. By concluding peace, he reconciled vnto himself & his people, the Atheniens. He discomfited Darius and his whole armie, tooke his wyfe & children prisoners, whom he vsed very parci∣ally, nay, very mercifully, considering y• he had iuster occasion to execute tyrānical violence, then to shew any sparkle of cō∣passi. He behaued himself in al his warlike enterprises, like a puisant Martialist, hauing vertue his forrunner, and For∣tune his weighting mayd. Pamphylia, Cilicia, Pisidia, Phry∣gia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia &c. fel into his dominiō, & thus most miraculouy were y• bods of his kingdome amplified & inlarged. He passed ouer the oud Issus & came to Damascus, tolte Cyprus, all Phenicia, Tyrus excepted: which citie, when he was assaulting, there appeared vnto him in his dreame, Hercules calling him by his name, and offring himself to take him downe from the walls. Another thing appeared also vn∣to him in his sleape, a Satyre playing with him, whom when he would haue caught, it ran away from him: neuerthelesse, at last it came voluntarily, & yelding vnto him, was taken in his hands. This last dreame, being put to expositours, to be interpreted, was thus vnderstoode, that by the diuision of the word Satyrus, the dreame did import this meaning, namely . Tua Tyrus: The lād of T  sea yflown At  dsire, shalbe thine own. : The citie Tyrus shalbe yours. After that he tooke Gaza, a great and stately citie in Syria: hée conquered Aegypt, in which countrie, hee was desirous to leaue some monument of himselfe, that the memorie of him, and his peo∣ple,
might flourish throughout all posterities. This citie he called after his owne name, which he built in such a plott of land, as a better, neither for pleasauntnesse, nor commoditie, might be chosen in all that region. Thus procéeding from wor thinesse to worthinesse, from renowne to renowne, moun∣ting as it were by steppes, he became so famous, that all the world heard of the déedes of Alexander, counting him rather a God, then a man. So He draweth to his conclu∣sion, wherein he maketh an application of that which is before spoken then your Grace may sée by these confused and disordered discourses, packt together in praise of a right praise worthie Prince, what a valliaunt spirite hee was directed withal in al his aduentures. How farre he was to reuolt from manhoode, no not when hee was in extremitie of daunger, but withstanding all inconueniences, thoroughe the good guiding of vertue, and the fauour of fortune, that neuer failed, hee purchased a name of noblenessé, which re∣mayning in the registers of many Chroniclers and writers, may serue for an incitation, or incouragement to other kings and Princes, to followe his steppes in puisaunce and marti∣all excercises, though their lucke be not like his, nor the suc∣cesse of their labours so fraught with happinesse. Nowe, to ende with that, wherein I should haue begunne, namely, the ornamentes of his minde, which proued him a noble gentle∣man in déede: it is manifest in all that was written of him, how studious and painefull he was, to be seene in the know∣ledge of the sciences liberall, and no lesse earnest and desirous to put that in experience, wherein he was instructed. The learning of Which con∣sisteth in the precepts of morll Philo∣sphie, wherof Aristotle wrot a lerned wok called his E∣thickes. things tending to humanitie, what goodly effects wrought it in his hart, yea euen in the heate of warre when the force of his anger should haue pluckt him violently to re∣uengement, then was hée passing appliable to compassion, in somuch that hée did both forgiue and forgett offences com∣mitted against his maiestie, albeit they were oftētimes done to worke his owne mischiefe. In the mysteries of nature he laboured so diligently, being taught of Aristotle, that there was kindled in him such a meruailous delight, that he could not abide, others to be communicants and partakers of that which hee knewe, but himselfe to haue the vnderstanding of
that onely and alone, whereof others should be ignoraunt. In the art of Physick he did profite wonderfully, not in that on∣ly which consisteth in speculation, but in that also which is altogether occupied in practise & experience: in so much that when he was but sixtéene yeares of age, he was able to doe such things, as men of greater age, and longer practise, could not compasse, neither by knowledge nor cunning. Thus your Grace séeth the expresse picture of a prince, to whose pathes I would wish you directe your footestepps, if you meane to be a partaker of his praise. Ch. Hegendorphinus, to Lau∣rentio Czocho. ¶THE ARGVMENT. This epistle is written to Lau. Czo. not as a dehortation vnto him, to leaue the foule abuse of drunkennesse (for he was a sober young man, & such a one of whose vertuous disposition Hegendorphi∣nus, and others had good hope:) but it is sent vnto him, as an ex∣ample or president to make the like epistle in dehorratorio ge∣nere, if occasion so serued him to write, either for excercise sake, or otherwise. IS A Proeme or beginning expostulatoe wherein hee reasoneth with authoritie. it a good hearing, thinke you, that you are neuer from the Alehouse, nor the Tauerne, but like an Epiurean por∣ket, wallowe day and night in the dregges of dronckennesse? Haue you not the witt, and discretion to perceiue, how foule and filthie a vice it is? and how vnséemely a qualitie for any man to vse? There is but one thing that maketh a difference betwéene a man and a beast, and that is Reason: in this pro∣pertie of the minde, he excelleth all other creatures, as farre as the glorie of ye heauens passeth the vilenesse of the yearth. This gift of reason, by the benefite of the Gods giuen vnto you, for your owne auaile, you doe most miserably abuse, by ingurgitating and powring downe your throate continuall streames of delicat wine and strong drincke: insomuch that
the light of reason, being greatly dimmed, & in maner cleane put out, you differ verie little from a filthie swine. What meanest thou man? what swéetnesse doest thou find in tum∣bling thée selfe in such a loathsome vice? Is all thy iudge∣ment consumed through thine excessiue abuse? Hast thou not one sparckle of perseueraunce lefte, to examine and take ac∣compt in thine owne conscience, what inconueniences giue attendaunce vppon drunkennesse? Doeth not the huge ar∣ruie of mischiefous maladies, whereof Plinie in his Plinie lib. 4. de Naturalib. Natu∣rals maketh an enumeration or rehearsall, make thée afraid to frequent the same? Of drunkennesse (sayth hée) come han∣ging and blabber cheekes: from drunkennesse proceede disseases in the eyes, as bloudshotts, &c. From drunkennesse proceedeth tremblng handes, spiced with the Palsie, not a∣ble to hold a cupp of wine from spilling: from drunkennesse doe proceede terrible and fearefull dreames, vnquiet sleepes &c. These thinges would bée considered. What As if he had said: your ad∣uersaries will take an occa∣sion, by your misdemea∣nour, to giue you a very ill report. will bée the communication of your aduersaries, and the vsuall talke of such as beare you no goodwill? What will bée the words of such as marcke your missdemeanours? Yea, what will your best friendes say, when they heare of this your beastly béehauiour? Sée, will one say, this fellowe could take vppon him to disuade vs from drunkennesse, who should be vnto vs as a burning Beacon, to giue vs warning to béeware of a∣buses: and who is more immoderate then hée? who is giuen to excessiue swilling so much as hée? Whooe swerueth so farre and wyde from sobrietie as hée? Hée is neuer from the Ie bush: his lippes are alwayes staynd with the With wine. For the grape is called the berrie of Bac∣chus, whome Poets feigned to be the God of wine. Iuice of Bacchus his berries. What a shameful report is this? Do you not remember, that the propertie of drunkards is to kepe no∣thing in secrete, but with the Terentian Parmeno, to blab a∣broad in the hearing of all men, whatsoeuer is told him in si∣lence, though it be a thing of neuer such weight & counsell? I say no more but end wyth this caueat: Take héede that you forsake drunkennesse, and fashion your selfe to sobernesse, if you meane to kepe the credite and opinion of a wise man, and the report of one that is honest. Fare you well.
Ch. Hegend. to Laur. Cz▪ THE ARGVMENT. By this short letter, hee teacheth howe a letter of request should bee made by one friend to another, if the one maye refourme that wherin the other is abused: immagining his argument or matter of a Sycophant, or vaine lying merchaunt, whose studie it is to carrie tales vpp and downe from eare to eare, that trueth might be falsified. I A letter of petition and complaint. Haue a request to your goodnesse (right worshipfull syr) wherein I would gladly bée satisfyed. So it is, that a cer∣taine Sycophant, and alse varlot, wel ynough knowne vnto you, ouercloyeth me with many and continuall troubles: in consideration whereof, because vppon sundrie considerations I sée it auayleable, I haue thought good to open ye matter vn∣to you, as to one that fauoureth not any such deceitful & lewd fellowes, to the intent you may take him in hand, suppre his awcinesse, and make him leaue off his mallapertnesse, that I, through your benefite, may finde an end of disquiet∣nesse. Can any thing be seasoned with more iustice, then one frend to take another frendes part, to defend and maintaine him against the backbiting, slaunderous, and hellish barking of a maliciously disposed Sycophant? And surely, I cannot sée what you may do wyth more facilitie and easinesse, sythence a countenaunce of your authoritie, may redresse this abuse. Doe but so much as giue thisBy whose meanes I am so molested▪ vexed, & dis∣quieed. naughty fellowe warning, to rule his spitefull tongue: and to leaue his opprobrious spea∣ches, and raseallike raylinges. This may you doe passing conueniently, at such time as hée commeth to salle and vi∣site you, as hée is accustomed: and I am yours in what you please, at seruice and commaundement. Fare you well.
Ch. Hegend. to Laur. Czoc. THE ARGVMENT. A letter of imitation, made, in Suasorio scribendi genere, wherin He∣gendorphinus goeth about by counsell and reason drawne from that which is dishonest, from that which is discommodious, from that which is hard and laborious, from that which is not necessa∣rie, from that which is wicked, from that which is daungerous, and from that which is vnpossible, to winne his friends minde, from the trade of a merchant, and to frame himselfe to some faculie of learning. ALthough (my bes beloued friend) you are of sufficient wisedome to be your owne counseller: yet notwithstan∣ding, in consideration of my Which in a true harted friend, cannot but shew fruit suffcient. singular loue and speciall kinde∣nesse, wherwith I tender your safetie, I cannot smoulther si∣lence in a cause of constraint, but néeds must impart vnto you for your profite (as I hope) my priuate opinion touching your determination and purpose. It is reported vnto me, that you meane to be a merchaunt venturer: I am sorrie that you should so employ the time and your labour, yea I would (if I could) disuade you from this intent. Consider with your selfe that your substaunce and wealth is not verie great, and ther∣fore you cannot deale franckly in traffique: and surely, the trade of merchandise, except it bée sumptuous and costly (ac∣cording to the authoritie of Cicero) it is lightly to be regar∣ded: yea it is to be thought a kind of pedlarie exchange, to buy that at the merchants hand, which shortly after is set to open sale: what gaine or aduauntage doe they reape by their chop∣ping, chaunging and intercourse of traffique, vnlesse they lye most odiusly? neither is there any thing in the world more beastly and dishonest, then vanitie &c. Thus sayth Cicero. Furthermore, An enumera tion of such hazardes as merchantes & occupiers are ubiecte vnto. set before your eyes, the dangers which pur∣sue you from place to place, whether you ryde, whether you goe on foote, or whether you sayle. If you carrie monie wyth you in your budgett, you are in a thousand hazards. For, ey∣ther
you are like to loose them and your life likewise, in the swelling waues: you are in peril of Pyrates and Rouers to spoyle you: of cuttethrote théeues and knaues by lande to robbe and take them from you: what should I talke of the stormie shoures that you must suffer in your iourney or voi∣age: what shoulde I talke of thunder, lightning, blustering blastes of windes, hayle, and other tempestes, whereunto you be subiect when you are abroade. I wil say nothing of the labour that is emploied in bargaining: of the toile in pac∣king: of the paine in shipping, of the care in conueying your wares and merchandise home to your owne house. These inconueniences wel considered, it is great meruaile, if you abhorre not the trade of a merchaunt, as muche as you ab∣horre an Adder or Toade. But A supposed obiectiō wher to foloweth immediatly after a fitt re∣solution or answer. peraduenture the gayne that ariseth by occupying, pleaseth you marueilous well, so that you thinke it in no wise to be mislyked. But weighe with your self on the other side, wt what drudgerie it is got∣ten, with what small regarde of vpright dealing, honestie or conscience. For, you buy a thing good cheape, for a small price, and in manner a trifle: you sell the same againe to your Brother too déere and out of reason. Sée I pray you, is this kinde of gaine to be liked? is it to be commended? Nay, is it not to be detested, is it not to bee abhorred, hated and despised? what if you loose by one kinde of ware, or twoe, more then you shall recouer againe in manie? what if you haue not monie for present and readie payment, whereby you are forced (because of credit and forbearaunce) to giue a greater price, for that whiche you buy, then you take by their vtteraunce, yea, many times it commeth to passe, that in thus bargaining you are so farre from being a sauer, that you are a great looser. And what if it so chaunce (as per∣aduenture it may) that moste men buy suche ware as you want, whereby your merchandise lye vpon your hande, in your storehouse vnfolde: where is your gaine become nowe in these harde cases? To conclude, what neede (in Gods name) haue you, to giue your selfe to suche an vncertaine trade, so daungerous, bothe in consideration of losse of goods,
and in respecte of losse of life in like manner? What man, are you not As i he ad said: being learned as you are, what neede you tye your selfe to a trade or occu paion. learned? haue you not knowledge in the sci∣encs liberal? are not these a sufficient purueyance, in what place of the worlde soeuer you chauuce to trauell? For (as saithe the prouerbe) No land there is but doth maintaine Eache Noble Art with goodly gaine. Why do not you apply your selfe, to some one kinde of pro∣fessiō, or other, wherin there is certaintie & stay of liuing? as for example, Physicke, or the Law, which of the twaine you do best like? By these you shall soone and safely mount to be riche and woorshipful, whereafter▪ I knowe you hunger and thirst, like to one that is famished for want of necessarie sustenaunce: wherfore, if you meane, that I shall continue towardes you, mine accustomed fauour and fréendshippe, chaunge this your perillous purpose, and determine other∣wise to shifte in the worlde. Fare you well. Ch. Hegend. to Laur. Czcho. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle, being in dliberatiuo genere, runneth altogether vpo persuasions. The whole summe of the letter doeth signifie thus much. One freend being desirous of another good freends estate, giueth him counsell (because he was learned and well seene in the liberal Arts) to frame himselfe to the studie of the ciuil law: and to the ende e might peruade himselfe thereunto, he vseth sundrie reasons, drawne from sundrie Rhethorical places▪ a for xample: first from that which is honest. 2. Frō that which is pro fiable.  From that which is possible. 4. From that which is ne∣cessarie. . Frō that which is easie. 6. From that which is pleasant o delight some. &c. It may serue vey wel for .
I Heare say (my good fréende) that you are considring wt your selfe vpon what kinde of profession, it were best to beow your time & labour. Surely, if it please you to admit the counsell that I shall minister, whiche is bothe freendely and profitable, aboue al other faculties, I woulde wishe you to be a A profes∣sour ostu li∣ent of the Ci∣uil lawe, whi∣che yeeld great aduan∣tage. Ciuilian. For, then this profession what can be rec∣koned more honest? what can be immagined more honou∣rable? By the benefite of this, you may succour the distres∣sed, you may mainteine the right of the Orphan, you may defende the wronged widowe, and what is there that belon∣geth to iustice and equitie, but you may put it in experience? And what (I pray you) can be more necessarie? take out of Cities and incorporations the ciuil Lawe, and what will followe but an ouerthrowe of common wealths, a displacing of order, a confusion of estates, and other inconeniences? you are not ignoraunt (I suppose) of Ciceroes wordes, had in his Oration pro Cluentio, wherein he saith: That Cir. in orat. pro. A. Cluentio: as I remember, he speaketh there of lawe in general, not meaning any certaine espe∣cial kinde of Lawe. the Ciuil Lawe is the bond of the Citie, it is the foundation of freedome. For (saith he,) looke what our bodies be, when the soule hath forsaken them, euen that is a Citie, wherein are no Lawes: these lawes, are to the common wealthe (as it were) members, limmes, ioyntes, sinowes, veines, bloude, soule and spirit, the vse wherof wanting in a Citie, no good can insue. Lysten yet a litle further, and heare what the same Oratour saieth, in his Plée for Caecinna: There is nothing, that ought to be mainteined with suche care, dili∣gence, and circumspection, in any Citie and incorporation, then the ciuil Law: which being abolished and put to silence, what man is there that can haue certaine knowledge, what is his owne right, and what is anothers interest? The ciuil lawe laboureth wholy to this end, namely that euery Citie be brought into suche good frame & order, as a better can not be deuised: so affirmeth mine authour Alcinous. Loe, nowe you sée the necessitie of the ciuil Lawe. As for the credite, the countenaunce, the fauour, the estimation, and the ho∣nour whiche it doeth bring, who is there but is able to testifie? To pretermit & passe ouer a great number, who by
this facultie haue béene aduaunced: what shall we thinke of There were ma∣ny Gentlemē,  by the name o Mu∣tius, touching whom, Rapha l Volaterane hath spoken somewhat largely. Mutius Scaeuola, who by this profession grewe in exceè∣ding reputation, among the Romanes, in so muche that his house was called Oraculum Ciuitatis, the Oracle of the whole Citie? A certaine Sabine, descending of a simple stock, and béeing therwithal in like manner very poore, was made a Knight of the Noblest order, by Tyberius Caesar, for none other cause, then for that he was a learned and skil∣full Ciuilian: yea, to this state of honour attained he, when he was aged, béeing almoste (as it is registred) fiftie yeares olde. Whom Ne∣ro commaun∣ded to bee put to deathe be∣cause he bare the name and gaue the badge or cog∣nisaunce of the same Cas∣si that slew . . Pompon. Caius Cassius Longinus, by and through the same science, became very worshipful vnder the forenamed Ty∣berius, and vnder Claudius he was created and made Lord President of Syria. Nowe, if so be the thing whereat you lay the leuell of your thoughtes and purposes, be gaine and commoditie, then I say vnto you, and that out of the booke, there is no profession that affoordeth larger aduauntage, no trade that yéeldeth the like profite: whiche wordes of mine to be true, that vsuall verse, althoughe it hault in one syllable, manifestly affirmeth, saying: Galene giues richesse and substance good store: Iustiman giues honours and titles of glore. Do you not sée, that the simplest Lawyer of all, hée who in comparison of other, is but an Idiot, to liue like a Gentleman, in abilitie to mainteine his house and fa∣mili, to beare a port and countenaunce. &c. So that there is no cause (as farre as I can coniecture) wherby you shoulde be discouraged, and driueu into dumpes of doubtfulnesse. The studie of this science, is meruailous easie, if a man bée sufficiently armed and furnished with the knowledge of other Artes: and An enume∣ of such  &  as make  for the  of   in . thence you haue toung at libertie, that is, vtteraunce at pleasure: sithence you are more eloquent then eloquence is it selfe, sithence your memorie is cor∣taine and ifallible, sithence your iudgement is sounde  not to be dissalowed: what hardnesse can there bée in
studying the ciuillawe? Nay rather, what canne be more easily learned, especially of you, in whome is suche ripenesse of learning? Here vnto is to be added, as not vnwoor∣thie the consideration, that the whole substaunce of this sci∣ence, is conteined in certaine bookes, not infinite and innu∣merable, so that it is but a kinde of pastime for you, to at∣teine the knowledge of the same with perfection (which you can not but doe, if you apply your minde thereunto) where∣by you may in time, growe to be a seconde Scaeuola: in the studying of this Art, this caueat muste bee had, name∣ly, to take vnto you one certaine writer: you must not doe, as a great many doe in these dayes, who whyles they are buisie with this booke of lawe, and that booke of lawe, fol∣lowing the interpretations and notes of diuerse men, they themselues be vncertaine whiche chiefly to immitate, and their counsel, in the meane while, is no furtherance to their clientes. To be shorte, in the vnderstanding and perfecte knowledge of the Lawe, there is a certaine swéetnesse and delectation to be gathered. For (that I may vse the words of Cicero) if any man conceiue pleasure in the studie of for∣reigne and straunge thinges, let him haue recourse to the Ciuil lawe, let him searche the Priestes registers, let him looke vpon the twelue tables of antiquities, whereby the auncient customes of the Romanes, their diuerse kindes of exercises, and their trade of life are discouered: and hee shal finde much and manifolde matter, in the which he may be delighted. Go too then: sithence there is no facultie, then the ciuil lawe more honest, none more necessarie, none more profitable, none more easie, for end, none more plea∣saunt: you shalbe counted as very a dawcocke and dizzarde as euer was This was not Coroc∣bus the Athe∣nien, of whom Plinie lib. 7. cap. 56. but the same whome Virgil spea∣keth . 2. Aeneid. Coroebus, if to the profession and practise of the same, you shewe not your selfe appliable. Fare you well.
C. Hegendorphinus, to Laur. Czocho. THE ARGVMENT. He setteth downe an example, how to write an epistle in demonstra∣tiuo genere, concerning the commendation of some worthie and famous deed. The places, from whence, he boroweth his reasons, are these. From that whiche is honest and honourable, from that whiche is harde and  karse venturable. &c. All which belong to the confirmation of his purpose. MAny are the Noble déeds of armes of the Romanes, but among all other, this carieth away the pearle of praise & renoune: that Of whose valiauntnesse diuerse au∣thours haue written: and a∣mong the rest Valerius Max imus. P. Decius, for the preseruation of his countrie whiche was in irrecouerable daunger, offered his owne life (then which nothing in the world more swéet and precious) to a gaping gulffe, & that of a voluntarie motion, to bee swa∣lowed vp and deuoured. For, what could hee attempt sauou∣ring of more honestie and honour, in consideration, either of his priuate estate, or in respect of the whole body of the com∣mon wealthe? In consideration of his owne priuate person: because it is no small argument and token, of a couragious harted man, of his owne accorde, to pushe vpon the pykes of death: because it is a manifest testimonie, of a valiant spi∣rit, not to loue life, (then whiche among men nothing more déere,) but to forsake it, & that moste willingly, that others by his death might inioy the benefite of life. He did not put himselfe into this horrible aduenture, vppon temeritie and rashnesse: but being warned so to do by a vision in his sléepe, or rather beeing so admonished by reuelation from heauen, he was not wayward to shew himselfe conformable to such forceable representations. In respect of the whole Common wealthe: because it can not but be honest and honourable, that a good and vertuous man dyeth, for the deliueraunce of his countrie, from an inconuenience. Let vs procéede
and consider what commodities did redounde to the Com∣mon wealthe, by this his déede of valiauntuesse. He saued the life of many a Noble Duke: The fruites and commo∣dities which insued the va∣liant death of P. Decius. he wrought the safegard of many a conquerous Capteine: he sente home the armie with victorie and triumphe: to the Romanes hee purchased euerlasting renoune: for ende, to his owne selfe, he wonne a name of immortal maiestie. He may (of right) chalenge to him self this singular title, to be called Pater Patriae, The fa∣ther of his Countrie. What should I here stand in rehersing the daunger of the enterprise, what should I doe spending the time, in putting you in minde of the hardnesse of the ad∣uenture? Howe terrible a thing it was, that he so coura∣giously attempted, you may gather by the circumstaunces. As who said: there is none but thinketh and persua∣deth himselfe that life is passing sweet. What man is there but loueth his life? & good reason: ne∣uerthe lesse, what is he among a mylliā, that is not surprised with sorrowe, when hee séeth that soule and body must bee separated? yea, this parting in sunder, maketh the valiaunt mans heart to quake and tremble. Howebeit, this Noble Gentleman, vnderstanding by reuelation, that if he en∣ioyed life, the whole common wealthe was like to be mar∣uelously molested, did chuse rather, of his owne life to make a resignation, then that his countrie, whiche he moste ten∣derly loued, should fall in the gréedy iawes of deuouring de∣solation. And speci∣ally lustie Gentlemen & gallant Cour∣tiers, who should be a spectacle and patterne to the rest. All noble harted men therefore, setting before them, this worthie fact of Decius, let them put in practise some parte of his prowesse, if they meane to be partakers with him, of his perpetuall renoune. Fare you well. Conradus Celtis, to N. Patritio. THE ARGVMENT. He exhorteth N. Pat. a young Gentleman being in warrefare, & de∣sirous to return home to his countrie, to continue stil in battel,
and as he hath begunne, so to perseuere. To proue that there i no losse, but gaine gotten by absence from ones natural countrie, he vseth the example of Medea. Lastly he concludeth with a short sentence out of Euripides. IN all the Epistles that I sende to your Capteine and go∣uernour, I see good and necessarie occasion offered, not to pretermitte your commendation: touching whiche I must say somewhat, euen with an vpright iudgement, and eui∣dent witnesse, of my beneuolence towardes you alwayes inclined. First, I would wishe you to set aside Wherein to be busie and occupied, is a thing arre vn∣sitte for your prson, and degree. all trifling affaires, and vaine follies: shake off that delightfull desire whiche you haue, to be conuersaunt in the Citie: and there∣vnto labour to aspire by continuance and vertue, whereto you haue once giuen assayes to mount already: Fye man, mise not of your aduenture. Let Medea be a patterne and example for you to followe, who although she were a nyc and delicate Ladie, at what time she returned home to her countrie, after a certaine time of absence expird, and bée∣ing asked the question of Matrones and auncient Gentle∣women, howe she liked thereof: she made them this an∣swer to their dmaunde: saith she: to gette vertue and ho∣nour, it is a goodly thing (doubtlesse) to be absent from ones countrie. For, many when they are farre distant from their natiue soyle, inde themselues thereby muche bene∣fited, and their dooinges and dealinges (in suche a case) are more allowable. Contrariwise, many that haue spent their yeares at home, haue béene so farre from being therefor commended, that they haue incurred rather a great mislike∣ing, in the number of whome, it had béene your lucke to haue béen reckoned, had not we perforce thrust you out, and vrged you to attempte that, wherewith you were verie loathe to meddle. But we will deferre these matters till When we sha haue  leasure,  etter op∣ to ▪ & . another time, intending to write of them largely, when we are at more leasure. And because I haue taken vpon  to represent the person of uéene Medea, I thinke it  , to put you in reembraunce of this sentence:
A sentence taken out of Euripides. That wise mans wit is nought but vaine, Who for himselfe no good can gaine. Looke to your healthe: and fare you well. Conradus Celtis to Hasilina Eudemia. ¶ TH ARGVMNT. In this epistle he setteth downe an example, how one that is in loue should write to his beloued: beginning firste with a certaine af∣fection of minde somewhat  to : (whereby oe , that men beeing bnded with loue, must, if they meane to get her fauour, feede her with fre speeche, tendng  th praise of her person: for therin women conceiue a passing pride, and are muche delighted) then falling into a complaint of her crueltie, and his miserie: after that he falleth to intreating and to promising: by which he doeth nothing else, but set downe a president or an example, (as I saide) howe he shoulde write that is in loue, and woulde obteine goodwill for his kidnesse. I Can not but sighe and be sorrowful, so often as thou com∣mest to my remembraunce. He descri∣beth the beau tie and come∣linesse of his loue, a aire Damosel, in re peating the occasions of his perturbed▪ and vexed minde, I can not but féele mee selfe much pricked with griefe, whiles I thine vpon thy golden glistering hairy lockes: when I thinke vppon thy moste comfortable countenaunce: when I thinke vpon thy crim∣son chéekes: when I thinke vpon thy sugred lippes: when I thinke vpon thy neate proportion: when I thinke vpon thy swéete tounge: finally, when other heauenly ornaments wherewith thou art inriched & beautified, ofer themselues to my cogitations and memorie. But (Oh cruel and blo∣die woman) thou regardet not my waling wordes: th hast no compassion vpon mée in my perplexitis: thou suffe∣rest mee to pine away in gréeuous agonies: thou lettest death swallowe me vp, th art art so full of vnkindenesse. I wot not howe i commeth to pae, whether by the froward∣nesse of my fortune: the vnhappinsse of my destinie: the cro∣
of my lucke: or the cursed houre of my birthe and natiuitie: to which of these, I may best ascribe it, I am vncer∣taine: that I louing thée so excéedingly, can not obteine so muche as one louely looke: not so muche as one wanton winke: not so muche as one priuie token of goodwill, wher∣by I may féele my selfe refreshed. I sende thée a lamentable letter, a letter written with teares. He pleadeth like a suppli∣aunt, for pitie and compas∣sion▪ a thing not out of vse and custome with louers. Alas, be not so sa∣uage, be not so cruell, be not so mercilesse: repaire vnto mée, sitte by mée, talke with me, and let me inioy thy companie. For what thing is more pleasaunt, what thing is more electable, then that we two shoulde liue together, shoulde loue together, shoulde imbrace one another, and minister long required recreation one to another? Our age is not farre spent, gyftes we want none to bestowe vpon thée, thou hast our heart wholy in thy perpetuall possession. Fare you well, and haue mée in remembraunce. Conradus Celtis, to Paleologo Con∣stantinopolitano. THE ARGVMNT. This Epistle eacheth, howe one shoulde indite a letter of consola∣tion to his distressed freende. The order whiche he vseth in his example is this. First he beginneth with the person of himselfe, shewing that his sorrow is such for his freends sak, that he had no lesse neede himselfe to be succoured, then his freend by his counsels & exhortations to be comforted. Then he proceedeth, shewing that he ought not so muche to be greeued, for his pre∣ent losse, because others in times past, haue been, partakers of the like. Lastly, he giueth him counsel to shake off sadnesse, persua∣ding him to hope, and not to despaie. ALthoughe I haue more néede to be comforted, then to minister consolation to suche as be grieued: yet notwith∣standing,
in consideration that nothing doeth so muche mo∣lest mée, as At the re∣membraunce whereof▪ I feele my self assaulted with muche sorow and anguishe. the thought of your losse and ill lucke, I can not chuse but earnestly exhort you, and hartily beséech you, for the speciall kindenesse whiche knitteth our two harte together, that you would not be discouraged, but shewe your selfe to be manful and valiant: I would haue you to consider the condition whéreunto all men are subiect, the mafolde miseries wherein we be wrapped, and the vnhappie times wherein we are borne and conceiued. Your vertue (Man) your vertue hathe done you more honour, then your fortune hathe wrought you disworship: and though by the last, your riches are diminished, yet by the first your estate is aduaun∣ced. For you haue obeined that whiche many men haue not gotten: and you haue lost that, wherof many a Noble Gen∣tleman (in like manner) hathe béene depriued. Then, sithence it is so, let not greefe and heauines of heart, bring you into suche thraldome, as that you should forget Whiche is, no to relent at any moles∣tation & trou ble, but to in∣dure al with patience, for∣bearaunce, & valiauncie. the duetie of a couragious man. You are not the first that haue suffred ship wrack: you are not the first vpon whom fortune hath frow∣ned: you are not the firste whose floure of felicitie hath béene soudenly blasted: then why should you so yéelde to sorrowe, as thoughe there were no hope of after ioye? why shoulde present heauinesse so vexe you, as though by future com∣fort, you were not to be reuiued. The Sunne is not alwayes darkened with cloudes: the Sea is not alwayes tossed with a storme: the windes doe not alwayes blsteringly blowe. The Winter Frostes doe not alwayes indure: no more should your gréefe heauines and anguish be continual. You haue had the name of a wiseman, and not without deserte: shew not your selfe therfore in time of necessitie, when wis∣dome should shew her selfe in brauest and brightest beauty, an vndiscréet person, wanting wit, iudgemēt & reason. Words of comort and consolation prouerbially vsed. Re∣member: there is nothing that is perpetuall, the hard rockes consume in time, so doeth yron, so doeth the harde flint: & thinke you that your fal is so sore, that you are neuer like to rise, that your ebb is so lowe, that you are neuer like to haue a fl tyd? I warrant you I▪ though you wade betwixt hope
and despair,  vncertaine yet, where your lotte will ligh, yet▪ because Hope and Despaire despaire is a signe of , and hope an ar∣gumet of valiauntnesse, leane to the one, and forsake the other: for in despaire there is no succour, in hope there is some comforte. Fare you well. Conradus Celtis, to Marco Car∣dinali. ¶THE ARGVMENT. An example or president to make a letter of commendation, for the furtheraunce of a mans freende, if nde so require▪ wherein first hee confesseth the beneuolence of him to whome hee writeth, and so maketh an entraunce into his purpose. Then he moueth the matter it selfe, and nameth the person for whome he labou∣reh. Lastly he concludeth with a repetition of his request, shew∣ing therein a certaine earnestnesse. Buse the proofes of your beneuolence vnto me, are not onely manifolde, but also manifest, in so muche that they are sled with A mber   an   a   ▪ mea∣nig innu∣merble, and exceeding the ordr of ac∣comptes. a thousand testimonies: therefore it com∣meth to passe, that many haue recourse vnto mée, requiring that I woulde be a mediatour for them vnto you, that vpon the ght of their commendable report, signified vnto you by letter, it wold please you to be their furtherer. Wherfore, among al other, in whose behalf I am to intreate, and make reque, F. Francisco, a very fréend of mine, and a Citizen no lesse honest then worshipful, commeth to my remembrance. This man hath a younger brother, very modest in behaui∣our, and vertuously disposed, and suche a one, whome we can not but like and loue: hee it is whome we commend at this present to your courtesie, & goodnesse, desiring you to stande his faueurer and furtherer. This man∣ne of conclu∣ding is fami∣liar and v∣suall, with the best he∣thoricians, in this kinde of lipistle. Yeu shall do me an excéeding gret pleasure, if he may vnderstande by some assuraunce, that my letter of commendation, written vnto you in his behalfe, hath béen for his profite & preferment. Fare you wel.
Jo. Ludouicus Viues, to Idiaqueo &c. Secretarie to Charles the fifte. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle conteineth a Catalogue, or rehersall of suche as haue written Epistles heretofore. Some of the he commendeth, other∣some he dispraiseth, shewing wherin they deserued liking, and whorein againe they were woorthie of reprehension. His mea∣ning is that their authorite is rather to be vsed, whose Epistles carrie away moste credite: and who they are, the Epistle mani∣festly declareth. HAueing written vnto you a methode, or platfourme of inditing letters, not that I thought, thereby to bée your teacher, (for I am not ignoraunte howe exquisite∣ly you haue the knowledge of that facultie) but because my desire was, that vnder the protection of your name, this small Epistolcall treatise, written and deuised by me for the instruction of the ignorannt, might be published: I thought it not amisse, after many preceptes giuen, for good order kéeping in making a letter, to say somewhat touching the Authors of Epistles. And to beginne with the Epistles of Writers of no lesse excel∣lentnesse then auncientnese. Plato and Demosthenes, because they are most auncient and but a very fewe in number, I omitte with silence. As for the Epistles of A man, in his kine of profession, without matche. Tullre, althoughe wee hae diuerse of them reerued vnto our owne vse, euen till this age (as it were through many tempestes, and daungers) wherei as he excelled all other wryters, and specially the , in choen wordes, finenesse of phrase, and eloquence of style; so in them are many things to be learned, bothe touching matters of common wealthes,
and priuate preceptes tending to iudgement and wisedome: yet notwithstanding, many of them were lost, but howe ma∣ny, it is vncertaine. The Epistles of A darke & mystical Phi∣losopher, crab bed & harshe, yet profound and learned in writing. Seneca are full of Philosophie. The Epistles of Plinie are necessarie for vse and exercise: bothe in consideration of mennes priuate buisinesse, and in respecte of affaires tending to the weale publique: neuerthelesse in bothe pointes, because Cicero is the better, I count him the rather of the twaine to bee chosen. Plinie in his Epistles, is short, pleasaunt, readie, abounding with apt, sententious clauses, and merueilous conuenient, for quicke witted youthes to reade and peruse, when they sende letters one to another for practise sake, sa∣uouring of an eloquent veine, thoughe the matter and Ar∣gument be not so weightie: among the Graecians there are found some, whose Epistles are read here and there, in di∣uerse writers volumes, among whome Lucianus is one, whose Epistles are So are they also shorte breefe, and compendious plaine and easie: and the Epistles of Philostratus, whiche are fuller of painted wordes, then be∣séemeth the matter wherein he is conuersaunt. The Epistles of them bothe, to say the very trueth, are vaine, trifling, and seruing to small purpose. The Epistles of A christian Philosopher, of Pentapolis in Africa, pre∣sident of Pto∣lemais. &c. Suidas. he was a great writer Synesius, are not a litle laboured in, and chiefly for Me∣taphors, whiche hee moste vseth. There are also Epistles of Basilius, Gregorius, and Libanius, and many more, bréefe and wittie (I must néedes confesse) but yet more méete for common Schooles, and men to reade for pleasure, when they haue nothing whereaboutes to be occupied: then fitte otherwise in matters of weight and importaunce. But let the Graecian writers passe, and let vs come to the La∣tines. After Caius Plinie, by succession of time, were many Christian writers, not onely more learned then the residue of their profession, but excelling all other whatsoeuer without controuersie. Auncient Fathers of the Church, epis∣toliogra∣phers, or wri∣ters of epistles Tertullian is mysticall, obscure, darke and harde in his methode of writing. Cyprian is not so doubtful and intangled in his style, though hée were of the same Countrie and Region. Augustine is some∣what
smoother then the other twaine, but not so eloquent and curious. Hieronymus is pathetical and vehement, as thoughe hee seemed to be alwayes directing his talke to Iudges, sitting vppon matters of life, and deathe. Ambrosius is somwhat milder and nothing so earnest: in some places, neuerthelesse perplext and cumbersome to bée vnderstoode. Symmachus, neither by the hautinesse of his Argument, nor yet by the finenesse of his phrase, coulde winne fame and credite with Or with them that suc ceeded him from age, to age, by de∣grees of times. his posteritie. Sydo∣nius Apollinaris Aluernas, is so enigmaticall, so darke and mystie (as I may terme it) that a man can searse tell where to finde out his meaning: in so muche that hée obteined not the fauour and well liking of his hearers, because (in déede) he deserued no such benefite. A long time after these, Franciseus Petrarcha, appeared as it were a bright shineing starre, in thicke and palpable fogges: this man is somewhat long and tedious, curious also therewith all, and not voide of difficulties, drawing to his methode, very many obseruations out of rustie and mouldie antiquaries. After him succéeded Gasparinus: who (among many other seniours) was the firste that sette penne to paper, in Italie, to write latine Epistles: whose letters, euen for this cause, deserue to be read, because they are reckoned in the num∣ber of them that be learned. After this man followed di∣uerse others, a A catalogue of late writer or at leastwise of no great antiquitie or auncientnesse Leonardus Aretinus, not all of the fi∣nest: the twoe Philelphes, namely the Father and the Sonne, pretily garnished with painted woordes, but in vt∣tering wise sayinges, not so full of grace or maiestie. Then Poggius the babbler, the trifler, the railer. Pius Socun∣dus pontifex, whose name was also Aeneas Syluius, had a good naturall inuention and style of his owne, but he wan∣ted Art. Aegidius Calntius and Campanus, neither of them are to bee contemned, althoughe one of them séem vaineglorious and arrogant. Sabellicus in all his dooings is like himselfe, bothe for copie of matter & wordes, & also for
facilitie, easinesse, plainenesse, and pleasauntnesse. Pomnonius Loetus, beeing desiros of the puritie of the Latie tongue, refused Whether his rsusal deserned com mention or reprehension, shal rest (for mee) in con∣trouersie. to studie Greeke writers, bee∣cause he would not make a mingle mangle, of the pro∣perties of two seuerall languages, and so corrupt the one, with the other: his wordes that he vsed, were chosen, and his style was cleane, and not to be amended. Io. Picus, and Angelus Politianus, imbrace them bothe, for they are not vnworthie of credite with the Reader, thoughe hee be no∣uer so deintie and delicate: neither of them is to be dissa∣lowed▪ One of them passeth in swéete sentences, carry∣ing with them matter of weight, woorthie to be conside∣red, the oter for his wittie inuention and pleasauntnesse of style, is not to be neglected: yea, he is muche to be estéemed  all , saue onely for his    an      due order. gréedinesse of glorie and , whiche maketh him (many times) to wander out of  ust limittes of an Epistle. He occupieth his penne  then in toyes, and conceites of his owne immagi∣ or fancie: againe, in some thinges wherein hee shew∣th reat learning▪ knowledge and grauitie, he may séeme scare delightsome: because in a trifling matter, of no weight nor importaunce, he bestoweth muche labour, to giue a shewe principally, of his fine compaing witte and elo∣quence: quipping and nipping suche, as dissalowe of his dooinges. These thinges like younge heades passing well, and therein they delight them selues, as it were in questioning and reasoning for the maistrie: but to men of more grauitie & iudgement, they appeare as méere ridicu∣lous, and not approueable. The tender and yonger wits, in whome reason hathe not yet taken fast roote, are infected with two vices, very daungerous and noysome among men: the one of them, is An affection not proper to younger vvitts only, but oftē times also inci dent to more settled heads. vaineglorie or arogancie: the other is bitter rayling and  abuse of the tounge: by reading suche Epistles: whiche is so much the more odi∣ous and to be abhorred, because suche bytter braling, and wrangling woordes, spring from very small and light cau∣fes,
yea from such, then which more vaine and vile cannot be: as vppon a letter of the Alphabet: vppon a syllable: about a vowell, about a consonant, about a liquide: about a double: about the skanning of a Uerse: about the vnderstanding of a sentence, &c. Yea, many times by reading such tryfles wher∣in more wordes are vttered, then witt is declared, the man∣ners of younge learners are disordered: wherefore they are not to be regarded that sett downe such friuolous fansies, of their owne running inuention. In Hermolaus Barbarus, there is more grauitie, & more knowledge of Arts bewrayed* Commen∣dation wonn by desarte. in his writing, then in any one béeside, I admitt no compari∣son: neuerthelesse, I must néedes say, that hée is somewhat intricate, and hard to bée vnderstoode. Amonge these, the counterfect Philosopher Marsilius Ficinus sheweth himself,* A proper & pleasant com∣parison. like vnto a sea Gull among a sort of faire swānes: this mans epistles sauouring of Platonicall questions and reasons, tho∣ughe in matter they be pithie, yet in words and phrases they want beautie, and delight not the reader. The epistles of Franciscus Picus, althoughe they are not fully so sine and elo∣quent as his Unckles, yet in consideration of their style, they are not to be dispraised, because it is good and not blame wor∣thie: and in respecte of the weightie sentences, which he doeth vse, they deserue to be cōmended: but this man lacking luck, did also lacke wel lyking. Rodolphus Agricola, if he had a∣mended his owne doings, if his owne works had fallen vnder his correction, he might haue worne the wreath of worthines with the chiefest, and the best, amonge the auncient writers: and why? Because of the soundnesse of his knowledge: the déepenesse of his learning: and the perfectnesse of his iudge∣ment. Wée sawe (of late yeares) the epistles of Ioannes Cap∣nio, both Or, in the glosse of their glorie, and the blemish of their beautie: that is, when they were most famous, and when the prosperous vpspring of other writers was an occa∣sion that his wonted wor∣thinesse withe red and wa∣sted. bredd (as a man may say) and also buried: the common consent of the learned sort, did so much mislike them that they did quite condemne them: howe then could they continue longe aliue? Nay, how could they but quickly dye? for, ere many monethes were expyred, they grewe out of cre∣dite. Christophorus Longolius, béeing too too curious in imi∣tation, marreth the readinesse of his naturall inuention. Hée
hath many of Ciceroes words, which whether he obserue of a good meaning, or for a fashion, it remayneth to be decided as a case of doubt? This is once true, the sense of his epistles may be amended, and made better & sitter for his phrase, because in small matters he vseth great and thumpiug words, wher∣in is no good agréement. For, it is not sufficient and enough for him, with excéeding diligence to imitate the woords and y• phrase of Cicero, except he had also expressed Cicero in all o∣ther points. By this Alle∣gorical speach he meaneth nothing else, but that Lōg. tooke more vpon him, thē he was able to performe in imitating Tul lie. Should hée feigne to himself a weale publique, and immagine y• gouernment of the same, he himselfe being but a priuate man, and shutt vp close in an odde corner, farre vnlike a man allotted to such a calling? Wherein hée deser∣ued as much to be laughed at, as if hée had put vppon him the attyre of a Gyant, and had spoken his words with a feigning voice like a Gyant, to the end men might beléeue e was in∣déede a Gyant: neuerthelesse, hée is not altogether not to bée regarded: but for his words sake, wherein he commeth some∣what néere Tullie, deserueth to be read. All the writers of e∣pistles in this age, they are but enche whistlers to Erasmus Roterodamus, and Gulihelmus Budeus, who in déede, excell all their predecessours, that liued either in the dayes of their syers, or their grandsyers, in wisedome, in learning, in elo∣quence, in varietie of writing and choice of inuention: and ei∣ther of them in his peculiar style, and proper kinde of excerci∣ses, notable men both, and singular. Erasmus is easie, plaine, perceiuable, and neuer swaruing from his accustomed veine. * Budeus is delighted in a newe, straunge, and vnusuall order of writing, which is more méete to be wondered at, then to be followed. The epistles of S. Paule, are too loftie, to mysticall, to déepe, and profound, so that it is not séemely for vs, to mea∣sure them by our iudgement. And thus haue I runne about a round row of writers, and haue shewed wherein they are to be marked: it remaineth to choose the best approued, & to let the other alone as lesse necessarie. Fare you well.
Christophorus Longolius to Petro Michianello. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Hee excuseth himselfe of intermission or ceassing from writing to his friend Petro Michianello, in the constancie of whose frendship hee confesseth himselfe much comforted. To conclude, hee she∣weth that his loue is so farre from being reptoued, that it is aug∣mented. Lastly he giueth a short reckoning of his estate. THe comming of Some Gen∣tleman and frend of his. Antonius Francinus vnto mée was sim∣ply and of it selfe most pleasaunt and ioyfull: yea so much the more delightsome was it, and fuller of gladnesse, because by his report vnto mée made, I was certified that you conti∣nue the beneuolence and remembraunce of courtesie, which old acquaintaunce requireth, and approued frendshipp chal∣lengeth. For surely, I was surprised with a foule suspicion and motion of mistrust, least you Or, hauing  gainst mee some conceite of displeasure. for my delay∣ing and put∣ting of my let ters &c. hauing taken an offence at my long intermission, and ceassing from writing, had aliena∣ted your minde, and so suffered the same to be estraunged from accustomed kindnesse: with which doubt I was the ra∣ther troubled, because in a thing which I promissed to do the last yeare in a letter, I haue crackt my credite. But into the daungers of those times, vppon a soudaine, I am tumbled, which haue not onely cut off all libertie of cōming vnto you, but haue also not giuen me so much leasure as to send: with the allegation of which probable causes, although I did sup∣pose my selfe not inexcusable, and that you could not but ad∣mit such impedimentes as, I might not withstand: yet thus much be you persuaded off, and well assured, that the report which our friende Whome in the beginning of his epistle he nameth. Francinus made to mée, touching the con∣stancie and vnuariablenesse, of your goodwil towards mée in∣clined, was most delectable, and so singular a comfort, as a greater might not be wished. For, thus bée you fully resol∣ued of my nature, that with such reuerence I remember
you in your absence, as that not onely any part of my loue and affection towardes you is diminished, but the same also, how much soeuer it hath béene in measure and proportion, is through a longing desire of your companie and presence, so kindled and increased, that I make reckoning of nothing so much at this instant, as I doe of the sight of your person, in comparison of whome An earnest protestatin o giue testi∣monie & wit∣nesse of his hartie affectiō and kindoes. I set light by all thinges else beside, whatsoeuer. I would write vnto you a discourse of the trade of my life, and the order of my studies, but that I haue alrea∣die communicated and shewed the same to Francinus, vppon condition, that hée should certifie you thereof, by woord of mouth in euery respect, as by mée he was infourmed▪ Wher∣fore hée is to giue you vnderstanding of all maner of circum∣stances more precisely: thus much in breuitie, least I should séeme to say nothing to the purpose. Such is my life (through the bountifulnesse of God) as I am therewith contented: such is my quietnesse, as therewith I finde my heart singularly delighted: for end, this comfort of conscience I haue in like manner, that if Or, that if a Christian mās minde may be contenta∣ble. a Christians mannes minde bée not defec∣tiue, then am I not forlorne, wretched, or miserable. Fare you well. At Patauium, the 7. of the Calends of July. Ch. Longolius to Francisco Belino. ¶THE ARGVMENT. Betweene Ch. Longolius and Franciscus Belinus, as there was great and familiar acquaintaunce, so there was no great distaunce of dwelling (for so the breefe of the epistle seemeth to import) inso∣much that they had often meetinges and talkings together: Now Frāciscus Belinus promising Longolius to come to him home to his house, (where hee was looked for of Longolius) but beeing not so good as his woord, hee is therefore charged with vnkinde∣nesse. HOw desirous you were to visite mée to day, I am not able to declare, at whose request made vnto me but yesterday,
I was wylling to hée intreated, gyuing attendaunce at home. in mine  , of purpose to looke and tarrie for your comming▪ I Or, I found & felt my self much grieued with the ex∣pectation and hope of your comming. was much troubled wyth  and looking  you▪ but it makes no matter, you are not lyke to escape scotfrée, and as for , which peraduenture you wil make by reason of the great showers, I meane to admitt none. For the more fowle the day was, the more blustering, and the more tempestuous▪ omuch y• more méete was it, to be spent in frendly company, and familiar cōmunication, which might haue mynistered occasion of delight. Now, thoroughe your offence it is come to passe, that I did not only want your pre∣sence, wherupon a special portion of my pleasure dependeth: but did lacke, in like manner, A man of great fame & worthinesse, thoough the notable lear∣ning & know∣ledge wher∣with he was indued. Petrus Bembus his méeting, wyth whom I would haue béen meruailous merrie, this day chiefly, wherein I was at such leasure. For, I was fully de∣termined to haue gone to him, and to haue spent away the te∣dious time, in some talke, if you had not béene so carestly in hand wyth me yesterday, to tarry within the walles of mine owne house, in hope of your cōpany. Thus much I did meane to let you vnderstand, to the intent that hereafter, I should not be deluded and mocked wyth vaine expectation, of your comming: besides that also, to the end you might alledge (if you can) some other impediment which cut you off from kee∣ping company, béeside rayne, lightning and thunder excepted. For, I thinke that you are neither tongu tyed, nor vnproui∣ded, what to say for your selfe in this behalfe, though such bée your degrée, that whatsoeuer you alledge by the way of ex∣cuse, it is not of me to bée dissallowed or despysed, vnlesse (per∣happes) you vse these or such lyke woords, that our company and conference is not wyth you, in such great accompt, that you should in stormy weather, and durtie wayes, set al aside, and come tripping to mée in your silcken sleppers. But, of durtiè way you are not to cōplaine, for you might haue gone al along the O galleries▪ both interpe∣tations are tol∣lerable. cloysters, and so escaped the showers: againe, the rayne did not fall continually, but at certaine times, now one shower and then another, so that you might haue found the meanes to haue come and séene mée, according to promisse.
But I will omitt this matter, desiring rather to  informed by your owne mouth, for the more certaintie : Doe what you can (if not to your owne hinderance) that we may méete and Beelike they were not farre distant one frō another. talke together after supper: For I haue in my head to tell you, that which I am desirous to discouer. Fare you well. Ch. Longolius to Nic. Draconi. THE ARGVMENT. Writing to N. Dra▪ he certifieth him first of all of the ceipt of his let∣ters: telling him that in reading them hee was delighted: commē∣deth by the way somewhat at large, the famous Oratour & Rhe∣torician M. T. Cicero▪ both for his eloquence, and also for other his singular ornamentes of Arte and Nature: exhorteth Daco to excercise himselfe in reading and studying▪ so learned a writers workes: annexeth the commodities that grow by labouring in so notable an Authour: From thence hee descendeth to particular affiyres, touching him and his friendes: giueth him thankes, for his readinesse to do him pleasure: saith somewhat of one Fuluius a Student: and lastly maketh a discourse of certaine pleasaunt delights, whereof he wisheth himselfe a partaker. EUen then (as also long before) I began to labour & long after your friendly letters, when in good time, namely on the nynthe of the Calends of Auguste, they were deliuered vnto my hands: in reading whereof, among all other circum∣staunces therewithin conteyned, that one thing was most pleasaunt, yea so effectuall was it to make mee glad and ioy∣full, as I sawe nothing to that ende so forceable: and what was the thing wherewith I was delighted? Euen the assuraunce which I gott by the sight and style of your wri∣ting, that you are more diligent, then you You haue ta ken paines at your studie in times past ve∣ry diligently: but the order of your style and phrase, gi ueth euidence of your exce∣ding earnest∣nesse, there∣in presently employed. haue béene wont, in studying the workes of Mar. Tul. Cicero. For vndoubted∣ly, there were in your epistle, diuers and sundry appearan∣ces, whereby I gathered, and that manifestly, the thing to
bée  which I haue affirmed  , shall I ell you fur∣ther   did so well like of your letter▪ that from the begin∣ning to the ending, I cannot but giue this  that it sauored altogether of Ciceroes phrase,  wth fine∣nesse and swéetenesse, I doe highly commend your purpose, and indeour, instantly exhorting you,  as it were, ha∣stening you forward in your running race) to excercise your selfe in the woorkes of this approued Authour. For, if the knowledge of the Latine tongue, bée obteyned, not so much by priuate practise at hame, or by publique pleading in the common place, as it is by vsuall trayning our mindes in the bookes of famous and learned writers: to whom then may wée submitt our selues as Scholers, then to him, who by the iudgement and generall voyce of all ages, hath the name to bée more eloquent then al the best leaned: and more learned, then they all that are thought most eloquent? I am of this opinion, doubtlesse, that it is a thing vnpossible, that any man should sufficiently painte out in pure and pickt La∣tine tearme, the inuentions of his owne braine, haueing not diligently and attentiuely layd to his lystening care and la∣bour for the In which two fingular  requi∣si  a Rhe∣torician, Cce∣ro excelled.  writers of all ages. fynenesse of Tullies phrase, and his * varietie of  Againe, touching him that is buisily and studi∣usly occupyed in reading and marking his style, this is my iudgement, that althoughe his knowledge bee but indiffe∣rent, yet  it is like in time to come to passe, that euen by that indifferent knowledge, hée shall growe to greater vnderstanding, and in the ende shall béecome to ma∣ny, a very myrrour▪ Moreer▪ if the knowledge which hée hath bée but simple and small▪ neuerthelesse, thorough the due obseruation and marking of his maister, hée shal vse such on orderly conueying of such thinges, as hee deuiseth in wry∣ting▪ that through the whole course of his doing, none shalbe able do finde any thing amisse, and blame worthie. I In wht re∣spect Longol∣commendeth Cicer. do not reuerence Cicero in this respecte so much, because heè excel∣leth all other authors that euer haue béene in any age, both in pleasantnesse, and also in plentifulnesse of words and mat∣ter:
But because such is the subtiltie of his , so per∣ect and exquisite of iudgement, that with him there is none to be compared: besides that, in disposing and aptly placeing that which he hath deuised, by the helpe of his wysedome and the benefite of his knowledge, that nothing can bée immagi∣ned more méete, nor to the purpose better agréeable. To the forecited qualities, right worthy of commendaion, a third is to be added, namelyA rare gift, and therefore deseruing pe∣culiar praie. the methode & forme of his style in wry∣ting, méere angelicall and heauenly, which as in eloquence it is singular, so for the easie vnderstanding of the same, it is meruaylos and matchlesse: insomuch that euen those things which are pouldered wyth most grauitie, and polished wyth most beautie, séeme smothly & mildly to offer themselues to the readers capacitie, and not to sauour of any curious labour therein employed, tough they be tyed to the obseruation of numbers in syllables. It shalbe your part therefore (euen as you doe) to haueTullie hee meaneth, of whome, and touching whō hee hath com∣mendably written. this man in estimation and reuerence, and so farre foorth as your abilitie will permitt, let him be a presi∣dent & example for you to imitate and followe. For, although you cānot (be your studie neuer so great & your labour neuer so earnest) aspire to the perfection & fulnesse of his praise yet notwithstanding, it shalbe no smal commendation vnto you, nor lightly to be estéemed, if you draw towards him y• is most excellent, though you come not néere him by a great distance: it shall I say make much for the aduancement of your name, if you be next him, though but in y• third or the ourth degrée. But I am fallen from my determinatiō, sythence it was my meaning, to answere your letter. I could not wel haue kept in sylence, that which I haue somwhat largely declared, to y• intent I might giue you a signification, of my good lyking and wel allowing of your endeuour in Tullies works employed. WherforeHe cheth certaine speci∣alties contei∣ned and men∣cioned in his friends letter. to let y• passe, and to come to your epistle in the which, whereas you say that your authoritie was to Fuluius néedelesse and litle auaylable, hée signified the same vnto mée in his owne letter: whereby I founde mée selfe delighted twooe sundrie wayes, both because you were disburthe∣ned, of that trouble, (for I am certaine that it could not
but be cumbersome to you, bothe at this time to come into the citie, & also to be drawne from your purposed studies) & bycause those of your affinitie, had shewed thē selues reaso∣nable to their brother. Howbeit, there remaineth behinde a certeine cause deseruing the dutie of giuing thanks, in y• you promise, that you will hereafter, and are ready euen nowe, i the matter so require, for my sake to traine your abilitie. I would haue you to confirme Fuluius, in the good mynd wher∣in he is nowe, touchingOr, being disposed to his booke, & the loue of . a students life, this must you do by aire persuading meanes, whome, when you haue incoura∣ged and established in that his towardnesse of will, send him backe againe to vs as soone as may be, with sufficient proui∣ion and maintenance. For you (if you be wise, and as I take you to be) neuer remoue from the place where you be har∣boured, sithence you enioy such an heauenly life, in compari∣son of which, my leasure, my libertie, and all my quietnesse, séemeth vnto me vnpleasant: and yet you would not beléeue, how happie and blessed I thinke my selfe somtimes, through the vse of this benefite. To be raysed out of your bed early in a morning, with the chirping noyse and swéete singing of byrdes: to be incouraged to sit downe to your studie, and to bestow a few houres at your booke: to rise out of your chaire and walke about the flelds brauely beautified with flowres, hearbes, and blossomes: to fetch a clyming course vp and a∣bout the pleasaunt and delightsome hilles: Then, after your returne from walking, to betake you to your accustomed companions, and with them to haue conference, til the heate of the day decline and be ouerpast: or else, all noonetide to so∣lace your selfe in the refreshing shadowe, or else to be exerci∣sed with shooting in a crossebowe, and to make tryall howe you can leuell at a marke. Sometimes to mount on horse∣backe, and goe abroade a hunting: then to sit close at your booke, for a while, and when you are wearie with reading, nay, when your reason hath persuaded you in a measure of studie, (forBy that clause he mea neth nothing els, but that in leaning is no loathing, ex∣cept it be in a loytere. the Muses are such pleasant companions, that the more we frequent them, the more desirous we are to vse them, o farre they be from breeding loathsomenesse) then
you haue your deintie suppers prouided, and dishe vpon dishe presented to te table: After that, you haue your fine wal∣kes, in places of pleasure, and therewithall communication seasoned with the leuen of learning: to cclude and shut vp all in breuitie: you haue your swéete and delicate sléepes in your comfortable chambers. I would I were deade, if these e not such rare delightes, to mée specially, as that I coulde finde in my heart, if I wist where to haue them, euen to saile euer seas, but euen to sée them: and what I woulde then gladly doe to enioy them, may soone be uspected. A protestati on of heartie goodwill and friendly afec∣tion. Day and night I thinke, nay, I wishe that I had wings, that I might flée vnto you. Wherefore, sée that you looke for me about the Ides f September. For I meane (by Gods helpe) at that appointed day, to be present with you: neyther will I goe forwarde with the rest of my determined peregrination and voiage, before I see the euent and full successe of my labours, and the whole trade of my life: that is, til I haue part of your pleasures, a fewe dayes, in your gay gréene medowes. Fare you well. Dated at Patauium. Ch. Longolius to Ia Sadoleto. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. He confesseth what pleasure he conceiued by the letter which M. A. Michael receiued, frō Sadoletus, to be conuyed vnto him: pre∣ferreth the bountie of his nature before perfourmaunce of pro∣mises: acknowledgeth him selfe to continue myndfull of Sado∣letus his curtesie: discouereth the occasion why he rather choseth to dwell in Pataium, then in the citie of Rome: declareth that whē his troubles be vntwisted, he will visite Sadoletus: Lastly, he concludeth, with the mouing of a petition, in his former lettr mencioned. THE letter whiche M. Antonius Michael sent me the last daye fromThe situati∣n whereof, to gether with the auncient descent of the people there inhabiting▪ i to be read in euerie geog pher. Venice, minisred vnto me a great sig∣nification of familiaritie betwéene vs both, and a manifest
proofe of your good liking of me: of our familiaritie, in that you persuade your sele to be excusable, and that I will not burthē you for the long delaying and silence which you vsed, before you writte vnto me: of good liking, in that you be de∣sirous to haue me leade my life with you, and to turne all that is yours into my vse and seruice. But surely, although suche be my condition at this present, that nothing vnto me could séeme more worthy acceptation, then the receiuing of letters from you: yet notwithstanding, heref I would not haue you ignoraunt, that your good will and kynde heart, is to me in more price and estimation, then the prfourmaunce of all promises: not for that by them you giue a testimonie and declaration, to outreach myne opinion (for I haue bene alwayes resoled thus in mynde, that what soeuer might be looked for at the handes of a vrie friend, should, (nothing to the contrarie) passe from you vnto me, thatThough he seede, osten∣times, vpon things of grt  and vncertein∣tie. hope in her account might not be vnsatisfied) but bycause I reading and perusing your Epistles, might in them see and behld a most liuely representation of your liberall and bountiull nature. In consideration whereof, I yealde you infinite thankes, as by duetie I féele my selfe constreined: and also, that it will please you to continue this your accustomed kindnsse, to my behoofe, I beséech you most earnestly. For, I trust so to es∣cape the rocks of forgetfulnesse and vnthankfulnesse, which haue caused many a one to suffer shamefull shipwracke, that I shalbe able enough to performe and accomplish as I hope, with daily dutifulnesse and continuall recourse of courtesie, all suche seruice as your deserts doe exact and require. In that you say, you sée no cause, why I shoulde rather desire to dwell atA citie in ∣talié, now cal∣led Padua, foū ded by Ante∣nor a Troian Duke whose aūcient tumb or sepulchre is there remai ning to bee seene. Patauium, then in another house within the citie, to the end I may kéepe in secrete, the inwarde grudge of my heart, and not discouer my hidden thoughtes touching the citie, I tell you trueth, that if the worlde did laughe vppon mée, as it doeth vppon you, I woulde not passe a  in what place I spent the time that I haue to liue. As for you that haue all thinges about you, whiche are neces∣sarie and requirable, it makes no greate matter, sythence
in any countrie whersoeuer you come, you are able to main∣teine your selfe in welth and honour, according to the noble∣nesse of your fortune, and the worthy calling where vnto you are allotted: but my condition and estate is farre otherwise, that euen in this plentie and abundaunce of all things, I am so farre from bearing any port, or hauing a traine of men to daunce attendance vpō me, that I am not of abilitie suffi∣cient, to finde a poore lackie to doe my necessarie seruice: and what shoulde I then doe (thinke you) at Rome? But, for so much as it pleaseth you, to offer me the vse and commoditie of your house, that is, to drawe me thether where you be re∣sident, I will not shew my selfe so vntoward, as to refuse the benefite of your proffered curtesie, neyther will I shew any signe of such foolishnesse, as to labor longer in the lack of your familiaritie, whiche I haue desired most heartily, yea, so ear∣nestly, as nothing aboue it, whatsoeuer. But bycause Matters of necessitie, be∣like, for so it may be con iectured. my matters are brought into so narrowe a streight, that they can not with such ease, nor yet with suche spéede, be set at li∣bertie, and obteine a larger scope, I haue not as yet to write any thing vpon certaintie to you, of my comming: so soone as I haue vntwinde my selfe out of the bryers, I will giue you informatien. In the meane seasn, remember I am so affec∣ted in mynde, that I wishe with all my heart to enioy your bountifulnesse, and your familiaritie: moreouer, the same petition which I made vnto you in my former letter, I re∣newe againe in this: namely, that through your friendly fur∣theraunce (when you are at conuenient leysure) I may haue accesse to our He meaneth the Pin whos fauour this Sa doletus was, and might therefore doe much in his friendes be∣lfe. supreme Bishop, and with him obteine fa∣uour, by the means of your commendation tending to my credite. Thus much I craue at your hands, and that most instantly. Fare you well. Dated at Pataui∣um: the third of the Calends of Au∣gust. ¶ Thus farre out of later Epistoliographers.
The last extract of Epistles, be∣longing to this Panoplie: out of M. Gualter Haddon, and M. Roger Aschame: Gentlemen of late memorie, for their rare learning and knowledge, verie famous. M. G. Haddon, to the right noble and honourable the Duke of Northumberland. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle sent to the Duke of Northumberlande, was written in the name of the whole vniuersitie of Cambridge: wherein occa∣sion is taken, first of all to commende the Dukes worthynesse, both by lande and sea, testified. In consideration whereof, toge∣ther with a certaine hope conceiued of his courtesie and gentle∣nesse, they offer and giue him, with one consent and agreement, the office of the Chauncelourship: (for, if that bee not the sense of the wordes, I can not tell what should be ment by their chiefe magistrate) for the receiuing wherof, he vseth diuers persuasions and reasons. GOD hath inriched you (Right noble Duke) both with the ex∣cellent with goodly vertues, to the increasing of your honour and noblenes. ornaments of mynd, and also with gracious giftes belonging to the bodie: he hath aduaunced you to high honour, and placed you in a degrée of singular dignitie, to the ende you might be a beautifying to the other parts of the common wealth. For youre industrie, your diligence, your valiantnesse, &c. hath flourished both on
lande and sea, at home and abroade, in warre and in peace: in so much that there is betwéene your labours susteined on sea, a certaine strife and variaunce, with them that you haue indured on lande: and your domesticall commendations are at dissention with your forreigne praises, for superioritie: and the stormie skyrmishes of bloudsheading battell, O, wherein you haue she∣wed manifest testimonies & asurances of your valiaunt∣nesse. from which your puisaunce hath not bene withdrawne, contende with your doinges in time of peace and quietnesse for the more worthynesse: neyther is it possible to attaine certaine knowledge, whether your enimies abroad stād in more feare of you, in consideration of your prowesse: or citizens at home beare you more loue, in respect of your often proued good∣nesse. It is not easie to iudge, whether in playing the part of a capteine in foughten fielde, or in discharging the office of a wise Senatour in court and counsell, Bycause in both, your ex∣cellencie ap∣peareth, to the admiration of a great num∣ber. you expresse the more noblenesse. Wherefore, sithence the manifolde ver∣tue wherewith you be adorned, spreadeth it selfe, bothe farre and neare: and opening vnto it selfe a passage through∣out all and euerie part of the common wealthe, offereth to some full and flowing founteines: so to vs (as we hope) it shall be so fauourable, as to let the riuers of your boun∣tie, runne to our behoofe: it shall vouchsafe (we doubt not) gouerne by grauitie and sage counsell: rule by wisdome and policie: defende, support, and mainteine, with authoritie: this our little (but learned and not lightly to be regarded) common wealth. Upon a certaine affiaunce conceiued in our hearts, of your clemencie and goodnesse, The head & body of the whole Vniuer sitie. we haue with a generall consent and vniuersall voyce, committed to your noblenesse, the chiefest office in our Uniuersitie, and made you our highe magistrate, as not repining to render, to s worthy a person, obedience in ample manner, and conueni∣ent order. In the which thing, we are not discontent, that our willes should be prest and applyaunt to doe your com∣maundement and pleasure: but not so ready to allowe and pay you any pension and rewarde. For, it is not requisite, that by our meanes you should reape commoditie: but it is rather necessarie and expedient, that through you, we should
be partakers of aduauntage. And though we our selues haue a denyall, yet to our letters made in the behooe of lear∣ning, be gracious to giue a graunt, vnto which, in their peti∣tion, albeit you be not satisfactorie, yet in respect of their humble supplication and intretance, Which is both honest & honourable. let them in the summe of their desire and suite, haue full effect and perfourmaunce. Great are your possessions, great your reuenues: great also, yea, very great is our want of that which is necessarie: we craue not your riches and substaunce, but In this clause the sum of their request is com prised. your authoritie and countenaunce: which for so muche as it may deseruedly challenge immortalitie, it shall therfore be so much the more worthy of the Arts and sciences whiche among vs are pro∣fessed and published, wherein doth consist as it were a myr∣our of maiestie, continued from age to age by incessant suc∣cession and perpetuall memorie. Our petition appeareth to haue in it an orderly procéeding: for sithence, the rest of the common welth hath by you bene administred and gouer∣ned: vouchsafe therefore He meaneth the vniuersitie in the behalfe of the which he wrote this letter. this our common wealth with semblable authoritie, this our common wealth (I say) last in date, but first in price, comming and offering it selfe volun∣tarily to your noblenesse. Nowe knowe the cause, nowe vn∣derstande the matter, if you were ignorant thereof before: and if you knewe it. yet vnderstand it againe. The charge and maintenaunce of learning, to whome doth it belong, but to Princes to Dukes, and suche as are placed in stately seates of principalitie? for the supportation of such things as are most precious, pertaineth to those that are of Among the number of whome you are to be rec∣koned. most worthynesse, of most honour, of most noblenesse. If it be so, then account our letters worthy acceptation, and like a fauourable patrone, let them (as clients) haue accesse to your person: of which if it shall please you accordingly to consider, to estéeme and deale with thē after ye measure of their wor∣thinesse, it shal so come to passe, y• in manner of recompence, they shal aduance your honour with monuments of eternal memorie: & for the present helpes, adiumentes, & furtheran∣ces which by and through your goodnesse are theron employ∣ed, they shal make requitall we such future benefites as shall
neuer vanishe, but beare For learning maketh full satisfaction, in time, to al her benefactours, sauourers and aduauncers. braue blossomes throughout all ages: yea, they shal make large restitution (estéeming your good déeds but borowed and lent) and far surmounting that which they receiued. Loose and set at libertie the toungs of our studies, our mute Muses make to speake & sound their triumphant voyces, that by the trmpe of their vtteraunce, sounding farre and neare, the fame of your worthynesse may passe through all places, whiche hauing alreadie the goodly possession of all other praise worthie ornaments, néedeth no further aduauncement by any thing, but onely the notable and renouned testimonie, the vndoubted assurance, the spe∣ciall and perdurable warrant of noblenesse, from our Artes and sciences redounding. Maye it please you nowe at the length, (Right honourable) To bring that to pefecti on, which you haue attemp∣ted & begun. to finishe the building whereof your owne worthinesse hath layde the foundation, which as it hath in martial exployts, warlike aduentures, matters of policie, and affaires tending to good gouernement, béene sea∣led with sundrie and certaine testimonies and assuraunces, so to make the aduauncement of learning and knowledge, the ende of your purchased renoune, that the lightsomenesse and beautifull brightnesse of the same, being made glorious∣ly to glister (by the meanes of your honour and noblenesse) all For as the bright beams of the sunne driueth away darknesse: so doth learning chase away g noraunce. mystes and fogges of ignoraunce, may be driuen away out of all the corners of this kingdome: that by this benefite (the promoting of learning, I meane, wrought by your pro∣curement) you may winne singular renoune to your owne person, and perpetuall praise to your posteritie. God giue your honour prosperitie and happynesse in aboundance. Fare you well.
M. G. Haddon, to the right honoura∣ble, the Lord Robert Dudleie, Earle of Leycestre. &c. THE ARGVMENT. Writing to the Earle of Leycestre that nowe is, he taketh the be∣ginning of his Epistle from his owne person: then exhorteth him to bestow his conuenient leasure in the studie & learning of the sciences liberall: bringeth in an erronious opinion, long since helde of the auncient Romaines, and answereth the same by the authoritie of Cicero: therevpon he taketh occa∣sion, yet againe, to exhort him to the studie of Arts, reckoning three seuerall thinges not vnmeete for his person: and to the intent his words might carrie the greater credite and counte∣naunce, hee vseth examples, both forreigne and domesticall, one among the rest drawne from her owne highnesse (I meane the Queenes maiestie, nowe in possession of the English Em∣pire) in the mencion whereof he toucheth sundrie circumstan∣ces: Lastly, he concludeth with a speciall exhortation, wherein he sheweth his loe to GOD Almightie, to his souereigne▪ and to his countrie. THat Diuers excel lent epistolio∣graphers haue vsed this kyd of beginning and among all other that I haue read and re∣member, E∣rasmus to sun drie Gentle∣men. &c. my seruice is so acceptable with your honour, I sée good and substantiall cause to reioyce: and sithence I sée it hath such happie successe, I will not be slake in conti∣nuing the course thereof, euen for the time it is allowed of you, and is thought aunswerable to your will and plea∣sure. Howe muche mine abilitie is inferiour to your ho∣nours commendable report, so much is and ought your fa∣uour and courtesie to minister vnto me the more delectati∣on: in which point, I shall neuer giue sufficient testimonie of the loue whiche I beare you, till I haue st abroade in o∣pen viewe of the worlde, some singular monument: and sounded in the eares of people, an especiall kynde of melo∣die, whereby it may not onely be knowne and vnderstoode, but also sealed and assured, what benefites I haue receiued of your honour specially, and of yours in like manner gene∣rally. In the meane season, as I may, and as I can, I will
be your He meaneth for the increse of knowlege: it is not other wise to be vn∣derstoode. fauorer and furtherer, that so much time may be bestowed & confecrated to tearning & studie, as the affaires of the weale publique, & your necessarie buisinesse do affoord: and though it be not so muche as you woulde, yet let it be as muche as it may. In the auncient yeares of the Ro∣mane common wealth, it was an opinion of a greate num∣ber, an opinion (I say) which preuailed not a little in those dayes: and the selfe same, as yet, euen in the Courtes of Princes, hath taken too déepe roote, An opinion then which a more absurd and repugnāt to reason can not be main∣teined. that the knowledge of Artes and sciences is nothing necessarie to Noble men, ney∣ther that they ought to tye and intangle their myndes in suche toyes and trifles. But he authoritie of Cicero, leauened with greate grauitie, and pouldered with wise∣dome, is at contradiction with this barbarous opinion, that Noble men at their méetinges should not be mute and tong∣tyed: neyther that they ought to spende the time in vaine prattle tending to no purpose, but that as their degrée is highe and honourable: so is it conuenient and séemely, their knowledge shoulde be aunswerable. Wherefore, al∣though you haue not full leasure, to apply all your labour to the studie of Arts and sciences, yet must you so acquaint your selfe with them, and as it were The line next and im∣mediately be∣fore going, sheweth the sense and mea ning of that allegorie. dye your wit in their vnchaungeable colours, that in euerie liberall science, you may haue a certaine sight and iudgement: especially in those whiche are most plausible, popular, and praysewor∣thy, as are for example, eloquence, the ciuil lawe, and histo∣ries. But, in this kinde of studie, it is néedelesse to giue you exquisite preceptes, bycause you haue attending vpon you, one for the same purpose, sufficiently furnished, the be∣nefite of whose seruice you haue in vse. Or, wherein you haue wel and wisely pro ided. Wherein ap∣peareth a perfect proofe of your prudence and prouidence: For, you shall not▪ finde, among all your riche and precious possessions, any one thing of the like value and estimation, if he be suche a man indeede, as by your letters vnto me di∣rected and deliuered, I doe gather. In that, after the exam∣ple of Neoptolemus, you impart a little leasure to Philoso∣phie, it is well and not to be misliked: For, that leasure, shall
procure vnto you great profite, and nolesse pleasure. But the life of Neoptolemus, as it was neuer frée from weightie af∣faires, but alwayes occupyed in mattrs of importaunce; besides that, still busied in battell, skirmishes, & conquestes, like a right Martialist: so I must néedes confesse, the trade of your life to be accompanied with much businesse, but howe it is warlike I sée not, neyther would I wishe it to be so, I tell you trueth. And yet The cōme tariographer: he was called Iulius, of the mouth Iulie, wherin he was made L. Dic∣tatour: or, by∣cause in that moneth he was borne, as it is reported. Iulius Caesar, which was a Mo∣narche of the world vniuersall, euen in the midst of extreme heate and rage of battell, brought ouer with him, into this English Island (then called Britanie,) Trebatius the lawyer, to the intent he might not loose, no not that little leasure, but by the vse of the same, reape some learning. A noble Ro mane: of whō Atheneus som what largely writeth. L. Luullus, in that most daungerous conflict, whiche he aduentured a∣gainst Mithridates, was so farre from forgetting Philoso∣phie, that for the continuall increase of wisedome, he had a Philosopher in his companie, throughout all his iournies, to the ende that the course of his studies shoulde not be hinde∣red. Of * Alexander the great, it is not vnknowne, with what daily diligence he heard Aristotle his maister. But these be olde auncient examples, and also forreigne. I will bring you home to our owne countrie: yea, euen to the heart of the court, and I will set before you a principall pat∣terne, after the whiche (as I suppose) you are verie well content to frame your self precisely. You sée that The Queenes ma∣iestie that now is (God pros∣per and pre∣serue her high nesse) paineful and studious at her booke: a notable ex∣ample, & not lightly to bee regarded. her Ma∣iestie hath matters manifold and innumerable wherabout to beate her braine, and yet you are not ignoraunt, howe her highnesse is addicted to studie, and with what a desire she longeth after learning. When I am in the court, and consi∣der this, I am somwhat ashamed of my selfe. For so often as I haue recourse to her highnesse, I finde her commonly at her booke, and yet suche resort and daily attendaunce is there on her Grace, and suche a multitude of suites of all sortes, that it is to bée thought her Maiestie hathe not so muche leasure, as once to thinke vppon learning. But of this her earnest and diligent , that waye em∣ployed, she hath reapt profite plentifully, namely, the know∣ledge
and vnderstanding of all things, in whiche she is able fo reason and conferre with men of learning: besides that, great glorie, yea, suche glorie as is lincked to euerlasting∣nesse: bycause shée, being but a woman, is so prouided of al furniture belonging to learning and wisedome, that all o∣ther noble men, Princes, and potentates, may rather stande musing and maruelling at her maiestie, as at a worldes wonder, then set her hyghnesse before them as a president, or an example to immitate and follow. And The praise of the quenes▪ maiestie still continued, for the varietie of her goodly giftes in un∣drie toungs & languages. as her Graces giftes be excéedingly commended in these quarters, among forreigne people and straungers: so likewise, her passing prayse, as well for the learning wherewith she is indued, as for the sundrie languages also whereof she hath vnder∣standing, is spreade abroade and published, by the report of such persons, as in whome wisedome and iudgement is not wanting: and this her prayse being noysed farre and neare, is so farre from perishing, that it is perpetuall: and the flowre of her fame dothe neuer ceasse flourishing. If An effectual persuasion, grounded vp∣on a speciall and singular example. you will be applyable to the like diligence and continu∣aunce in studie, as this excellent Ladie and péerlesse prince accustomably vseth, it can not be, but you must néedes bée a communicate of the like renoune, and in the chiefest com∣mendations that can bée attained, haue your deserued por∣tion. But whiles I call to remembraunce the noblenesse of your person, I finde this my long exhortation to bée a néedelesse lesson: bycause, to loue learning commeth wholy to you Sithenc your progeni∣ours were fa∣uourers and furtherers of learning and leaned men. by inheritaunce. For, your father, although he him selfe was vnlearned, yet he was a great fauourer and fur∣therer of suche men as were learned: whiche to be no vn∣trueth, by this proofe is most apparant and manifest, bicause hée made so muche of me in consideration of that same vn∣certaine shadowe of learning whiche in me hée perceiued: for the sounde substauce of learning, he could not sée in mée, sythence thereof I was voyde and destitute. Further∣more, Iohn of Warwicke the elder brother, was so inflamed with an earnest The com∣mendation of a worthy gen∣tleman. loue to learning, that in comparifon there∣of, he had all thinges else in lesse account & estimation: next
whome, though your brother, who euen nowe is aduauncd to his honour, eniyeth the selfe same titles of dignitie and noblenes, be not indued wt the like abilities of knowledge, yet is he affected with equall measure of loue and good liking to∣wards learning: in so much that he giueth none the hearing with more readinesse, then he doth such, whome he is persua∣ded to passe others in wisedome, iudgement, and vnderstan∣ding. Touching He turneth his talke to the Earle of Leycester▪ wherein is much matter to be marked▪ your person I will say nothing, specially in presence: onely thus much in conclusion shall be added, that sithence God (of his gracious goodnesse) hath planted you in place of promotion, farre aboue the degrée of other men: ne∣cessarie it is and requisite also, that you be circumspect and diligent, first to pray vnto God with humblenesse of spirite, and to do him seruice continually, from whome all thinges flowe as from a full founteine: secondly, that you spare no labour, but do the vttermost of your endeuour, that with the knowledge of all sciences, you may be absolutely furnished, that through so precious and auailable a benefite, you may haue in you▪ abilitie sufficient, both to perfourme to your prince that duetifull obedience, which you owe to her high∣nesse, and to discharge the seruice which is due to your coun∣trie: then which thing onely and alone, I account nothing more pleasaunt and acceptable, employing therein what so euer I can at this present, or hereaster shall be able to com∣passe. From Brugesse. Fare you well. Nothing is of me more wished and desired, then the continuall health and prosperi∣tie of my He meaneth the Queene Maiesti. souereigne Ladie and gracious maistresse, and next vnto her highnesse, the welfare and good estate of your honour: Wherefore, in that you certified me of both, you shewed a poynt of speciall courtesie, and you did euen as muche as I was able to require. Once againe Fare you well.
M. G. Haddon to Syr Thomas Smithe, Knight. &c. THE ARGVMENT. Hee beginneth with a testimonie of loue, and a comparison of both their cōditions, wherin he proueth to be great inequalitie, by sū∣dry circūstances: he toucheth both their estates, as well his owne being the writer of this letter, as also his to whom it was, writtē, shewing that they can not long continue, albeit they be contra∣rie: hee toucheth the miseries of this life, shewing (by the ex∣ample of a shippe gouernour to his purpose aptly applyed) tha wee ought not to struggle with necessitie, neyther yet to disa∣lowe of what soeuer is appointed vs by Gods good prouidence: Lastly, hee concludeth with hope, saying, that death which is al∣wayes nigh & at hand, (like a hauen to harbour vs) wil make an alteration of this wretched life, for a life happie and blessed. BUt that I loue you muche, I would beare you a grudge, sythence betwéene your present fortune and myne, there is suche difference aud inequalitie, as to me it is a great griefe, but to you an excéeding ioy. For, you haue gotten at one time, the loue of your countrie, the fauour of youre Prince, a wife, friendes, leasure with pleasure, and the For at the same time hee was embassa∣dour into Fraunce, as the title of the E∣pistle impor∣teth. ho∣nour of an Embassadour: as for me, suche is myne vnhap∣py fortune, and matchlesse vnluckinesse, that of al these con∣solations belonging to the life of man, I am boyde and desti∣tute: yea, I am so intangled and wrapped as it were in a certaine labyrinthe, that not Dedalus him selfe if he were aliue, coulde finde a way to get out againe, after he is once entered. But your happinesse can not be of long continu∣aunce, nor yet mye vnluckinesse euerlasting: and why? bycause The life of man, euen frō his infancie to his decrepite age, ful of va∣riablenesse & miserie. suche is the frailtie of our nature, and the varia∣blenesse of our condition, euen from our byrth and generati∣on, that no part or parcell of our life is pitched vpon perpe∣tuitie and stedfastnesse, but shaken to shiuers with a thou∣sande sundrie and vncertaine chaunces. Wherefore, euen
as Gouernours of shippes, kéepe that course in sayling which they can, not that which they would: and cut the waues as they are furthered with a merrie winde: euen so let vs frame our studie and labour, to that wherevnto we are con∣strained by necessitie: and shewe our selues not discontent, with that wherevnto we are appointed by Gods gratious prouidence, bycause For there is no striuing a∣gainst the streame: Gods ordinaunce & fore appoint∣ment none is able to resist. we must be ruled thereby, there is no remedie, howe so euer we séeme to wrestle and withstande. Furthermore, let vs fasten our selues vpon the sure anchor of this most certaine and infallible hope, that although we be ouerwhelmed, and as it were in manner sounke, in seas of miseries, though we be tossed too and fro with most outragi∣ous stormes and tempestes of troubles, incident to this wretched life: yet Death, the port or hauen of peace and quietnesse. death (being the port of peace and qui∣etnesse) is neuer farre from vs in these daungerous extre∣mities, by and through whose singular benefite, we shall be remoued out of the ruinous cotage, of this worlde fraught with vanities, into heauenly houses and most blessed abi∣dings, where eternitie and euerlastingnesse reigneth, where we shall liue in all pleasantnesse, séeing, féeling, hearing nor tasting any thing whereat to be offended and grieued. In the meane space, God of his goodnesse, blesse you with perfect health and long life, to whome I commit you and all yours, what soeuer. From Brugesle. M. G. Haddon to M. Thomas Henneage. &c. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. Writing to M. Thomas Henneage, with whome he had speciall fa∣miliaritie, he beginneth his letter with an occasion taken of the beneuolence and kindenesse▪ which betweene them was not vn∣testified. He sayth that friendship must not be considered, accor∣ding to the number and greatnesse of giftes: but after a mans minde and goodwill. He commendeth him for mainteining the memorie of his father in lawe, least in time he should be forgot∣ten▪ by hauing his picture (as I thinke) in liuely proportion and
represented▪ twyting (by the way) suche a set out their friende after their death, much otherwise then thy were of person, when they eioyed life. Finally, after a short commendation of his so∣litarinesse, compared with that wherein Scipio tooke pleasure, he concludeth. YOu owe me nothing (most déere and welbeloued friende) but loue and wel liking, wherein I would haue you my So hall the fort of our friendship & familiaritie re main inuinci∣ble. continuall debter. Our desertes, if they be examined and weighed, are yours, being of so much the more account and worthynesse, as they are in their kynde, and their due time considered: but in contracts and bondes of vnfeigned friend∣ship, benefites must (at no hande) be called in reckoning: onely the heart and mynde of a man is to be marked and esteemed, which in eyther of vs, as well you as me, hath (in mine opinion) béene most agréeable to our auncient acquain∣tance, and well beséeming the old friendshippe, that of long time we haue professed, and by the vse and conference of many and sundrie thinges established. In that you are care∣full not to forget your father in lawe, your so doing (in my thinking) is not to be disalwed: but in that you giue him his owne proper likenesse, and not a false and counterfet: your doing is so muche the more to be approued. For, He discom∣mendeth thē that cause the pictures of their prede∣cessours, and of such as thei loued when they were a∣liue, otherwise to be painted thē they bare semblance or likenesse. I coulde neuer conceiue well of those vine and light headed people, who commend to their posteritie after their funerals (more like flatterers then friendes) such whome they loued and fauoured: as though they that be liuing, had quite razed the deade out of their remēbrance: or as though the yrksome ghostes were delighted after death with ye publishing of a tie, which none in their life time, being of an honest & vertuously disposed nature, can abide, but rather abhorre it, and haue it in contempt and detestation. I like maruellous well of your solitarinesse, bycause it hath in it a certaine semblaunce of the solitarinesse wherein Scipio tooke pleasure, who was neuer more busie, then when he was best at leasure: or if you haue nothing wherein to be occupied, yet you escape many discōmodities of all sorts, whereto yong gentlemen a great number of your state and condition are subiecte. To
morrowe I will visite you, in the euening, if you bée at your house. In the meane season reape ye fruit of your studies, en∣ioy the benefite of your The right v∣sing and well ordring wher of, procure great incease of learning & knowledge. bookes and solitarinesse, then which two specialties (with your wiues swéete companie, and your frendes comfortable acquaintaunce) you shal find nothing in this life, of more woorth, value, accompt, and estimation. Fare you well. M. G. Haddon to M. T. Henneage. TH ARGVMNT. As he began his former epistle, to the selfe same Gentleman, with a commemoration of frendshippe and goodwill: euen so hee keth the same occasion in this letter, as a fitt entraunce to o∣ther circumstaunces. Then, hee maketh mencion of  matters, wherein they were both carefull, which notwithstan∣ding were hindered by the meanes of one, against wome he tooke stomache: hee toucheth a specialtie concerning Ger∣mani, which I leaue to the readers coniecture to gather if hee can: something (beelike) it was, that belonged to the common welth. Hee speaketh much concerning his wife, whose death hee lamenteth: hee seemeth to be sorrie for her highnesse sick∣nesse, therevppon inferring an exclamation and , against the roked and accurssed condition of this life. Lastly, he con∣cludeth with a prayer to God, for her preseruation, briefly tea∣ching (as it were in a woord) the remedilesse miserie that Eng∣land should suffer, if it pleased God, to call her highnesse out of this vile earth, into that glorious heauen. I Doubt not that the friendshippe which hath flourished so long betwéene vs, and hath wanted no assurances of due∣tifull courtesie, hath taken roote with such déepenesse, and is growne to such perfection and rypenesse, that no tempest of violence can haue the power, to displace ad plucke it vpp, so long s wée doe liue. I knowe you bée gréeued, for that our matters haue no more forwardnesse: for they are not pri∣uate
but publique, and in such cases (as I can tell well y∣nough) you haue a speciall care and regard to haue them fur∣thered, and with the like affection in that behalfe, ought eue∣ry good and well disposed Gentleman to be touched. Mine o∣pinionOr, there is no disagremēt betwene your opinion and mine: O, you thinke one thing, and I thinke the ve∣ie same. is aunswearable to your coniectures, but in such sort and order, that I thinke D. himself, to be a great impediment in this point and an hindraunce, then which man, if you iudge any thing more troublesome and vntoward, you are in a wrong beléefe, your opinion is erronious. Touching yt which you tell mée out of Germanie, I rather wish it then looke for it: of mine accustomed sentence in this matter, you are not ignorant, from the which nothing hath the power to pull and withdrawe mée, but one onely thing, which that I might sée and behold in presence, I am most desirous. For, in this case, I am altogether To beleeue no further thē I see: the next and ready way not to bee de∣ceiued. Dydimus, to giue credite no further then mine eye sealeth an assuraunce. That there is some hope, in the meane while offered, it is wel: nd I am glad to heare so much I tell you trueth: not for min owne sake, whose life is not long to last, as for the comm wealthes cause, which I would, if I could, make immortal. I thank you for my sonne, to whom I can wish nothing of more worthe, then that hee should be like his mother, then whom (in my iudgement) no∣thing hath any time béene more pleasaunt, and more profita∣ble. By the inge∣mination and twice repea∣ting of one thing, ee sig∣nifieth the pas sion of his inde. I would to God shée had liued, I would her life might haue béene excused by my death: and yet shée liueth I doubt not, yea shée liueth euerlastingly: But I, euer since I was without her, haue béene no better then a dead ghoste: yea I suffer death daily, in consideration that the stafe of mine e∣state is taken from mée, and the comfort of my whole life vt∣terly lost, as you remember and can testifie, and I at this pre∣sent would forget (if I could) verie gladly. But it is more then I can doe, or then I shalbe able to doe, whiles I haue a day to liue: no, I may not so much as thinke vpon her, with∣out wéeping. The health of our By this ex∣clamtion hee testifieth how hartily he lo∣ued her high∣nes: so ought l subiectes to doe, bee their degree neuer so hautie and honorable. Gratious Lady▪ and good mistresse, as it appeareth is somewhat shaken. O * miserable and ost cruel condition of this our life present, which is al∣wayes assaulting either with sicknesfe or with death, such
woorthie persones, as without whome it is impossible to liue. So that wee are alwayes either in griefe, or else in feare, and at that stay are wee like to continue still, till that last & lightsome day be come, which into the harts of the rascal ra∣blement striketh sadnesse and terrour: but contrariwyse, fil∣leth the mindes of good men, and uch as bee wise in deede, with all ioy and pleasauntnesse. God of his infinite mercie, preserue and kéepe at all assayes, my most excellent & match∣lesse mystresse, by whose death (chaūce when it shal chaunce) the lower of all womankinde shall fade, and England shall haue a most dolerous wound, yea a wound irrecouerable, and smarting with continuall anguish. This I leaue to you that bée of younger yeares: as for mee, I am in great hope, that after I haue waded out of the woes of this world ful of wret chednesse, I shall méete her There to weare a crown of immortali∣tie, blessednes, and euerla∣sting feliciti. Amen. in heauen. Commend mée to your good wife. From Brugesse the 15. of the Calends of Iulie. Fare you well, M. R. Aschame to the Queenes maiestie, his souereigne Ladie, Eliza∣beth by the grace of God &c. ¶ TH ARGVMENT. Writing to the Queenes maiestie, hee beginneth very Rhetori∣cally, with a comparison of he highnesse, wherewith hee was discouraged, and her goodnesse whereby he was imboldened to write to her maiestie. Hee toucheth himselfe, vppon consi∣deration of duetie to bee  to hi graious prince. Hee mketh mencion of two thiges, namely knowledge and dig∣nitie, (a goodly accouplement) which in her maiestie are not wanting: hee sheweth that the one should bee ioyned with the other, which hee proueth by examples, as well Poeticall as Historicall, and that doeth hee in breuitie. Lastly, hee coclu∣deth with a short exhortation and a prayer.
MOst excellent Ladie Elizabeth, I haue laboured long in doubtfulnesse of mind, whether I should be more discou∣raged in consideration of your Because of yor Maiestie, i tht you are a Queene, &c. hignesse, or more imboulde∣ned in respect of your Because you are fauou rable, lberall, vrtuous. &c. goodnesse, to present you with an epi∣stle. But after I had made vp my full reckoning & accompt, & throughly considered, how mindfull it hath pleased you to be of mée in mine absence, and what singular gentlenesse and courtesie I haue tasted oftentimes in presence, I did rather choose to bée accused of writing out of season, then to bée con∣uinced, in any point of vnthanckfull silence: and I am better content that my too much duetie should be reprehended, then as one that is toungtyed to be reproued, The experi∣ence and triall of her high∣nese boie, minstred vn∣to his hart at bould∣nesse and con∣sidence. sythence I am most assuredly persuaded, that my letters are so farre from béeing combersome to your highnesse, that they cannot but bée wel∣come to your goonesse. And although I haue innit occasiōs, wherein to occupie my penne touching your maiestie: yet do I nothing with a more towardnesse and readinesse of heart, then in shewing mée selfe glad and ioyfull for your sake, in that I sée you daily busied in beautiing and making more glorious, those so great & incomparble ornaments of Or, o bodie and mind: or so the wordes may (in mine opinion) not vnaptly be in∣terpreted. For∣tune and Nature, with such vnbatterable bullworkes and singular safegardes of learning: wherby whether your true renowne shalbe the more inlarged, or the worthines of your capacitie, together with your vnknowne diligence, by the report of all people, more commended, it is a matter of doubt and vncertaintie. And although thi your maiesties purpose and intent, in coupling excellent knowledg with passing dig∣ie, hath (as I am net ignorant) Plato the famous Philoso∣pher for an insample and president: yet neuerthelesse, thus much I doe know, and I may bouldly affirme it for a trueth, that through Noblenesse of witt & sin∣gularitie of udgment cō∣mended in her . your owne noble wit and singular iudgment, you prospered excéedingly: that by the conference which you had with y• most worthie gentlewomā, the Ladie Champer∣nowne, you were also much furthered: and that by the pre∣ceptes and instructions of my G. Grindall, you reaped no small benefite and aduauntage. Wée read recorded both in true histories, and also in eigned poesies, that before the age
in which Plato liued, euerie notable and vertuous Prince, tooke vnto them one Philosopher or other, in wysedome and iudgement famous, to whose counsells and aduertisementes, they applied themselues thorough the whole course of their life, accustomably. This to be no vntrueth, the fabulous in∣uentions of Poets testifie, saying, that Iupiter vsed the aduise of Prometheus and Agamemnon of Nestor. By histories al∣so the same is to be verifyed: for it is read, that Hiero vsed the counsell of Simonides: and Pericles of Anaxagoras: whereby wée haue to learne this frutefull lesson, as well I meane by the excellent déedes of most noble Princes, as also by the wyse and graue preceptes of profounde Philosophers, that A detection of his owne opinion,  vpon the examples be∣fore going. nothing ought to bee of more accompt and estimati∣on, then that power and principalitie should be alwayes lin∣ked to singular knowledge and great learning. And to what end are these words spoken? not as though I séemed to with∣drawe you Whic are so fare from being to bee found in your Grace, that the contrarie is of you imbraced and followed. from lingering delayes, but rather to incourage you in your voluntarie towardnesse & readinesse in running the way to learning, and to giue you, now that you are euen at the end of your worthie race, as it were with shouting & clapping of handes in token of excéeding ioyfulnesse, your de∣serued praises. In which notable course of commendation and renowne, there are none, with whome you should Because you hae not your equal, neither yet your supe∣riour. con∣tend and striue for maysteries, victorie and triumph, but with your owne peculiar person. As therfore (most gratious Elizabeth) you haue done alreadie, so continue & perseuere, that you may daily outgrow your selfe in dignitie and excel∣lencie, and that through the glorie of your lerning and singu∣lar knowledge, the noblenesse of your byrth may bée the more renouned: then which worthie déede, nothing can better be∣séeme your royall estate, nothing can bée more wished and de∣sired of such as beare your Grace goodwill: nothing can pur∣chase greater praise in the iudgement of this present age: nei∣ther can any thing be left more of force and effecte, to sett the mindes of such as shall liue hereafter, by succession of yeares, more a museing. The A familiar & vsuall conclu∣sion o well wishing. Lord Iesus prosper and increase your highnesse from day to day in vertue, knowledge & noblenesse Amen.
M. R. Aschame to Syr Th. Smithe. &c. THE ARGVMENT. Hee maketh a commemoration or rehearsall, of such notable bene∣fites, as Syr T. Sm, receiued by and thorough the bountifulnesse and liberalitie of the Vniuersitie of Cambridge (hee meaneth not corporall benefites, benefites I meane belonging to the body, but inward benefits of the minde, as learning, knowledge &c) there∣vpon inferring a persuasible reason, o moue him to the perfour∣maunce of deserued dutie. IF you be the man (right worshipfull) on whome this Uni∣uersitie of Cambridge, hath bestowed all her abilities: if it hath practised vppon you, all dueties of reuerence and god∣ly affection: if it hath furnished you with all kinde of know∣ledge and learning, with all manner Iuells and ornamente of her Commonwealth: if shée haue sowed in you onely and a∣boue all other, the séedes of her renowne: if in you especially∣shée hath fixed the affiaunce of her safetie and good estate: Note his ne∣cessarie conse∣quēt, inferred vpon the enu∣meration & re hersall of the forecited cir∣cumstaunces. Go to then, thinke and consider with your selfe what you are bound to pay her backe againe, for such inualuable benefits: call your conscience to a streight accompt & reckoning, what the Uniuersitie, what the learning and vnderstanding, what the weale publique, what Almightie God himselfe for such singular assurances of kindnesse and bountie, whereby your worshippe so flourisheth, doth of right require. The Uniuer∣sitie doeth denie you nothing: nay what is it that she hath not beautified and inriched you withall, sithence shée hath besto∣wed vppon you, all thinges, whatsoeuer shée her selfe posses∣seth: in consideration wherof shée doeth not simply and with∣out cause craue a good turne againe, but requireth such ser∣uice as might counterpeise her deserued duetie. Shée doeth not set before you some one particular cause, but she putteth her owne selfe in your credite: and all thinges vnto her be∣longing
the committeth vnto you: neither is it néedeful, that she should discouer vnto you her counsells, sithence you know them all thoroughly, yea, be they neuer so priuie and secrete. In this his persuasorie speach, he gi∣ueth a testimo nie of the pas∣sing loue & af fction which he did beare to the Vniuer∣sitie of Cam∣bridge. Doe that therefore you knowe: let your will labour with your abilitie, and that which you owe of duetie, see dischar∣ged: so shall you bring that to passe, which good learning, which the Uniuersitie, which the common wealth, which Re∣ligion, which Christe and your prince looke for, at your hands to be accomplished and perfourmed. Iesus prolong your life many yeares in health and prosperitie. M. R. Aschame to Syr Ioh. Cheeke. &c. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. The course of this epistle (wherein sundrie circumstaunces are touched about learning, and the commodities of the same, in one Gentleman of great fame and worthinesse, appearing:) gi∣ueth mee to coniecture, that the meaning of the writer was, onely to moue Syr Iohn Cheeke (to whome this letter was di∣rected) to bee mindefull of the Vniuersitie of Cambridge, and vnto the same, to continue beneficiall. The reasons which hee vseth are all grounded vppon persuasion. AMonge all the number of notable men (Right worship∣full) that haue had enteraunce into the Common weal∣the, by the benefite and furtheraunce of He meaneth the Vniuersi∣tie of Cam∣bidge the gar∣den plot of Artes and Sci∣ences. &c. this Uniuersitie, you are one, (whome before all other,) this Uniuersitie hath in more countenaunce and estimation when you are pre∣sent: & in more reuerence and admiration when you are ab∣sent: vppon whiche, you haue béestowed, in the time of your presence, and impart nowe also in the time of your ab∣sence, more then any other béesides, whatsoeuer. For, at your béeing in the Uniuersitie, you gaue notable and singular pre∣eptes of learning and knowledge, for all others instruion:
and such examples of wisedome and iudgement, for others i∣mitation and following, vnto which whiles many were ap∣pliable, they reaped greate profite: howbeit Syr Iohn Cheeke his deserued com∣mendation. fewe or none grewe to the like perfection and ripenesse. There is not so much as one among vs all, so ignoraunt but can testifie, nei∣ther yet so enuious that can auouche the contrarie, that this happie and blessed successe of our studies, these swéete foun∣teines of all our excercises in learning, (whereto many haue atteined and also tasted, by their great labour, paine, & hope) to haue flowed from the praise of your excellent witt, from your safegard, from your example, and from your counsell: so that these monuments of your humanitie, of your wisedome and of your learning, imprinte in our mindes, an cuerla∣sing remembraunce of your most worthie person. As Wherein he shewed him∣sele a true & a right noble Genleman. for the helpes and furtherances which ye Uniuersitie hath alwayes had, both for the more certaine supplie, and the perpetuall maintening of the same in fame and dignitie, through your meanes they are more then either all our fauourers besides could conceiue, or wée our selues might looke for at any time, wherein to haue our portion. For, whiles He meaneth king Edwade the sixt of most famous memorie. the kinges maie∣stie, being of you taught and instructed, hath such a loue and regard to learning: what others also in like manner, by and thorough your counsell, will, or ought to doe for the behoofe of our Uniuersitie, wée are not ignoraunt. This our hope haue wée, and this our lesson learne wée, out of your Plato, to that viious and ill disposed king Dionysius: neuerthelesse, ye pro∣fite and aduauntage of the same wée haue, but of late, tho∣roughe your helpe and assistaunce, sufficiently proued in our most Uertuous Prince Edward. Wherefore, sithence such recourse of mutuall duetie, such assured seruice of bountie, so many bonds of gentle and liberal deseruings, haue passed be∣twéene you and the Uniuersitie, to beginne with the remem∣braunce of your infancie, and so forward to the praise of the worshipp and dignitie which you do nowe possesse and nioy, Tht which hee sayth here to syr Iohn , may likewise bee said to other Gentlemen, a great number. there is nt in you to be found any one benefite of Nature, any one commditie of labur, any one commēdation of witt, any one supprtation of Fortune, any one ornament of re∣nowne,
but our Uniuersitie hath béene a procurer and fur∣therer of the same to your profite, or else a partaker thereof with you, to her owne glorie and honour. We doubte not, but our Uniuersitie may hope for, and also commaund you this seruice, considering the goodly & pretious Iuels, wher∣with she hath inriched you, that you would continue to the vttermoste of your power and abilitie, a mainteiner of her dignitie, as you your self arise by degrées to aduauncement. We do not cōmitt vnto you, the cause of one particular per∣son, but all our causes in generall, wherein we hope, you wil bestow no lesse labour, then either you ought in our behalfe to employ, or as we look for at your hands to be perfourmed. The Lord Iesus be your preseruer and kéeper. M. R. Aschame, to the two young Gentlemen M. Iohn, and M. Dominicke Vac∣chan, brethren: and their sister M. Mabell Vacchan, the floure of Vir∣ginitie. After his salutations ended, he excuseth his delayes of writing: wherin he bestoweth a good part of his letter: al the rest of his letter toucheth th praise of the yong gentlemen & yong Gentlewoman to who he wrote. So that the whole summe of this Epistle, may be reduced vn to two heads or principal pointes: The first, an excuse: the second a commendation: the excuse touching his owne person: the commen∣dation tending to other, in this his Epistle specified. Lastly he con∣cludeth with a prayer to God, to prosper them and their dooings. MOste happie children descended of moste worthie Pa∣rentes, commendations. &c. In that I haue not hither∣to answered your letters, whiche are vnto me for many con∣siderations and causes, most acceptable and pleasaunt, Or, it is not, for that you are worne out of my remembrance nor yet be∣cause in the perfourmance of my duetie I waxe loose and dissolte. this my delay is not to be imputed to forgetfulnes, nor yet to be
ascribed to negligence of dutie. I can not complaine of want of matter, wherin to be ocupied in writing, because in great aboundaunce I haue had it offered: neither can I excuse my self with want of opportunitie & conuenient leasure of sen∣ding, because it hath cōtinually béen proffred: so y• the dealt remaineth only in mée, why these cōmodities haue not béen vsed: not because my goodwill and louing affection towards you, is diminished: but because I séemed (in mine own think∣ing) these last monethes past and expired, with all kinde of learning somewhat offended. But hauing entred againe into fauour and reconcilement with learning, I tooke penne in hand, deuising with my selfe, howe I might, thoughe not wholy haue all my former silence excused: yet notwithstan∣ding in some respect at least touching the same be pardoned. I confesse, that great is my fault, and muche am I to be bla∣med, for being so long silent: as for mine opinion otherwise then I ought of you conceiued, wherewith neuerthelesse I am so sore charged, I acknowledge none at all. For By an ear∣nest obtesta∣tion he decla∣rth the reue∣ opinion whiche he con ceiued of thē to whome he wrote this Epistle. I pray God al the Muses may be angrie with mée for euer, & beare mée an endlesse grudge, if this hathe not alwayes béene my iudgement concerning you, that you are very rare examples of vertue and learning: yea, especial patternes, not the like to bee founde in this our present age: nor yet heard off in the dayes of our predecessours many yeares already paste, and long since expired. I meruailed, yea vpon good occasion I meruailed, that you, being but young Gentlemen, and M. Mabell Vachan, a ver∣tuous gentle∣woman. your sistr also a young Gentlewoman, continuing with∣in the walles and compasse of your Parentes dwelling, dai∣ly tasting the swéetenesse of your mothers louing kindenes, and liuing in the sight of all brauery and gallantnesse, could attaine to suche singularitie & excellencie of learning, know∣ledge, and iudgement, as many haue laboured for with ear∣neftnes, but very fewe haue gotten for al their painfulnes: & that also, you hauing entred into more ripenesse of yeares, are content to bestowe your time in Cambridge and Oxenford the twoe lampes of England, for learning, know ledge. &c. the Uniuersities, with hard and sparing diet, where nothing is to be found, that may to learning be a hinderance: but al things in a readines,
that it may iucrease and haue sufficient furtheraunce. You are deceiued therfore, if you thinke this my meruailing is to be referred to any doubt concerning your abilitie, and not ra ther to pertaine to the praise of your witts, to the commen∣dation of your knowledge, and to the aduauncing of your education and bringing vp. For, at these thrée things, name∣ly, the worthinesse of your witte, the manner of your know∣ledge, & the order of your bringing vp, made me woonder at you excéedingly. Al the praise that belongeth to your witte, it is your owne, by you it is purchased, of you it is possessed, because the vse and seruice consisteth in vertue: the cōmen∣dation of your knowledge and learning, To you, for the readinesse of your wittes & quick capa∣cities: to him for his paine∣fulnesse & di∣ligence in tea ching. &c. is common both to you and to your instructour: for as he is therein to challenge a part, so you haue (in like manner) a portion. The praise of your education and bringing vp, is to be ascribed to your pa∣rents. For, in consideration of your witts, I haue séene ther∣in a rare towardnesse, a voluntarie readinesse, & a continu∣ing painefulnesse. In your instructour or teacher, I haue al∣lowed sufficient ablenesse, and also his faithfulnesse. In your Parents, I haue commended both their wisedome and their bountie: their wisedome, in that they were so well aduised, & so circumspect, in Wherein appeaeth the wisedome and true loue of Parents to their children. the goodly & vertuous bringing vp of you their children: their bountie (which I perceiued in them not onely plentifull, but also principal) for the great costes and charges which they susteined, to haue you growe to that per∣fection of vnderstanding & learning which you haue gotten. These circumstances when I called in cōsideration, I could not but in y• very front & beginning of my letter, vse this gra∣tious gréeting, rightly & meritoriously to name you, The begin∣ning of his letter, whiche was his salu∣tation or gree∣ting. Moste hapie children descēded of most worthie parents: for which happines sake, both redoūding to you, & also to your parents, I am right glad & ioyfull at my heart: to you, in consideratiō of the great and singular benefites which you do now reape, & are like hereafter to inioy: to your parents, in respect of y• vnme asurable gladnes, which they shal cōceiue by & throgh y• excllēcie of your learning▪ & which you again on the other side shalbe filled withal, by weighing their prouidence, wise∣dome,
and goodnes, tending wholy to your cōmoditie. Wher fore, touching the duetie whiche vnto mée belongeth,Promise of duetifulnesse touching his owne person. I wil as I haue hitherto, continue a ready beholder of your course a daily exhorter of you to perseuere and persist in your dili∣gence, an especiall commender and a wonderer at your ver∣tue: yea, for the full satisfying of my iudgement concerning your persons, I wil also liue in moste assured confidence and certaine expectation, of that honourable aduauncement, whiche suche a course, suche a diligence, suche noblenesse of vertue, séeme to deserue. For,Note the or der of his drawing to a conclusion of this his letter. through this course so dis∣créetely begunne, through this diligence so constantly em∣ployed, through this vertue so happily obteined, nothing is to be looked for, but that which is singular, but that which is precious, but that whiche is honourable, but that whiche is excellent, so far as I can discerne & perceiue: which thing that it may come to passe, yea, that it may come to passe within a short time, he (no doubt) who is both the well head of all wisedome, the authour of al diligence, and the giuer of all happinesse,Or, wil graunt of his gratious good nesse. &c. say Amen: who prosper you and our studies continually, and fulfill your parents good hope, with much ioy and long gladnesse. God. &c. M. R. Aschame to the right worship full young Gentleman, Barnabe Fitz∣patrike. THE ARGVMENT. Writing to a young Gentleman, of good countenaunce in the cour (as the Epistle testifieth) he exhorteth him to loue learning, and for the increase of the ame in him, to spare no labour. And that his persuasions might carrie the more credite, he vseth reasons drawne from the person of the Gentleman to whom he writeth, whom whiles he exhorteth, he commendeth: to the same pur∣pose and effect, he bringeth in the right noble & vertuous King Edward the sixt, for an example, worthie to be followed. Lastly, he concludeth with twoe seueral prayers to God, the one for the Kings maiesties prosperitie, the other for the young Gentleman, whose name, in the titl of this Epistle, is declared.
ALthough I am not to learne (Right worthie Barnabe) what aWhiche is an inallible proofe and  arg ment, that you are a ver∣tuously dispo sed Gentle∣man. vehement zeale and feruent loue you beare to learning: yet notwithstanding I haue purposed and attemp ted somewhat to assault you with letters of persuasion, both because it was your owne request and desire I should so do: and because (at suche time as I was with you in presence,) my promise in that behalfe made vnto you, might not be vn∣perfourmed. And sithence there be many incouragements, and reasons of force, whiche may muche moue you to the loue of learning, and the imbracing of knowledge, namely, the notable towardnesse of your owne witte, the conuenient time of your age, the excellent hope of your iligence, this place of preferment, whiche aboue the rest, you possesse in the Kinges maiesties Court, and the singular preceptes and instructions, whiche you want not for your furtheraunce, though euery one of these, seuerally, are of force sufficient to moe you excéedingly, yet ought they not all béeing ioyned together, so to stirre you vppe, to forstowe no time towardes the attainement of suche a benefite,King Ed∣ward the sixte with what goodly gysts of mine he was indued. as the noblenesse of witte, stdie, vertue, learning and knowledge, whiche in our worthie and renouned King Edward daily appeareth (you your selfe séeing and bearing witnesse) and moste gloriously glistereth: a better patterne of diligence, a more perfecte example of learning, a more manifest hope of praise and conunendation, you cannot set before you to followe. Your promise was to write backe againe vnto mée, whiche shall not of you bee neglected, either for béeing as good as your word▪ or else that I may see, by your owne signification, how well you handle your penne, and howe diligently you exer∣cise your witte. A more conuenient bearer, then he is to whome I haue deliuered this present Epistle, you can not require. I haue sentOr, Copies. examples to the Kinges Maiestie, and the rest of that noble and gallant companie.He kniteth vp his letter with an ear∣nest praier, wherin he gi∣ueth witnesse of his well wishing heart. Christ Iesus, graunt of his gratious goodnesse, that my Lord the King, may excell his father in renoune, his instructours and tea∣chers in vnderstanding, and that the multitude of his yeres in possessing the Empire, together with his flourishing feli∣citie
and happinesse, may excéede and passe the prayers of his Englishe subiects. And the same Christe Iesus, of his large bountie, increase in you continually, the goodly giftes of ver∣tue, learning, and noblenesse, aboundantly. M. R. Aschame, to the moste noble Gentlewoman, Lady Anne, wife to the Right honourable, the Earle of Penbroche. THE ARGVMENT. This Epistle consisteth of three members: the firste is gratulatorie, touching the person of himselfe and his freende, M. Mid. the seconde is petitorie in the behalfe of M. Pin. the third is exhorta¦torie and laudatorie, as by the course of the words and the mat∣ter may be gathered: so then, it is apparant, that this is, and may be called Epistola mixta: the reasons why, are manifest, & neede no declaration. THeFrom the acknowledge¦ment and con¦fessing of be∣nefites recei∣ued, he falleth ordely to his petition: whiche is a very good &  way towards the atteinment of his purpose▪ for in shewing his own thāk¦fulnesse, hee winneth fur∣ther fuour & well liking. greate benefites whiche you haue bestowed vpon M. M. and the greater good wil which you haue testified vnto mée, require infinite thankes at my handes, Right Ho∣nourable Ladie. But, sithence your estate is so hautie & high, & my degrée on y• other side of suche inequalitie, that you may better bestowe newe benefites, then I pay olde thankes: yet notwithstanding, I reioyce excéedingly, that this kinde of courtesie, is at this present, of your Ladyship to be craued, wherein your Gentlenes is more prest & rea∣dy to giue a graunt, then is my labour to aske and desire. My request is, that M, P. may enioy still the fruite of your bountifull fauour, and furtheraunce, as he hathe hitherto had the same in vse, to his special aduantage. And although, I am well assured, and knowe it for a veritie, that you will haue him in such acceptation & countenance, as y• he shal not stande in néede of my commendation, sithence he is of suffi∣ciencie by himself, to obteine al things tending to his auaile: yet notwithstanding thus muche I craue in his behalfe, yea.
I craue it with instancie & earnestnes, euen as thoughe the matter perteined to mine owne person, that he may haue the benefite of your Ladyshippes fauour and assistaunce, to* Or, he may perceiue, and I also vnder∣stande. the Queenes maiestie, whereby he may be persuaded, and I also asured, y• by the meanes of this my petitorie Epistle, your old accustomed goodwil, vnto him a long time cōtinued is by y• putting too of a new trial of fauour, not diminished, but increased. Wherfore, you must be as careful, as circum∣spect, & as diligēt as may be, euen to the vttermost, that both theBy the enu∣meration o these  circum∣stances he mo ueth and com mendeth. goodly gyftes of your witte and knowledge, the learned preceptes of your teacher, the passing examples of N. your brother, and the footesteppes of your moste worthie Father whiche you tred and followe, should moue and stirre you vpp to the imbracing of learning, to the purchasing of praise, and to the attayning of Noblenesse. I doe not occupie my penne to write in this order, as thoughe I should séeme toWhiche is so farre in you to be ound, that your for wardnesse is wonderfull, and to be con tinued should want no in couragement. withdrawe you from lingring, but rather in this your for∣ward running to giue you incouragement: & that I might be thought not so muche to take vpon me the office of one that exhorteth, as to discharge the duetie of one y• reioyceth, albe∣it my letter hathe that notable verse of Ouid for a president and example. Who so exhortes you that to doe, Whiche you to doe intend, Whiles he exhortes, the wordes he speakes His owne deedes doe commend. I feare I am to tedious. Thus muche doth onely remaine, & rest behinde, that it would please you to write back again, if it be but in thrée wordes, by this young Gentleman my good fréend & wel wiler: your letter shalbe vnto mée most cer taine testimonies & vndoubted assurances, bothe of your in∣crease of knowledge in the latine toung, & also of the fauour and goodwill whiche you beare me. Commende mée (I pray you) to that worthie GentlemanGentlemen with whom he was well acquainted and familiar. T. S. & Win. if his name be not out of my memorie: the swéetenesse of his manners, and the delightsomnesse of his ehauiours, haue taken more déepe roote in my remembraunce, then can by any force be pluckte vp and loosed.
M. R. Aschame, to M. F. Alane. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. A wothie and learned epistle, deseruing to be read, and to be borne in remembraunce, written by M. R Aschame, to a Gentleman of his acquaintance: wherein firste he , that there be three thinges, wherein the life and estate of man consisteth: to whiche three (after he hath spoken his minde accordingly, as he thought good vpō circumstāces) he ioyneth two more, no lesse necessarie, then the three first, which he declared. The occasio of writing this Epistle, was a booke which he made and sent to M. F. Alane. The specialties whereof the whole letter (from the beginning to the ending) doth treate, are these: Beautie, Richesse, Dignitie, Learning, ad Freendeshippe. In this Epistle, he sheweth fine in∣uentio, proper disposition, and sweete eloquence. THere be thrée things (my F. Alene) which throughout the whole course and trade of mannes life, are of excéeding great force, and wt a certaine maiestie beare generall rule & dominion: Three speci∣alties wheup∣on this whole Epistle run∣neth. Fauour, Monie, and Honur. On fauour atten∣deth pleasure: from monie procéedeth profite: and to honour perteineth an high degrée of dignitie: for of these thrée things the ignoraunt people of the auncient worlde in consideration of their aduantage: or else, learned Poets many hundred yeares agoe, through their wisedome, and knowledge, im∣magined to be thrée seuerall Gods, who had the bestowing of these sundrie benefites. For, they made Venus giues beautie: Plu∣ts gies : Iupiter giues honour Venus Lady and Quéene of beautie and fauour: they made Plutus Lord and King of Riches and monie: and they made Iupiter Em∣perour of honour and maiestie: afterwards, in tract of time and prcesse of yeares, to the selfe same thinges, yea, in the very schooles of Philosophers, the name and title of the best and chiefest Good was assigned: and by the opinion of al wise men it was assented vnto, that in these thrée, very greate force, vertue, and effectuall working did consist. Wherefore
(my F. Alane) sithence I knowe it well, that Or, that you hae a singular and speciall re∣gard. &c. you are a no∣table and earnest beholder of comelinesse and fauour: sithēce it is my desire, you shoulde abounde in wealthe and richesse: sithence I am of this iudgement touching you, that you are bred and borne to the possessing of worshippe and dignitie: I was so muche the more willing and toward, to offer you Some book which he had written, and bestowed vp∣on the Gentle man to whō he wrote, as a gifte of his good will, & a token of kindenesse. this booke: by the vse and seruice whereof, you, (to whom I beare a singular and speciall goodwill,) shal enioy to your full contentment, all the thrée thinges within named, moste happily, moste blessedly. For, you shall viewe and beholde, in this booke, as it were in a bright glasse, without spot, and blemishe, sundrie beautiful, famous, and comely shapes, not suche stately, proude, and disdainefull péeces as we sée daily, but suche as be chosen, picked, and sorted out for the nonce, suche I say as are not vnworthi the maiestie of an Empe∣rour: these you may beholde fréely, without controllement, without hinderaunce, with safetie, without daunger, with∣out mistrust, without grudging, without iealousie, without suspicion, without wantonnesse. &c. Here you shall sée to the delight of yor heart, and pleasure of your eye, the coun∣tenaunces of virgins and matrones, excelling Venus her selfe, in beautie and amiablenesse: brawing mothers, threatening stepdames, rigorous husands, angrie Men that goe a wooi to one wo man, betwi whome com∣monly, there is emulation and hatred. riuals, shall not stoppe you from the sight of this so passing a page∣ant & spectacle. Walls, doors, barrs, boults, locks. &c. shal not be able to keepe you out, or forbidde you entraunce. Here, you shall haue prouided for your readie possession, of richesse great plentie: not the pearles, not th iewels, not the milli∣ans of mines, whiche A King of Lydia & Sonn to Halias: this man in the vaine conceite of his riches (whiche were in deede vn∣measurable) called himself the floure of felicitie, o the pearle of pro∣sperous es∣tate. Croesus gathered together: but the aboundant treasure of euery citie and towne, yea of the worlde vniuersall, for your inriching: in so▪much that what soeuer the frugalitie and thriftinesse of good and well dispo∣sed people, haue prouided in time of peace, and tranquilitie: or the force of the mighty & violent gotten in time of warre and bloudshed: or the lawlesse lst of tyrantes wroung for their owne lucre, by extortion and iniuri▪ here you haue it eadie purchased, readie prepared: and therefore you may
take full, right, and quiet possession. Nowe, touching h∣nour and dignitie: what more perfect patternes and more tre examples can you haue, either, fitte to be followed, or worthie the wondring, or deseruing to be praised, then those of the Caesars and the Augustes, moste vertuous and victo∣rious Nobles. And to the intent (my F. Alane) you may plainely sée and perceiue, that I meane no deceite, but good faith and iust dealing, that I mocke you not with wordes of vanitie, but that I giue you suche ornamentes as are true in déede and not counterfecte: loe, these beautifull shapes, and amiable fauours, are of this right kinde and propertie, that they blinde not the minde at any time with painted pre∣tences, shewes, shadowes, and foolishe allurementes, out∣ward gaynesse and brauerie: but ll the hart alwayes, with true delight, with perfect pleasauntnesse, with suche ioy as is not idle in operation and working: This clause is to be refer∣red to that whiche goeth , where  speakth   &  fa , and not to tht which followeth, (though the o ue wartnes of the wordes seeme to of∣fer suche sen) where he talketh of pleaure and delight, not being deceiua∣ble of nature, not varriable in time, not withering throughe the heate of the sunne, not consuming by the soaking of sick∣nesse: but continuing vchaungeable, constant, vndimini∣shed, safe, and sound for euer and world without end. These richsse, whiche I bestowe vpon you, shall neither worke mine impouerishment, in giuing▪ neyther shall they tende to your harme and amoyaunce, in taking: and as I parte from them, without any losse or dammage to my selfe pro∣cured: so on the other side, they shall of you, without labour be possessed, without feare be preserued, & without enuie v∣sed. As for the pathway, which is decyphered and set forth in this booke, it shal leade you directly, to honour and digni∣tie, it shall make you a ready entraunce to an estate of wor∣thinesse, you shall passe at pleasure without combersome∣nesse, and in saetie voide of daunger: that you may (by and through the benefite of that booke,) enioy the moste happie and right blessed degrée of dignitie, whiche is of Cicro, in the beginning of his Oratour highly commended, but of him∣selfe for all his praising, neuer obteined. Unto the thrée principall commodities, whiche I haue forecited, two o∣ther,
of no litle value and vetue, are anneed: namely,* In the be ginning of his epistle he na∣med three ne cessrie things belonging to mans life, whereunto he ioyneh other two: learning & reendeship. &c. Learning, and Freendshippe: the worthinesse of the one, is in this booke discouered: the other, by and throughe the mutuall recourse of hartie kindenesse, and vnfeigned good∣will, not vntestified. And what part or portion belonging to learning, is there (I pray you) of more excellencie, of more importaunce, and of more pleasauntesse, then a cun∣ningly compiled, and a learnedly coneyed history, liuely re∣presenting to the minde ad iudgement of the reader, suche matters of policie, touching the ciuil estate: suche valiant actes, (I say) and noble déedes of armes, as haue by moste renouned Kinges, and passing puisant Emperours, not onely béene aduentured, but also accomplishedot onely attempted, but also finished: not onely stoutly ad lustily taken in hande, but also gallantly and gratiously brught to perfourmaunce. Or, whiche beeing refr∣red: or, which perteining: or, beloging. &c. Whiche hauing relation altogether, to th leaing of humanitie, and▪ ciuil behauiours, it will not one vnto you, whose minde  wholy addicted, and  uen to that trade of life, be pleasaunt and delectable iperu∣sing: but in practising also, it will be fruitefull and profita∣ble. Touching the fréendeshippe, wherein we be ioyned together, I A significa∣tion of his wa rynese and circumpec∣tion. wil speake so sparingly, that my meaning in a fewe woords may be deliuered: leafte, whies I giing an euident proofe of the towardnes of my will▪ in seting out your deserued praise and commendation, might séeme by the way, through want of aduisement, to committe some of∣fence, worthie of blame and eprehension. For suche per∣sons, whose willes are at agréement▪ whose deires drawe bothe vnder one yoke, and whose vowes and couenantes al∣so, in some pointes, are leuelled and diected to one marke, can not but deserue cōmendation, can ot but  repre∣hension. Nowe, to haue the beneuolence and fauour, of all It should seeme▪ that whn he idi∣ted this Epis tle, his conti∣nuace was in▪ th Princes Courte. in this gallant Court, it is a thing wherein I doe reioyce: and to haue the goodwill and wel liking, of a certaine num∣ber selected & seuerall, it is a thing, whereof I reape passing
pleasure: but to be in fréendeshippe, credite, and countenance with you, oh, it is a thing of mée moste hartily wished, and principally desired. For this kindenesse towardes mée con∣ceiued: this bountie of yours, which to my profite and bene∣fite, hath neuer béen but appliable: I haue by so many and so sundrie ways, séene put in proofe and trial: I haue therof had so often assuraunces, that Worde of considence, wherin whiles e maketh de claration of his owne affec tion, he consir meth to him∣self his freends kindenesse. there is none, of whom I make more account, in whom I haue faster affiaunce, or vpon whō I are further presume and persuade my minde with pro∣mises, then you onely and alone, bothe for mine owne auaile, and also in the behalfe of my fréendes and alleies. And for so muche as many, (and not so many in number, as strong and effectual in vertue) be the linckes of loue and good wil, which knitte vs together, yet none (in mine opinion and iudge∣ment) is in déede of more certaintie and induraunce, or more pleasaunt, ioyfull, and acceptable to vs bothe, as the vse and ecourfe of that fauour and furtheraunce, whiche a Gentle∣man of no lesse courtesie then authoritie, hathe to either o vs moste largely and liberally testified, and thereby bound bothe of vs ioyntly, in moste assured dutifulnesse, in onside∣ration of his goodnesse, to be declared and discharged. Wher∣fore to drawe to an end: if His artifici∣all conclusion conteining a recapitulation of the foreci∣ted circum∣stances, in bre uitie. beautie, voide of vaine allure∣mentes: if richesse, frée from clogging carefulnesse: if dig∣nitie, wherein lurkes no daunger: i learning, whiche is neuer without the companie of pleasure & profite: if fréend∣shippe be of you so regarded, that thereof you make due rec∣koning: if all the forecited circumstances be of you not dissa∣lowed, be loued, be liked, be desired and followed, then am I in good hope and confidence, that my purpose and paines, in presenting vnto you this my booke, shall not be blamed, sha not be rebuked. The This is his vsual and ac∣customed or∣der of ending. moste mightie and gratious God, be your preseruer and kéeper, prolong your life in health and prosperitie, and graunt of his goodnesse, that the wishes and willes of either of vs, may soone b satisfied. Fare you well.
A letter, or supplication, of M. R. As∣chame, which he made and wrote, in the behalfe of the prisoners in Ludgate, at the cōming of king Philippe into England. ¶ THE ARGVMENT. A supplication inuented and written by one, in the name, and for the behoofe of many, (for I may better call it by the name of a sup∣plication, then of an Epistle, althoughe it haue a roome among the rest of the letters whereof he was the Authour) to King Phi∣lippe when he was arriued and abiding in England: wherein af∣ter complaint made of their miserie and wretchednesse, which in∣dured imprisonment in Ludgate, he reckoneth vp certain parti∣cular causes among an infinite number incident to suche whose trade and occupying is in merchandise, which brought them into suche perplexities of pouertie: vseth allowable excuses for the auoyding of yll suspicion, and the defence of honestie and plain dealing: setteth downe the totall summe of the debt, the parci∣litie and bountifulnesse of their creditours, and the number of prisoners. Lastly, after supplication made to King Philippe for discharge and deliueraunce, he concludeth with a prayer to God for his prosperitie. &c. AMong This his Pro eme or begin∣ning, was drawen from occasions offe red, as from the tme then present. &c. so many goodly sightes and shewes in this Citie wherewith your eyes be pleased: among so many ioyful gréetinges: wherewith your eares be delighted: haue a regarde to the voice and groning lamentation of suche as be poore and distressed, on whome to take pitie and compassion, your hart (as we are in hope) wilbe moued: the voice is a voice of ioye and gladnesse: but the grienous mourning be∣wrayeth miserie and wretchednesse. For, we doe all reioyce euen with all our hearts, at the comming in of your Maies∣tie into this Realme, which was of many much wished and greatly desired: againe, we specially (as we must néedes) mournefully lament our owne miserie, and fall a groning, through the lotte of vnluckinesse, wherwith we are gréeued. For, miserable men are we, and swallowed vppe (as you
sée & perceiue) in miserie it selfe. But because this our pre∣sent miseri, hath had issue from the frowardnes of The fro∣wardnesse of Fortune, and not their own fault, the cause of  di∣stresse. fortune, and not from any heynous osfence of vs committed: because wée are caste into this comfortlesse calamitie, not so much through our owne fault, as the iniurie of other, and their in∣forced wrong, therefore with more bouldnesse of spirite and confidence, wée make supplication to your maiesties good∣nes, sythence we cannot personally appeare, nor come with∣in the presence of your highnesse: whereuppon with a la∣menting voice, and in writing witnessing the woe of oure wrethednesse (which wée can only doe at this time, and in this place) we call vppon your excéeding lemencie, to bée cō∣forted: and to your gratious goodnesse wée make our mone, to be deliuered. This He meaneth Ldgate. place (most prudent Prince) is not a prison or gaile to receiue villans, théeues, and such ill dispo∣sed people: but it is in déede, according as it is named, ye pri∣son for such persons as pouerty and distresse hath attainted: within the walles whereof though wée be now kept & inclo∣sed, yet haue we not béen thrust in of others, but of our own wil and accord haue therein taken vp our lodging: which we haue done to this intent and purpose, An honest xcuse for the uoyding of suspicion. not that in so shifting, the smart of punishment might be auoyded: but that by and thorough hope of better lucke hereafter, we might be relée∣ued: for luck onely & alone, hath layd vs vp in this lamenta∣ble lodge. We are citizens of Londō, who in times past, haue liued in sufficient abundaunce and plentie of all necessaries, in worship also, credite, and countenaunce, among men of the same calling and condition: and I trust, our life hath eene so orderly & honestly lead among our neighbours and acquain∣tance, that the same is not to be reprehēded: but now ( ēthesis including an  of such casual∣tis, as make men (whenso∣eur they chaunce,) to hue a shrewd fal, and great∣ly to . such are the ouertwhart chaunces incident to the trade of mer∣chants, such is the often chaunge of our english coyne, such are the sundrie robberies of French rouers, comitted on sea, such are the losses, shipwrackes and sinkings of goods thro∣ugh the stormes and tempestes of the outragious and swel∣ling waues, such are the great vsuries & exactions of credi∣tours, such is the vnsaithfulnes & deceitfulnes of debters not deseruing to be trusted) through ill hap we are tumbled into this misrie, owing vnto others such large summes of
of monie, y• except we be discharged of the paiment of y• same, & be set at libertie, through y• benefite of your heauenly help, and singular goodnes, wée are like to lie and rot, in filthy, loth∣some, & cōfortlesse imprisonmēt. And A defence grounded vp∣pon witnsle, not to be neg lected. y• we haue not throgh our owne default, & inordinate vsage, runne into this danger of being in debt to other men: but y• either the tempestuous & stormie sea, or the spoile & violence of enimies, or the fraude & deceitful dealing of such, to y• trial of whose credit we haue béen content to stand, hath driuen vs into this extremitie, we are able to bring no woorse witnesses, then y• same men, to whom we be indebted: who, perfectly knowing & throughly vnderstanding, y• our fléeing to this place for present refuge and succour, issued not from a desire & meaning to do others wrong and iniurie, but from a méere mischance and il luck, Occupiers in dunger of much lose & many mis∣chances. common to such as occupie merchandise, & haue intercourse of traffique, and calling to remembrance the estate of mans life, how fraile it is, how brickle, how vncertaine & variable, shew themselues fauourable therupon vnto vs, & bountiful, that they are content to take two thousand pound in ful pai∣ment The summe of the debt, & the number of the prison∣ners. for ten thousand pound, & a greater sum, which we be ing The summe of the debt, & the number of the prison∣ners. thirtie in number, owe them vppon good assurances, and to giue vs a cleare discharge of y• ouerplus. Wherefore (most worthie prince) in consideration of your  ending wholy to per∣sions: wher in hee playeth the pat o  suppliant, special bountie: of your most blessed comming & entrance into this relme, & this royall citie: of the great hope and confidence, which not one man particularly, but all people throughout England gene∣rally, conceiue and haue of the issue of your body: we beséech your maiestie, that it would please you to take cōpassion vp∣pon vs, in this our lamētable cas, most wretched & succour∣lesse: & by the swéete & comfortable triall of your moste gra∣tious liberalitie, The ende of hi supplicati∣on mae in the behalfe of the prisone of , restore vs againe to our perfect estate and libertie. The Lord God almightie & most merciful, so incline and turne your maiesies hart to pittie, for the  ad a∣uaile of vs poore prisoners in distresse, y• wee may with the prophetical prince and princely Prophe Dauid, first to God omnipotent, then to your highnesse, sound this sacred sen∣tence The ende of hi supplicati∣on mae in the behalfe of the  of , Propter vocē & gemitū pauperū nunc exurgam, di domi∣nus: at the voice & mourning cōplaint of the poore & cōsort
lesse, I wil arise saith the Lorde. Wherefore, suche hope as we ought to haue, in this so happie a day: or in you so blessed and gratious a Prince, we are bolde to builde vpon: promi∣sing and persuading our selues in hart, that the thing which with such earnesnes is desired, shal in semblable maner be obteined. The He conclu∣deth with prai er for the pro∣sperous estate of king Philip: the date of this supplication my be soone learned, by iust accompt of the yeares, beginning at the yeare. 1554 Lord God graunt you a long life, many children, a prosperous Reigne in this Realme of Eng∣land, Power and Dominion ouer the world vniuersall, & also preserue your high∣nesse in perpetual happi∣nesse.Out of bondes and imprisonment, the 18. of Aug. 1554 FINIS. ¶ Thus farre out of Maister Gualter Haddon, and Maister Roger As∣chame: with whose Epistles we will end this our Panoplie. Imprinted at London, for Ralphe Newberie. Anno Domini. 1576.
