11156 99838245 2617
THE BROKEN HEART. A Tragedy. ACTED By the KINGS Majesties Seruants at the priuate House in the BLACK-FRIERS. Fide Honor. LONDON: Printed by I. B. for HVGH BEESTON, and are to be sold at his Shop, neere the Castle in Corne-hill. 1633.
TO THE MOST VVOR∣THY DESERVER OF THE noblest Titles in Honour, VVIL∣LIAM, Lord CRAVEN, Baron of Hamsteed-Marshall. MY LORD: THE glory of a great name, acqui∣red by a greater glory of Action, hath in all ages liu'd the truest chronicle to his owne Memory. In the practise of which Argu∣ment, your grouth to perfection (even in youth) hath appear'd so sincere, so vn-flattering a Penne∣man; that Posterity cannot with more delight read the merit of Noble endeauours, then noble endeavours merit thankes from Posterity to be read with de∣light. Many Nations, many eyes, have beene witnesses of your Deserts, and lou'd Them: Be pleas'd then, with the freedome of your own Nature, to admit ONE amongst All, particularly into the list of such as honour a faire Example
of Nobilitie. There is a kinde of humble Ambition, not vn-commendable, when the silence of study breakes forth in∣to Discourse, coveting rather encouragement then Applause; yet herein Censore commonly is too severe an Auditor, with∣out the moderation of an able Patronage. I have ever beene slow in courtship of greatnesse, not ignorant of such defects as are frequent to Opinion: but the Iustice of your Inclinati∣on to Industry, emboldens my weaknesse, of confidence, to rellish an experience of your Mercy, as many brave Dan∣gers have tasted of your Courage. Your Lordship stroue to be knowne to the world (when the world knew you least) by voluntary but excellent Attempts: Like Allowance I plead of being knowne to your Lordship (in this low pre∣sumption) by tending to a favourable entertaiment, a De∣uotion offred from a heart, that can be as truely sensible of a∣ny least respect, as ever professe the owner in my best, my eadiest services, A Lover of your naturall Love to Vertue, Iohn Ford.
The Prologue. OVr Scene is Sparta. HE whose best of Art Hath drawne this Peece, cals it the Broken Heart. The Title lends no expectation here Of apish laughter, or of some lame Ieere At place or persons; no pretended clause Of iest's fit for a brothell Courts' applause From vulgar admiration: such low songs, Tun'd to vnchast eres, suit not modest tongues. The Virgin Sister then deseru'd fresh bayes When Innocence and Sweetnesse crown'd their layes Then vices gasp'd for breath, whose whole Commerce Was whip'd to Exile by vnblushing verse. This law we keep in our Presentment now, Not to take freedome more then we allow; What may be here thought a fiction, when Times youth Wanted som riper yeares, was knowne A Truth: In which, if words haue cloath'd the subiect right, You may pertake, a Pitty, with Delight.
The Sceane, SPARTA. The Speakers names, fitted to their Qualities. AMYCLAS, Common to the Kings of Laconia. ITHOCLES, Honour of louelinesse, A fauourite. ORGILVS, Angry, Sonne to Crotolon. BASSANES, Vexation, A iealous Nobleman. ARMOSTES, An appeasor, A Counsellor of State. CROTOLON, Noyse, Another Counsellor. PROPHILVS, Deare, Friend to Ithocles. NEARCHVS, Young Prince, Prince of Argos. TECNICVS, Artist, A Philosopher. LEMOPHIL, Glutton, Two Courtiers. GRONEAS, Tauernhaunter, Two Courtiers. AMELVS, Trusty, Friend to Nearchus. PHVLAS, Watchfull, Seruant to Bassanes. CALANTHA, Flower of beauty, The Kings daughter PENTHEA, Complaint, Sister to Ithocles. EVPHRANEA, Ioy, A Maid of Honor. CHRISTALLA, Christall, Maids of Honour. PHILEMA, A kisse, Maids of Honour. GRANSIS Old Beldam. Ouerseer of Pethea. Person's included. THRASVS, Fiercenesse, Father of Ithocles. APLOTES, Simplicity, Orgilus so disguis'd.
THE BROKEN HEART. Actus primus, Scaena prima. Enter Crotolon and Orgilus. Crot. DAlly not further, I will know the reason That speeds thee to this iourney. Org. Reason? good Sir I can yeeld many. Crot. Giue me one, a good one; Such I expect, and e're we part must haue Aths? pray why to Athens? you intend not To kicke against the world, turne Cynicke, Stoicke, Or read the Logicke Lecture, or become An Arpagite; and Iudge in causes Touching the Common wealth? for as I take it, The budding of your chin cannot prognosticate So grave an honour, Org. All this I acknowledge, Crot. You doe: then () if books and loue of knowledge Enflame you to this trauell, here in Sparta You may as freely study. Org. 'Tis not that Sir. Crot. Not, that Sir? As a father I command thee To acquaint me with the truth Org. Thus I obey :
After so many quarrels, as Fury, and Rge had  in blood, and Wit With now Our present King Your eager swords, and Seal'd a  peace: Friends you prosest your selues, which to confme, A resolution for a lasting league Betwt your Families was entertain'd, By ioyning in a  bond, Me, and the faire Penthea, onely daughter To Thrasus. Crot. What of this? Org. Much, much (deere sir) A freedome of conuerse, an enterchange Of holy, and chast loue, so sixt our soules In a firme grouth of vnion, that no Time Can eat  pledge: we had enioy'd The sweets our vowes expected, had not cruelty Preuented all those triumphs we prepar'd for, By Thrasus his vntimely death. Crot. Most certaine. Org. From this time splouted vp that poysonous stalke Of Acoit, whose ripened fruit hath ravisht All health, all comfort of a happy life: For Ithocles her brother, proud of youth, And prouder in his power, nourisht losely The memory of former discontents. To glory in reenge, by  partly, Partly by threat, a woos at once, and forces His virtuous sister to admit a marriage With Basanes, a Noble-man, in honour And riches, I confesse beyond my fortunes. Crot. All this is no sound reason to import me My leave for thy departure. Org. Now it followes, Puthe wedded to this torture By an insulting brother, being secretly Compeld to yeeld her virgine freedome vp To him, who uer can vsrp her hear Before contracted mine, is now so
To a most barbarous thrldome misery, Affliction, that he sauo not humanity Whos sorrow melts not into more then pitty, In hearing but her name. Crot. As how pray? Org. Bassanes The man that call her wife; considers truly What Heaven of perfections he is Lord o, By thinking faire Penth his: This thought Begets a kinde of Monster-Loue, which Loue Is nurse vnto a feare so strong, and seruile, As brands all dotage with a Iealousie. All eyes who gaze upon that shrine of beauty, He doth resolue, doe homage to the miracle; Some one, he is assur'd, may now or then (If opportunity but sort) preuaile: So much out of a selfe-vnworthinesse His feares transport him, not that he findes cause In her obedience, but his owne distrust. Crot. You spin out your discourse. Org. My griefs are violent For knowing how the Maid was heretofore Courted by me, his iealousies grow wild That I should steale againe into her fauours, And vndermine her vertues: which the gods Know I nor dare, nor dreame of: hence, from hence I vndertake a voluntary exile. First, by my absence to take off the eares Of Iealous Bassanes, but chiefly (Sir) To free Penthea from a hell on earth: Lastly, to lose the memory of something, Her presence makes to liue in me afresh. Crot. Enough (my Orgilus) enough To Athens I giue a full consent: — Alas good Lady — Wee shall heare from thee often? Org. Often. Crot. See Thy Sister comes to giue a farewell. Enter Euphrania. Fuphr. Brother. Org. A brothers kisse
Thy health, and thy well-doing, then my life. Before we part, in presence of our father, I must preferre a lut to '. Euphr. You may stile it, My brother, a command. Org. That you will promise To passe neuer to any man, how euer worthy, Your faith, till with our Fathers leave I giue a free consent. Crot. An easie motion, I'le promise for her, Orgilus. Org. Your pardon; Euphrania's oath must yeeld me satisfaction. Euphr. By Vesta's sacred fires I sweare. Crot. And I By great Apollo's bemes ioyne in the vow; Not without thy allowance, to bestow her On any liuing. Org. Deere Euphrania Mistake me not; farre, farre 'tis from my thought, As farre from any wish of mine, to hinder Preferment to an honourable bed, Or fitting Fortune: thou art young, and handsome; And 'twere iniustice; more, a tyrannie Not to aduance thy merit. Trust me Sister, It shall be my first care to see thee match'd As may become thy choyce, and our contents: I haue your oath. Euphr. You haue: but meane you brother To leae us as you say? Crot. I, I, Euphrania He has iust grounds direct him: I will proue A father and a brother to thee. Euphr. Heauen Does looke into the secrets of all hearts: Gods you haue mercy with 'ee, else— Crot. Doubt nothing Thy brother will returne in safety to vs. Org. Soules sunke in sorrowes, never are without 'em; They change fresh ayres, but beare their griefes about 'em. Exeunt omnes. Flourish. Scaene 2. Enter Amyclas the King, Arstes, Prophilus, and attendants. Amy. The Spartne gods are graciou, our humility Shall bend before their Altars, and per
Their Temples with abundant sacrifice. ee Lords, Amyclas your old King is entring Into his youth againe. I shall shake on This siluer badge of age, and change this snow For haires as gay as are Apollo's lockes; Our heart leaps in new vigour. Armo. May old time Run backe to double your long life (great Sir) Amy. It will, it must Armostes, thy bold Nephew, Death-brauing Ithocles, brings to our gates Triumphs and peace vpon his conquering sword. Laconia is a monarchy at length; Hath in this latter warre trod vnderfoot Messenes pride; Messene bowes her necke To Lacedemons royalty: ô 'twas A glorious victory, and doth deserue More then a Chronicle; a Temple Lords, A Temple, to the name of Ithocles. Where didst thou leave him Prophilus? Proph. At Pephon Most gracious Soueraigne; twenty of the noblest Of the Messenians, there attend your pleasure For such conditions as you shall propose. In setling peace, and liberty of life. Amy. When comes your friend and General? Pro. He promis'd To follow with all speed conuenient. Enter Cretoln, Calantha, Chrystalla, Philema and Euphrania. Amy. Our daughter — Deere Calantha, the happy newes, The conquest of Messene, hath already Enrich'd thy knowledge. Calan. With the circumstance And manner of the fight, related faithfully By Prophilus himselfe; but pray Sir, tell me, How doth the youthfull Generall demeane His actions in these fortunes? Proph. Excellent Princesse, Your owne faire eyes may soone report a truth Vnto your judgement, with what moderation, Calmenesse of nature, measure, bounds and limits f thankefulne and ioy, 'a doth digest
Such amplitude of his successe, as would In others, moulded of a spirit lesse cleare, Aduance 'em to comparison with heaven. But Ithocles.— Cal. Your friend.— Proph. He is so Madam, In which the period of my Fate consists: He in this Firmament of honour, stands Like a Starre fixt, not mov'd with any thunder Of popular applause, or sudden lightning Of selfe-opinion: He hath seru'd his Country, And thinks 'twas but his duty. Crot: You describe A miracle of man. Amy. Such Crotolon, On forfeit of a Kings word thou wilt finde him: Harke, warning of his comming, all attend him. Flourish. Enter Ithocles, Hemophill, and Groneas: the rest of the Lords vshering him in. Amy. Returne into these armes, thy home, thy sanctuary. Delight of Sparta, treasure of my bosome, Mine owne, owne Ithocles. Itho. Your humblest subiect. Armo. Proud of the blood I claime an Interest in; As brother to thy mother, I embrace thee Right noble Nephew. Itho. Sir, your love's too partiall. Crot. Our Country speakes by me, who by thy valour, Wisdome and seruice, shares in this great action; Returning thee, in part of thy due merits, A generall welcom. Itho. You exceed in bounty. Calan. Chrystalla, Philena, the Chaplet. — Ithocles Vpon the wings of Fame, the singular And chosen fortune of an high attempt, Is borne so past the view of common sight, That I my selfe, with mine owne hands, haue wrought To crowne thy Temples, this provinciall garland; Accept, weare, and enioy it, as our gift Deseru'd, not purchas'd. Itho. Y'are a royall mayd. Amy. Shee is in all our daughter. Itho Let me blush,
Acknowledging how poorely I haue seru'd, What nothings I haue done, compar'd with th' honours Heap'd on the issue of a willing minde; In that lay mine ability, that onely For who is he so sluggish from his birth? So little worthy of a name, or country, That owes not out of gratitude for life, A debt of Seruice, in what kinde soeuer Safety or Counsaile of the Common-wealth Requires for paiment? Ca. A speaks truth. Itho. Whom heaen Is pleas'd to stile victorious, there, to such, Applause runs madding, like the drunken priests In Bacchus sacrifices without Reason; Voycing the Leader on a Demi god: When as indeed, each common souldiers blood Drops downe s current coyne in that hard purchase, As his, whose much more delicate condition Hath suckt the milke of ease. Iudgement commands, But Resolution executes: I vse not Before this royall presence, these fit sleights, As in contempt of such as can direct: My speech hath other end; not to attribute All praise to one mans fortune, which is strengthed By many hands. — For instance, here is Prophilus A Gentleman (I cannot flatter truth) Of much desert; and, though in other ranke, Both Hemophil and Groneas were not missing To wish their Countries peace; for in a word, All there did striue their best, and 'twas our duty. Amy. Courtiers turne souldiers?— we vouchsafe our hand. Obserue your great example. Hemo. With all diligence. Gron. Obsequiously and hourely. Amy. Some repose After these toyles are needfull we must thinke on Conditions for the Conquered; they expect 'em. On, — come my Ithocles. Euphr. Sir with your fauour, I need not a supporte. Proph. Fate instructs me. Exeunt. Man Hemophill, Groa, Chrisalla et Philema.
Hemophill stayes, Chrystalla, Groas, Philema. Chry. With me? Phil. Indeed I dare not stay. Hem. Sweet Lady Souldiers are blunt,— your lip. Cris. Fye, this is rudenesse; You went not hence such creatures. Gron. Spirit of valour Is of a mounting nature. Phil. It appeares so: Pray in earnest, how many men apeece Haue you two beene the death of? Gron. Faith not many; We were compos'd of mercy. Hemo. For our daring You heard the Generals approbation Before the King. Christ. You wish'd your Countries peace: That shew'd your charity; where are your spoyles, Such as the Souldier fights for? Phil. They are comming. Chri. By the next Carrier, are they not? Gr Sweet Philena, When I was in the thickest of mine enemies, Slashing off one mans head, anothers nose, Anothers armes and legs. Phil. And altogether. Gron. Then would I with a sigh remember thee; And cry deare Philena, 'tis for thy sake I doe these deeds of wonder:— dost not loe me With all thy heart now? Phil Now as heretofore. I haue not put my loue to vse, the principall Will hardly yeeld an Interest. Gron. By Mar I'le marry thee. Phil. By Vulcan y'are forsworne, Except my mind doe alter strangely. Gron. One word. Chri. You lye beyond all modesty,— forbeare me. Hem. I'le make thee mistresse of a City, 'tis Mine owne by conquest. Chri. By petition; sue for't In Forma pauperis: — City? Kennell. Gallants Off with your Fathers, put on aprons, Gallants; Learne to reele, throm, or trim a Ladies dog, And be good quiet soules of peace Hobgoblins. Hem. Christalla? Chri. Practise to drill hogs, in hope To share in the Acorns. Souldiers? Corncutters; But not so valiant: they oft times draw blood, Which you durst neuer doe. When you have practis'd More wit, or more civility, wee'll ranke I th list of men: till then, braue things at armes
Dare not to speake to vs, — most potent Groneas. Phil. And Hemophill the hardy, — at your seruices. Gron. They scorne vs as they did before we went. Hem. Hang 'em, let vs scorne them, and be reueng'd. Eexunt Chri. at Philema. Gron. Shall we? Hem. We will; and when we sleight them thus, Instead of following them, they'll follow vs. It is a womans nature. Gron. 'Tis a sruy one. exeunt oies. Scaene 3. Enter Tcnicus a Philosopher, and Orgilus disguised like a Scholler of his. Tecn. Tempt not the Stars (young man) thou canst not play With the seuerity of Fate: this change Of habit, and disguise in outward view, Hides not the secrets of thy soule within thee, From their quicke-piercing eyes, which dive at all times Downe to thy thoughts: in thy aspect I note A consequence of danger. Org. Giue me leaue (Graue Tecnicus) without fore-dooming destiny, Vnder thy roofe to ease my silent griefes, By applying to my hidden wounds, the balme Of thy Oraculous Lectures: if my fortune Run such a crooked by-way, as to wrest My steps to ruine, yet thy learned precepts Shall call me backe, and set my footings streight: I will not court the world. Tecn. Ah Orgilus, Neglects in young men of delights, and life, Run often to extremities they care not For harmes to others, who contemne their owne. Org. But I (most learned Artist) am not so much At ods with Nature, that I grutch the thrift Of any true deseruer: nor doth malice Of present hopes, so checke them with despaire, As that I yeeld to thought of more affliction
Then what is incident to frailty: wherefore Impute not this retired course of liuing Some little time, to any other cause Then what I iustly render: the information Of an vnsetled minde, as the effect Must clearely witnesse. Tecn. Spirit of truth inspire thee. On these conditions I conceale thy change, And willingly admit thee for an Auditor. lete my study. Org. I to contemplations: In these delightfull walkes — thus metamorphiz'd, I may without suspition hearken after Penthes vsage, and Euphranias faith: Loue! thou art full of mystery: the Deities Themselues are not secure, in searching out The secrets of those flames, which hidden wast A breast, made tributary to the Lawes Of beauty; Physicke yet hath neuer found A remedy, to cure a Louers wound. Ha? who are those that crosse yo priuate walke Into the shadowing groue, in amorous foldings? Prophilus passeth ouer, supporting Euphrania, and whispering. My Sister; ô my Sister? 'tis Euphrania With Prophilus, supported too; I would It were an Apparition; Prophilus Is Ithocles his friend: It strangely pusles me: Againe? helpe me my booke; this Schollers habit Must stand my priuilege my mind is busie, Mine eyes, and eares are open. walke by reading. Enter againe Prophilus and Euphrania. Proph. Doe not wast The span of this stolne time (sent by the gods For precious vse) in nicenesse! Bright Euphrania, Should I repeat old vowes, or study new, For purchase of beleefe to my desires — Org. Dsires? Proph. My seruice, my integrity — Org. That's better. Proph. I should but repeat a lesson
Oft conn'd without a prompter; but thine eyes, My Loue is honourable — Org. So was mine To my Penthea: chastly honourable. Proph. Nor wants there more addition to my wish Of happinesse, then hauing thee a wife, Already sure of Ithoclas a friend, Firme, and vn-alterable. Org. But a brother More cruell then the graue. Euphr. What can you looke for In answer to your noble protestations, From an vnskilfull mayd, but language suited To a diuided minde? Org. Hold out Euphranc. Euphr. Know Prophilus, I neuer vnder-valued (From the first time you mentioned worthy loue) Your merit, meanes, or person: It had beene A fault of iudgement in me, and a dulnesse In my affections, not to weigh and thanke My better Starres, that offered me the grace Of so much blisfulnesse. For to speake truth, The law of my desires kept equall pace With yours, nor haue I left that resolution; But onely in a word, what-euer choyce Liues nearest in my heart, must first procure Consent, both from my father, and my brother, E're he can owne me his. Org. She is forsworne else. Proph. Leaue me that taske. Euphr. My brother e're he pared To Athens, had my oath. Org. Yes, yes, a had sure. Proph. I doubt not with the meanes the Court supplies, But to preuaile at pleasure. Org. Very likely. Proph. Meane time best, dearest, I may build my hopes On the foundation of thy constant suffrance In any opposition. Euphr. Death shall sooner Diuorce life, and the ioyes I haue in liuing, Then my chast vowes from truth. Proph. On thy faire hand I seale the like. Org. There is no faith in woman — Passion? ô be contain'd: my very heart strings Are on the Tenters. Euphr. Sir, we are over-heard; Cupid protect vs: 'twas a stirring (Sir)
Of some one neere. Proph. Your feares are needlesse, Lady; None haue accesse into these priuate pleasures, Except some neere in Court, or bosome Student From Tecnicus his Oratory; granted By speciall fauour lately from the King Vnto the graue Philosopher. Euphr. Me thinkes I heare one talking to himselfe: I see him. Proph. 'Tis a poore Scholler, as I told you Lady. Org. I am discouered — Say it: is it possible With a smooth tongue, a leering countenance, Flattery, or force of reason (— I come t'ee Sir) To turne, or to appease the raging Sea? Answer to that, — your Art? what Art to catch And hold fast in a net the Sunnes small Atomes? No, no; they'll out, they'll out; ye may as easily Out-run a Cloud, driuen by a Northerne blast, As fiddle faddle so. Peace, or speake sense. Euphr. Call you this thing a Scholler? 'las hee's lunaticke. Proph. Obserue him (sweet) 'tis but his recreation. Org. But will you heare a little Lyon are so teatchy, You keepe no rule in argumet; Philosophy Workes not vpon impossibilities, But naturall conclusions. — Mew? — absurd; The metaphisicks are but speculations Of the celestiall bodies, or such accidents As not mixt perfectly, in the Ayre ingendred, Appeare to vs vnnaturall; that's all. Proue it; — yet with a reuerence to your grauity, I'le baulke illiterate sawinesse, submitting My sole opinion to the touch of writers. Proph. Now let vs fall in with him. Org. Ha ha ha. These Apish boyes, when they but tast the Grammates, And principals of Theory, imagine They can oppose their teachers Confidence Leads many into errors. Proph. By your leaue Sir. Euphr. Are you a Scholler (friend?) Org. I am (gay creature) With pardon of your Deities, a mushrome
On whom the dew of heauen drops now and then: The Sunne shines on me too, I thane his beames, Sometime I feele their warmth; and eat, and sleepe. Proph. Does Tecnicus read to thee? Org. Yes forsooth, He is my master surely, yonde dore Opens vpon his Study. Proph. Happy creatures; Such people toyle not (sweet) in heats of State, Nor sinke in thawes of greatnesse: Their affections Keepe order with the limits of their modesty: Their loue is loue of vertue. — What's thy name? Org. Aplotes (smptuous master) a poore wretch. Euphr. Dost thou want any thing? Org. Books (Venus) books. Proph. Lady, a new conceit comes in my thought, And most auaileable for both our comforts. Euphr. My Lord.— Proph. Whiles I endeuour to deserue Your fathers blessing to our loues, this Scholler May daily at some certaine houres attend, What notice I can write of my successe, Here in this groue, and giue it to your hands: The like from you to me; so can we neuer, Barr'd of our mutuall speech, want sure intelligence; And thus our hearts may talke when our tongues cannot. Euphr. Occasion is most fauourable, vse it. Proph. Aplotes, wilt thou wait vs twice a day; At nine i'th morning, and at foure at night, Here in this Bower, to conuey such letters As each shall send to other? Doe it willingly, Safely, and secretly, and I will furnish Thy Study, or what else thou canst desire. Org. Ioue make me thankfull, thankfull, I beseech thee Propitious Ioue, I will proue sure and trusty You will not faile me bookes. Proph. Nor ought besides Thy heart can wish. This Ladies name's Euphraea, Mine Prophilus. Org. I haue a pretty memory, It must proue my best friend. — I will not misse One minute of the houres appointed. Proph. Write The bookes thou wouldst haue bought thee in a note,
Or take thy selfe some money. Org. No, no money: Money to Schollers is a spirit inuisible, We dare not finger it; or bookes, or nothing. Proph. Bookes of what sort thou wilt: doe not forget Our names. Org. I warrant 'ee, I warrant 'ee. Proph. Smile Hymen on the grouth of our desires, Wee'll feed thy torches with eternall fires. Exeunt. manet Org. Org. Put out thy Torches Hymen, or their light Shall meet a darkenesse of eternall night. Inspire me Mercury with swift deceits; Ingenious Fate has lept into mine armes, Beyond the compasse of my braine. — Mortality Creeps on the dung of earth, and cannot reach The riddles, which are purpos'd by the gods. Great Arts best write themselues in their owne stories, They dye too basely, who out-liue their glories. Exit. Actus Secundus: Scaena prima. Enter Bassanes and Phulas. Bass. I'le haue that window next the street dam'd vp; It giues too full a prospect to temptation, And courts a Gazers glances: there's a lust Committed by the eye, that sweats, and taels, Plots, wakes, contriues, till the deformed bear-whelpe Adultery be lick'd into the act, The very act; that light shall be dam'd vp; D'ee heare Sir? Phul. I doe heare my Lord; a Mason Shall be prouided suddenly. Bass. Some Rogue, Some Rogue of your confederacy, (factor For slaues and strumpets) to conuey close packets From this spruce springall, and the tother youngster; That gawdy Eare-wrig, or my Lord, your Patron, Whose pusioner you are.— I'le teare thy throat out
Sonne of a Cat, ill-looking Hounds-head; tip vp Thy vlterous maw, if I but scont a paper, A scroll, but halfe as big as what can couer A wart vpon thy nose, a spot, a pimple, Directed to my Lady: it may proue A mysticall preparatiue to lewdnesse. Phul. Care shall be had. — I will turne euery thread About me to an eye. — here's a sweet life. Bass. The City houswiues, cunning in the traffique Of Chamber-merchandise, set all at price By whole-sale, yet they wipe their mouthes, and simper, Cull, kisse, and cry Sweet-hart, and stroke the head Which they haue branch'd, and all is well againe: Dull clods of dirt, who dare not feele the rubs Stucke on the fore-heads? Phul. 'Tis a villanous world, One cannot hold his owne in't. Bass. Dames at Court Who flaunt in riots, runne another by as Their pleasure heaues the patient Asse that suffers Vp on the stild of Office, titles, Incomes; Promotion iustifies the shame, and ues for't: Poore Honour! thou art stab'd, and bleed'st to death By such vnlawfull hire. The County mistresse Is yet more wary, and in blushes hides What euer trespasse drawes her troh to guilt; But all are false. On this truth I am bold, No woman but can fall, and doth, or would — Now for the newest newes about the Citie; What blab the voyces sirrha? Phul. O my Lord, The rarest, quaintest, strangest, tickling newes That euer — Bass. Hey da, vp and ride me Rascall, What is't? Phul. Forsooth (they say) the King has mew'd All his gray beard, in stead of which is budded Another of a pure Carnation colour, Speckled with Greene and Russet. Bass. Ignorant blocke. Phul. Yes truly, and 'tis talkt about the streets, That since Lord Ithocles cme home, the Lyons Neuer left roaring, at which noyse the eares
Haue danc'd their very hearts out. Bass. Dance out thine too. Phul. Besides, Lord Orgilus is fled to Athens Vpon a fiery Dragon, and 'tis thought A' neuer can returne. Bass. Grant it Apollo. Phul. Moreouer, please your Lordship, 'tis reported For certaine, that who euer is found iealous Without apparant proofe that's wife is wanton, Shall be diuorc'd: but this is but she-newes, I had it from a midwife. I haue more yet. Bass. Anticke, no more; Ideots and stupid fooles Grate my calamities. Why to be faire Should yeeld presumption of a faulty soule? Looke to the doores. Phul. The horne of plenty crest him. Exit Phul. Bass. Swormes of confusion huddle in my thoughts In rare distemper. Beauty? ô it is An vnmatcht blessing, or a horrid curse. Enter Penthea, and Gransis an old Lady. Shee comes, she comes, so shoots the morning forth, Spangled with pearles of transparent dew, The way to pouerty is to be rich; As I in her am wealthy, but for her In all contents a Bankrupt. — Lou'd Penthea, How fares my hearts best ioy? Gran. In sooth not well, She is so ouer-sad. Bass. Leaue chattering Mag-pye.— Thy brother is return'd (sweet) safe, and honour'd With a Triumphant victory: thou shalt visit him: We will to Court, where, if it be thy pleasure, Thou shalt appeare in such a rauishing lustre Of Iewels aboue value, that the Dames Who braue it there, in rage to be out-shin'd, Shall hide them in their Closets, and unseene Fret in their teares; whiles euery wondring eye Shall craue none other brightnesse but thy presence. Choose thine owne recreations, be a Queene Of what delights thou faciest best, what company, What place, what times, doe any thing, doe all things
Youth can command; so thou wilt From the pure firmament of thy faie lookes Gran. Now 'tis well said my Lord, what Lady? laugh, Be merry, time is precious. Bass. Furies whip thee. Pen. Alas my Lord, this language to your Hand-maid Sounds as would musicke to the deafe: I need No braueries nor cost of Art, to draw The whitenesse of my name into offence; Let such (if any such there are) who couet A curiosity of admiration, By laying out their plenty to full view, Appeare in gawdy out-sides; my attires Shall suit the inward fashion of my minde; From which, if your opinion nobly plac'd, Change not the Liuory your words bestow, My Fortunes with my hopes are at the highest. Bass. This house me thinkes stands somewhat too much inward It is too melancholy, wee'll remoue Nearer the Court; or what thinks my Penthea Of the delightfull Island we command? Rule me as thou canst wish. Pen. I am no Mistresse; Whither you please, I must attend; all wayes Are alike pleasant to me. Gran. Island? prison: A prison is as gaysome: wee'll no Islands: Marry out vpon 'em, whom shall we see there? Sea-guls, and Porpiseis, and water-rats, And Crabs, and Mewes, and Dogfish? goodly geere For a young Ladies dealing, or an old ones. On no termes Islands, I'le be stew'd first. Bass. Gransis, You are a Iugling Bawd. — This sadnesse (sweetest) Becomes not youthfull blood, — (I'le haue you pounded) For my sake put on a more chearefull mirth, Thou't marre thy cheekes, and make me old in griefes. —(Damnable Bitch-foxe.) Gran. I am thicke of hearing Still when the wind blowes Southerly. What thinke 'e, If your fresh Lady bred young bones (my Lord?) Wood not a chopping boy d'ee good at heart?
But as you said, Bass. Or chop thee into collo Gran. Pray speake louder Sure, , the wind blowes South still, Pen. Thou prai'st madly. Bass. 'Tis very hot, I sweat extreamely — Now. Enter Phula. Phul. A heard of Lords, Sir. Bass. Ha? Phul. A  of Indies. Bass. Where? Phul. Shoalds of horses. Bass. Peasant, how? Phul. Caroches In drifts—th'one enter, th'other stand without, sir. And now I vanish. Exit Phulas. Enter Prophilus, Hemophil, Groneas, Christalla and Philena. Proph. Noble Bassanes. Bass. Most welcome Prophilus, Ladies, Gentlemn, To all, my heart is open, you all honour me. (A tympany swes in my head arady) Honour me bountifully. — (How they flutter, W ailes and ayes together?) Proph. From your brother, By virtue of your loue to him, I require Your instant presence faireh Pen. He is woll Sir. Proph. The gods preserue him euer: yet (deare beauty) I finde some alteration in him lately, Since his returne to Sparta. My good Lord, I pray vse no delay. Bass. We had not needed An inuitation, if his sisters health Had not fallen into question. — Hast Penthea, Slacke not a minute: lead the way good Prophilus, I'le follow step by step Proph. Your arme faire Madam. Exeunt omnes sed Bass. & Gran. Bass. One word with your old Bawdship: th' hadst bin better Raild at the sinnes thou worshipst, thou haue thwarted My will. I'le vse thee cursedly. Gran. You dote. You are beside your selfe. A Politician In iealousie? No, y'are too grosse, too vulgar. Pish, teach not me my trade, I know my ue: My crossing you, sinks me into her trust, By which I shall know all: my rade's a sure one. Bss. Forgiue me, Gransis, twas consideration
I rellisht not, but haue a care now. Gran. Feare not, I am no new-come-too't. Bass. Thy life's vpon it, And so is mine. My Agonies are infinite. Exeunt omnes: Scaene 2. Enter Ithocles alone. Itho. Ambition? 'tis of vipers breed, it knawes A passage through the wombe that gaue it motion. Ambition? like a seeled Doue, mounts vpward, Higher and higher still to pearch on clouds, But tumbles headlong downe with heauier ruine. So squibs and crackers flye into the ayre, Then onely breaking with a noyse, they vanish In stench and smoke: Morality appli'd To timely practice, keeps the soule in tune, At whose sweet musicke all our actions dance; But this is forme of books, and schoole-tradition, I physicks not the sicknesse of a minde Broken with grief: strong Feers are not eas'd With counsell, but with be receipts, and meane: Meanes, speedy meanes, and certaine; that's the cure. Enter Armoster and Crotolon. Armo. You sticke (Lord Crotolon) vpon a point Too nice, and too vnnecessary. Prophius Is euery way desertfull. I am confident Your wisdome is too  to need instruction From your Crot et not so ripe (My Lord Armoster) tht t dares to doe Vpon the painte  smooth perswasion, Which tempts me to breach of faith. Itho. Not yet Resolu'd (my Lo)  consent Be so auaileable, wee'll wri to For his  to . The Kings Will ioyne with our dres, he as beene 'd too. Armo. Yes, and the King himselfe mportun'd Crotol For a dispatch. Co command, their wil
Are Lawes not to be questioned. Itho. By this marriage You kit an union so denout, so hearty, Betweene your loues to me, and mine to yours, As if mine owne blood had an interest in it; For Propilus is mine, and I am his. Crot. My Lord, my Lord. Ith. What, good Sir? speak your thoght. Crot. Had this sincerity beene reall once, My Orgilus had not beene now vn-wi'd, Nor  our lost Sister buried in a Bride bed. Your Vnckle here, Armoster knowes this truth, For had your father Thrasus liu'd, but peace Dwell in his graue: I haue done. Armo. Y'are bold and bitter. Itho. 'A presses home the iniury, it smarts; No reprehensions Vncle, I deserue 'em. Yet gentle Sir, consider what the heat Of an vnsteady youth a giddy brae, Greene indiscretion, flattery of greatnesse, Rawnesse of iudgement, wilfulnesse in folly, Thoughts vagrant as the wind, and as vncertaine Might lead a boy in yeeres too; 'twas a fault, A Capitall fault, for then I could not diue Into the secrets of commanding Loue: Since when, experience by the extremities (in others) Hath forc'd me to collect. And trust me Crotolon, I will redeeme those wrongs with any seruice Your satisfaction can require for currant. Armo. Thy acknowledgement is satisfaction. What would you more? Crot. I'me conquer'd: if Ephra Her selfe admit the motion, let it be so. I doubt not my sonnes liking. Itho. Vse my fortunes, Life, power, sword, and heart, all are your owne. Enter Bassaes, Prophilus, Cala, Petha, Ephrane, Chrystalla, Phlma, and Grasi. Armo. The Princesse with your sister. Calan. I present 'e A stranger here in Court (my Lord,) for did not Desire of seeing you, draw her abroad, We had not beene made happy in her company.
Ith. You are a gracious Princesse.— Sister, wedlocke Holds too seuere a passion in your nature, Which can engrosse all duty to your husband, Without attendance on so dea a mistresse. 'Tis not my brothers pleasure, I presume, T' immure her in a chamber. Bass. 'Tis her will, Shee gouernes her owne houres; (noble Ithocles) We thanke the gods for your successe, and welfare. Our Lady has of ate beene indispos'd, Else we had waited on you with the first. Itho. How does Penthea now? Pen. You best know brother, From whom my health and comfort are deriu'd. Bass. I like the answer well; 'tis sad, and modest; There may be tricks, yet, tricks.— Haue an eye Gransis. Calan. Now Crotolon, the suit we ioyn'd in must not Fall by too long demurre. Crot. 'Tis granted, Princesse, For my part. Armo. With condition, that his sonne Fauour the Contract. Calan. Such delay is easie. The ioyes of marriage make thee, Prophilus, A proud deseruer of Euphrama's loue, And her of thy desert. Proph. Most sweetly gracious. Bass. The ioyes of marriage are the heauen on earth, Life's paradise (great Princesse) the soules quiet, Sinewes of concord, earthly immortality, Eternity of pleasures; no restoratiues Like to a constant woman. — (but where i she? 'Twould puzzle all the gods, but to create Such a new monster.) — I can speake by proofe, For I rest in Elizium, 'tis my happinesse. Crot. Euphrania how are you resolu'd, (speake freely) In your affections to this Gentlemn? Euphr: Nor more, nor lesse thn a his loue assures me, Which (if your liing with my hers warrants) I cannot but approue in all point worthy. Crot. So, so, I know your answer. Ith. 'T had bin pitty To sunder hearts so equally consented. Enter Hephill.
Hem. The King (Lord Ithocles) commands your presence; And (fairest Princesse) yours. Calan. We will attend him. Enter Groneas. Gron. Where are the Lords? all must vnto the King Without delay: the Prince of Argos— Calan. Well Sir. Gron. Is comming to the Court, sweet Lady. Clan. How! The Prince of Argos? Gron. 'Twas my fortune, Madam, T' enioy the honour of these happy tidings. Ith. Penthe! Pen. Brother! Ith. Let me an howre hence Meet you alone, within the Palace groue, I haue some secret with you — Prethe friend Conduct her thither, and haue speciall care The walks be clear'd of any to disturbe vs. Proph. I shall. Bass. How's that? Ith. Alone, pray be alone. I am your creature, princesse.— on my Lords. Exeunt. Bassanes. Bass. Alone, alone? what meanes that word alone? Why might not I be there? — hum! — hee's her brother; Brothers and sisters are but flesh and blood, And this same whorson Court ease is temption To a rebellion in the veines  — Besides, His fine friend Prophilu mus be her guardian. Why may not he dispatch a businesse nimbly Before the other come? — or — paring, pandring, For one another? bee't to sister, mother, Wife, Couzen, any thing, 'mongst youths of metall, Is in request: It is so — stubborne Fate: But if I be a Cuckold, and can know it, I will be fell, and fell. Enter Groes. Gron. My Lord, y'are call'd for. Bass. Most hartily I thanke y,  my wie pray? Gron. Retir'd amongst the Bass. thanke ee There's an old waiter with  w you ? Gron. She  pesence Lobby fast aepe ir. Bass. Asleepe? sleepe Sir Gron, Is your Lordship troubled You will not to the King? Bass. Your humblest Vassaile.
Gron. Your seruant my good Lord. Bass I wait your foot stps. Exeunt. Scaene the third. Pophilus, Penthea. Proph. In this walke (Lady) will your brother find you: And with your fauour, giue me lee a little To worke a preparation, in his fashion I haue obseru'd of late, some kind of slacknesse To such alacrity as Nature And custome tooke delight in: Sadnesse growes Vpon his recreations, which he he hrds In such a willing silence, that to question The grounds will argue skill in friendship, And lesse good manners. Pen. Sir, I'me not inquisitiue Of secrecies without an inuitation. Phoph. With pardon, Lady, not a sillable Of mine implyes so rude a sense; the drift.— Enter Orgilus. Proph. Doe thy best To make this Lady mery for an hour. Exit. Org. Your will shall be a law, Sir. Pn. Prethe leaue me, I haue some priuate thoughts I would account with: Vse thou thine owne. Org. Speake on, faire nimph, our soules Can dance as well to musick of the Spheares As any's who haue feasted with the gods. Pen. Your Schoole terms are too troublesome. Org. What heauen Refines mortality from drosse of earth, But such as vncompounded beauty hallowes With glorified perfection. Pen. Set thy wits In a lesse wild proportion. Org. Time can neuer On the white table of vnguilty faith Write counterfeit dishonour; turne those eyes (The arrowes of pure loue) vpon that fire Which once rose to a flame, perfum'd with vowes As sweetly scented as the Lcense smoking like The holiest Atars, Virgin teares
On Vesta's odours) sprinkled dewes to feed 'em, And to increase their feruour. Pen. Be not franticke. Org. All pleasures are but meere imagination, Feeding the hungry appetite with steame, And sight of banquet, whilst the body pines, Not relishing the reall tast of food, Such is the lennesse of a heart diuided From entercourse of troth-contracted lones; No horror should deface that precious figure Seal'd with the liuely stampe of equall soules. Pen. Away, some fury hath bewitch'd thy tongue: The breath of ignorance that flyes from thence, Ripens a knowledge in me of afflictions, Aboue all suffrance. — Thing of talke be gone, Be gone without reply. Org. Be iust, Penthea, In thy commands: when thou send'st forth a doome Of banishment, know first on whom it lights; Thus I take off the shrowd, in which my cares Are folded vp from view of common eyes; What is thy sentence next? Pen. Rash man, thou layest A blemish on mine honour with the hazard Of thy too desperate life: yet I professe, By all the Lawes of ceremonious wedlocke, I haue not giuen admittance to one thought Of female change, since cruelty enforc'd Diuorce betwixt my body and my heart: Why would you fall from goodnesse thus? Org. O rather Examine me how I could liue to say I haue bin much, much wrong'd; 'tis for thy sake I put on this Imposture; deare Penthea, If thy soft bosome be not turn'd to marble, Thou't pitty our calamities; my Interest Confirmes me thou art mine still. Pe. Lend your hand: With both of mine I claspe it thus, thus kisse it, Thus kneele before ye. Org. You instruct my duty. Pen. We may stand vp: Haue you ought else to vrge Of new demand? as for the old forget it,
'Tis buried in an everlasting silence, And shall be, shall be euer; what more would ye? Org. I would possesse my wife, the equity Of very reason bids me. Pen. Is that all? Org. Why 'tis the all of me my selfe. Pen. Remoe Your steps some distance from me; at this space A few words I dare change; but first put on Your borrowed shape. Org. You are obey'd, 'tis done Pen. How (Orgilus) by promise I was thine, The heauens doe witnesse; they can witnesse too A rape done on my truth: how I doe loue the Yet Orgilus, and yet, must best appeare In tendering thy freedome; for I find The constant preseruation of thy merit, By thy not daring to attempt my fame With iniury of any loose conceit, Which might giue deeper wounds to discontents: Continue this faire race, then though I cannot Adde to thy comfort, yet I shall more often Remember from what fortune I am fallen, And pitty mine owne ruine. — Liue, lie happy. Happy in thy next choyce, that thou maist people This barren age with vertues in thy issue: And ô, when thou art married, thinke on me With mercy, not contempt: I hope thy wife, Hearing my story, will not scorne my fall: Now let vs part. Org. Part! yet aduise thee better: Penthea is the wife to Orgilus, And euer shall be. Pen. Neuer shall nor will. Org. How! Pen. Heare me, in a word I'le tell thee why The Virgin dowry which my birth bestow'd, Is rauish'd by another: my true loue Abhorres to thinke, that Orgilus deseru'd No better fauours then a second bed. Org. I must not take this reason. Pen. To confirme it, Should I outliue my bondage, let me meet Another worse then this, and lesse desir'd,
If of all the men aliue thou shouldst but touch My lip, or hand againe. Org. Penthea, now I tell 'ee you grow wanton in my sufferance; Come sweet, th'art mine. Pen. Vnciuill Sir, forbeare, Or I can turne affection into vengeance; Your reputation (if you value any) Lyes bleeding at my feet. Vnworthy man, If euer henceforth thou appeare in language, Message, or letter to betray my frailty, I'le call thy former protestations lust, And curse my Starres for forfeit of my iudgement. Goe thou, sit onely for disguise and walkes, To hide thy shame: this once I spare thy life; I laugh at mine owne confidence; my sorrowes By thee are made inferiour to my fortunes. If euer thou didst harbour worthy loue, Dare not to answer. My good Genius guide me, That I may neuer see thee more. — Goe from me. Org. I'e teare my vaile of politicke French off, And stand vp like a man resolu'd to doe Action, not words shall shew me. O Penthea. Exit Orgilus. Pen. 'A sigh'd my name sure as he parted from me, I feare I was too rough: Alas poore Gentleman, 'A look'd not like the ruines of his youth, But like the ruines of those ruines: Honour, How much we fight with weaknesse to preserue thee. Enter Bassanes and Gransis. Bass. Fye on thee, damb thee, rotten magot, damb thee, Sleepe? sleepe at Court? and now? Aches, convulsions, Impostumes, themes, gouts, palsies clog thy bones A dozen yeeres more yet. Gran. Now y'are in humors. Bass. Shee's by her selfe, there's hope of that; shee's sad too, Shee's in strong contemplation: yes, and ixt. The signes are wholesome. Gran. Very wholsome truly. Bass. Hold your chops night mare.— Lady, come your brother Is carried to his closet; you must thither. Pen. Not well, my Lord? Bass. A sudden it, 'twill off;
Some surfeit or disorder. — How doest derest? Pen. Your newes is none o'th best. Enter Prophilus. Proph. The chiefe of men, The excellentest Ithocles, desires Your presence Madam. Bass. We are hasting to him. Pen. In vaine we labour in this course of life To piece our iourney out at length, or craue Respite of breath, our home is in the graue. Bass. Perfect Philosophy: then let vs care To liue so that our reckonings may fall euen When w' are to make account. Proph. He cannot feare Who builds on noble grounds: sicknesse or paine Is the deseruers exercise, and such Your vertuous brother to the world is knowne. Speake comfort to him Lady, be all gentle; Starres fall but in the grossenesse of our sight, A good man dying, th' Earth doth lose a ligh. Exeunt omnes. Actus Tertius: Scaena prim. Enter Tecnicus, and Orgilus in his owne shape. Tecn. BE well aduis'd, let not a resolution Of giddy rashnesse choake the breath of reason. Org. It shall not, most sage Master. Tecn. I am iealous: For if the borrowed shape so late put on, Inferr'd a consequence, we must conclude Some violent designe of sudden nature Hath shooke that shadow off, to flye vpon A new-hatch'd execution: Orgilus, Take heed thou hast not (vnder our integrity) Shrowded vnlawfull plots: our mortall eyes Pierce not the secrets of your hearts, the god Are onely priuie to them. Org. Learned Tecnicus,
Such doubts are causelesse, and to cleere the truth From misconceit, the present State commands me. The Prince of Argos comes himselfe in person In quest of great Calantha for his Bride, Our kingdomes heire; besides, mine onely sister Euphrania is dispos'd to Prophilus. Lastly, the King is sending letters for me To Athens, for my quicke repaire to Court. Please to accept these Reasons. Tecn. Iust ones, Orgilus, Not to be contradicted: yet beware Of an vnsure foundation; no faire colours Can fortifie a building faintly ioynted. I haue obseru'd a growth in thy aspect Of dangerous extent, sudden, and (ooke too't) I might adde certaine — Org. My aspect? could Art Runne through mine inmost thoughts, it should not sift An inclination there, more then what suited With iustice of mine honour. Tecn. I beleeue it. But know then Orgilus what honour is: Honour consists not in a bare opinion By doing any act that feeds content; Braue in appearance, 'cause we thinke it braue: Such honour comes by accident, not nature Proceeding from the vices of our passion Which makes our reason drunke. But reall Honour Is the reward of vertue, and acquir'd By Iustice or by lour, which for Bases Hath Iustice to vphold it. He then failes In honour, who for lucre of Reuenge Commits thefts, murthers, Treasons and Adulteries, With such like, by intrenching on iust Lawes, Whose sou'raignty is best preseru'd by Iustice. Thus as you see how honour must be grounded On knowledge, not opinion: For opinion Relyes on probability and Accident, But knowledge on Necessity and Truth: I leaue thee to the fit consideration
Of what becomes the grace of reall Honour. Wishing successe to all thy vertuous meanings. Org. The gods increase thy wisdome (reuerend Oracle) And in thy precepts make me euer thrifty. Exit Org. Tecn. I thanke thy wish. — Much mystery of Fate Lyes hid in that mans fortunes, Curiosity May lead his actions into rare attempts; But let the gods be moderators still, No humane power can preuent their will. Enter Armostes. From whence come 'ee? Arm. From King Amycl; (pardon My interruption of your Studies) — Here In this seal'd box he sends a treasure deare To him as his Crowne, 'a prayes your grauity You would examine, ponder, sit and bolt The pith and circumstance of euery tittle The scroll within containes. Tecn. What is't Armostes? Armo. It is the health of Sparta, the Kings life, Sinewes and safety of the Common-wealth, The summe of what the Oracle deliuer'd, When last he visited the propheticke Temple At Delphs; what his reasons are for which After so long a silence he requires You counsaile now (graue man) his maiesty Will soone himselfe acquaint you with. Tecn. Apollo Inspire my Intellect. — The Prince of Argos Is entertain'd. Armo. He is, and has demanded Our Princesse for his wife; which I conceive One speciall cause the King importunes you For resolution of the Oracle. Tecn. My duty to the King, good peace to Sparta, And faire day to Armostes. Armo. Like to Tecnicus. Exeunt.
Soft Musicke. A Song. CAn you paint a thought? or number Euery fancy in a slumber? Can you count soft minutes rouing From a dyals point by mouing? Can you graspe a sigh? or lastly, Rob a Virgins honour chastly? No, ô no; yet you may Sooner doe both that and this, This and that, and neuer misse, Then by any praise display Beauties beauty, such a glory As beyond all Fate, all Story, All armes, all arts, All loues, all hearts, Greater then thoe, or they, Doe, shall, and must obey. During which time, Enters Prophilus, Bassanes, Penthea, Gran∣sis, passing ouer the Stage; Bassanes and Gransis enter againe softly, stealing to seuerall stands, and listen. Bass. All silent, calme, secure.— Gransis, no creaking? No noyse; dost heare nothing? Grans. Not a mouse, Or whisper of the winde. Bass. The floore is matted, The bed-posts sure are steele or marble. — Souldiers Should not affect (me thinkes) straines so eeminate; Sounds of such delicacy are but fawnings Vpon the floth of Luxury: they heighten Cinders of couert lust vp to a flame. Grans. What doe you meane (my Lord) speak low; that gabling Of yours will but vndoe vs. Bass. Chamber-combats Are felt, not hard. Pro. A wakes. Bas. What's that? Ith. Who's there Sister? all quit the roome else. Bass. 'Tis consented.
Enter Prophilus. Proph. Lord Bassanes, your brother would be priuate, We must forbeare; his sleepe hath newly left him. Please 'ee withdraw? Bass. By any meanes, 'tis fit. Proph. Pray Gentlewoman walke too. Gran. Yes, I will Sir. Exeunt omnes. Ithocles discouered in a Chayre, and Penthea. Itho. Sit nearer sister to me, nearer yet; We had one Father, in one wombe tooke life, Were brought vp twins together, yet haue liu'd At distance like two strangers. I could wish That the first pillow whereon I was cradell'd, Had prou'd to me a graue. Pen. You had beene happy: Then had you neuer knowne that sinne of life Which blots all following glories with a vengeance, For forfeiting the last will of the dead, From whom you had your being. Itho. Sad Penthea, Thou canst not be too cruell; my rash spleene Hath with a violent hand pluck'd from thy bosome A louer-blest heart, to grind it into dust, For which mine's now a breaking. Pen. Not yet, heauen I doe beseech thee: first let some wild fires Scorch, not consume it; may the heat be cherisht With desires infinite, but hopes impossible. Itho. Wrong'd soule, thy prayers are heard. Pen. Here lo I breathe A miserable creature led to ruine By an vnnaturall brother. Itho. I consume In languishing affections for that trespasse, Yet cannot dye. Pen. The handmaid to the wages, The vntroubled of Country toyle, drinkes streames With leaping kids, and with the bleating lambes; And so allayes her thirst secure, whiles I Quench my hot sighes with fleerings of my teares. Itho. The labourer doth eat his coursest bread, Earn'd with his sweat, and lyes him downe to sleepe; Which euery bit I touch turnes in disgestion To gall, as bitter as Penthea's curse.
Put me to any pennance for my tyranny, And I will call thee mercifull. Pen. Pray kill me, Rid me from liuing with a iealous husband, Then we will ioyne in friendship, be againe Brother and sister. — Kill me pray: nay, will 'ee? Itho. How does thy Lord esteeme thee? Pen. Such an one As onely you haue made me; a faith-breaker, A spotted whore, forgiue me; I am one In art, not in desires, the gods must witnesse. Itho. Thou dost be lye thy friend. Pen. I doe not Ithocles For she that's wife to Orgilus, and liues In knowne Adultery with Bassanes, Is at the best a whore. Wilt kill me now? The ashes of our parents will assume Some dreadfull figure, and appeare to charge Thy bloody gilt, that hast betray'd their name To infamy, in this reproachfull match. Itho. After my victories abroad, at home I meet despaire; ingratitude of nature Hath made my actions monstrous: thou shalt stand A Deity (my sister) and be worship'd, For thy resolued martyrdome: wrong'd maids, And married wiues shall to thy hallowed shrine Offer their orisons, and sacrifice Pure Turtles crown'd with mirtle, if thy pitty Vnto a yeelding brothers pressure, lend One finger but to ease it. Pen. O no more. Itho. Death waits to waft me to the Stygian bankes, And free me from this Chaos of my bondage, And till thou wilt forgiue, I must indure. Pen. Who is the Saint you sere? Itho. Friendship, or Of birth to any but my sister, durst not Haue mou'd that question as a secret, Sister: I dare not murmure to my selfe. Pen. Let me, By your new protestations I coniure 'ee, Partake her name. Itho. Her name,— 'tis, — 'tis, I dare not. Pen. All your respects are forg'd. Itho. They are not.—Peace
Calantha is the Princesse, the Kings daughter, Sol heire of Sparta — Me most miserable, Doe I now loue thee? for my iniuries Reuenge thy selfe with brauery, and gossip My treasons to the Kings eares. Doe; Calant Knowes it not yet, nor Prophilus my nearest. Penth. Suppose you were contracted to her, would it not Split euen your very soule to see her father Snatch her out of your armes against her will, And force her on the Prince of Argos? Itho. Trouble not The fountaines of mine eyes with thine owne story, I sweat in blood for't. Pen. We are reconcil'd: Alas, Sir, being children, but two branches Of one stocke, 'tis not fit we should diuide: Haue comfort, you may find it. Itho. Yes in thee: Onely in thee Penthea mine. Pen. If sorrowes Haue not too much dul'd my infected braine, I'le cheere inuention for an actiue straine. Itho. Mad man! why haue I wrong'd a maid so excellent? Enter Bassanes with a ponyard, Prophilus, Groneas, Hemophill and Gransis. Bass. I can forbeare no longer: more, I will not; Keepe off your hands, or fall vpon my point: Patience is tyr'd, for like a slow-pac'd Asse Ye ride my easie nature, and proclaime My sloth to vengeance, a reproach and property. Itho. The meaning of this rudenesse. Proph. Hee's distracted. Pen. O my grieu'd Lord. Grans. Sweet Lady come not neere him He holds his perilous weapon in his hand To pricke 'a cares not whom, nor where,— see, see, see. Bass. My birth is noble, though the popular blast Of vanity, as giddy as thy youth, Hath rear'd thy name vp to bestride a cloud, Or progresse in the Chariot of the Sunne; I am no clod of trade, to lackey pride, Nor like your slaue of expectation wait The baudy hinges of your dores, or whist
For mysticall conueyance to your bed-sports. Gron. Fine humor, they become him. Hem. How 'a stares, Struts, puffes, and sweats: most admirable lunacy? Itho. But that I may conceiue the spirit of wine Has tooke possession of your soberer custome, I'de say you were vnmannerly. Pen. Deare brother. Bass. Vnmannerly — Mew Kitling— smooth formality Is vsher to the ranknesse of the blood, But Impudence beares vp the traine: Indeed, sir, Your fiery mettall, or your springall blaze Of huge renowne, is no sufficient Royalty To print vpon my forehead the scorne Cuckold. Itho. His Iealousie has rob'd him of his wits, 'A talkes 'a knowes not what. Bss. Yes, and 'a knowes To whom 'a talkes; to one that franks his lust In Swine-security of bestiall incest. Ith. Hah deuill. Bass. I will hallo't, though I blush more To name the filthinesse, than thou to act it. Ith. Monster! Proph. Sir by our friendship. Pen. By our bloods, Will you quite both vndoe vs, Brother? Grans. Out on him, These are his megrims, firks and melancholies. Hem. Well said, old Touch-hole. Gron. Kick him out at dores. Pen. With fauour let me speake.— My Lord? what slacknesse In my obedience hath deseru'd this rage? Except humility and sin lent duty Haue drawne on your vnquiet, my simplicity Ne're studied your vexation. Bass. Light of beauty, Deale not vngently with a desperate wound! No breach of reason dares make warre with her Whose lookes are soueraignty, whose breath is balme O that I could preserue thee in fruition As in deuotion! Pen. Sir, may euery euill Lock'd in Pandora's box; showre (in your presence) On my vnhappy head, if since you made me A partner in your bed, I haue beene faulty In one vnseemely thought against your honour. Itho Purge not his gee, Penthea. Bass. Yea,  on,
Excellent creature— Good be not a hinderance To peace, and praise of vertue. — O my senses Are charm'd with sounds caelestiall. — On, deare, on I neuer gaue you one ill word; say, did I? Indeed I did not. Pen. Nor, by Iuno's forehead, Was I e're guilty of a wanton error. Bass. A goddesse, let me kneele. Grans. Alas kind Animall. Itho. No, but for pnnance. Bass. Noble sir, what is it? With gladnesse I embrace it; yet pray let not My rashnesse teach you to be too vnmercifull. Itho. When you shall shew good proofe that manly wisdome Not ouer-sway'd by passion, or opinion, Knowes how to lead iudgement; then this Lady Your wife, my sister, shall returne in safety Home to be guided by you, but till first I can, out of cleare euidence approue it, Shee shall be my care. Bass. Rip my bosome vp I'le stand the execution with a constancy: This torture is vnsufferable. Itho. Well Sir, I dare not trust her to your fury. Bass. But Penthea sayes not so. Pen. She needs no tongue To plead excuse, who neuer purpos'd wrong. Hemo. Virgin of reuerence and antiquity Stay you behind. Grn. The Court wants not yor diligence. Exeunt omnes, sed Bass. & Grans. Grans. What will you doe my Lord? my Lady's gone, I am deny'd to follow. Bass. I may see her. Or speake to her once more. Grans. And feele her too, man, Be of good cheare, she's your owne flesh and bone. Bass. Diseases desperate must find cures alike: She swore she has beene true. Grans. True on my modesty. Bass. Let him want truth who credits not her vowes Much wrong I did her, but her brother infinite; Rumor will voyce me the contempt of manhood, Should I run on thus. Some way I must try To out-doe Art, and cry a Iealousie. Exeunt omnes.
Flourish. Enter Amyolas, Nearchus leading Calantha, Ar∣mostes, Crotolon, Euphranea, Christalla, Philema, and Amelus. Amy. Cozen of Argos, what the heauens haue pleas'd In their vnchanging Counsels to conclude For both our kingdomes weale, we must submit to: Nor can we be vnthankfull to their bounties, Who when we were euen creeping to our graues, Sent vs a daughter; in whose birth, our hope Continues of succession: As you are In title next, being grandchilde to our Aunt, So we in hear desire you may sit nearest Calantha's loue; since we haue euer vow'd Not to inforce affection by our will, But by her owne choyce to confirme it gladly. Near. You speake the nature of a right iust father: I come not hither roughly to demand My Cozens thraldome, but to free mine owne: Report of great Calantha's beauty, vertue, Sweetnesse, and singular perfections, courted All eares to credit what I finde was publish'd By constant truth: from which if any seruice Of my desert can purchase faire construction, This Lady must command it. Calan. Princely Sir, So well you know how to professe obseruance That you instruct your hearers to become Practitioners in duty; of which number I'le study to be chiefe. Near. Chiefe, glorious Virgine, In my deuotions, as in all mens wonder. Amy. Excellent Cozen, we deny no libertie Vse thine owne opportunities. — Armoste, We must consult with the Philosophers, The businesse is of weight. Armost. Sir, at your pleasure Amy. You told me, Crotolon, your sonne's return'd From Athens? wherefore comes 'a not to Cout
As we commanded? Crot. He shall soone attend Your royall will, great Sir. Amy. The marrage Betweene young Prophilus and Euphranea, Tafts of too much delay: Crot. My Lord. Amy. Some pleasures At celebration of it would giue life To th' entertainment of the Prince our kinsman Our Court weares grauity more then we rellish. Armo. Yet the heauens smile on all your high attempts, Without a Cloud. Crot. So may the gods protect vs. Calan. A Prince, a subiect? Near. Yes, to beauties scepter As all hearts kneele so mine. Calan. You are too Courtly. To them, Ithocles, Orgilus, Prophilus Itho. Your safe returne to Sparta is most welcome, I ioy to meet you here, and as occasion Shall grant vs priuacy, will yeeld you reason Why I should couet to deserue the title Of your respected friend: for without Complement Beleeue it, Orgilus, 'tis my ambition. Org. Your Lordship may command me your poore seruant. Itho. So amorously close close? — so soone? — my heart! Proph. What sudden change is next? Itho. Life to the King, To whom I here present this Noble gentleman, New come from Athens; Royall Sir, vouchsafe Your gracious hand in fauour of his merit. Crot. My sonne preferr'd by Ithocles! Amy. Our bounties Shall open to thee Orgilus; for instance, Harke in thine eare; if out of thos inuentions Which flow in Athens, thou hast there ingrost Some rarity of wit to grace the Nuptials Of thy faire sister, and renowne our Court In th' eyes of this young Prince, we shall be debtor To thy conceit, thinke on't Org. Your Highnesse honors me. Near. My tongue and heart are twins. Calan. A noble birth Becomming such a father. — worthy Orgilus, You are a guest most with'd for. Org. May my duty Still rise in your opinion, sacred Princesse.
Itho. Euphranea's brother, sir, a Gentleman Well worthy of your knowledge. Near. We embrace him, Proud of so deare acquaintance. Amy. All prepare For Reuels and disport: the ioyes of Hymen, Like Phoebus in his lustr, puts to flight All mists of dulnesse; crowne the houres with gladnesse: No sounds but musicke, no discourse but mirth. Calan. Thine arme I prethe Ithocles. — Nay, good My Lord keepe on your way, I am prouided. Near. I dare not disobey. Itho. Most heauenly Lady. Exeunt. Enter Crotolon, Orgilus. Crot. The King hath spoke his mind. Org. His will he hath But were it lawfull to hold plea against The power of greatnesse, not the reason, haply Such vnder-shrubs as subiects, sometimes might Borrow of Nature, Iustice, to informe That licence soueraignty holds without checke Ouer a meeke obedience. Crot. How resolue you Touching your sisters marriage? Prophilus Is a deseruing, and a hopefull youth. Org. I enuy not his merit, but applaud it: Could with him thrift in all his best desires, And with a willingnesse inleague our blood With his, for purchase of full growth in friendship He neuer touch'd on any wrong that malic'd The honour of our house, nor stirr'd our peace; Yet, with your fauour, let me not forget Vnder whose wing he gathers warmth and comfort, Whose creature he is bound, made, and must liue so. Crot. Sonne, sonne, I find in thee a harsh condition, No curtesie can winne it; 'tis too ranckorous. Org. Good Sir be not seuere in your construction, I am no stranger to such easie calmes As sit in tender bosomes: Lordly Ithocles Hath grac'd my entertainment in abundance; Too humbly hath descended from that height Of arrogance and spleene which wrought the rape
On grieu'd Penthea's purity; his scorne Of my vntoward fortunes is reclaim'd Vnto a Coutship, almost to a fawning: I'le kisse his foot, since you will haue it so. Crot. Since I will haue it so? Friend I will haue it so Without our ruine by your politike plot, Or Wolfe of hatred snarling in your breasts You haue a spirit, Sir, haue ye? a familiar That poasts i'th ayre for your intelligence? Some such Hobgoblin hurried you from Athens, For yet you come vnsent for. Org. If vnwelcome, I might haue found a graue there. Crot. Sure your businesse Was soone dispatch'd, or your mind alter'd quickly. Org. 'Twas care, Sir, of my health, cut short my iourney; For there, a generall infection Threatens a desolation. Crot. And I feare Thou hast brought backe a worse infection with thee, Infection of my mind; which, as thou sayst, Threatens the desolation of our family. Org. Forbid it our deare Genius, I will rather Be made a Sacrifice on Thrasus monument, Or kneele to Ithocles his sonne in dust, Then wooe a fathers curse: My sisters marriage With Prophilus, is from my heart confirm'd: May I liue hated, may I dye despis'd, If I omit to further it in all That can concerne me. Crot. I haue beene too rough, My duty to my King made me so earnest; Excuse it Orgilus. Org. Deare Sir Enter to thm Prophilus, Euphranea, Ihocles, , Hemophil. Crot. He comes Euphranea, with Prophilus and Ithocles. Org. Most honored — euer famous. Itho. Your true friend, On earth not any true. — With soth eyes Looke on this worthy couple, you consen Can onely make them one. Org. They haue it. — Sister,
Thou pawn'dst to me an oath, of which ingagement I neuer will release thee, if thou aym'st At any other choyce then this. Euphr. Deare brother, At him or none. Crot. To which my blessing's dded. Org. Which till a greater ceremony perfect, Euphrana lend thy hand; here take her Prophilus, Liue long a happy man and wife; and further, That these in presence may conclude an omen, Thus for a Bridall song I close my wishes: Comforts lasting, Loues increasing, Like soft houres neuer ceasing; Plenties pleasure, peace complying Without iarres, or tongues enuying; Hearts by holy Vnion wedded More then theirs by custome bedded; Fruitfull issues: life so graced, Not by age to be defaced; Budding, as the yeare ensu'th, Euery spring another youth: All what thought can adde beside, Crowne this Bridegroome and this Bride. Proph. You haue seal'd ioy close to my soule: Euphranea, Now I may call thee mine. Itho. I but exchange One good friend for another. Org. If these Gallants Will please to grace a poore inuention, By ioyning with me in some light deuise, I'le venture on a straine, my younger dayes Haue studied for delight Hom. With thankfull willingnesse I offer my attendance. Gron. No endeuour Of mine shall faile to shew it selfe. Itho. We will All ioyne to wait on thy directions, Orgilus. Org. O my good Lord, your fauours flow towards A too vnworthy worme; but as you please, I am what you will shape me. Itho. A fast friend. Crot. I thanke thee sonne for this acknowledgemen, It is a sight of gladnesse. Org. But my duty. Exet omnes.
Enter Calantha, Penthea, Calan. Who e're would speake with vs deny his entrance Be carefull of our charge. Chri We shall mdam. Calan. Except the King himselfe,  none admittance, Not any. Phil. Madam it shall be our care. Exunt Calantha, Pthea. Calan. Being alone, Penthea, you haue granted The oportunity you sought, and might At all times haue commanded. Pen. 'Tis a benefit Which I shall owe your goodnesse euen in death for My glasse of life (sweet Princesse hath few minutes Remaining to runne downe; the sands are spent; For by an inward messenger I feele The summons of departure short and certaine. Calan. You feed too much your melancholly. Pen. Glorie Of humane greatnesse are but pleasing dreames, And shadowes soone decaying: on the stage Of my mortality, my youth hath acted Some scenes of vanity, drawne out at length By varied pleasures, sweetned in the mixture, But Tragicall in issue; Beauty, pompe, With euery sensuality our giddinesse Doth frame an Idoll, are vnconstant friends When any troubled passion make assault On the vnguarded Castle of the mind. Calan. Contemne not your condition, for the proofe Of bare opinion onely: to what end Reach all these Morall texts? Pen. To place before 'ee A perfect mirror, wherein you may see How weary I am of a lingring life, Who count the best a misery. Calan. Indeed You haue no little cause; yet none so great As to distrust a remedy. Pen. That remedy Must be a winding sheet, a sold of lead, And some vntrod-on corner in the earth. Not to detaine your expectation, Princesse, I haue an humble suit. Calan. Speake, I enioy it.
Vouchsafe then to be my Exria, And take that trouble o 'ee, to dispose Such Legacies, as I bequeath impartially I haue not much to giue, the paines are easie, Heauen will reward your piety, and thanke it When I am dead; for sure I must not liue, I hope I cannot. Calan. Now beshrew thy sadnesse; Thou turn'st me too much woman. Pen. Her faire eyes Melt into passion; Then I haue assurance Encouraging my boldnesse. — In this paper My Will was Character'd; which you, with pardon, Shall now know from mine owne mouth. Calan. Talke on, prethe, It is a pretty earnest. Pen. I haue left me But three poore Iewels to bequeath; The first is My youth; for though I am much old in griefes, In yeares I am a child. Calan. To whom that? Pen. To Virgin wiues, such as abuse not wedlocke By freedome of desires, but couet chiefly The pledges of chast beds, for tyes of loue, Rather than ranging of their blood And next To married maids, such as preferre the number Of honorable issue in their vertues, Before the flattery of delights by marriage, May those be euer young. Calan. A second Iewell You meane to part with. Pen. 'Tis my Fame, I trust, By scandall yet vnouch'd; this I bequeath To memory, and Times old dughter Truth If euer my vnhappy name find mention When I am falne to dust, may it deserue Be seeming charity without dishonour. Calan. How handsomely thou playst with harmlesse sport Of meere imagination; speake the last, I strangely like thy will. Pen. This Iewell, Madam, Is dearely precious to me; you must vse The best of your discretion to imploy This gift as I entend it. Calan. Doe not doubt me. Pen. 'Tis long agon since first I lost my heart,
Long I haue liu'd without it, else for certain I should haue Of it, to great Calantha, By seruice bound, and by affection vow'd, I doe bequeath in holiefe rites of loue Mine onely brother Ithocles. Calan. What saydst thou? Pen. Impute not, heauen-blest Lady, to ambition, A faith as humbly perfect as the prayers Of a deuoted suppliant indow it? Looke on him, Princesse, with an eye of pitty; How like the ghost of what he  apper'd A' moues before you. Calan. Shall I answer here, Or lend my eare too grffely? Pen. First, his hear Shall fall in Cynders, scorch'd by your disdaine, E're e will dare, poore man; t pe an eye On these diuine lookes, but with low-bet thoughts Accusing such presumption; as for word, A' dares not vtter any but Yet this lost creature loes'. — Be a In sweetnesse as in blood; giue him his doe, Or raise him vp to comfort. Cal What new change Appeares in my behauiour, that th Tempt my displeasure? Pen. I  the world To reuell Elizium, and 'tis To wish my brother some aduantage her Yet by my best hopes, Ithocles is ignorant Of this pursuit. But if you please to kill him, Lend him one angry looke, or one sh wrd, And you shall soone conclude how rong a power Your absolute authority hld His life and end. Calan. You hau forgot, Pnthea, How still I haue a father. P. But remember I am a sister, though to me this ther Hath beene you know vnkie  most vnkinde! Calan. — Lady, Your checke lyes in my .
Both. Madam, here. Calan. I thinke 'ee sleepe, ee droes; wait on Pentha Vnto her lodging. — Ithocs wrong'd Lady! Pen. My reckonings are made euen, Death or Fate Can now nor strike too soone, nor force too late. Exeunt. Actus Quatus: Scaena prima. Enter Ithocles and Armostes. Itho. FOrbeare your Inquisition; curiosity Is of too subtill, and too searching nature: In feares of loue too quicke; too slow of credit: I am not what you doubt me. Arm. Nephew, bethen As I would wish; — alilis not right, — Good heauen Confirme your Resolutions for dependance On worthy end which may aduance your quiet. Ith. I did the Noble Orgilus much iniury, But grieu'd Penthea more: I now repent it; Now, Vncle, now; this Now, is now too late: So prouident i  in sad iss, That after-wit, like Bankrupts debts, stand tallye Without all possibilities of payment: Sure he's an honest, very honest Gentleman; A man of singl meaning. Arm. I beleeue it: Yet Nephew, 'tis the tongue informes our cares; Our eyes can neuer pierce into the thoughts, For they are lodg'd too inward: — but I question No truth in Orgilus. — The Princesse (Sir) Ith. The Princesse? ha? Arm. With her the Prince of Args. Enter Nearchus leading Calantha, Amel, Christalla, Philema. Near. Great (faire one) grace my hopes with any instance Of Liuery, from the allowance of your fuour, This little sparke. Cal. A Toy Ner. Loue fea on Toyes,
For Cupid is a child, — vouchsafe this bounty It cannot beny'd. Calan. You shall not value (Sweet Cozen) at a price what I count cheape, So cheape, that let him take it who dares stoope for't, And giue it at next meeting to a Mistresse, Shee'le thanke him for't, perhaps. Casts it to Ithocles. Ame. The Ring, Sir, is The Princesses, I could haue tooke it vp. Ith. Learne manners, prethe. — To the blessed owner Vpon my knees. Near. Y'are sawcy. Cal. This is pretty, I am, belike, a Mistresse. — wondrous pretty: Let the man keepe his fortune, since he found it; He's worthy on't. — On Cozen. Ith. Follow Spaniell. I'le force'e to a fawning else. Am. You dare not. Exeunt. Manet Ith. & Armost. Arm. My Lord, you were too forward. Ith. Looke'ee Vncle: Some such there are whose liberall contents Swarme without care in euery sort of plenty; Who, after full repasts, can say them downe To sleepe; and they sleepe, Vncle: in which silence Their very dreames present 'em choyce of pleasures: Pleasures (obserue me Vncle) of rare obiect: Here heaps of gold, there Increments of honors; Now change of garments, then the votes of people; Anon varieties of beauties, courting In flatteries of the night, exchange of dlliance, Yet these are still but dreames: giue me felicity Of which my senses waking are partakers; A reall, visible, materiall happinesse: And then too, when I stagger in expectance Of the last comfort that can cherish life: I saw it (Sir) I saw it; for it came From her owne hand. Arm. The Princesse threw it t'ee: Itho. True, and she said — well I remember what. Her Cozen Prince would beg it. Arm. Yes, and parted In anger at your taking on't. Ith. Penthea! Oh thou hast pleaded with a powerfull language.
I want a fee to gratifie thy myrit. But I will doe— Arm. What is't you say? Itho. In anger, In anger let him part; for could his breath, Like whirlewinds, tosse such serile slaues as licke The dust his footsteps print, into a vapour, It durst not stirre a aire of mine; It should not, I'de rend it vp by th' roots first. To be any thing Calantha smiles on, is to be a blessing More sacred than a petty-Prince of Argos Can wish to equall, or in worth or Title. Arm. Containe your selfe, my Lord, Ixion ayming To embrace Iuno, bosom'd but a cloud, And begat Centaures: 'tis an vsefull morall, Ambition hatch'd in clouds of meere opinion, Proues but in birth a prodigie. Itho. I thanke 'ee; Yet, with your Licence, I should seeme vncharitable To gentler Fate, if rellishing the dainties Of a soules setled peace, I were so feeble Not to digest it. Arm. He deserues small trust Who is not priuy Counsellor to himselfe. Enter Nearchus, Orgilus, and Amelus. Near. Braue me? Org. Your Excellence mistakes his temper For Ithocles in fashion of his mind Is beautifull, soft, gentle, the cleare mirror Of absolute perfection. Amel. Was't your modesty Term'd any of the Prince his seruants Spaniell? Your Nurse sure taught you other language. Itho. Language. Near. A gallant Man at armes is here: a Doctor In feats of Chiualry; blunt, and rough spoken, Vouchsafing not the fustian of ciuility, Which rash spirits stile good manners. Ith. Manners. Org. No more (Illustrious Sir) 'tis marchlesse Ithocles. Near. You might haue vnderstood who I am. Ith. Yes, I did — else — but the presence calm'd th' affront; Y' are Cozen to the Princesse. Near. To the King too; A certaine Instrument that lent supportance To your Collossicke greatnesse: — to that King too
You might haue added. Itho. There is more diuinity In beauty then in Maiesty. Arm. O fie, fie Near. This odde youths pride turnes hereticke in loyalty. Sirrah! low Mushroms neuer riuall Cedrs. Exeunt Nearchus & Amelus. Itho. Come backe: what pittifull dull thing am I So to be tamely scoulded at? Come backe; Let him come backe and eccho once againe That scornefull sound of Mushrome; painted colts, Like Heralds coats, guilt o're with Crownes and Scepters, May bait a musled Lion. Arm. Cozen, Coxen, Thy tongue is not thy friend. Org. In point of honour Discretion knowes no bounds. Amelus told me 'Twas all about a little Ring. Itho. A Ring The Princesse threw away, and I tooke vp: Admit she threw't to me; what arme of brasse Can snatch it hence? No, could a' grind the hoope To powder, a' might sooner reach my heart Then steale and weare one dust on't. — Orgilus, I am extreamely wrong'd. Org. A Ladies fauour Is not to be so slighted. Itho. Slighted. Arm. Quiet These vaine vnrly passions, which will render ye Into a madnesse. Org. Griefes will haue their vent. Enter Tecnicus. Arm. Welcome; thou com'st in season (reuereud man) To powre the balsome of a supplying patience Into the festering wound of ill-spent fury. Org. What makes He here? Tecn. The hurts are yet but mortall, Which shortly will proue deadly: To the King, Armostes, see in safety thou deliuer This seal'd vp counsaile; bid him with a constancy Peruse the secrets of the gods: — ô Sparta, O Lacedemon! double nam'd, but one In fate: when Kingdomes reele (marke well my Saw) Their heads must needs be giddy: tell the King That henceforth he no more must enquire after My aged head: Apollo wil it so;
I am for Delphos. Arm. Not without some conferenc With our great master. Tecn. Neuer more to see him, A greater Prince commands me. — Ithocles, When youth is ripe, and Age from time doth part, The liuelesse Trunke shall wed the Broken Heart. Ith. What's this, if vnderstood? Tecn. List Orgilus, Remember what I told thee long before, These teares shall be my witnesse. Arm. 'Las good man. Tecn. Let craft with curtesie a while conferre, Reuenge proues its owne Executioner. Org. Darke sentences are for Apollo's Priests: I am not Oedipus. Tecn. My howre is come; Cheare vp the King: farewell to all. — O Sparta, O Lacedemon. Arm. If propheticke fire Exit. Tec Haue warm'd this old mans bosome, we might construe His words to fatall sense. Ith. Leaue to the powers Aboue vs, the effects of their decrees; My burthen lyes within me. Seruile feares Preuent no great effects. — Diuine Calantha. Arm. The gods be still propitious. — Exeunt, manet Org. Org. Something oddly The booke-man prated; yet a' talk'd it weeping Let craft with curtesie a while conferre, Reuenge proues its owne executioner. Conne it againe; for what? It shall not puzzle me; 'Tis dotage of a withered braine. — Penthea Forbad me not her presence; I may see her, And gaze my fill: why see her then I may; When if I faint to speake, I must be silent. Exit Org. Enter Bassanes, Gransis, and Phulas. Bass. Pray vse your Recreations, all the seruice I will expect, is quietnesse amongst 'e: Take liberty at home, abroad, at all times, And in your charities appease the gods Whom I with my distractions haue offended. Grans. Faire blessings on thy heart. Phul. Here's a rare change My Lord, to cure the itch, is surely gelded;
The Cuckold, in conceit, hath cast his hornes. Bass. Betake 'ee to your serall occasions, And wherein I haue heretofore beene faulty, Let your constructions mildly passe it ouer, Henceforth I'le study reformation, — more, I haue not for employment. Gran. O sweet man! Thou art the very hony-combe of honesty. Phul. The garland of good-will; — Old Lady, hold vp Thy reuerend snout, and trot behind me softly, As it becomes a Moile of ancient carriage. Exeunt, manet Bass Bass. Beasts onely capable of sense, enioy The benefit of food and ease with thankfulnesse; Such silly creatures, with a grudging, kicke not Against the portion Nature hath bestow'd; But men endow'd with reason, and the vse Of reason, to distinguish from the chaffe Of abiect scarscity, the Quintescence, Soule, and Elixar of the Earths abundance, The treasures of the Sea, the Ayre, nay heauen Repining at these glories of creation, Are verier beast than beasts; and of those beasts The worst am I; I, who was made a Monarch Of what a heart could wish, for a chast wife, Endeuour'd what in me lay, to pull downe That Temple built for adoration onely, And leuel't in the dust of causelesse scandall: But to redeeme a sacrilege so impious, Humility shall powre before the deities: I haue incenst a largenesse of more patience Then their displeased Altars can require: No tempests of commotion shall disquiet The calmes of my composure. Enter Orgilus. Org. I haue found thee, Thou patron of more horrors then the bulke Of manhood, hoop'd about with ribs of Iron, Can cramb within thy brest: Pnthea (Bassanes)
Curst by thy Iealousies; more, by thy dotag Is left a prey to words. Bass. Exercis Your trials for addition to my pennance, I am resolu'd. Org. Play not with misery Past cure some angry Minister of Fate hath Depos'd the Empresse of her soule, her rson, From its most proper Throne; but what's the miracle More new, I, I haue seene it, and yet liue. Bass. You may delude my senses, not my iudgement: 'Tis anchor'd into a firme resolution, Dalliance of Mirth or Wit can ne're vnfixe it. Practise yet further. Org. May thy death of loue to her Damne all thy comforts to a lasting fast From euery ioy of life: Thou barren rocke, By thee we haue bee split in ken of harbour. Enter Ithocles, Penthea her bare about her eares, Philema, Christalla. Ith. Sister looke vp, your Ithocles, your brother Speakes t'ee: why doe you weepe? Deere, turne not from me: Here is a killing sight: lo, Bassanes, A lamentable obiect. Org. Man, dost see't? Sports are more gamesome; am I yet in merriment? Why dost not laugh Bass. Diuine, and best of Ladies, Please to forget my out-rage? mercy euer Cannot but lodge vnder a root so excellent: I haue cast off that cruelty of frenzy Which once appear'd, Impostors, and then iugled To cheat my sleeps of rest. Org. Was I in earnest? Pen. Sure if we were all Sirens, we should sing pittifully; And 'twere a comely musicke, when in parts One sung anothers knell: the Turtle sighes When he hath lost his mate; and yet some say A' must be dead first: 'tis a fine deceit To passe away in a dreame: indeed I'ue slept With mine eyes open a great while. No falshood Equals a broken faith; there's not a haire Sticks on my head but like a leaden Plummer
It sinkes me to the graue: I must creepe thither. The iourny is not long. Ith. But thou, Penthea, Hast many yeeres, I hope, to number yet E're thou canst trauell that way. Bass. Let the Swan first Be wrap'd vp in an euerlasting darknesse, Before the light of nature, chiefly form'd For the whole worlds delight, feele an Ecclipse So vniuersall. Org. Wisdome (looke 'ee) Begins to raue: — art thou mad too, antiquity Pen. Since I was first a wife, I might haue beene Mother to many pretty pratling Babes: They would haue smil'd when I smil'd; and, for certaine I should haue cry'd when they cry'd; — truly brother, My father would haue pick'd me out a husband, And then my little one had beene no bastards: But 'tis too late for me to marry now, I am past child-bearing; 'tis not my fault. Bass. Fall on me, if there be a burning Etna, And bury me in flames; sweats hot as sulphure, Boyle through my pores: affliction hath in store No torture like to this. Org. Behold a patience Lay by thy whyning gry dissimulation, Doe something worth a Chronicle; shew Iustice Vpon the Author of this mischiefe; dig out The Iealousies that hatch'd this thraldome first With thine owne ponyard: euery anticke rpture Can roare as thine does. Ith. Orgilus forbeare. Bass. Disturbe him not, it is a talking motion Prouided for my torment: what a foole am I To bawdy passion? e're I'le speake a word I will looke on and burst. Pen. I lou'd you once. Org. Thou didst, wrong'd creature, in despite of malice; For it I loue thee euen. Pen. Spare your hand, Beleeue me, I'le not hurt it. Org. Paine my heart to Complaine not though I wring it hard: I'le kisse it; O 'tis a fine soft palme: harke in thine care, Like whom doe I looke, prehe? nay, no whispering.
Goodnesse! we had beene happy: too much happinesse Will make folke proud they say — but that is he; points at Ithocles. And yet he paid for't home; alas, his heart Is crept into the cabinet of the Princesse; We shall haue points and bridelaces. Remember When we last gather'd Roses in the garden I found my wits, but truly you lost yours: That's He, and still 'tis He. Ith. Poore soule, how idely Her fancies guide her tongue. Bass. Keepe in vexation, And breake not into clamour. Org. She has tutor'd me: Some powerfull inspiration checks my lazinesse: Now let me kisse your hand, grieu'd beauty. Pen. Kisse it. Alacke, alacke, his lips be wondrous cold; Deare soule, h'as lost his colour: haue 'ee seene A straying heart? all crannies, euery drop Of blood is turn'd to an Amethist, Which married Bachelours hang in their eares. Org. Peace vsher her into Elizium: If this be madnesse, madnesse is an Oracle. Exit Org. Ith. Christalla, Philema, when slept my sister, Her rauings are so wild. Chri. Sir, not these ten dayes. Phil. We watch by her continually; besides, We cannot any way pray her to eat. Bass. Oh — misery of miseries! Pen. Take comfort, You may liue well, and dye a good old man: By yea and nay, an oath not to be broken, If you had ioyn'd our hands once in the Temple, 'Twas since my father dy'd, for had he liu'd He would haue don't: I must haue call'd you father: Oh my wrack'd honour ruin'd by those Tyrants, A cruell brother, and a desperate dotage! There is no peace left for a rauish'd wife Widdow'd by lawlesse marriage; to all memory, Penthea's, poore Penthea's name is strumpeted: But since her blood was season'd by the forfeit Of noble shame, with mixtures of pollution, Her blood ('tis iust) he henceforth neuer heightned
With tast of sustenance. Stare, l that fulnesse Whose plurisie hath euer'd faith and modesty, Forgiue me: ô I faint. Arm. Be not so wilfull. Sweet Neece, to worke thine owne destruction. Ith. Nature Will call her daughter, monster,— what? not eat? Refuse the onely ordinary meane Which are ordain'd for life? be not, my sister, A murthresse to thy selfe. — Hear'st thou this, Bassanes? Bass. Fo, I am busie; for I haue not thoughts Enow to thinke all shall be well anon. 'Tis tumbling in my head there is a mastery In Art to fatten and keepe smooth the outside; Yes, and to comfort vp the vitall spirits Without the helpe of food, fumes or perfumes, Perfumes or fumes: let her alone, I'le search out The tricke on't. Pen. Lead me gently; heauens reward ye Griefes are sure friends; they leaue (without controule) Nor cure nor comforts for a leprous soule. Exeunt the maids supporting Penthe Bass. I grant t'ee; and will put in practice instantly What you shall still admire: 'tis wonderfull, 'Tis super singular, not to be match'd: Yet when I'ue don't, I'ue don't; ye shall all thanke mee. Exit Bassanes. Arm. The sight is full of terror. Ith. On my soule Lyes such an infinite clogge of massie dulnesse, As that I haue not sense enough to feele it. See, Vncle, th'augury thing returnes againe, Shall's welcome him with Thunder? we are haunted, And must vse exorcisme to coniure downe This spirit of maleuolence. Arm. Mildly, Nephew. Enter Nearchus and Amelus. Near. I come not, Sir, to chide your late disorder: Admitting that th' inurement to a roughnesse In Souldiers of your yeares and fortunes, chiefly So lately prosperous, hath not yet shooke off
The custome of the warre in houres of leisure: Nor shall you need excuse, since y are to render Account to that faire Excellence, the Princesse, Who in  priuate Gallery expect it From your owne mouth alone: I am a messenger But to her pleasure. Ith. Excellent Nearchus, Be Prince still of my seruices, and conquer, Without the combat of dispute, I honour 'ee. Near. The King is on a sudden indispos'd, Physicians are call'd for; 'twere fit, Armostes, You should be neere him. Arm. Sir, I kisse your hands. Exeunt. Manent Nearchus & Amelus. Near. Amelus, I perceiue Calantha's bosome Is warm'd with other fires then such as can Take strength from any fuell of the loue I might addresse to her: young Ithocles, Or euer I mistake, is Lord ascendant Of her deuotions; one, to speake him truly, In euery disposition nobly fashioned, Ame. But can your Highnesse brooke to be so riual'd, Considering th'inequality of the persons? Near. I can, Amelus; for affections iniur'd By tyrannie, or rigour of compulion, Like Tempest-threatned Trees vnfirmely rooted, Ne're spring to timely growth: obserue, for instance, Life-spent Penthea, and vnhappy Orgilus. Ame. How does your grace determine? Near. To be iealous In publike, of what priuately I'le further; And though they shall not know, yet they shall finde it. Exeunt omnes. Enter Hemophil and Grone as leauing Amyclas, and pla∣cing him in a Chayre, followed by Armostes, Croto∣lon, and Prophilus. Amy. Our daughter is not neere? Arm. She is retired, Sir, Into her gallery. Amy. Where's the Prince our Cozen? Proph. New walk'd into the Groue (my Lord.) Amy. All leave vs, Except Armostes, and you Crtoln,
We would be priuate. Proph. Health vnto your Maiesty Exunt Prophilus, Hemophil, & Gro Amy. What, Tecius is gone? Arm. He is to Delpho And to your Royall hands presents this box. Amy. Vnseale it, good Armostes, therein lyes The secrets of the Oracle; out with it; Apollo liue our patron: read, Armostes. Arm. The plot in which the Vine takes root, Begins to dry, from head to foot, The stocke soone withering, wnt of sap Doth cause to quaile the budding grape: But from the neighboring Elme, a dw Shall drop and feed the Plot Amy. That is the Oracle, what exposition Makes the Philosopher? Arm. This brief one, onely: The plot is Sparta, the  a Vine the King; The quailing grape his daughter; but the thing Of most importance, not to be reual'd, Is a neere Prince, the Elme the rst conceal'd. Tenicus. Amy. Enough; although the opening of this Riddle Be but it selfe a Riddle, yet we constru How neere our lab'ring age drwes  rest But must Calantha quaile to the young grap Vntimely budded! I could mourne for her, Her tendernesse hath yet deseru'd no igor So to be crost by Fate. Ar. You misapply, Sir With fauour let me speake it what Apollo Hath clouded in hid sense: I here coiectur Her marriage with some neighb'ring Prince, the dew Of which befriending Elme shall euer strengthen Your Subiects with a Soueraignty of power. Crot. Besides, most gracious Lord, the pith of Oracles Is to be then digested, when th euents Expound their truth, not brought  to ligh As vtter'd; Truth is Child of Time and herein I finde no scruple, rather cause of comfort
With unity of kingdomes. Amy. May it proue so For weale of this deare Nation. — where is Ithocles? Armostes, Crotolon; when this wither'd Vine Of my fraile carkasse, on the funerall Pile, Is fir'd into its ashes, let that young man Be hedg'd about still with your cares and loues; Much owe I to his worth, much to his seruice. Let such as wait come in now. Arm. All attend here. Enter Ithocles, Calantha, Prophilus, Orgilus, Ephranea, Hemophil, and Groneas. Cal. Deare Sir, King, Father! Ith. O my royall Master! Amy. Cleane not my heart (sweet Twins of my life's solace) With your fore-iudging feares: there is no Physicke So cunningly restoratiue to cherish The fall of Age, or call backe youth and vigor, As your consents in duty: I will shake off This languishing disease of time, to quicken Fresh pleasures in these drooping houres of sadnesse: Is faire Euphranea married yet to Prophilus? Crot. This morning, gracious Lord. Org. This very morning Which with your Highnesse leaue you may obserue too Our sister lookes (me thinks) mirthfull and sprightly; As if her chaster fancy could already Expound the riddle of her gaine in losing A trifle; Maids know onely that they know not: Pish, prethe blush not; 'tis but honest change Of fashion in the garment, loose for streight, And so the modest maid is made a wife: Shrewd businesse, is't not sister? Euph. You are pleasant. Amy. We thanke thee, Orgilus, this mirth becomes thee: But wherefore sits the Court in such a silence? A wedding without Reuels is not seemely. Cal. Your into indisposition, Sir, forbade it. Amy. Be it thy charge, Calantha, to set forward The bridall spots, to which I will e resent: If not, at least consenting  owne Ithocles, I haue done little foe the yet. Ith. Y'haue built me
To the full height I stand in. Cal. Now or neuer May I propose a suit. Amy. Demand and haue it. Cal. Pray Sir giue me this young man, and no further Account him yours, then he deserues in all things To be thought worthy mine; I will esteeme him According to his merit. Amy. Still th'art my daughter, Still grow'st vpon my heart, giue me thine hand; Calantha take thine owne; in noble actions Thou'lt find him firme and absolute: I would no Haue parted with thee, Ithocles, to any But to a mistresse who is all what I am. Ith. A change (great King) most wisht for, cause the sam.— Cal. Th'art mine. — Haue I now kept my word. Ith. Diuinely. Org. Rich fortuness guard to fauour of a Princesse, Rocke thee (braue man) in euer crowned plenty; Y'are minion of the tim, be thankfull for it: Ho, here's a swinge in Destiny. — Apparent, The youth is vp on tiptoe, yet may stumble. Amy. On to your recreations; now conuey me Vnto my bed-chamber: none on his forehead Were a distempered looke. Omnes. The gods preserue'ee. Cal. Sweet be not from my sight. Ith. My whole felicity. Exeunt carrying out of the Kng, Orgilus stayes Ithocles Org. Shall I be bold my Lord? Ith. Thou canst not, Orgilus; Call me thine owne, for Prophilus must henceforth Be all thy sisters; friendship, though it cease not In marriage, yet is oft at lesse command Then when a single freedome can dispose it. Org. Most right, my most good Lord, my most great Lord, My gracious Princely Lord, I might adde royall. Ith. Royall, a Subiect royall? Org. Why not, pray Sir? The Soueraignty of Kingdomes in their nonage Stoop'd to desert, not birth: there's as much meri In clearenesse of affection, as in puddle Of generation: you haue conquer'd Loue Euen in the loueliest; if I greatly erre not, The sonne of Venus hath bequeath'd his quiuer
To Ithocles his manage, by whose arrowes Calantha's brest is open'd. Ith. Can't be possible? Org. I was my selfe a peece of suitor once, And forward in preferment too; so forward, That speaking truth, I may without offence (Sir) Presume to whisper, that my hopes, and (harke 'ee) My certainty of mariage stood assured With as firme footing (by your leaue) as any's Now at this very instant — but. — Ith. 'Tis granted: And for a league of priuacy betweene vs, Read o're my bosome, and pertake a secret; The Princesse is contracted mine. Org. Still: why not? I now applaud her wisdome; when your kingdome Stands seated in your will secure, and setled, I dare pronounce you will be a iust Monarch: Greece must admire, and tremble. Ith. Then the sweetnesse Of so imparadis'd a comfort, Orgilus, It is to banquet with the gods. Org. The glory Of numerous children, potency of Nobles, Bent knees, hearts pau'd to tread on. Ith. With a friendshi So deare, so fast as thine. Org. I am vnfitting For Office, but for seruice. Ith. Wee'll distinguish Our fortunes meerely in the Title; partners In all respects else but the bed. Org. The bed? Foresend it Ioues owne Iealousie, till lastly We slip downe in the common earth together; And there our beds are equall, saue some Monument To shew this was the King, and this the Subiect. List, what sad sounds are these? extremely sad ones. Ith. Sure from Penthea's lodgings. Org. Harke, a voyce too.
Soft sad musicke. A Song. Oh no more, no more, too late Sighes are spent; the burning Tapers Of a life as chast as Fate, Pure as are vnwritten papers, Are burt out: no heat, no light Now remaines 'tis euer night. Loue is dead, let louers eyes, Lock'd in endlesse dreames, Th' extremes of all extremes, Ope no more, for now Loue dyes, Now Loue dyes, implying Loues Martyrs must be euer, euer dying. Ith. Oh my misgiuing heart! Org. A horrid stilnesse Succeeds this deathfull ayre, let's know the reason: Tread softly, there is mystery in mourning. Exeunt. Enter Christalla and Philema, bringing in Penthea in a chaire vaild: two other seruants placing two chaires, one on the one side, and the other with an Egine on the other; the maids sit downe a her feet mourning, the seruants ge out, meet them Ithocles and Orgilus. Ser. 'Tis done, that on her right hand. Org. Good, begone. Ith. Soft peace inrich this roome. Org. How fares the Lady? Phil. Dead. Chri. Dead! Phil. Staru'd. Chri. Staru'd! Ith. Me miserable! Org. Tell vs How parted she from life? Phil. She call'd for musicke, And begg'd some gentle voyce to tune a farewell To life and griefes: Christalla touch'd the Lute, I wept the funerall song. Chri. Which scarce was ended, But her last breath seal'd vp these hollow sounds, O cruell Ithocles, and iniur'd Orgilus! So downe she drew her vaile, so dy'd. Ith. So dy'd. Org. Vp; you are messengers of death, goe from vs; Here's woe enough to court without a prmpter.
Away; and harke ye, till you see vs next, No sillable that she is dead. —Away, Exeunt Phil. & Chri. Keepe a smooth brow. — My Lord. Ith. Mine onely sister, Another is not left me. Org. Take that chayre, I'le seat me here in this: betweene vs sits The obiect of our sorrowes; some few teares Wee'll part among vs; I perhaps can mixe One lamentable story to prepare 'em. There, there, sit there, my Lord. Ith. Yes, as you please. Ithocles sits downe, and is catcht in the Engine. What meanes this treachery? Org. Caught, you are caught Young master: 'tis thy throne of Coronation, Thou foole of greatnesse: see, I take this vaile off; Suruey a beauty wither'd by the flames Of an insulting Phaeton her brother. Ith. Thou mean'st to kill me basely. Org. I foreknew The last act of her life, and train'd thee hither To sacrifice a Tyrant to a Turtle. You dream't of kingdomes, did 'ee? how to bosome The delicacies of a youngling Princesse, How with this nod to grace that subtill Courtier, How with that frowne to make this Noble tremble, And so forth; whiles Penthea's grones, and tortures, Her agonies, her miseries, afflictions, Ne're toucht vpon your thought; as for my iniuries, Alas they were beneath your royall pitty, But yet they liu'd, thou proud man, to confound thee: Behold thy fate, this steele. Ith. Strike home; a courage As keene as thy reuenge shall giue it welcome: But prethe faint not; if the wound close vp, Tent it with double force, and search it deeply. Thou look'st that I should whine, and beg compassion, As loath to leaue the vainnesse of my glories; A statelier resolution armes my confidence, To cozen thee of honour; neither could I, With equall tryall of vnequall fortune, By hazard of a duell, 'twere a brauery
Too mighty for a slaue intending murther: On to the Execution, and inherit A conflict with thy horrors. Org. By Apollo, Thou talk'st a goodly language; for rquitall, I will report thee to thy mistresse richly: And take this peace along; some few short minutes Determin'd, my resolues shall quickly follow Thy wrathfull ghost; then if we tug for mastery, Pentheas sacred eyes shall lend new courage. Giue me thy hand, be healthfull in thy parting From lost mortality: thus, thus, I free it. kils him. Ith. Yet, yet, I scorne to shrinke. Org. Keepe vp thy spirit: I will be gentle euen in blood; to linger Paine, which I striue to cure, were to be cruell. Ith. Nimble in vengeance I forgiue thee; follow Safety, with best successe ô may it prosper! Penthea, by thy side thy brother bleeds: The earnest of his wrongs to thy forc'd faith, Thoughts of ambition, or delitious banquet, With beauty, youth, and loue, together perish In my last breath, which on the sacred Altar Of a long look'd for peace-now-moues-to heauen. moritur. Org. Farewell, faire spring of manhood; henceforth welcome Best expectation of a noble suffrance: I'le locke the bodies safe, till what must follow Shall be approu'd— Sweet Twins shine stars for euer. In vaine they build their hopes, whose life is shame, No monument lsts but a happy Name. Exit Orgilus. Actus Quintus: Scaena prima. Enter assnes alone. Bass. AThens, to Athens I haue sent, the Nursery Of Greec for leaning, and the Fount of knowledge:
For here in Sparta there's not left amongst vs One wise man to direct, we're all turn'd madcaps: 'Tis said, Apollo is the god of herbs; Then certainly he knowes the vertue of 'em: To Delphos I haue sent to; if there can be A helpe for nature, we are sure yet. Enter Orgilus: Org. Honour Attend thy counsels euer. Bass. I beseech thee With all my heart let me goe from thee quietly, I will not ought to doe with thee of all men. The doublers of a Hare, or, in a morning, Salutes from a splay-footed witch, to drop Three drops of blood at th' nose iust, and no more, Croaking of Rauens, or the screech of Owles, Are not so boading mischiefe as thy crossing My priuate meditations: shun me, prethe; And if I cannot loue thee hartily, I'le loue thee as well as I can. Org. Noble Bassanes Mistake me not. Bass. Phew, then we shall be troubled; Thou wert ordain'd my plague, heauen make me thankfull, And giue me patience too, heauen I beseech thee. Org. Accept a league of amity; for henceforth I vow by my best Genius, in a sillable, Neuer to speake vexation; I will study Seruice and friendship with a zealous sorrow For my past inciuility towards 'ee. Bass. Heydey! good words, good words, I must beleeue 'em, And be a Coxcombe for my labor. Org. Vse not So hard a Language; your misdoubt is causelesse For instance; if you promise to put on A constancy of patience, such a patience As Chronicle, or history ne're mentioned, As followes not example, but shall stand A wonder, and a Theame for imitation, The first, the Index pointing to a second, I will acquaint'ee with an vnmatch'd secret,
Whose knowledge to your griefes shall set a period. Bass. Thou canst not (Orgilus) 'tis in the powr Of the gods onely; yet for satisfaction, Because I note an earnest in thine vtterance, Vnforc'd, and naturally free, be resolute The Virgin Bayes shall not withstand the lightning With a more carelesse danger, than my constancy The full of thy relation: could it moue Distraction in a senselesse marble statue, It should finde me a rocke: I doe expect now Some truth of vnheard moment. Org. To your patience You must adde priuacie, as strong in silence As mysteries look'd vp in Ioues owne bosome. Bass. A skull hid in the earth a treble age, Shall sooner prate. Org. Lastly, to such direction As the seuerity of a glorious Action Deserues to lead your wisdome and your iudgement, You ought to yeeld obedience. Bass. With assurance Of will and thankfulnesse. Org. With manly courage Please then to follow me. Bass. Where e're, I feare not. Exeunt omnes. Scaene 2. Lowd musicke. Enter Groneas and Hemophil leading Euphranea, Christalla and Philema leading Propholus, Nearchins supporting Calantha; Crotolon, and Amelus; cease loud Musicke, all make a stand. Cal. We misse our seruant Ithocles and Orgilus, On whom attend they? Crot. My sonne, gracious Princesse, Whisper'd some new deuice, to which these; Reuels Should be but vsher: wherein I conceiue Lord Ithocles and he himselfe are Actors. Cal. A faire excuse for absence: as for Bassanes. Delights to him are troublesome; Armostes Is with the King. Crt. He is. Cal. On to the dance: Deare Cozen, hand you the Bride, the Bridegroome must be Intrusted to my Courtship: be not icao
Euphranea, I shall scarcely proue a temptresse: Fall to our dance. Musicke. Nearchus dance with Euphranea, Prophilus with Calantha, Christalla with Homophil, Philema with Groneas. Dance the first change; during which, Enter Armostes. Arm. The King your father's dead. — in Calantha's eare Cal. To the other change. Arm. Is't possible? Dance againe. Enter Bassanes. Bass. O Madam! Penthea, poore Penthea's staru'd. Cal. Beshrew thee, Lead to the next. Bass. Amazement duls my senses. Dance againe. Enter Orgisus. Org. Braue Ithocles is murther'd, murther'd cruelly. Cal. How dull this musicke sounds? strike vp more sprightly? Our footings are not actiue like our heart Which treads the nimbler measure. Org. I am thunder-strooke. Last change. Cease musicke. Cal. So, let us breath a while: hath not this motion Rais'd fresher colour on your cheeks? Near. Sweet Princesse. A perfect purity of blood enamels The beauty of your white. Cal. We all looke cheerfully: And Cozen, 'tis, me thinks, a rare presumption In any, who prefes our lawfull pleasures Before their owne sowre censure, to interrupt The custome of this Ceremony bluntly. Near. None dares, Lady. Cal. Yes, yes; some hollow voyce deliuer'd to me How that the King was dead. Arm. The King is dead: That fatall newes was mine; for in mine armes He breath'd his last, and with his Crowne bequeath'd 'ee Your mothers wedding Ring, which here I tender. Crot. Most strange! Cal. Peace crown his ashes: we are queen then. Near. Long lie Calanha, Sparta's Soueraigne Queene. Omnes. Long liue the Queene. Cal. What whispered Bass? Bass. That my Penthea, miserable soule, Was starn'd to death. Cal. Shee's happy; she hath finish'd
A long and painefull progresse.— A third murmure Pierc'd mine vnwilling eares. Org. That Ithocles Was murther'd; rather butcher'd, had not brauery Of an vndaunted spirit, conquering terror, Proclaim'd his last Act triumph ouer mine. Arm How? murther'd? Cal. By whose hand? Org. By mine; this weapon Was instrument to my reuenge: the reasons Are iust and knowne: quit him of these, and then Neuer liu'd Gentleman of greater merit, Hope, or abiliment to steere a kingdome. Crot. Fye Orgilus. Euph. Fye brother. Cal. You haue done it. Bass. How it was done let him report, the forfeit Of whose alleageance to our lawes doth couet Rigour of Iustice; but that done it is, Mine eyes haue beene an euidence of credit Too sure to be conuinc'd: Armostes, rent not Thine Arteries with hearing the bare circumstances Of these calamities: thou'st lost a Nephew, A Neece, and I a wife: continue man still, Make me the patterne of digesting euils, Who can out-liue my mighty ones, not shrinking At such a pressure as would sinke a soule Into what's most of death, the worst of horrors: But I haue seal'd a couenant with sadnesse, And enter'd into bonds without condition To stand these tempests calmely; marke m, Nobles, I doe not shed a teare, not for Pentha: Excellent misery! Cal. We begin our reigne With a first act of Iustice: thy confession, Vnhappy Orgilus, doomes thee a sentence; But yet thy fathers, or thy sisters presence Shall be excus'd: giue, Crotolon, a blessing To thy lost sonne Euphranea, take a farewell, And both be gone. Crot. Confirme thee, noble sorrow, In worthy resolution. Euph. Could my teares speake, My griefes were sleight. Org. All gooddesse dwell amongst yee Enioy my sister, Prophilus; my vengeance
Aym'd neuer at thy preiudice. Cal. Now withdraw: Exeunt Crotolon, Prophilus, & Euphrana Bloody relator of thy staines in blood; For that thou hast reported him whose fortunes And life by thee are both at once snatch'd from him, With honourable mention; make thy choyce Of what death likes thee best, there's all our bounty. But to excuse delayes, let me (deare Cozen) Intreat you and these Lords see execution Instant before 'ee part. Near. Your will commands vs. Org. One suit, iust Queene, my last; vouchsafe your clemency That by no common hand I be diuided From this my humble frailty. Cal. To their wisdomes Who are to be spectators of thine end, I make the reference: those that are dead, Are dead; had they not now dy'd, of necessity They must haue payd the debt they ow'd to nature, One time or other. — Vse dispatch, my Lords, Wee'll suddenly prepare our Coronation. Exeunt Calantha, Philea, Christa Arm. 'Tis strange, these Tragedies should neuer touch on Her female pitty. Bass. She has a masculine spirit: And wherefore should I pule, and like a girle, Put finger in the eye: let's be all toughnesse, Without distinction betwixt sex and sex. Near. Now Orgilus thy choyce. Org. To bleed to death. Arm. The Executioner. Org. My selfe, no Surgeon. I am well skill'd in letting blood: bind fast This arme, that so the pipes may from their conduits Conuey a full streame: here's a skilfull Instrument: Onely I am a beggar to some charity To speed me in this Execution, By lending th'other pricke to th' tother arme, When this is bubling life ou. Bass. I am for 'ee. It most concernes my art, my care, my credit; Quicke, fillet both this armes. Org. Gramercy friendship Such curtesies are reall, which flow cheerefully
Without an expection of requitall. Reach me a staffe in this hand: if a pronenesse, Or custome in my nature, from my cradle, Had beene inclin'd to fierce and eager bloodshed; A coward guilt, hid in a coward quaking, Would haue betray'd fame to ignoble flight, And vagabond pursuit of dreadfull safety: But looke vpon my steddinesse, and scorne not The sicknesse of my fortune, which since Bassanes Was husband to Penthea, had laine bed-rid: We trifle time in words: thus I shew cunning In opening of a veine too full, too liuely. Arm. Desperate courage. Org. Honourable infany. Lem. I tremble at the sight. Gron. Would I were loose. Bass. It sparkles like a lusty wine new broacht; The vessell must be sound from which it issues; Graspe hard this other sticke I'le be as nimble. But prethe looke not pale; haue at 'ee stretch out Thine arme with vigor, and vnshooke vertue. Good; ô I enuy not  Riuall fited To conquer in extremities; this pastime Appeares maiesticall: some high tun'd poem Hereafter shall deliuer to posterity The writers glory, and his subiects triumph: How is't man, droope not yet. Org. I feele no palsies: On a paire royall doe I wait in death; My Soueraigne, as his Liegeman; on my Mistresse, As a deuoted seruant; and on Ithocles, As if no braue, yet no vnworthy enemy: Nor did I vse an engine to intrap His life, out of a slauish feare to combate Youth, strength, or cunning, but for that I durst not Ingage the goodnesse of a cause on fortune, By which his name might haue out-fac'd my vengeance: Tecnicus, inspir'd with Phaebus fire, I call to mind thy Augury, 'twas perfect; Reuenge proues its owne Executioner
When feeble man is bending to his mother, The dust 'a was first fram'd on, thus he totters. Bass. Life's fountaine is dry'd vp. Org. So falls the Standards Of my prerogatiue in being a creature: A mist hangs o're mine eyes; the Sun's bright splendor Is clouded in an euerlasting shadow: Welcome thou yce that sit'st about my heart, No heat can euer thaw thee. Near. Speech hath left him. dyes. Bass. A' has shooke hands with time: his funerall vrne Shall be my charge: remoue the bloodlesse bodie; The Coronation must require attendance: That past, my few dayes can be but one mourning. Exeunt. An altar couered with white. Two lights of Virgin wax, during which musicke of Recorders, enter foure bearing Ithocles on a ease, or in a chaire, in a rich robe, and a Crowne on his bead; place him on one side of the Altar, after him enter Calantha in a white robe, and crown'd Euphrana; Philema, Christalla in white, Nearchus, Armostes, Crotolon, Prophilus, Amelus, Bassanes, Lemophil, and Groneas. Calan∣tha goes and kneeles before the Altar, the rest stand off, the wo∣men kneeling behind; cease Recorders during her deotions: Soa musicke. Calantha and the rest rise doing obeysance to the Altar. Cal. Our Orisons are heard, the gods are mercifull: Now tell me, you whose loyalties payes tribute To vs your lawfull Soueraigne, how vnskilfull Your duties or obedience is, to render Subiection to the Scepter of a Virgin, Who haue beene euer fortunate in Princes Of masculine and stirring composition? A woman has enough to gouerne wisely Her owne demeanours, passions, and diuisions. A Nation warlike and inu'd to practice Of policy and labour, cannot brooke A feminate authority: we therefore Command your counsaile, how you may aduise vs In choosing of a husband whose abilities
Can better guide this kingdome. Near. Royall Lady, Your law is in your will. Arm. We haue seene tokens Of constancy too lately to mistrust it. Crot. Yet if your highnesse setle on a choice By your owne iudgement both allow'd and lik'd of, Sparta may grow in power, and proceed To an increasing height. Cal. Hold you the same minde. Bass. Alas great mistris, reason is so clouded With the thicke darkenesse of my infinites woes That I forecast, nor dangers, hopes, or safety: Give me some corner of the world to weare out The remnant of the minutes I must number, Where I may heare no sounds, but sad complaints Of Virgins who have lost contracted partners; Of husbands howling that their wives were ravisht By some untimely fate; of friends divided By churlish opposition, or of fathers Weeping upon their childrens slaughtered carcasses; Or daughters groaning ore their fathers hearses, And I can dwell there and with these keepe consort As musicall a their what can you looke r From an old foolish peevish doting man, But crasinesse of age? Cal. Cozen of Argos. Near. Madam. Cal. Were I presently To choose you for my Lord, Ile open freely What articles I would propose to treat on Before our marriage. Near Name them vertuous Lady. Cal. I would presume you would retaine the royalty Of Sparta in her owne bounds: then in Argos Armostes might be Viceroy; in Messne Might Crotolon beare sway, and Bassanes — Bass. I, Queene? alas! what I? Cal. Be Sparta's Marshall: The multitudes of high imployments could not But set a peace to priuate griefes: these Gentlemen, Gronas and Lemophil, with worthy pensions Should wait vpon your person in your Chamber: I would bestow Christall on Amelus,
Shee'll proue a constant wife, and Philm. Should into Vesta's Temple. Bass. This is a Testament, It sounds not like conditions on a marriage. Near. All this should be perform'd, Cal. Lastly, for Prophilus He should be (Cozen) solemnly inuested In all those honors, titles, and preferments Which his deare friend, and my neglected husband Too short a time enioy'd. Proph. I am vnworthy To liue in your remembrance. Euph. Excellent Lady! Near. Madam, what meanes that word neglected husband? Cal. Forgiue me: now I turne to thee thou shadow Of my contracted Lord: beare witnesse all, I put my mother wedding Ring vpon His finger, 'twas my fathers last bequest: Thus I new marry him whose wife I am; Death shall not separate vs: ô my Lords, I but deceiu'd your eyes with Anticke gesture, When one newes straight came hudling on another, Of death, and death, and death, still I danc'd forward, But it strooke home, and here, and in an instant, Be such meere women, who with shreeks and out-crie Can vow a present end to all their sorrowes, Yet liue to vow new pleasures, and out-liue them: They are the silent griefes which cut the hart-strings; Let me dye smiling. Near. 'Tis a truth too ominous. Cal. One kisse on these cold lips, my last; cracke, crcke. Argos now's Sparta's King: command the voyces Which wait at th' Altar, now to sing the song I fitted for my end. Near. Sirs, the ong
A Song. All.Glories, pleasures, pomps, delighs, and ease, Can but please outward senses, when the mind Is not vntroubled, or by peace refin'd. 1Crownes may flourish and decay, Beauties shine, but fade away. 2.Youth may reuell, yet it must Lye downe in a bed of dust: 3.Earthly honors flow and wast, Time alone doth change and last. All.Sorrowes mingled with contents, prepare Rest for care; Loue onely reignes in death: though Art Can find no comfort for a broken heart. Arm. Looke to the Queene. Bass. Her heart is O royall mad, would thou hadst mis this part: Yet 'twas a braue one: I must weepe to see Her smile in death. Arm. Wise Tecnicus, thus said e When youth is ripe, and age from time doth part, The liuelesse Trunke shall wed the broken hearts 'Tis here fulfill'd. Near. I am your King. O. Long liue Nearchus King of Sparta. Near. Her last will Shall neuer be digrest from; wait in order Vpon these faithfull louers as becomes vs. The Counsels of the gods are neuer knowne, Till men can call th' effects of them their owne FINIS.
