1467 99849621 14780
A DIVINE CENTVRIE OF Spirituall Sonnets. Altera Musa venit, quid nisit & alter Apollo. LONDON Printed by Iohn VVindet. 1595.
TO THE RIGHT REVERENDE FATHER IN GOD, the Right honourable and my very good Lorde, TOBIE (by the grace of God) Bishop and Counte Palatine of Duresme and Sadberge: Increase of all true zeale, honour & perpetuall consolation of mind and bodye. RIGHT gracious, and my very good Lorde (if in any measure I coulde haue better deuised, consonant with the weak∣nesse of my slender faculties how for so many your honourable great fauours to mee worthlesse, neyther of any the least deserueable: publiquely to divulge, and promulgate the reuerende gratuitye which I still by numberlesse respects of duetie, pretend and beare to your worthinesse) it should haue beene euen in the mightiest power of my wittes, and vertu∣ousest indeuors more (though not better) manifested. But since it both proceedeth from a francke spirite, & the chiefest treasures of my better parte: I beseech your good Lordship (not onely as in tollerating this boldenesse braunching from the firme confidence of my meere loue and duetie, but that also in gracious admittance of your honourable Patronage) you would dignifie these spirituall Poemes: which this last yeere in my late litle trauails had through some partes of Fraunce (as tribute of that measure of witte, and inuention, which it hath pleased almighty God of his super aboun∣dant grace, and mercie to endue my feeble spirite withall) I daily
to his honour and seruice by prescribed taske, deuoted. And albeit it nothing neere (by millions of sacred degrees) attayneth to the glorie of this diuine subiect, and argument: yet was it written (I call his sacred Maiestie to record, that I neyther for vayne glo∣rie nor my iustification speake it) in liuely touche, motion, and feeling-anguishe of spirite, voyde of all colourable varnishe, and hypocrisie: and therefore more fitte for their spirituall consolatiō to bee perused of diuerse, whome numerous Orations moue much more then proase: and to that ende these (at motion of some o∣thers my wel-deseruing friendes) I haue committed to the pub∣lique tipographicall Theatre of generall censure, which if they shall his omnipotencie (in whose honour by mee most vnworthie vassall of sinne and mortallitie they were composed) please, then am I most pleased, fortunate, and comforted for euer. And then I doubt not but they shall also hightly stande with your Lordshippes good liking and contentment: to whome if in fauour these shall in this worlde passe, I much lesse depende of other mens opinions: referring them alone (next vnder God) to your honours vertuous protection, and the protection of your honour to the great Pro∣tectour, and disposer of all honours and blessinges. With which I beseech his mightinesse indue your good Lordship, and yours to his best pleasure and your deere soules comforte. From London this 30. of August. 1595. Your Honours in all spirituall deuotion assured. Bar. Barnes.
To the fauourable and Chri∣stian Reader. I Haue published (curteous Reader) an hundreth Quatorzaines in honour of the greatest disposer of all great hon∣ours; wherin, if through secret, and in∣seperable combat betwixt earth and my spirite, the priuie motions, and sting of diuers wounds, as they did succeede and grieue my soule, manifested appeare: Let them (though not in these, that singular vertue to contri∣cion, may mouingly perswade and stirre vp your Spirite to Diuine contemplation of your Ghostly comfort) re∣maine yet as remembrancers to kindle more gracious and rich spirits of zeale and pure holinesse in your more Co∣pious and Facile prepared wittes & natures: Which only as they be in respect of all other creatures reasonable, and most Diuine; so ought they to bee (likewise) in all reason imployed to the propagation, honour and mightinesse of his Diuinitie; whose vertue abundantly moueth vpon all vnworthie creatures of his handes: but vpon vs (the mo∣dels of his similitude, & liknes) in that large measure, which as it is ineffable, so doth it by nature enioyne vs to glorifie the singular operations, of his omnipotent handes. The glorious subiect, as it is matchlesse, and incompa∣rable for Tytles and Mightinesse, so woulde it (in some richer & more copious Inuentions) rayse the tryumphant charyot of your sacred Muses, aboue the starre-bearing
firmament, & vpō the spirituall Pegasus of celestiall poesie in diuine harmonie of spirite beare the writer to that ma∣iesticall Throane, and Hemicycle of incomparable state and comfortable dignitie where he should (with consent and assistaunce of Angelles and heauenly Spirites, to the musicall stringes of royall crowned Harper's) for euer sing ALLELVYA, Saluation, Honor, Glory, Renowne and Eternitie bee ascribed alwayes to the greatest God of gods, King of kinges, Lorde of lordes, onely victorious, tryumphant, mercifull and gracious: And if any man feele in himselfe (by the secret fire of immortall Entheusiasme the learned motions of strange and diuine passions of spi∣rite, let him refine and illuminate his numerous Muses with the most sacred splendour of the holy Ghost, & then he shall (with diuine Salust the true learned frenche Poet) finde that as humane furie maketh a man lesse then a man, and the very same with wilde vnreasonable beastes: so di∣uine rage and sacred instinct of a man maketh more then man, and leadeth him (from his base terrestriall estate) to walke aboue the starres with Angelles immortally. The seuerall passions of comforte & ghostly combates, albeit they stand in my booke confused, & peraduenture therefore may to some readers seeme disordered and straunge, as in their vnequall coherence of praises, peni∣tence and fearefull afflictions, yet vpon some especiall oc∣casions and in earnest true motions of the spirite were they deuised: and I therefore in this respecte implore your generall fauours. Reade I beseeche you, and with singlenesse of zeale and true spirit giue censure according to my good will and indeuours. Farewell. Bar. Barnes.
INVOCATION To the Diuine Father of sacred Muses. SONNET. I. NO more lewde laies of Lighter loues I sing, Nor teach my lustfull Muse abus'de to flie, With Sparrowes plumes and for compassion crie, To mortall beauties which no succour bring. But my Muse fethered with an Angels wing, Diuinely mounts aloft vnto the skie. Where her loues subiects with my hopes doe lie: For Cupids darts prefigurate hell's sting. His quenchlesse Torch foreshowes hell's quenchles fire, Kindling mens wits with lustfull laies of sinne: Thy wounds my Cure deare Sauiour I desire To pearce my thoughts thy fierie Cherubinne, (By kindling my desires) true zeale t' infuse, Thy loue my theame and holy Ghost my Muse.
SONNET. II. SWeete Sauiour from whose fiuefold bleeding wound, That comfortable Antidote distilde: Which that rancke poyson hath expeld and kild, In our old wretched father Adam found. In Paradise when he desertlesse crown'd, Receau'd it as th' enuenomde Serpent willde, In steede of lustfull eyes with arrowes fillde: Of sinfull loues which from their beames abound. Let those sweete blessed wounds with streames of grace, Aboundantly sollicite my poore spirite: Rauish'de with loue of thee that didst debase Thy selfe on earth that I might heauen inherite, O blessed sweete wounds fountaines of electre, My wounded soules balme, and saluations nectre. SONNET. III. SAcred redeemer, let my praiers pearce Thine eares to contrite sinners open still At my harts altar made, where (to fulfill My vowes) I sacrifice in humble verse. Which doe with troubled penitence rehearse My ceaselesse sinnes repugnant to thy will: Let mercie mittigate the large blacke bill Of my dead sinnes: Deare iudge the doome reuerse Which with foule guilt agrieu'de my conscience gaue, By iustice iustly damn'd to quenchlesse fire: Oh my deare Sauiour crucifi'd, mee saue! Let my contricions incense vp aspire (With true zeale kindled on my Altar hart) And of thy sweete saluation purchase part.
SONNET. IIII. Deare comforter (with whose deare precious blood, The costly ransome of my sinnes was paide, For my redemption murthered and betraide, Sole spotlesse Lambe before the throane which stoode Opening the seuen sealde Booke: who for pure foode Thy precious selfe in sacrifice had'st laide To my soules sustenance: which had decaide If thou hadst not beene lifted on the roode) O let my soule (thy Temple) be perfum'de With sacred incense of thy vertuous grace: Which hauing with repentant sighes presum'de (Though charg'de with sinne) to kneele before thy face, Yet for like Almes (in mercy) doth implore, Though last in worke, with those which wrought before. SONNET. V. BLessed creatour let thine onely sonne (Sweete blossome stocke and roote of Dauids line The cleare bright morning starre) giue light and shine On my poore spirit, which hath new begunne With his loues praise and with vaine loues hath donne: to my poore Muse let him his eares incline, Thirsting to tast of that celestiall wine Whose purple streame hath our saluation wonne. O gracious bridegroome, and thricelouely bride Which come and fill who will for euer crie, Water of life to no man is deny'de: Fill still who will if any man be drye. O heauenly voice! I thirst, I thirst and come For life, with other sinners to get some.
SONNET. VI. PVre sacrifice, once offred for vs all, Euen all which were defilde with deadly sinne: Let me poore deadly sinner, who beginne With voice and hart repentant thee to call, And cry that finde my selfe about to fall Into that quenchlesse lake, repleate within With howling fiends which euer gnash and grin, Haue Audience from thy throane celestiall. Deere spotlesse sacrifice (which didst discend And as a man for mankindes safetie dy'de, And ransackt Hels foule dungeon without end: Enlarging sinners which therein were ty'de) Since thou didst die that sinners sau'de might bee, I am a wicked sinner (Lord) saue mee. SONNET. VII. WHite spotlesse Lambe (whose precious sweete bloudshed The whole worlds sinnefull Debt hath satisfied: For sinners scorn'd, whipp'de, wounded, crucified, Beholde my sinfull soule by Sathan led Euen to the gates of Hell: where will be red My consciences blacke booke: vnlesse suppli'de Be (to those leaues past number) thy wounds wide: Whose purple issue which for sinners bled, Shall wash the Register of my foule sin, And thence blot out the vile memoriall: Then let thy blessed Angell enter in My temple purg'd, and that historiall (Of my sinnes numberlesse) in deepe Seas cast: So shall I be new borne, and sau'd at last.
SONNET. VIII. LYon of Iudah (which dost iudge and fight With endlesse iustice, whose annointed head Was once with wounding thornes inuironed, But now with sacred Crownes by glorious right: Whose glorious hoast succeedes in armour white, Before whose face so many millions fled, And whose Imperiall name, no man could read) Illuminate my thoughts, with the beames bright Of that white powrefull and celestiall Doue: Kindle my spirit with that sacred heate, Which me may rauish with an heauenly Loue: Whil'st I thy ceaselesse graces doe repeate, Downe powrde in full aboundance to mankind, Which comfort in my soule (poore wretch) I find. SONNET. IX. O Gracious shephearde (for thy simple flocke By guilefull Goates to rauening Wolues misled,) Who thine owne deare harts precious bloud didst shed, And Lambelike offered to the butchers blocke; O gracious shepheard (vnremouing rocke Of succour to such all as thither fled) Respect one of thy flocke which followed These cursed Goates, and doth repentant knocke. To be with mercy taken to thy folde, I know thy grace doth still for wanderers looke, I was a lost sheepe once (deare Lord) beholde, And in compassion take me with thy hooke: In one lost sheepe new found thou dost reioyce, Then know thy sheepe, which knowes his shepheards voice.
SONNET. X. HEauenly Messias (sweete annointed King, Whose glorie round about the world doth reach, Which euerie beast, plant, rocke, and riuer teach, And aerie birds like Angels euer sing, And euery gale of winde in gustes doth bring, And euery man with reason euer preach) Behold, behold that lamentable breach: Which (my distressed conscience to sting) False spitefull Sathan in my soule doth make: Oh (sweete Messias) lend some gracious oyle To cure that wound, euen for thy mercies sake: Least (by that breach) thy temple he dispoyle. Helpe, helpe, my conscience thether him doth leade, And hee will come, if thou bruse not his head. SONNET. XI. MErcifull Iesus thine eyeliddes of grace Decline vnto a wicked sory sinner Humbly prostrate, who (but a new beginner) Begges that thine holy Ghost might Sathan chase From his foule soule, ordaind for thy pallace: as it did Mary Mag'daline saue, and winne her From seuen foule spirits which did raigne within her: But now behold a more contagious place, A place where the seuen mortall sinnes roote take, From whence beside all ougly crimes braunch out, With each of these seuen legions doe pertake Of vncleane spirits raging round about: Oh now deare Iesus, Iesus shew thy power, And driue them forth, least they my soule deuoure.
SONNET. XII. BOuntifull Lord Christ (whose hand liberall Is still outstretched for mans sustenance Which wee much thankelesse with small souenance recount, when in such larges it doth fall: But that which all men in especiall Ought to maintaine in high rememberance, (Naylde feete and hands, and hart pearc'de with a Launce For our redemption from the sinfull thrall) With feruent zeale, true Loue, feare reuerent, Is quite forgot of most: and yet these bee The chiefe deare signes for our saluation sent: Oh blessed Christ, bestow thy grace on mee Bestow this blessed grace (deare Christ) that I May hope new life by thy death, when I die. SONNET. XIII. DEare Dauids sonne (whom thy forefathers haue In Psalmes and prophecies vnborne foretolde, That hell in Adamantine chaines should holde, And thence poore sinners both inlarge and saue Whom former blindnes to damnation gaue) Mee swallowed in the gulfe of sinne behold: A Lambe amongst wilde wolues (once of thy fold) Whom Sathan now doth for his porcion craue: Deare sonne of Dauid helpe, yet helpe with speede. Thy wounds bleede fresh in my remembrance yet, Which blessed wounds did for offenders bleede: These wounds I will not in distresse forget, For all cheefe hope of my saluation, grounds In Nectre of those comfortable wounds.
SONNET. XIIII. O Benigne Father let my sutes ascend, And please thy gracious eares from my soule sent; Euen as those sweete perfumes of incense went From our forefathers altars: who didst lend Thy nosthrils to that mirrh which they did send, Euen as I now craue thine eares to be lent. My soule, my soule, is wholy, wholy bent To doe thee condigne seruice, and amend, To flie for refuge to thy wounded brest; To sucke the balme of my saluation thence, In sweete repose to take eternall rest, As thy childe folded in thine armes defence: But then my flesh me thought (by Sathan fir'de) Said my proud sinfull soule in vaine aspirde. SONNET. XV. PIttifull Lord (whose endles mercy reacheth From East to West and the worlds compasse filleth, Whose charge imperious (as thy spirit willeth) Things sencelesse as in life obedience teacheth: Whose bright omnipotence the Dumbe borne preacheth: Whose grace in full aboundance downe distilleth To contrite sinners, which olde Sathan killeth, And wounded spirits heales, whome sinne appeacheth) With those bright eyes of mercy me respect, From my soule (made thy temple) Sathan driue, That my pure spirit may thy praise detect, And from death by thy liuely grace reuiue: That (sinne and Hell suppress'd) I might appeare After deaths conquest, by thy mercies cleare.
SONNET. XVI. SVre corner stone of that rocke firme and hie, (Where of eternall life the fountaine springs, Whose vertue to the soule such comfort brings That he which tasteth neuer shall be drie, Nor euer slaue of death againe shall die) Oh let thy blessed Angell carrie wings And arme my soule: which loathing earthly things For liuely water to that rocke would flie: There neuer dare approch my Ghostly foe, Which would from number of thy Saints exempt My silly soule: sweete Christ let him forgoe That deare soules purchase: which he doth attempt. Remember (my deare Lord) thou dy'd to saue it Then neuer shall the roaring Lyon haue it. SONNET. XVII. MYlde King of Salem Lord of louely peace, (Who do'st in brother like agreement ioy, In mercy mourning when thou do'st destroy, Where iustice condigne anger doth encrease) Behold a wretch, whose sinnes doe neuer cease With haynous guilt his conscience to annoy: Who by that meanes cannot calme rest enioy Behold deare Christ, and for my free release (Vpon contrition) those offences blot Out of those large inditements, which be giu'n By my iust conscience: let them be forgot. Forget, forgiue (deare Lord) for I am driu'n (By their remembrance) almost to dispaire: Which my soules ruine ready would prepare.
SONNET. XVIII. HYe priest of Syon (whose eternall throne With endlesse right, and mercy seated is: Which all knees (when his name repeated is) Adore: whose rule hath times swift wings outgone, Whose Scepter is an euerlasting one, Whose Monarchie neuer compleated is) This humble Alter see, which heated is With feruent zeale I beare to thee alone: Which from the Syon of my soule aspireth, Euen from this zealous hart vnto the chayre Of euerlasting power, where it desireth (Through pleasing incense) for me to prepayre A glorious Crowne, which neuer will take rust: Which graunt (Deare Sauiour) in whose helpe I trust. SONNET. XIX. LOuely Samaritane, draw neere, and view The mangled obiect of a wretched soule, Afflicted deadly with a conscience foule: The iust sting of such sinnes as my soule slew, Whose faults be numberlesse though yeeres bee few. Oh note them not sweete Lord in thy blacke scroule Which may my deare saluations hope controle, When breath and body shall be changed new: But these foule desperate wounds (deare Christ) vp bind, Cherishd with oyle of mercies and sweete grace: And let thy Gospell minister each kind Of heau'nly foode, and bee thy Church the place Where I may mee repose to purchase cure, That (when thou com'st) I may be sound and pure.
SONNET. XX. GReat God of Abraham (whose eternall power Shaketh the worlds vnsure foundations, Whose frowne affrights all Kings and nations, whose anger doth like flames of fire deuour, Whose triumph comming is in vnknowne hower, Whose praise exceedes all mortall mens Orations, Whose time of grace (for sinners preparations) Thou do'st inlarge, to yeeld vs more succour) Like Father chastice mee with tender twigges, Not like an angrie Iudge with yren Rodde, Least Sathan purchase conquest by dispaire. That (when heauen shall shake downe her Starres like Figges) Thou (both as equall iudge, and gentle God) For mee the Crowne of glorie may prepare. SONNET. XXI. SOle hope and blessing of olde Israels line (Which gaue by promise to his blessed seede A land that should all blessings plentie breede, Riuers of pleasant Honnie, Milke, and wine, Whose ofspring numberlesse thou calledst thine, Whome with thine Angels Manna thou didst feede Being before from Pharoes bondage freede, When Moyses first thy statutes did resigne) Behold deare God, one in these daies of grace: Since by thy precious bloud thou freede mankinde, By promise which a portion and a place Amongst thy children hopeth for to finde In Gospels comfort, through thy bloudes deare prise, Oh let him purchase such a Paradise!
SONNET. XXII. FOuntaine of life, and endlesse happinesse, O quench these wordly sparkes of Sathans fier, Enkindled in my fancies and desier: Rocke of saluation and all blessednesse Defend mee charg'de with sinful wickednesse; Spirite of comfort let thy breath inspire My soule infected, ready to retire, And carnall mocions striuing to represse. I thirst (cleare fountaine) for the streame of life, I fall farre set from my saluations rocke, And Sathan with my Spirite is at strife, Vrging that I am seuer'd from thy flocke: Yet my deare Sauiour, strong rocke, and sweete spirite, Through mercy, my poore soule shall heauen inherite. SONNET. XXIII. FAther of Pietie by this wee know The glories greater of thy gracious loue Then of desires which carnal fancies moue: For if wee praise a mortall shape below By flattery their Diuinities wee show, Comparing them their perfectnesse aboue: Their cheekes to Roses, their neckes white to Doue, Their eyes to starres from whence all fortunes flow: Their eyes effects to the Meridian Sunne, Their modest thoughts to the colde Virgine moone. Oh fooles, fooles ignorant, when this is donne, Wee know wee flatter them, then Muses soone Why turne you not your numbers musicall To God aboue mans praise which ruleth all?
SONNET. XXIIII. PVre spotlesse ofspring of vngratefull Iurie (At morning, mid-day, and at quiet night) I neither will forget thy praise, nor might: When men vngratefull shall prouoke thy furie I shall bee safe, if that deare grace procure I And finde sweete comfort of eternall light, Mongst Cherubes, Seraphins, and Angels bright. But if thy precepts I forget, then sure I With sinners must expect my portion dew, Because thy grace celestiall I abus'd. And in thy face (with vile contorcion) threw Those sacred blessings stubbornely refus'd: At length I like an Angell shall appeare In spotlesse white, an Angels Crowne to weare. SONNET. XXV. GLorious Iehouah Oh how full of power, How full of sacred maruailes bee thy deedes! Thou that with plenties euery creature feedes, And blessed bounties which bestowes each hower. With hand of mercie sending forth a shower In large aboundance to produce good seedes, My wounded hart with pearsed conscience bleedes, When I remember thee my soules succour: Who was so many times by mee forgot, Who by mee wicked, vilest, hainous wretch, Prophaned oft hast beene, but praised not: At length though late) mine armes, mine hart I stretch, My soule, my sinfull soule I lift to thee, Who (with thy praises triumph cleare) would bee.
SONNET. XXVI. GReat God of larges, bountifull good giuer Of endlesse blessings (as thou didst bestow On me poore wretch, that reason how to know Thee without all beginnig endlesse liuer) Powre likewise downe thy graces louely Riuer, And let it (Lord) my poore hart ouerflow: These like sweete fire (which Diuine spirits blow) May clearely burne in zeale of thy Loues euer: That all my thoughts thy Testament embrace, That all my wits thy tearmelesse grace set out, That by thee praising I may shew thy grace Which in large Talent thou to mee let out: That after good accompt (past terme of ages) I may receiue a trustie stewards wages. SONNET. XXVII. HIgh King of Kings (who with thine awfull cheeke Controles the sterne windes, sinfull land, rough Seas: Who chides in thunder when wee doe displease, Whome all things feare and tremble at his becke, Yoking in one the Kings and beggers necke Without respect (in wrath) yet will appease His wrath, when sinners penitent shall prease His throne (in zeale sincere) without contecke. Oh God iust, mercifull, and gracious, Full of all plentie, blessing, and kindnesse, Whose endlesse rule past limit, spacious, Illuminate my soule, and banish blindnesse: Consider how this sinfull soule (opprest With nature) by thy grace would bee redrest.
SONNET. XXVIII. FOrtresse of hope, Anchour of faithfull zeale, Rocke of affiance, Bulwarke of sure trust, (In whome all nations for saluation must Put certaine confidence of their soules weale) Those sacred misteries deare Lord reueale Of that large volume, righteous and iust: From mee (though blinded with this earthly dust) Doe not those gracious misteries conceale. That I by them as from some beame some Lampe, May finde the bright and right direction To my soule blinded, marching to that Campe. Of sacred soldiours: whose protection Hee (that victorious on a white horse rideth) Taketh, and euermore triumphant guideth. SONNET. XXIX. RAyons of glorie beames of endlesse ioy, Cheerish my soule, illuminate my wits: Rauish my sences with celestial fits, That mistes infernall doe not them anoy: All carnall motions weaken and acoy, Eu'n from that beame some throne (where glorious sits The Lord of light whose eye no shade admits) That filthy Dragon my sonles foe destroy, Which in foule pit of dreadfull darkenes liues, Repleat with horrour, and contagious smell: Whose shadow, noysome mist and blindnes giues, Raysde from th'infectious damps of vgly Hell. Rayons of comfort through my Temples pearse, And consecrate my Muse to sacred verse.
SONNET. XXX. HIgh mightie God of Gods, and King of Kings (Whose awful charge through the round world doth runne, Eu'n from the rising of the glorious Sunne Vnto the Seas, where hee his Chariot brings) What instruments, or what harmonious strings Shall to thy graces, which bee new begunne, And haue so many soules with comfort wonne, Giue praises due to such celestiall things Praise and thankesgiuing to the Lord surrender, And pay thy duties to thy God most highest, Least thou before his throane a vile offender Appeare, when sinne and Hell (to conscience nighest) Accuse thee wicked sinner, for that grace Which God bestowde, and thou cast in his face. SONNET. XXXI. O Glorious Patrone of eternall blisse, Victorious conquerour of Hell and death, Oh that I had whole westerne windes of breath, My voice and tongue should not bee so remisse: My notes should not bee so rare and demisse: But euery riuer, forrest, hill, and heath Should eccho forth his praise, and vnderneath The worlds foundations sound that it is his: Hee which did place the worlds foundations, Hee which did make the Sunne, the Moone and starres, Who with his blood redeem'd all nations, And willing none from Paradise debarres, Shall not all instruments and voyces sounde His glories, which in all these things abounde?
SONNET. XXXII. THe well of life, the forte of happinesse, Rocke of affiance, Piller of sure trust, Anchor of hope, Treasure repining rust, Starre of direction, Ease of wretchednesse, Great Lord of largesse, Iudge of wickednesse, Balme of saluation, Ayder of the iust, Fountaine of grace, Quickner of Clay and dust, Cure of disease, Releeuer of distresse, Bright Sunne of comfort, Iustice of true peace, The branch of glory, and the Fruite of blisse, Kingdomes disposer, Husband of increase, For penitence who pardons things amisse, And in contrition dayly who delightes: What man can giue due glorious Epithites? SONNET. XXXIII. THrice puissant generall of true Christian hoast (Whose voyce it selfe is dreadfull thundercracke, Whose wrath doth nether fire nor lightning lacke, Whose stormie frowne makes tremble euerie coast: Chasing thy fearefull foes from post to post, Whose hands force can all the worlds forces sacke, Who turnes his foemens colours into blacke, Whose murthering thunderboults for arrowes bee, Whose sworde victorious, Trenchant, double edg'd, His holy Scripture is, whose foes conuert, The pointe to their owne brest, and haue alledg'd Vaine arguments thy deare Saints to subuert) As thou deare God art iudge, so giue thy doome (In iustice) to subuert ambitious Rome.
SONNET. XXXIIII. BEhold deare Father (with those gracious eyes Which all the world with their beames glorie brighten) My plaints, and then my cause in iustice righten. My soule repentant still for mercy cries Prick'd with vaine sinnes, which in my thoughts arise: Hope of thy mercy doth my sorrow lighten, Feares (least more sinnes ensue) with my soule fighten, And true zeales of thy loue my thoughts surprise. But angrie iustice seemes (with irefull threate) To giue blacke sentence of damnation vnto my soule distress'd, and doth repeate Olde sinnes, prouoking desperation: Oh saue mee, saue mee (Lord) least that I fall Into damnation, saue Lord when I call. SONNET. XXXV. A Rise thou mightie God of heau'n, rise vp, Against thy sinfull foes of Babell rise: And scatter thou like dust thine enemies: Let them dregges of thine indignation suppe: That haue beene drunken with the strumpets cuppe: Like smoke which vanisheth into the skies Disseuer them, and like the waxe (which fries Before the fire) so melt, and burne them vp. O magnifie the Lord, and praises sing Vnto the mightie God of heau'n, who makes The clouds to thunder, and his boults doth wing With fire and furie: who the round world shakes: Before whose face Kings with their Armies flie, And at whose feete proud Emperours dead lie:
SONNET. XXXVI. LOrd (with the light of thy cleare countenance) My sinfull troubled soule illuminate: And with thy mightie shoulders eleuate My feeble spirit, and his state aduaunce: From thy sweete brest (pearc'd sometimes with a Launce For my redeemption from accursed state) Lend one deare droppe, whose force shall animate My soule infect with sinnes misgouernaunce: Then purge my spirit by thine holy Ghost, And as an Angell let it mildly rest, In thy thrice blessed bosome wished most By my poore soule, with grieuous sinnes opprest: And let thy blessed feete suppresse all those, Which to thee, and my soule be vowed foes. SONNET. XXXVII. O My deare God how shall my voice preuaile? How shall my tongue giue vtterance to my mind? Where shall my thankefull hartfree passage find? My slender voice, tongue feeble, and hart fraile (Before they can giue condigne praise) will fayle: I cannot celebrate (in their due kinde) Thy glories numberlesse, which Angels finde Eu'n to surmount all Angels best trauayle. Oh my deare God, my comfort, my sollace, My swift soule flies (with my Diuine thoughts wings) Eu'n to thy bosome. Oh let it embrace, And triumph in my sweete saluations springs: For I beleeue thou wilt not me forsake, Who for mee didst thy Sonne a Martyr make.
SONNET. XXXVIII. GRacious, Diuine, and most omnipotent, Receiue thy seruants Tallent in good part, Which hidde it not, but willing did conuert It to best vse hee could when it was lent: The summe (though slender, yet not all mispent) Receiue deare God of grace, from cheerefull hart, Of him, that knowes, how mercifull thou art, And with what grace to contrite sinners bent: I know my fault, I did not as I should, My sinfull flesh against my soule rebeld, But since I did endeuour what I could, Let not my little nothing bee withheld From thy rich treasuries of endlesse grace; But (for thy sake) let it procure a place. SONNET. XXXIX. I Nuironed with dangers manifolde, At home and forren both by land and waue, (Where change of Nations diuers daungers gaue, And nouels earst which I did not beholde: Much like a doubtfull Pilgrim, whome infould Millions of woes, that knowes no helpe to haue, Nor how from dangers prest himselfe to saue) Was I: but when mee thought I perish should, My God of mercy did my life redeeme, My God of mercy did my soule sustaine, Oh then how well shall it my Muse beseeme To praise the Lord, and him collaude againe? Nay try (vain Poets) try, that King, that place, If God, and heauen, giue not your Muse most grace.
SONNET. XL. MY daies bee few, my sinnes past number bee, Adde to my daies (Oh God) more time of grace, And mercy to my sinnes: behold my case, With eyes of gracious pittie looke on mee: My wounded and afflicted conscience see, My soule afraide to stand before thy face: In pittie Lord, (deare Lord) a longer space, Or else in mercy (Father) set mee free, I finde high iustice doth my soule condemne, Which Sathan vrgeth still to my dispaire: Sathan auoide, thy malice I contemne, Al thy suggestions vaine illusions are. Of thy temptations this is my construction, Then perish in vaine hope of my destruction. SONNET. XLI. TEmpted in forren nation by that foe, Which both my soule and bodies health enuies, And vex'd with seuerall strange perplexities, Whose cause or reason I could neuer know, Or why my mind should mourne afflicted so To thee my God, I turne my sinfull eyes, (Whom I prouoke with my remorse full cries) Some succour for my vexed thoughts to show. That (as I haue my natiue Countrie changed) So likewise from the world I may bee weaned: And as my weede with nation is estranged, I so may shine in Christian armes vnfeyned: And as I leaue my nations true language, My Muse may change for a diuiner rage.
SONNET. XLII. OH you light Poets (whose Ardure diuine Inkindl'd with immortall furie was Ordaind therefore, all other wits to passe; Because those faculties you should incline To make with praise the most praise-worthie shine: From sacred numbers, roll'de in iust compasse, Sphoerelike in Musicke) turne your tunes alas To rauish eares with notes of your engine. By these you shal the God of Gods collaude, The King of Kings, and Lord of Lords exalt. Make not Diuine wit foule affections baude, It is against that holy Ghost a fault. Who therefore with his beames your wits did brighten, That your wits likewise should his glorie lighten. SONNET. XLIII. SAthan abroad (when I was left alone A stranger and distress'de) did mee assaile: Finding my nature hoped to preuaile, And make sure entrance where hee could finde none. A gentle nature soonest ouerthrowne Hee thought, supposing (for his more auaile) The sting of sinne should helpe if others faile: But now behold Gods mercie to mee showne. Hee gracious, louing, mercifull, and wise, Declar'd expressely that I was ordaind Vnto saluation, for that enterprise Of Sathans mou'de my soule (before profaind) To purge it selfe, with that repentant grace, Which mee shall saue from hell, and him displace.
SONNET. XLIIII. O Lord increase in mee true faith, and loue: Faith of saluation in thine onely sonne, And his loue that hath my soules health begunne, Who from my soule (his incense) will remoue That deadly sting which sinne did vnder shoue. O Lord increase my zeale, and let it runne Through my soules Organes: that thereby bee donne A pleasing incense to thy throane aboue: O Lord increase in mee that earnest care To make a mends for those high sinnes by past, And equall charitie to worke welfare, Vnto my neighbours bound in fetters fast: That by faith, Loue, true zeale, and charitie, (Through thee) my soule may find felicitie. SONNET. XLV. O What great comfort is it to giue praise To God the Lord of heauen, Oh what comfort Is it abroad his praises to report, And of his wondrous workes our notes to raise? To lift our Muses from base earthly laies To that Dinine angelicall consort, Bearing Palme, Oliue, and immortall Baies With chaunge of harmonies in one consort: To glorifie the mightie God of glorie, To magnifie the mightie God of might, To triumph in the guide of victorie, To celebrate the Iustice of all right, To make our refuge where all helpe is found, To cure our wounded soules with his sole wound.
SONNET. XLVI. OH Sunne and Moone the daies and Euenings lights, With powerfull Starres bright subjects of the same, Archangels, Angels praise his holy name: The glorious Cherubin which fierie fights With his proud foes: the Seraphes, holy sprights, Who with sweete himnes record his endlesse fame, The dreadfull thunder with his angrie flame, Which (when hee list) all men, and beastes affrights: Raine, Hayle, Snow, tempest, clouds, and bitter winde, Darknesse, and light, Earthquakes, and foggie mist, With Flies and fethered foules of seuerall kinde, My soule and spirite in his praise assist: Who (past all humaine wonder) did create Vs all, that all his praise might propagate. SONNET. XLVII. OH what celestiall Angell will downe send Into these eyes some dewy cloudes of grace To wash the furrowes of my withered face Defilde with sinne? what spirite will mee lend Sufficient winde, that my sighes might ascend And (with contrition) pearce to that pallace, From whence proceedes all succour and solace? What Champion Michaell my soule to defend, Will lend his puissant and victorious crosse, To conquere that olde Serpent, which assayles My feeble soule entombde in earthly drosse? Thy precious crosse, that launce, those pearsing nayles, If hee shall them, or their deare wounds espie, Will bruise his head, and yeelde mee victorie.
SONNET. XLVIII. O Glorious conquest, and thrice glorious speare, But seu'n times thrice more glorious the name, By which thrice powerfull wee coniure the same: Which but repeated doth that Dragon feare, That olde Leuyathan whose iawes Lord teare. Roote out his tongue which doth thy Saints defame, And thy sweete Gospell seeke to vaile with shame: This the chiefe conquest of all conquests weare, For which Archangels, and all Angels might, With Cherubins, and Seraphins out bring Victorious Palmes, arraide in sincere white: For which al Saints might Alleluya sing, Then glorious Captaine, our chiefe God and man, Breake thou the Iawes of olde Leuiathan. SONNET. XLIX. I Feele my soule in combat with the dust Of sinfull flesh, and ready to breake out From loathsome bondage, dreadlesse of all doubt: I feele my soule (by shaddowes) seuer must From that base prison of terrestriall rust, Where it shall triumph in celestiall route Of my forefathers Angels round about That glorious throne of the faithfull and iust. But yet my feeble flesh (surcharg'de with guilt) Trembleth at thought of death, but why should it Feare coward death, since for my soule was spilt His bloud, that shall for mee in triumph sit? Death doe thy worst, but yet (Lord) thine eare giue, Why I with Dauid would not die but liue.
SONNET. L. I Would not die but hue (deare liuing Lord) And to thy glory shew that facultie, With which thou didst mee worthlesse beautifie: Turning my Muse to that Diuine concord, Which I perceiue doth with my soule accord In endlesse praise of thy Diuinitie. But (if vnworthy them to magnifie, Because my sinfull mouth hath not abhorr'de To bee before with vanities abus'de) Thou loath my wicked tongue should them declare: Thy will bee donne, which cannot bee refus'de: For death of sinne the guerdon doth prepare, Yet when I die (deare God of Loue and truth) Remember not the follies of my youth. SONNET. LI. BReake thou the iawes of olde Leuiathan, Victorious conquerour, breake thou the iawes, Which full of blasphemie maligne thy lawes: Ready to curse, to lie, slaunder and banne, Which nothing but abhomination can: Who like a ramping Lyon with his pawes Thy little flocke with daily dread adawes, Antichrists Harrould who with pride beganne, Euen into thy triumphant throane to prease, And therefore his first comfort had forgonne: The bodies ruinor, and soules disease, Bawde to that harlot of proude Babilon, Which mortall men to mortall sinnes inuiteth, Teare out those Fangues with which hee thy flocke biteth.
SONNET. LII. FVll of celestiall syrropes, full of sweete are all thy preceptes, full of happines, full of all comforte, full of blessednes those salutations which our Sauiour greete: O let vs then contende (since it is meete) to keep those lawes with vpright holinesse, oh let vs vse, and haue in readinesse those sweete orations, prostrate at his feete: Begging, imploring, weeping, smiling, kneeling for succour, grace, and for our sinnes humbly repentance mercies signes in our heart feeling: Repent, and praise our God, for it is comely, O nothing doth a Christian more beseeme, Then him to prayse that did his soule redeeme. SONNET. LIII. DIdst thou redeeme my soule, my sole saluation? Oh with what raunsome (Lorde) didst thou redeeme it? Eu'n of so precious worth did he esteeme it, Because at our forefathers first creation, Hee in his breast by sacred inspiration, From his owne mouth (which did so well so well beseeme it) Breathed a soule diuine, then let vs deeme it A gracious, precious and deare immolation, For him to saue our soules with his bloudshed, For him to take mans nature, man to saue, For him to be whip'd, nayl'd, torne, crucify'd, For him to sweate in bloud, to lye in graue, For him (most mighty) to lye downe beneath, Where (for our life) he vanquish't hell and death.
SONNET. LIIII. THen awfull sting of Paile deathes leaden darte, Where is thy killing poyson and thy pile? Then fearefull horrid Serpent full of guile (Whose vgly kingdome hoped for his parte, The most of all poore soules in endlesse smart) Where is thy dreadfull conquest all this while? Behold how Christian soules triumph and smile To see thee bound, where thoufast burning art, To see that sacred and victorious troupe (Whose Captaine Lord of Lords, and King of Kings Adorn'd with many Crownes, makes all Crownes stoupe) Which in high triumph Alleluya sings, Makes God and Magog his fell furie finde, Which scattred flie like dust before the winde. SONNET. LV. FRom depth of fearefull Hels eternall shade, And bottomelesse discent into that lake, In heate, and cold where sinners burne and quake: Where all things vnconsum'de for euer fade, At whose remembrance sinners are dismaide For horrour of those dreadfull pangues which shake, And for sweete succour intercession make, Of their sinnes burthen, and hell fire affraide: Eu'n from the fearefull bottomelesse blacke pit, (At whose remembrance my poore soule doth tremble) Saue and deliuer mee, whereas I sit Inuiron'd with dispaire, which doth resemble An Iland (with rough seas inclosed round) At euery gust, in danger to bee dround.
SONNET. LVI. O That I might with the wise Prophet sing, Mine heart is ready, ready to giue praise! But mine is not, though willing most alwaies To celebrate the glorious heau'nly King Poore hart, not worthie to that Angels wing (Which with his glorie through the world doth paise In heau'nly number stemp'red with sweete phrase) The least soft downe of Plumage for to bring. Then milde, then spotlesse, comfortable Doue, Whose winges were sinne of sinnes to violate, Pure Bird of heau'nly sollace, peace and Loue, With Rayons bright my soule illuminate, From that false lustfull Pygeon late returnde, Which almost had both soule and body burnde. SONNET. LVII. THrough Sathans malice and my nature weake, When in my soule I finde my faith is deade, Those sacred schoedes of comfort, then I reade Whose powrefull words the gates of hell can breake: Then faith in kindleth fresh, and then I wreake My wrath on Sathan, and vpon his head Mee thinkes (like Michaell or Saint George) I treade: Whilst hee that earst against the Sunne did beake His foreswolne poysonous bulke, doth vanquishdlie In his owne filth: and I (which lately was Like to bee swallowd by mine enemie) Now safely like a conquerour may passe. Behold my Captaines puissance, who did this To ridde my soule from hell, and ransome his.
SONNET. LVIII. COmfort thy selfe (poore soule) whom griefe of sinne Downe presseth to the mouth of the lowest hell, With contrite penitence thou knowest well Him that will rayse and it from danger bring: Pray then, and praise the Lord, who will beginne To purge thy soule, and Sathans filth expell Who thee defileth and in thee doth dwell. Oh Lord my voice shall praise and neuer linne So long as thou shalt lend breath to my voice, My voice vnto my soule shall spirit lend, And in the comfort of my soule reioyce, And (with my mouth) consent world without end To speake, to praise, to glorifie to singe, That God, which to my soule doth succour bringe. SONNET. LIX. MY soule, my soule I feele, I feele is vexed, My mind and thoughts in vncouth forte distressed, My braynes with fearefull dreames by night oppressed, My hart with strange discouragement perplexed, My soles vnneathed vnto my feete annexed, My spirit with faint languor still distressed, And helpe (Lord) helpe my soule, my soule addressed, (By Melancholies poyson) is connexed In fetters serpentine of foule dispaire: Death almost my lifes ceasure hath begunne, And (after) Sathan will his bookes prepare Blotted with vgly sinnes, past number donne. Oh my God, my deare God, helpe and assist: Sinne, death, and hell, my safetie doe resist.
SONNET. LX. TVrne not away the sunne shine of thy face (Sweete God of comfort) from my troubled hart Congeald with sinne: doe not (sweete Lord) depart From him that penitently sues for grace. Whose soule through countlesse sinnes (my whole liues space) Benumbd, can scarcely feele contritions smart: What Phisicke then shall serue, what helpe of art. My dead soule to reuiue, and sinne forth chase? Eu'n those pure Rayons of thy holy Ghost, Those gracious beames of thy pure holy word Shall mollifie, giue ease, and comfort most To my cold frozen soule, and helpe afford: Least with the frost of sinne my soule astounded, After deaths griefe, should with hels sting bee wounded. SONNET. LXI. WHere is that copious furie, whilom which My braines in kindled with an vncouth fire? Whose sacred spirit did of yore aspire Aboue the glorious Sunne with passions rich Which thoughts in choyce words to the starres would stich, With sacred Musicke tempering my desire: Contending holily to mount vp higher Whilst heau'nly chaunture did my soule bewitch. Oh precious Ardoure, by whose chearefull heate The braine especiall recreation findes, The soule chiefe comfort, I thy beames intreate Which cheere all plants, and beasts of seuer all kindes From my poore spirite, doe not take away Those rayes wich must with light my wittes aray.
SONNET. LXII. FOr comfort (my deare God) I did attend, And gracious eares to mee thou didst encline: At my petitions thou didst not repine, But present succour to my suits didst send. Thou didst direct my feete, which did depend On thee my stedfast Rocke, where brightly shine Thy lawes those Lampes to which my thoughts incline, Which Lord graunt that my soule doe not offend. In my mouth (Lord) thou didst put a new song, A due thankesgiuing vnto thee my God, Which men shall feare to violate and wrong Least they should bee corrected with thy rod. Oh God great wonders thou for mee hast wrought (For thy Sonnes sake) who my saluation bought. SONNET. LXIII. O Dreadfull horrour and tormented minde, Foule restlesse conscience charg'd with hainous sinnes, Lothsom and numberlesse (when God beginnes His fruitfull haruest in faire sheafe to binde) Hath thee for tares to quenchlesse fire assign'd, Where teares, nor hope of vaine repentance winnes Thy soule from Torture: where griefe neuer linnes More pangues (by worme of conscience) to find. Oh dreadfull hower, when (to thy soule condemn'd) The iudge of truth and King of glorie saith Hedlong with Lucifer fall, who contemn'd My lawes: fall downe thou Fiend of little faith: And with Deuils damned thy due portion take, Immortally to burne in fierie lake.
SONNET. LXIIII. THen if derne Loue of thy deare louing Lord, His gentle graces Oyle, his mercies balme, His bounties numberlesse, his spirite calme, His loue of peace, and comfort in concord Of the thrice sinfull soule remaine abhorrde: If to thy soule sinne wounded, no sweete Psalme, Nor heau'nly Harpe, nor Organe, Trump, nor Shalme Can comfort bring with their Diuine recorde, To make thee ioyne in praise of his good grace, Or to thy sinfull soule correction giue: Yet let that quenchlesse lake and dreadfull place, (Where soules in deadly torment euer liue, Creatour and creation which reproue) Make thee repent for feare, if not for Loue. SONNET. LXV. O Mercy, mercy, which much greater is Then heauens themselues! Oh truth, Oh sincere truth, Which to the cloudes extendeth and insueth! Of iustice which doth neuer iudge amisse! Oh age of ages, euermore in youth! Oh Iudge whose righteous punishment is ruth! Which sinners worthlesse dost with bountie blisse? Oh where shall I finde to my spirite voice? Where to my voice sufficient choyce of words? To shew how much my spirite doth reioyce In those large blessings, which thy grace affords? My spirite first will faile with feeble voice: Oh my Lord God lende spirit, life and breath, That I may praise thy name to conquer death.
SONNET. LXVI. IF death may by thy prayses vanquish't be, Then voyce, then spirit, let your organes breake And of his glory sing, criefoorth, and speake Of him that succours, helps and comforts me, Moue toungue, sounde voyce, and from your slouthfull gree Avoyde, and in this vtter aunce be not weake: If hell the venome of his furie wreake, It shall not be of force to vanquish thee. Oh laude, laudes, glory, gloryes, prayse of prayse, Fame, honour, trueth, eternitye, renoume, And iustice mercifull ascribe alwayes To thee great Keyser of the thorny crowne: Which coronation infamous, did gayne That millions shoulde rich glorious Crownes obtayne. SONNET. LXVII. VVHat thing in spacious heauen, round earth, deepe seas, Which thy praise worthy glories doth not tell? Whose golden Sunneshine euer doth excell In many millions farre aboue all these: So much exceeding (that if any prease To giue due praise) hee shall perceyue it well His faculties against his will rebell, And that his toungue cannot his spirit please. Oh who shall giue due glories to his name, That glorifies all thinges, with decent pride? Or what is he can signifie the same, Or in an equall share his praise deuide With those great bounties which he hath bestow'd, And those great mercies (on vs sinners) show'd?
SONNET LXVIII. THat bounteous largesse of sweete mercies oyle, That peace of soule, that siluer streame of grace, That comforte of saluation, that pallace Of heauenly succour which death cannot spoyle, That fortitude, whose force no force can foyle, Of IESSES precious braunch that royall race, Who with his glory filleth euery place, And with sweete dewes doth cherish euery soyle: Can with no florish of eternall phrase Be glorifi'de, according to desart: Who with meete colours shall his glory blaze? Who to the world shall condigne praise impart? What instrument, what voyce, what toungue, what spirite Shall giue due commendations to demerite? SONNET. LXIX. WHo to the golden Sunnes long restlesse race, Can limits set? what vessell can comprise The swelling windes? what cunning can deuise (With queint Arithmetique) in steadfast place To number all the starres in heauens pallace? What cunning Artist euer was so wise Who (by the starres and planets coulde aduise Of all aduentures the iust course and case? Who measur'd hath the waters of the seas? Who euer (in iust ballaunce) poys'd the ayre? As no man euer could the least of these Perfourme with humaine labour, strength and care: So who shall striue in volumes to contayne Gods prayse ineffable, contends in vayne.
SONNET. LXX. VNto my spirite lend an Angels wing, By which it might mount to that place of rest, Where Paradice may mee releeue opprest. Lend to my tongue an Angels voice to sing Thy praise my comfort, and for euer bring, My notes thereof from the bright East to West. Thy mercy lend vnto my soule distrest: Thy grace vnto my wits; then shall the sling Of righteousnesse, that monster Sathan kill: Who with dispaire my deare saluation dared, And like the Philistine, stoode breathing still Proud threats against my soule, for heauen prepared: At length I like an Angell shall appeare In spotlesse white, an Angels Crowne to weare. SONNET. LXXI. O Glorious Crowne more precious many waies, Then simple humaine Temples can deserue, Thrice glorious God who doth that Crowne reserue For men vnworthie to set out his praise. Oh mortall Temples what Muse can you raise, Which vnhard precious spirits doth reserue His praise most meritorious to serue? Admit that past all number were your daies, Admit your spirit more then the fower windes, Admit your learning bee (by more degrees) Aboue the Seraphins, admit all kindes Of Musickes instruments inferiour were (In heau'nly tunes and sacred harmonies) To thy sweete voice, all cannot his praise beare.
SONNET. LXXII. THe sunne of our soules light thee would I call, But for our light thou didst the bright Sunne make, Nor reason that thy Maiestie should take Thy chiefest subiects Epithites at all. Our chiefe directions starre celestiall (But that the starres for our directions sake, Thou fixed, and canst at thy pleasure shake) I would thee name: The Rocke substantiall Of our assurance I would tearme thy name, But that all Rockes by thy commaund were made: If King of Kings thy Maiestie became, Monarch of Monarches I thee would haue saide, But thou giues kingdomes, and makes Crownes vnstable: By these I know thy name ineffable. SONNET. LXXIII. TRiumphant conquerour of death and hell, Behold what legions (though in vaine) conspire, Thy Temple militant to set on fire, And Saints which in thy sanctuarie dwell To burne, whilst they against thy power rebell: See how like bloudy tyrants they desire Ambitiously to rise and mount vp higher, Like Lucifer which to perdition fell. Their forces are addrest against thy Saints, Breake thou their bowes, knap thou their speares in sunder: I know their spirit at thy presence faints, Against their Cannon plante thy dreadfull thunder, Thy thunderbolts against their bullets dash, And on their beauers bright let lightning flash.
SONNET. LXXIIII. ARmies of Angelles, Myriades of Saintes, Millions of Emperours, and holy Kings, Legions of sacred Patriarkes he brings, Which his rebellious foes with feare attaintes. Whose spirit at thy puisant spirit faintes, (Great Lord of Lordes) whose sacred armis singes Triumphant Peans, and new musicke bringes In glorious phrase, which thy sweete glorie payntes: Whilst vnder thy tryumphant chariot wheeles, Rowling vpon the starres, thy captiues lye In quenchlesse fiery lake, whose spirit feeles An endlesse torment in captiuitye: When thy fowre sweete Euangelistes ride bye (Like corporalles) proclayming victorye. SONNET. LXXV. ELders of grace, in number sixe times foure, Fall downe, fall downe vpon your aged faces; Sende from graue ceerefull voyce (throughout all places) Such ioyfull tydinges in aboundant store Of praise (then sandes of seas in number more) To the great bounteous giuer of all graces Harmonious Kinges cast downe your Crownes and Maces, Sounding your cheerefull harpes his throne before: Let Alleluiah round about resounde, Power, honour glory, praises and renowne Ascribe vnto the Lorde, who doth confounde Euen with his nostshils, breath, and casteth downe His worthlesse enemies of Magogs campe, And (vnto dust and ashes) them doth stampe.
SONNET. LXXVI. AS those three Kings (touch'd with a sacred zeale) By presents rich made Royal offerture, Our new borne Sauiours blessing to procure, Borne in an Oxe stall for our publique weale: When in adoring him they did reueale, his Godhead, by those gifts they did assure. So let faith, hope and loue make ouerture Of new saluation (which themselues conceale In this base mortall stable sinnes foule place) Whereof eternall ioyes, they may present To my saluation (borne of thy deare grace) Such rich Propines: As from thy Gospell sent By precious incense may my spirit bring The tearmelesse praises of my God to sing. SONNET. LXXVII. PVrge thou my guiltie soule sweete gracious Lord Defil'd and vgly made with sinfull spots: Heale my wounds desperate whose festure rots: My vexed members loathsome and abhorrd: Doe not in register my sinne recorde, My wicked practises, and vaine complots, But lift my soule from the defiled pots; And let thy mercy with my suite accorde. Make thou my soule cleere like white Salmons snow, Or like a siluer winged Doue appeare, Where diuers glorious golden fethers show: Conuert thy foemens forces into feare, Like Iaben make them, and like Cysara, Like Seba, Zeb, Horeb and Salmana.
SONNET. LXXVIII. RIde on in glorie on the mornings wings (Thrice puisant conquerour) in glorie ride: That heauen as Horse, courragious doth'st bestride, Who whether thou disposest succour brings. Ride on the glorious cloudes high King of Kings: Thy conquering sworde guirde to thy puisant side, Bright soldiours muster vp, whose armies guide Raungde into Quadraines, and triumphant Rings, That shamelesse strumpet of proud Babilon (Which thine Apostles killes, and Prophets stoneth, With Cuppe full of abhomination, Which poysons millions, and no man bemoneth) With her false, proud and Antichristian route, Suppresse, and put to slaughter rounde about. SONNET. LXXIX. THe tearmelesse date of my sweete second life, (When this corruption mortall in sinne bred, Shall resting in obliuion vanish dead, Ending the period of all earthly strife) Freshly recals those Loues, and graces rife Which from my sweete saluations conduict bled: These haue true zeale to my faithes refuge led, So that no torture fagot, crosse or knife Can seuer mee sequestred from thy flocke, I feare no Pagan, Schismaticke, nor Iewe, No worldly menaces can teare that Rocke Of my faithes Adamant, assur'de and true: But for that truth, I thousand deathes would dy To liue ten thousand liues immortally.
SONNET. LXXX. A Blast of winde, a momentarie breath, A watrie bubble simbolizde with ayre, A sonne blowne Rose, but for a season fayre, A ghostly glaunce, a skeleton of death, A morning dew perling the grasse beneath, Whose moysture Sunnes appearance doth impaire: A lightning glimse: a Muse of thought and care: A Planets shot: a shade which followeth: A voice which vanisheth so soone as heard: The thriftlesse heire of time: a rowling waue: A shew no more in action then regard: A Masse of dust: worlds momentarie slaue Is man in state of our olde Adam made, Soone borne to die, soone flourishing to fade. SONNET. LXXXI. BEhold (by misaduenture) how the winde From earth blowes dust and it in ayer scatter, And if therefore the very smallest matter Thine eye (the bodies Iewell in some kinde) Doe but by chance appeach, will grieue and blind, Vnlesse from thence it by good meanes you shatter: So that smooth foe who cunningly can flatter, And as a tempest rageth in his kind, Moues dust our flesh, from earth vpraysde to bleare Of our redemption the much better part, Our soules (with charge of sinnes) to vexe and feare, Blinded and grieu'd with earthly dust and smart. To thine eyes (Lord) let our eyes open bee, And shut from sinne, who sight blinds, blind makes see.
SONNET. LXXXII. AFter acoale-blacke comfortlesse foule night (With tempests horrour and thicke showers opprest, Disease of Pilgrims, Trauayllers vnrest) When as the glorious Sunnes vprising right With chearefull beames, and vertuous motion bright Hath from his Easterne mansion redressde, The chearelesse Medowes, and Cornefields supprest With liuely meanes of animating might. In equall semblance my poore soule enlargde From this earthes blindnesse and blacke dangers free With deadly sinnes sharpe tempest late surchargde Shall (when my glorious Iudge, I comming see) After rough stormes of sighes, and showers of teares, Through deare contrition franchised from feares. SONNET. LXXXIII. THat Bird imperiall which the gentile Poets worthy thought For vertues rare preheminence to stand ascribed fit To Iupiter, & since in chiefe whē Romanes honor'd it As richest ensigne which could bee for their great Monarch sought. That puissant and imperiall beast great into Iudah brought, Which of all other beasts beside doth as commaunder sit: That other firme and permanent which doth so well befit (For courage strength humility & seruice which he wrought) The figure of that glorious, and legate most Diuine: Together with that Angell childe chast innocent and faire Which to the spirite of thy deare Embassadour did shine. As Eagle first whose precious eyes more bright thē Sunbeames are, The next is Lyon mightie made, as Bull the third more strong And of thy deare Euangelists, the fourth as Angell yong.
SONNET. LXXXIIII. THe paradice of ioyes, true mercies seate The throne of iudgement, refuge and distresse, Sweete bosome of loue, health, and happinesse: The glorious Theater where Saintes repeate The most prayse worthies prayse: where froste nor heate With violent assaylance soules suppresse. The quyre of Angelles, Church of holynesse: Sweete pardons place where pennaunce doth intreate: The Pallace of eternall peace and ease: The spacious Courte where Kinges and Angelles serue: The scaffolde where true pompes of honour please: The golden pathes where Pilgrimes neuer swerue: The Stage of sacred tryumphes: and that place Where tearmelesse victorie giues endelesse grace. SONNET. LXXXV. COntrariwise, that horrible blacke pitte, That ougly gaole of sorrowes without ende: That filthie sincke to which foule sinners tende: That dreadfull fiery lake where furies sitte: That warde of madnesse and outrageous fitte: where hiddeous diuilles condemned spirits rende: Blacke desolations denne, where liues no frende But tortur'd souls depriued of their witte: That filthie dungeon whose chiefe musicke is The grones, outcries, sobbes, and forlorne laments of Parracydes, and men which liu'de amisse: The bootlesse teares of too late penitents: That loue of haeu'n, this loathsomnesse of hell, The wayes of life and death directly tell.
SONNET. LXXXVI. THat loathsome spirite of vayne stinking pride, Which (with contempt and detestable scorne) Begets all sinnes to condemnation borne: That selfe consuming Enuie, that foule bride Of filthie lust that gulfe still gaping wide For treasures numberlesse: that poignant thorne Of wraths fel passion, furious and forlorne: That sincke of gluttony: that slothfull guide Which to destruction and all sickenesse brings: None of these mortall vices which abounde In sinfull creatures, but in sorrowestings The troubled carkase with a curelesse wounde: And none of these but doth the soule dismay With restlesse guilt, and it to death betray. SONNET. LXXXVII. BVt that sweete spirite, modest, meeke and milde, Which with true zeale and solace doth imbrace The loue of vertues, and eternall grace: That charitie whose deedes of mercy builde With fayths assistaunce for his soule defilde An hospitall of ease in heauens pallace: That spotlesse contenance with rosie face. That sober temperance which hath exilde Detested ryot, and foule surfets vice: That hande of bountie which still giues and lendes: That blessed patience soules caulme sacrifice: That honest labour which lifes state defendes. Through peace of conscience and souls comfort these Our heartes for heauen prepare and high God please.
SONNET. LXXXVIII. THe worldes bright comforter (whose became some light Poore creatures cheereth, mounting from the deepe) His course doth in prefixed compasse keepe, And as courageous Gyant takes delight To runne his race, and exercise his might: Till him downe galloping the mountaynes steepe Cleere Hesperus smooth messenger of sleepe Viewes: and the siluer ornament of night Foorth bringes with starres past number in her trayne: All which with Sunnes long borrowed splendour shine: The Seas (with full tyde swelling) ebbe agayne: All yeeres to their olde quarters newe resigne, The windes forsake their mountayne-chambers wilde, And all in all thinges with Gods vertue filde. SONNET. LXXXIX. I Feele by motions in my sinnefull breast, My sillie soule, through weakenesse is depraued, And Sathan (fearing least it shoulde be saued) My memory doth with vile sinnes infest: And to procure my spirites more vnrest, When of my soule in anguish helpe is craued, (where her chiefe refuge is) with horrour raued My conscience in despayre cryes out opprest, O mercie, mercie, grace and succour sende Father of mercie for thy Sonne sweete Iesus, my sore hart and sinwounded soule defende, With thy sweete helpe and holy Spirite ease vs: Thy quickening vertue lende to my soule dead, Then shall my foote on Sathans bellie tread.
SONNET. LXXXX. IF that sweet spirit of omnipotence (All vertues and all comfort which contayneth: Which in soules penitent and heauenly raygneth, Whose gloryous power and vertues excellence Did rayse vp Iesus our sweete soules defence) In vs and our refourmed hearts remayneth. Then hee (whose puissance heuenly forceretayneth, and Christ vpraysde our soules preheminence) Shall our base mortall bodies liuely make Through sinne and nature corruptible first, And by that holy Ghost which place doth take In our reuiued spirites (mortall earst) Our soules and bodies both regenerate, Chaung'de for a ioyfull and immortall state. SONNET. LXXXXI. OH whither doth my lamentable soule (Wing'd with a spirite of a sighing breath) Prepare this langued carkase if to death Then farewell bondage of this prison foule, The sinne of vile transgression where I rowle In earthly dust and tumble vnderneath. I feele that sacred freelidge followeth, (Maugre the rage of Sathan) which doth howle, And cries out for lawes vengeance heare him not, Respect not him (deare Lorde) but on me looke: Looke on me (my deare Lorde) I feare him not: My God, my louing God, turne not thy booke Which may my conscience with sinnes burthen grieue, But let thy mercies baulme my soule relieue.
SONNET. LXXXXII. REleeue my soule with thy deare mercies balmes, Monarch of precious mercie succour send: I will indeuour my vile sinnes to mend And to thee my soules sacrifice in Psalmes. High God (whose holy spirit outrage calmes, Calme thou my sinfull spirits which intend To thy great praise their faculties to lend. On my soules knees I lift my spirits Palmes, With humble penitence to purchase grace, These eyes this mortall bodies skies downe power Teares of contrition on my blushing face, Fruites of repentance flourish with this shower. My soule, I feele is comforted and eas'de, Then Lord with my poore offring bee well pleas'de. SONNET. LXXXXIII. WIth my poore offring bee well pleasde sweete Lord, And then with ghostly peace and hart vpraised (Thy Temple celestiue where thou liu'st praised With ceaselesse Canticles, and Hymnes record, And meekenes which mine humble thoughts afforde) I will approche not any wise amazed, To see those sacred misteries rich blazed To my sinne blinded eyes before abhorr'de, In thy deare presence their due tribute paying For their misgouernance and riotise, My soule afflicted with harts incense praying It selfe deuoutly Lord doth sacrifice To that Lambe blemishlesse, which offring made Himselfe for my sinnes, and deathes forfeite paide.
SONNET. LXXXXIIII. O What a gracious burthen huge and heauie, What charge importable, and painefull weight Those deadly sinnes which with our soules doe fight, And fresh supplies of vile offences leuie? Yeelding more puisance to their powrefull might, In hope with shade of euerlasting night To blind the beamesome rayes of my poore soule (Which doth a restlesse stone of labour roule) Till thy deare gracious mercies from thy sight Do banish them, and with the glorie bright Of thy sweete pardon lighten them againe? And then (albeit no volumes can containe Thy praise and mercies) yet will I contend From East to West their memorie to send. SONNET. LXXXXV. THat golden Planet, Lampe of this worlds light Whose glorious Easterne insurrection showes His ceasclesse course, whose tearme no creatures knowes: That siluer Planet torch of silent night, Which (when the Sunne reposeth her beames bright In Westerne Seas) her Planet-darts forth throwes, Whose influence doth strange euents compose: That boystrous turbulence of North winds might Which swels and ruffles in outragious sort: Those chearefull Southerne showers whose fruitefull dew Brings forth all sustenance for mans comfort: East West, North, South, (if none thy puissance knew) Relate thy wondrous vertues, and with praise From West to East, from North to South them raise.
SONNET. LXXXXVI. FIrme Rocke of during stone, sure Bulwarke of defence, Strong arme of fortitude, Shielde of protection, Courage of puisance, and vertues of perfection, Eorne of saluation, and diuinest essence. Thou shalt sustaine my spirite least it backeward fall, Thou shalt my soule relieue from Sathans fierce giuen charge, Thou shalt my cause maintaine and combate him at large, Thou shalt huige blowes of sin, ward from my soule in thrall, Thou shalt with ghostly valour my soules strength inspire, Thou shalt annointe my head with oyle of peace and ioye, Thou mee shalt purifie with pure zeales holy fire, By these I shall my spirites enemie destroye. By these I shall effect my soules chiefe happinesse, By these I shall my soule vnhalowed redresse. SONNET. LXXXXVII. MY soule through manifold assaults of sinne (In grieuous combate with my flesh retain'de) Declining faintes, vnlesse it bee sustain'de: Then send thy mercies which might enter in, To seuer them least further broyles beginne: And if my soule (with wounds affliction payn'de) Haue penitently to thy grace complayn'de, Let it by gracious mnee as some mercie winne. Pure grace, sweete mercie, comfortable peace Zeale, truth, and righteousnesse are dearely met, Whose fame from East to West can neuer cease, Nor those which in these their affiance set Can euer bee (for glories want) obscure: But with Saluation eternizde endure.
SONNET. LXXXXVIII. WHere shall I vex'de my sinfull head repose? If that in errour and conceiued vice, Which with deceitefull Blandishments intice My feeble nature mortified with sinne. Then hope shall gates of my saluation close, Against my soule: and my dispaire beginne, If that in open sight, then open shame The Scarlet of my conscience will disclose; And sound the shamefull Trumpet of my fame. Where then shall I my vexed soule dispose? (If not in blind obscuritie nor light) Then there euen there impenitence with those Which weepe downe teares of comfort to delight Their soule enlarged from eternall night. SONNET. LXXXXIX. OH whether shall my troubled Muse encline? When not the glorious Scaffolde of the skies Nor highest heauens resplendent hierarchies, (Where heau'nly Soldiours in pure armor shine) Nor ayer which thy sweete spirite doth refine, Nor earth thy precious bloud vnworthy prise, Nor Seas which when thou list ebbe and arise, Nor any creature profane or Diuine, Can blaze the flourish of thy tearmelesse praise: Surreaching farre by manifold large space All Diuine fabricke of thy sacred hands? Euen thether shall my Muse her Musicke raise; Where my soules euerlasting pallace stands, Sweete refuge of saluation, Court of grace.
SONNET. 100. SAcred directour of diuine Syon With gracious handes and mercy-mouing eyes, With eares attentiue) take my sacrifice: Beholde my teares, heare my playntes which crie on, Lighten my pensiue soule which woulde flye on To thy sweete mercies seate, heauens Paradise: Thy pure Dooues white Winges (that my soule may rise, And mount from this base earth) deare Lorde tye on: So shall my Spirite flye from starre to starre: And in consent of musickes sweete reporte Beare thy rich Glories forth from farre to farre, When Cherubines with Seraphines resorte, And Angelles with Archangelles still to sing The glorious wonders of their heauenly King. FINIS.
HYMNE TO THE GLORIOVS HONOVR OF THE most blessed and indiuisible Trinitie. SACRED deere Father of all thinges created, (Whose ioyfull throane of endlesse triumph stands In glorious heauen: whose name earth (animated) Proclaymeth through the compasse of all landes) I lift these humble handes, Vpheau'de with courage of a zealous harte, Confirm'de with fortitude of constant fayth, Assur'd in grace of some sweete mercies parte: Which Treasures my deare hope in high heauen layth, Which comforte my soule hath. And thou deare onely Sonne of God alone, Thou precious Immolacion of mankinde, Who sits on right hande of thy Fathers throne, Who fearefull Sathan did in fetters binde, Whome death alone did finde, To be the peerelesse Champion of his foyle, Thou that redeemed'st from infernall payne Our great graundfathers and our selues assoyle Of our foule sinnes; nor humbled didst disdayne For mankinde to be slayne: And lastly thou sweete comfortable Spirite Of meekenesse, holinesse and spotlesse loue, By whose deare incense, not our vayne demerite, We purchase heritage in heauen aboue:
Thou that (in fourme of Doue) Thy sanctified Apostles didst salute: Spirite of trueth which doth our comforte bring, Without whose heauenly motions men are mute, By whose power in the Virgines wombe did spring Our comforter and King: And thou deare sacred Father of like power, With thy most deare Sonne sacrifice for sinne, And thou sweete holy Ghost who didst downe shower Clouen tongues of fire true glorie for to winne: All which three powers cloase in One sacred and indiuisible God. Vouchsafe oh you perpetuall highest powers, Of equall vertues, yet in number odde, These simple fruites of my repentaunt howers, And (with your graces showers) The temper of my feeble wittes renewe, To prosper, cherish'd with celestiall dewe.
A Table to find out any Sonnet herein Alphabetically. A ARise thou mightie God. Son. 35. Armies of Angels Son. 74 As those three Kings. Son. 76. A Blast of winde. Son. 80. After a coale-blacke. Son. 82. B BLessed Creatour. Son. 5. Bountifull Lord Christ. Son. 12. Behold deare Father. Son. 34. Breake thou the Iawes. Son. 51. Behold by misaduenture. Son. 81. But that sweete. Son. 87. C COmfort thy selfe. Son. 58. Contrariwise that. Son. 85. D DEare comforter. Son. 4. Deare Dauids Sonne. Son. 13. Did'st thou redeeme. Son. 53. E ELders of grace. Son. 75. F FOuntaine of life. Son. 22. Father of pietie. Son. 23. Fortresse of hope Son. 28. Full of celestiall. Son. 52. From depth of fearefull. Son. 55. For comfort my deare. Son. 62. Firme Rocke. Son. 96. G GReat God of Abraham. Son. 20. Glorious Iehouah. Son. 25. Great God of larges. Son. 26. Gracious Diuine. Son. 38. H HEauenly Messias. Son. 10. High priest of Sion Son. 18. High King of Kings. Son. 27. High mightie God. Son. 30. I INuironed with dangers. Son. 39. I feele my soule Son. 49. I would not die. Son. 50. If death may. Son. 66. I feele by motions. Son. 89. If that sweete spirit. Son. 90. L LIon of Iudah. Son. 8. Louely Samaritane. Son. 19. Lord with thy light. Son. 36. M MErcifull Iesus. Son. 11. Milde King of Salem. Son. 17. My daies be few. Son. 40 My soule my soule. Son. 59. My soule through. Son. 97 N NO more leude laies. Son. 1. O O Gracious shepheard. Son. 9. O benigne Father, Son. 14 O glorious Patrone. Son. 31.
O my deare God. Son. 37. O you light Poets. Son. 42. O Lord increase. Son, 44. O what great comfort. Son. 45, O Sunne and Moone. Son. 46. O what celestiall. Son. 47. O glorious conquest. Son. 48. O that I might. Son. 56. O dreadfull horrour Son. 63. O mercy mercy. Son. 65. O glorious Crowne. Son. 71. Oh whether doth. Son. 91. Oh what a grieuous. Son 94. Oh whether shall Son. 99. P PVre sacrifice. Son. 6. Pittifull Lord. Son. 15. Pure spotlesse. Son, 34. Purge thou my guiltie. Son. 77. R RAyons of glorie. Son. 29. Ride on in glorie Son. 78. Relieue my soule. Son. 92. S SWeete Sauiour Son. 2. Sacred Redeemer: Son. 3. Sure corner stone. Son. 16. Sole hope and blessing. Son. 21. Sathan abroad. Son. 43. Sacred director. Son. 100. T THe well of life. Son. 32. Thrice puisant generall. Son. 33. Tempted in forren nation. Son. 41. Then awfull sting. Son. 54. Through Sathans mallice. Son. 56. Then it derne Loue. Son. 64. Turne not away. Son, 60. That bounteous largesse: Son. 68. The Sun of our soules light. Son. 72. Triumphant conquerour. Son. 73. The tearmelesse date. Son. 79. That Bird imperiall Son. 83. The Paradice of ioyes. Son. 82. That loathsome Son. 86. The worlds bright. Son. 88, That golden Planet. Son. 95. V VNto my spirite Son. 70. W VVHilst spotlesse. Son. 7. Wher is that copious. So. 6. What thing in spacious. Son. 67. Who to the golden sunnes. Son. 79. With my poore offering. Son. 93. Where shall I vexe. Son. 98. FINIS. Errata Sonnet 59. for vnneathed read vnneathes. Sonnet 74. for bye read by. Sonnet. 83 for is Lyon. reade as Lyon.
LONDON Printed by Iohn Windet, dwelling at Powles Wharfe at the signe of the Crosse Keys and are there to be soulde. 1595.
