17466 99855937 21447
¶ A new and pleasaunt enterlude in∣tituled the mariage of Witte and Science. Imprinted at London in Fletestrete, neare vnto sainct Dunstones churche by Thomas Marshe.
¶The players names. Nature Witte. Will, Studie, Diligence, Instruction, Science, Reason, Experience, Recreation, with thre o∣ther women singers. Shame, Idelnes, Ignoraunce Tediousnes.
Nature, witte and will. GRaunde Lady mother of euery mortall thynge: Nurse of the woorlde conseruatyue of kynd Cause of encrease, of lyfe and soule the spring, At whose instincte, the noble Heauen doth winde, To whose award all Creatures are assynde, I come in place, to treate with this my sonne, For his auayle howe he the path may fynde, Wherby his Race in honour he may runne: Come tender Childe, vnrype and greene for age, In whom the paret settes her chiefe delite, Witte is thy name, but farre from wisdome sage, Tyll tracte of tyme shall worke and frame aryght, This perelesse brayne, not yet in perfect plyght: But when it shalbe wrought me thinkes I see As in a glasse before hand with my syghte A certaine perfect peece of worke in the, And now so farre as I gesse by signes Some great attempte is fyxed in thy brest: Speake on my sonne wherto thy harte inclynes And let me deale to set thy hart at rest, He salues the fore that knowes the pacient best As I doe thee my sonne my chiefest care, In whom my speciall prayse and ioye doth rest, To me therfore these thoughtes of thyne declare VVitte. Nature, my soueraigne Quene and paret passyng dere Whose force I am inforst to know and knowledge euery where, This care of myne though it be bread within my breste, Yet it is not so rype: as yet to brede me great vnrest, So runne I to and fro, with hap suche as I fynde, Now fast, now lose, now hot, now cold, vncōstant as that wind, I feele my selfe in loue yet not inflamed so, But causes moue me now and then, to let suche fancies go, Whiche causes preuailyng settes eche thing els in doubte Much like the nayle that last came in, & dryues the former out.
Wherfore my sute is thys, that it woulde please your grace, To settle this vnsetled head in some assured place: To leade me through the thyck, to guyde me al the waye, To poynt me where I maye atcheue my most desyred praye, For nowe agayne of late I kyndle in desire And pleasure pricketh fourth my youth to feele a greater fyre, What though I be to young to shewe her sport in bed, Yet are there many in thys lande that at my yeares doe wedde, And though I wed not yet, yet am I olde inowe To serue my Lady to my power and to begynne to woe. Nature. What is that Ladyes sonne which thus thy hart doth moue VVitte. A Ladye whom it myght be seeme hygh Ioue hym self to loue Nature Who taught the her to loue, or hast thou seene her face. VVitte. Nor this nor that, but I had menne talke of her apace. Nature. What is her name? VVitte. Reason is her sire, Experience her dame, The Ladye nowe is in her flowers and Science is her name Loe where she dwelles, lo where my harte is all possest, Loe where my bodie would abyde, lo where my soule doth rest. Her haue I borne good wyll, these manye yeares tofore, But nowe she lodgeth in my thought a hundred partes the more, And since I doe perswade my self that thys is she Which ought aboue all earthly wyghtes to be most deare to me And since I wote not howe to compasse my desyre, And since for shame I can not now nor mynd not to retyre, Helpe on I you besech and bring thys thyng about Wythout youre hurte to my greate ease, and set all out of doubte. Nature. Thou askest more, then is in me to gyue, More then thy cause, more then thy state will beare They are two things to able thee to liue, And to liue so, that none should be thy peare, The first fromme, procéedeth euerye where,
But this by tayle and practise of the mind, Is set full farre god wot and bought full deare, By those that séeke the frute therof to finde, To match thee then with Science in degrée, To knit that knot, that few may reach vnto I tel the playne, it lyethe not in mée, Why should I challenge that I cannot doe But thou must take another way to woe, And beate thy brayne and bende thy Curiouse head, Both ryde and runne and trauayle too and roe If thou entend that famous Dame to wed. VVitte. You name your selfe the Lady of this world. Nature. It is true. VVitte. And can there be within this world, a thing o hard for you. Nature. My power it is not absolute in Iurisdiction For I cognise an other Lord aboue That hath receaued vnto his disposition The soule of man which he of speciall loue To gyfts of grace and learning eke doth moue. A worke so farre beyonde my reach and call, That in to part of prayse with him my selfe to show Myght sone procure my well deserued falle. He makes the frame and receiue it soe, No iotte therin altered for my head, And as I it reciue I let it goe, Causyng therin suche sparkles to be bredde As he commyttes to me by whom I must be ledde Who guides me first and in me guides the rest, All which in their due course and kind are spedde Of giftes from me such as may serue them best, To thee sonne witte he wild me to infpire The loue of knowledge and certayne séedes deuine Which ground might be a meane to bring thee hiere, Yf therunto thy self thou wilt encline The massy golde, the counyng hand makes fyne:
Good groundes are tilde, as well as are the worste The rankest flower will aske a springyng tyme, So is mans wit vnperfit at the first. VVitte. Yf connyng be the key and well of wordly blysse My thinketh god might at ye first as well endue al with this. Nature. As connyng is the kay of blysse, so it is woorthy prayse The worthiest thīgs ar wonne wt pain in tract of time alwaies, VVitte. And yet right worthy things ther are, you wil cōfesse I trow, Which notwithstanding at our birth god doth on vs bestow. Nature. There are but such as vnto you that haue the great to name, I rather that bestow then wynne therby ymmortal fame, VVitte. Fayne would I learne what harme or detriment ensued, Yf any man were at his byrth with these good gyftes endued. Nature. There should be nothing lefte, wherin men might excell, No blame for sinne, no praise to thē that had defyned well Uertue should lose her price, and learning would abounde And as man wold admire the thing that echewher might be oūd, The great estate that haue of me and fortune what they wil Shold haue no nede to loke to those, whose heads are fraght wt skil The meaner sorte that nowe excells in vertues of the minde, Should not be once accepted there wher now they succor find For gret men should be spedde of al & wold haue nede of none And he that were not borne to land should lacke to liue vpon These and fiue thousand causes moe which I forbeare to tel, The noble vertue of the mind haue caused there to dwell Where none may haue accesse, but such as can get in Through many doble dores, through heat, through cold, through thick and thinne. VVitte. Suppose I would addresse my selfe to séeke her out And to refuse no paine that lieth there about Should I be suer to spede? Nature. Trust me and haue no doubte,
Thou canst not Chuse but spede with trauell and with tyme These two are they that must dyrect thee how to clime VVill. With trauel and with time, must they neds ioyne in one? Nature. Nor that nor this can do the good, if they be toke alone. VVitt. Time worketh all with ease, and gyues the greate dynt In tyme softe water dropes can hollowe hardest flynt Agayne. with labor by it selfe, great matters compaste bée Euen at a gyrde in very lyttel time or none wee sée Wherfore in my conceyte good reason it is Eyther this with out that to looke, or that with out this. Nature. Set case thou dyddest attempte to clyme Pernasus hill Take tyme fiue hundreth thousand yers & lōger if thou will Trowest thou to touch the top there of by standyng still Againe, worke out thy harte and spend thy selfe with toyle Take tyme with all or elles I dare assure the of the foyle VVitte. Madame, I trust I haue your licence and your leaue With your good wil & so much helpe as you to me can gyue Wyth further ayde also, when you shal spye your tyme, To make a proffe to giue attempt this famouse hil to clime And now I here request your blessyng and your prayer For sure before I slepe I will to yonder forte repaire Nature. I blesse thee here with al such gifts as nature can bestow And for thy sake I would they were as many hundred moe Take therwith all this childe, to wayte vpon the stil. A byrde of myne some kinne to thee, his name is Wyll. VVitte. Wellcome to me my will, what seruice canst thou doe, VVill. All thinges forsooth, sir when me liste and more to. VVitte. But when wilt thou list, when I shall list I trowe VVill. Trust not to that, paraduenture yea, paraduenture noe,
VVitte. When I haue néede of thee thou wilt not serue me soe, VVill. If yée byd me runne, perhappes I will goe: VVitte. Cock soule this is a boye for the nonse amongest twentie moe, VVill. I am plaine I tell you at a worde and a bloe, VVitte. Then must I pricke you childe if you be drowned in slouth Nature. Agrée you twayne for I must leaue you both, Farewel my sonne: farewel myne owne good Will, Be ruled by Witte, and be obedient still, Force the I cannot but as farre as lies in me, I wil helpe thy master to make a good seruant of thée Farrewell. Exit VVitte. Adue Lady mother with thankes for al your peine And now let me bethincke my self againe & eke again To matche with Science is the thinge that I haue toke in hande, A matter of more weight I sée, then I did vnderstande Will must be wonne to this, or els it wil be hard Will must goe breake the matter first, or els my gaine is marde, Sir boye are you content to take such parte for me As god shall sende, and helpe it forth as much as lyes in thee. VVill. Ye a Mayster by his wounds or els cut of his head. VVitte. Come then & let vs two deuise what trace were best to tredde, Nature is on my syde and Wyll my boye is fast, There is no doubt I shall obtayne my ioyes at last. Exent Act 2, sena. 1. VVitte and VVill. VVitte. VVhat Will I say Wil boye come againe folishe elfe
VVill. I crye you mercy sir you are a tall man your selfe, VVitte. Such a cokbraine as thou art I neuer saw y• like to it VVill. Truth in respect of you that are nothing els but Wit VVitte. Cāst thou tel me thy errād because thou art gone so sone, VVill. Can I remember a longe tale of a man in the moone, With such a circumstaunce and such flym flam I wyll tell at a worde whole seruante I am Wherfore I come and what I haue to saye, And cal for her aunswere, before I come awaye What should I make a brode trée, of euery litell shrubbe, And kepe her agreat whyle with a tale of a tubbe. VVitte. Yet thou must commend me to be rich, lusty pleasaunt and wyse. VVill. I can not commend you, but I must make twentie lies Rich quoth you, that appeareth by the port that you kepe, Euen as rich as a newe shorne sheepe Of pleasaunt conceiptes, ten busshells to the pecke, Lusty like a herringe, with a bell about his necke, Wyle as a woodcocke: as brage as a bodylouse, A man of your handes, to matche wyth a mouse: How say you, are not these proper qualities to prayse you with. VVitte. Leaue these mad toyes of thyne and come to the pythe One part of the errande should haue bene, To giue her this picture of mine to be séene, And to request her the same to accepte Safely vntill my comminge to be kepte, Which I suspence till thy returne and then If it like her Ladyshipppe to appoint me where and when I will waite vpon her gladly out of hande. VVill. Sir let me alone your mynde I vnderstand, I will handle the matter so that you shall owe me thankes,
But what if she finde fault with these spindle thankes Or els with these blacke spottes on your nose. VVitte. In fayth sir boye this talke deserueth blowes. VVill. You will not misvse your best seruant I suppose For by his nayles, and by his fingers toe. I will marre your mariage if you do clitter. VVitte. I praye the goe thy wayes and leaue this clatter. VVill. First shal I be so bold to breake to you a matter. VVitte. Tushe thou art disposed to spende wordes in wast, And yet thou knowest this busines asketh hast VVill. But euen two wordes, and then I am gon. VVitte. If it be worth the hearing, say on. VVill. I would not haue you thinke that I for my part From my promise or frō your seruice wil depart, But yet now and then it goeth to my hart, When I thinke how this mariage maye be to my smar VVitte. Why so? VVill. I would tell you the cause if I durst for shame. VVitte. Speke hardely what thou wilt without any blame. VVill. I am not disposed as yet to be tame, And therfore I am loth to be vnder a Dame, Now you are a Bachiler a man may sone win you Me thinks there is some good felowshippe in you, We may laugh and be méery at bord and at bedde, You are not so testy as those that be wedde, Myld in behauior and loth to fall out, You may runne, you may ryde & roue roūd about,
With wealth at your will and all thinge at ease, Frée franke and lusty, esye to please, But when you be clogged and tyed by the toe, So faste that you shal not haue power to let goe, You will tell me another lesson sone after And cry peccaui too except your lucke be the better: Then farewel goodfellowshyp then come at a call Then waite at an inche you idle knaues all, Then sparyng and pynchinge and nothing of gift, No talke with our maister, but al for his thrift, Solemne and sower and angry as a waspe, Althinges must be kept vnder locke and haspe, At that which will make me to fare ful ill. All your care shalbe to hamper poore wyll. VVitte. I warrant the for that take thou no thought, Thou shalt be made of, whosoeuer be set at nought As dere to me, as myne owne dere brother, Whosoeuer be one, thou shalt be an other. VVill Yea but your wyfe wyl play the shrew, perdy it is she that I feare VVitte. Thy message wyll cause her some fauor to beare, For my sake and thy sake and for her owne likewyse If thou vse thy selfe discretly in this enterpryse. VVill. She hath a father, a testy sower old man, I doubt lest he and I, shall fall out nowe and than, VVitte. Gyue hym fayre words, forbeare him for his age, Thou must consider hym to be auncient and sage, Shew thy selfe officious and seruisable stil, And then shall Reason make very muche of Will. VVill. If your wyfe be euer complayning, how then? VVitte. My wyfe wyll haue nothing to doe wyth my men. VVill. If she doe, beleue her not in any wyse.
And when you once perceyue her stomacke to aryse, Then cut her short at the first and you shall see A meruaylouse vertue in that medisen to bée, Giue her not the bridle for a yeare or twayne And you shal sée her bridle it without a reine, Breake her betymes and bring her vnder by force Or elles the graye Mare, wil be the better horse. VVitte. If thou haue done begone, and spende no time in vayne. VVill. Where shal I fynde you, when I come againe. VVitte. At home. VVill. Good enough take your ease let me alone with this Surely a treasure of all treasures it is, To serue such a mayster, as I hope him to bee, And to haue such a seruant as he hath of mee, For I am quicke, nimbell, proper and nise, He is ful good, gentle, sober and wyse, He is full loth to thide or to checke, And I am as willinge to serue at a becke, He orders me well and speakes me so fayre That for his sake no trauayle I must spare, But now am I come to the gate of this Ladye, I wyll pause a whyle to frame myne errante fynelye And loe wher she commeth yet will I not come nye her, But amonge these fellowes wyl I stande to eye her. Act. 2. sena 2. Reason, Experience, Science and VVill. Science. My Parentes ye knowe, howe many fall in lappes That do ascribe to me the cause of their mishappes? Howe many séeke that come to short of their desyre? Howe many do attempt that dayly do retire? Howe many roue about the marke on euery syde? How many thinke to hit when they are much to wyde? Howe many runne to farre how many light to lowe? Howe fewe to good effecte, their trauayle do bestowe,
And howe all these impute their losses vnto mee. Should I haue ioye to thinke of mariage nowe trowe yée What doth the worlde my loue alone say they Is bought so dere that life and goodes for it must paye Stronge youth must spende it selfe, and yet when al is done, We here of fewe or none that haue this Lady wonne. On me they make outcryes and charge me with the bloud Of those that for my sake aduenture life and good This griefe doth wound my hart so, ye suters more as yet I se no cause nor reason why I shold admyt. Reason. Ah daughter say not so there is great cause and skill, For which you shold mislike to liue vnmaried thus alone What comfort can you haue remayning thus vnknowne How shal the common wealth by you aduaunced be If you abide enclosed here where no man may you sée It is not for your state, your selfe to take the payne All straungers that resort to you to entertayne To suffer frée accesse of all that come and goe To be at eche mannes cal to trauayle too and fro, What thē, synce god hath plast such treasure in your brest Wherwith so many thousand thinke by you to be refresht Néedes must you haue some one of hyd and secret trust By whom these things may be, well ordered and discuste: To him you must disclose the depth of all your thought By him as time shall serue all matters must be wrought To hym aboue you must content your selfe to be at call Ye must be his, he must be yours, he must be al in all. Experience. My Lord your father telles you truth perdie And that in time your selfe shall fynde and trye. Science. I could aledge more then as yet I haue sayde, But I must yelde, and you muste be obayed Fall oute as it will there is no helpe I sée, Some one or other in time must mary mée, VVill. In time nay out of hand, Madame if it please you, In fayth I knowe a yonker that will ease you,
A lyuelye younge gentilman, as freshe as any flower, That wyll not sticke to marye you within this hower. Science. Such haste myght hapelye turne to wast to sum, But I pray thee my pretye boye whence art thou come. VVill. If it pleace youre good Ladyshype to accepte me soo, I haue a solemne message to tel or I goe, Not anye thynge in secrete your honour to stayne, But in the presence and hearinge of you twayne. Reason. Speake. VVill. The Lady of this world which Lady Nature hyght, Hath one a peereles sonne in whom she taketh delyght, On hym she chargeth mn to be antendant styll, Both kynde to her, hys name is Witte, my name is Will, The noble chyld doth feele the force of cupydes flame And sendeth now for ease by counsel of hys dame, Hys mother taught hym fyrst to loue whyle he was younge Which loue wt age encreaseth sore and waxeth wondrous stronge For verye fame displayes youre bountye more and more, And at thys pyntch he burneth so as neuer heretofore Not fanteses force, not vayne and Idle toyes of loue, Not hope of that whych commenlye doth other suiters moue, But fixed fast good wyll that neuer shall relent, And vertues force yt shines in you bade him geue this attempte, He hath no neade of wealth, he wooes not for youre good, His kynred is such he nede not to seke to match with noble bloud, Such store of fryndes that where he lest he may commaunde, And none so hardy to presume hys pleasure to withstand, Youre self it is, your vertue and youre grace, Youre noble giftes youre endles prayes in euery place, You alone I saye the marke that he would hit, The hoped ioye the dearest pray that can befale to witte, Experience. I haue not harde a meyssage more trymlee done, Scince. Nor I, what age art thou of my good sonne,
VVill. Betwene eleuen and xii, Madame more or lesse. Reason. He hath bene instructed this errand as I gesse. Sciencc, How old is the gentilman thy maister canst thou tell? VVill. Seuentene or there aboute I wote not verye well. Science. What stature of what makyng what kynde of port beares he VVill. Such as youre Ladyshipe can not myslike trust me. Well growen, wel made, a stripling clean and taule, Wel fauored, somwhat black and manlye therewithal, And that you may conceaue hys personage the better, Lo heare of hym the vearye shape and liuely picture, Thys hath he sente to you to viewe and to behoulde, I dare aduouch no Ioynt therin no Iote to be controulde, Science. In good fayth I thancke thy mayster with my hart, I perceyue that nature in him, hath done her part. VVill. Farther, if it please your honour to knowe: My master would be glad to runne ryde or goe, At your commaundment to any place farre or neer, To haue but a sight of your Ladyshippe there, I beseech you appoint him the place and the hower, You shal se how redyly to you he wil scoure. Reason. Do soe. Experience. Ye in any wise daugher, for heere you mee, He semeth a right worthy and trymme younge man to bee. Science. Commend me then to Witte, and let him vnderstande, That I accept with all my hart this present at his hande, And that I would be glad, when he doth see his tyme, To heare and se him face to face, within this house of myne Then maye he breake his mind and talke with me his fyll,
Tyll then adew both hee and thou myne owne swete little Will. Exent science, Reason Experience. Act 2. sena 3. Ah flattering Queene, how neatly she can talke How minionly she tryps, how sadlye she can walke Well wanton yet beware that ye be ound and sure, Fayre wordes are wont oft times, fayre women to allure, Nowe must I get me home and make report of this: To him that thinkes it longe, till my returne I wys. Act 3 sena 1. VVitte and VVill. VVitte. Sayst thou me so boye, will she haue me in deede VVill. Be of good cheere sir I warrant you to spede VVitte Did both her parentes speake wel to her of me. VVill. As hart can thinke go on and you shall see, VVitte. How toke she the picture, how lyketh shée my person. VVill. She neuer had done toting and loking theron. VVitte. And must I come to talke with her my fyll. VVill. When soeuer you please, and as oft as you will. VVitte. O my sweat boy, how shall I recompence, Thy faythfull hart and painfull diligence, My hope, my stay, my wealth, the kaye of al my ioye. VVill. I praye you sir call me your man, and not your boy, VVitte. Thou shalt be what thou wilt all in all. VVill. Promise me faythfully that if your wyfe brall Or set her father to checke me out of measure,
You will not se me abused to their pleasure VVitte. Giue me thy hande take here my fayth and troth, I wil maintayne thee, how soeuer the world goeth. Act 3 sena 1. VVitte. What shall we doe? shall we stande lingring here? VVill. If you be a man preasse in, and go neare. VVitte. What if there be some other suter there. VVill. And if there be, yet nede you not to feare, Untill I bringe his head to you, vpon a speare. I will not loke you in the face, nor in your syght appeare. Reason. Nay Witte, aduise your selfe and pause a while, Or els this hast of yours will you beguile. Science. No hast but good, take tyme and learne to fyghte, Learne to assault, learne to defende a ryght: Your matche is monstrous to behoulde and full of might, Whom you must vanquish, not by force but by slyght: VVitte. Madame stande to your promyse if I wynne I am sped, Am I not? Science. Yea trulye. VVill. Good enough, if we fyght not I would we weare dead, No man shal stay us, that béeres a head. Experience. Young man a word or twayne, and then adue. Your yeares are fewe your practise grene and newe, Marke what I saye, and ye shal fynde it true: You are the fyrst that shall this rashnes rue, Be ruled here, our counell do therafter, Lay good ground, your worke shal be the faser: This hedlong hast, may soner misse then hit,
Take hede both of Wittes wyll, and wilfull wit, We haue within a gentilman our retayner and our friend, With seruauntes twayne that do on him attende, Instruction, Studie, Diligence these thrée, At your commaundement in this attempt shalbe, Here them in stede of vs, and as they shall deuyse, So hardely cast our cardes in this enterpryse I will send them to you, and leaue you for now. VVitte. The more company the merier, boy what saist thou? VVill. It is a good faulte to haue more then enowe, I care not, so as we may pul the knaues downe, I would we were at it, I passe not how sone. VVitte. If it shal please you to send those three hyther, We wyll follow your counsell and go together. VVill. I warrant her a shrewe whosoeuer be an other, God make the daughter good, I like not the mother, Reason. Yet would not I for no good to haue forgone her. VVill. Mary sir in déede she talkes and takes on her: Lyke a Dame, nay like a Dutches or a quéene: Wyth such a solemnitie as I haue not seene. Reason. She is a quéene I tell thee in her degrée, VVill. Let her be what she list, wyth a vengaunce for me: I will kéepe me out of her reach if I can. Reason. If this mariage goe forward, thou must be her man. VVill. Mariage or mariage not, be shrewe me than, I haue but one maister, and I will serue no moe, And if he anger me, I wil forsake him to. Reason. She shal not hurt the vnlesse her cause be iuster.
VVill. By the fayth of my bodye sir, I intend not to trust her. Reason. Whye. VVill. Take me this woman that talkes so roundly, That be so wyse, that reason so soundly: That loke so narrow, that speake so shryll: Their words are not so curst, but their déedes are as ill. Reason. It is but thy fansy, I sée no such thing in her. VVill. Perhappes you had neuer occasion to try her. Reason. That were great maruayle in so many yeares. VVill. She hath wonne the mastery of you it appeares. VVitte. Well quiet your selfe thou shalt take no wronge, Me thinke oure thrée companions tary very longe. Act 3 sena 3. Instruction, Studie, Diligence, Reason, VVitte, VVill. Instruction. Sir we are come to know your pleasure. Reason. You are come in good tyme, Instruction our treasure, This Gentilman craueth your acquaintaunce & ayde. What you may do for him let him not be denayde, VVitte. Welcome good fellowes, wyll ye dwell wyth me. Diligence. If all partes be pleased, content are we. VVitte. Wellcome Instruction wyth al my hart. VVill. What thrée newe seruaunts, then farewell my part. Instruction. I hartely thanke you, and loke what I can doe, It shalbe alwayes redye to pleasure you.
Reason. Consider and talke together with these, And you shall fynd in your trauayle great Take here of me before I take my leaue, This glasse of Christal cleare which I you geaue Accept it and reserue it for my sake most sure, Much good to you in time it may procure, Beold your selfe therin, and view and prye, Marke what defectes it wil discouer and discrye, And so wyth indgement rype, and curiouse eye, What is a mysse indeuor to supplye, Farewell. VVitte. Farewell to you, right honourable syr: And commend me to my loue my hartes desyre, Let her thinke on me when she sees me not and wyshe me wel. VVill. Farewel mayster Reason, thincke vpon vs, when you sée vs not. And in any wyse, let not Wyll be forgot. VVitte. Synce I must take aduise and counsell of you thrée, I must entreat you all, to dwell in house wyth me, And loke what order you shall prescribe as néedefull, To kepe the same you shall fynd me as héedefull: Come, Instruction. Come, VVill. Goe. Act 4. sena.1. VVitte, VVill, Instruction, Studie, Diligence. VVill. Tushe tushe Instruction, your talke is of no force, You tell vs a tale of a rosted horse, Whych by hys woundes except we set to it, As fast as we make, this fellowes wyll vndo it, Their talke is nothing but soft and fayre and tary, If you folow their counsell you shall neuer mary.
Instruction. To followe our counsayle youre charge and promys was, VVitte I would I had neuer knowen you by the masse. Muste I looke so longe and spend my lyfe wyth toyle Naye sure, I will eyther wynne it, or take the foyle. Studye. The surer is your grounde, the better you shall beare it. VVill. Ground vs no ground, let him winne it and weare it. Instruction. Good sir be ruled and leaue this peuish elfe. VVitte. I had euen as leafe ye bad me hange my selfe, Leaue him: no no I would you all knewe, You be but loyterers to him, my Will telles me true, I conld be cōtent with a weke, yea a month or twaine, But 3. or 4. yeares, mary that were a payne, So longe to kepe me, and lye like a hogge. VVill. A life wythall my hart I would not wyshe a dogge. VVitte. Wyll a weke serue. Studie. Noo. VVitte A monthe. Studie. Neyther VVitte. Noo. Studie. Not so. Instruction. No nor so many moe. VVitte. Then farewell all for as I hope to thriue, I wyll proue him or I sleape, if I be aliue, And if ye be mine and good fellowes all thrée, Goe thyther, out of hand and take your chaunce wyth mee.
Instruction. For my part, I know I can do you no good. VVill. You are a proper man of your handes by the Roode, Yet welfare hym that neuer his maister forsaketh. VVitte. What sayst thou Studie. Studie. My head aketh. VVitte. Out vpon the coward: speake Diligence, Agaynst Instructions mynd, I am lothe to go hence, Yet I will make one, rather then you should lacke. VVitte. Perhappes we may fynd them at this time in bedde. VVill. So much the rather loke you to be sped, Care for no more, but once to come within her, And when you haue done: then let another win her. VVitte. To come within her child, what meanst thou by that. VVill. One masse for a penye, you know what is what. VVitte. Hard you euer such a counsell of such a Iacke sprot. VVill. Why sir do ye thinke to doe any good, If ye stande in a corner like Roben hood, Nay you must stoute it, and face it out with the best. Set on a good countenaūce, make the most of the lest, Who soeuer skippe in, loke to your part, And whyle you liue beware of a false hart. VVitte. Both blame and shame, rashe boldnes doth breede. VVill. You must aduenture both, spare to speake, spare to speede, What tell you me of shame, it is shame to steale a horse. VVitte. More hast then good speede, makes many fare the worse.
VVill. But he that takes not such time while he maye, Shal leape at a whyting when time is a waye. VVitte. But he that leapes before he loke, good sonne, Maye leape in the myre, and mysse when he hath done. Science. Me thinke I heare the voyce of Will, VVites boye. VVitte. I sée her come, her sorow and my Ioye, My salue, and yet my sore, my comfort, and my care, The causer of my wound, and yet the wil of my welfare: O happye wight, that haue the saynte of your request, O hoples hope that holdeth me frō ye which likes me best, Twixte hope and feare I stande, to marre or els to make, This day to be reliued quit, or els my death woūd to take. Reason. Here let vs rest a whyle and pause all thrée: Experience. Daughter sit downe, belike this same is hée. VVill. Be of good chere sir be ruled by me Women are best pleased, tyll they be vsed homely, Loke her in the face and tell your tale stoutely. VVitte. O pearle of passing pryse, sent downe from god on hye, The swetest beauty to entise that hath bene sene with eye The wel of wealth to all, that no man doth annoye: The kaye of Kingedomes & the steale of euerlasting ioye. The treasure and the store, whom al good things began, The nurse of Lady wysedoms lore, the lincke of mā & mā. What wordes shal me suffice, to vtter my desyre, What heate of talke shal I deuise, for to expresse my fyer I burne and yet I fréese, I flame and coole as fast, In hope to wyn and for to léese my pensiuenes doth last, Why should my dulled spryte, apal my courage soo. O salue my sore, or slée me quite, by saying yea, or noo, You are the marke at whome, I shot to hit or misse, My life it stayes on you alone, to you my sute it is,
Amitie not much vnmete wyth you some griefe to fynde, Dame Natures sonne, my name is Witte ye fancieth you by kind, And here I come this day, to wayte and to attende In hope to haue my hoped pray, or elles my life to ende. Science. Good cause there is wherfore I should embrase, This louing hart whyche you haue borne to me And glad I am that we be both in place, Ech one of vs eche others lookes to sée, Your picture and your person doth agree, Your princelike port and ecke your noble face, Wherin so many sygnes of vertue be: That I must néedes be moued in your case: Reason. Friend Witte? are you the man in dede whych you intēd, Can you be well content vntill your life doth ende, To ioyne and knit most sure with this my daughter here, And vnto her alone your fixed fayth to beare. VVitte. As I am bente to this so let my suite be sped, If I do fayle ten Thousāde plagues & more, lighte on my head. Experience. There are that promise fayre, and meane as well, As any heare can thinke, or tongue can tell, Which at the first are hot, and kindle in desyre, But in one month or twayne, quit quenched is the fyre. Such is the trade of youth whome famies force doth lede, Whose loue is only at the plonge & cannot longe procede. VVitte. Credit my wordes, and ye shall find me true. Experience. Suppose you kepe not touch, who shuld this bargaine rue. VVitte. I will be sworne here solemnly before you both. Experience. Who breaketh promise, wil not sticke likewyse to breake his othe. VVitte. I wyll be bound in all that euer I can make.
Experience. What good were that to vs if we thaduantage take. VVitte. Wyll neyther promyse serue: nor othe nor bandes, What other assuraunce wyll ye aske at my handes. VVill. My maister is a gentilman. I tell you and his word, I would you knewe it shall with his deedes accord. Reason. We know not whom to trust, the world is so ill. VVill. In dede sir as you say you may mend when ye wyll, But in good earnest Madam, speake of or on, Shal we speede at your hand, or shall we begone, I loue not this delayes, say so if we shall haue you, If not, say no, and let another raue you. VVitte. Soft and fayre sir boye, you talke you wot not what? VVill. Can you abyde to be driuen of wyth this and that, Can they aske any more then good assuraunce at your hands. Experience. All is now to little sonne, as the matter standes, VVill. If al be to litle both goodes and landes, I know not what will please you, except Darbyes bandes I haue an enemy, my frend Witte a mortal fo to me And therwithall the greatest plague that can befall to the. VVitte. Must I fyght wyth him, Reason. Can you fyght if néede be. VVill. If any such thing all, count the charge to me, Trouble not your selfe. VVitte. Hould thy peace elfe. Science. Here out my tale, I haue a mortall foe:
That lurketh in the woode, hearby as you come and goe, This monstrous Giant, beares a grudge o me and mine, And wyll attempt to kepe thee backe, from this desser of thine. The bane of youth the roote of rufne and destres: Deuouring those that sue to me, his name is Tediousnes. No soner he espyes, the noble Witte beginne: To styr and payne it selfe the loue of me to winne. But forth he steppes and with strong hands by might and maine: He beates and buffettes downe, the force and liuelynes of braine. That done in déepe dispayre, he drownes him villanously, Ten thousand suters in a yere, are cast away therby. Now if your mind be surelye fixed soe, That for no toyle nor cost, my loue you will forgoe. Bethinke you well, and of this monster take good héede, Then may you haue with mée, the greater hope to speede. Herein vse good aduise, to make you strong and stout, To send and kepe him of a whyle, vntill his rage be out. Then when you feele your selfe, well able to preuayle: Byd you the battell, and that so coragiously assayle. If you can wyn the field, present me wyth his head, I aske no more and I forth with, shall be your owne to bedde. VVitte. Il might I thriue, and lacke that likes me best, If I be not a scourge to him, that bredes your vnrest. Madam assare your selfe, he liues not in the land, Wth whom I would not in your cause, encounter hand to hand And as for Tediousnes that wretch, your common foe, Let mée alone, we twayne shall cope before I sleape I troe. VVill. Lustely spoken, let me claw thee by the backe: Howe say you now sir, here are thrée agaynst twayne, Studye. Go that go list, I will at home remayne, I haue more néede to take a nappe in my bedde. VVill, Do soe and here you couche a coddes head. Instruction. Well since it wyl none otherwyse frame. Let v twayne Studie, & retourn from whens we came.
Studie, Agréed. Exit. VVitte. And let vs thrée bestyre our selues like men. Unlikely thinges are brought to passe, by courage now and then My wyll be alwayes prest, and ready at an ynche To saue thy selfe to succour me, to helpe at euery pinche. Both twayne on eyther syde, assaulte him if ye can, And you shal sée me in the middes, howe I wil play the man Thys is the deadly denne, as farre as I perceaue, Approche we neere and valiantly let vs the vnset geue. Come forth thou monster fell, in drowsy darkenes hydde, For here is vvitte Dame Natures sonne, y• doth thee battaile bid. Act 4 sena 2. Tediousnes, VVitte, VVill, Diligence. Tediousnes. What pryncox haue we heere, that dares me to assayle, Alas poore boy, and winest thou, against me to preuale. Full smal was he thy frend, whoeuer sent the hyther, For I must driue the backe with shame, or slay thee altogether. VVitte. Great bost small rost, I warrant thee do thy best, Thy head must serue my tourne, this day to set my hart at rest. VVill. And I must haue a legge of the if I can catche it. Tediousnes. Fight, strike at vvill. First I must quise this brayne o thine, if I can reach it. VVitte. Well shifted VVill, now haue at thee sir knaue. Tediousnes. These friscoles shal not serue your tourne for al your hauntes so braue Hoh hoh, did I not tell thee thou camst to thy payne. Diligence. Helpe, helpe, helpe, our maister is slaine. VVill. Helpe, helpe, helpe &c. Tediousnes. Where are these luste bloude, that make their matche with mee? Here lyes a patorne for them all, to loke at and to sée.
To teach them to conspire against my force and might, To promise for their womans loue, to vanquishe me in fight: Nowe let them goe and crake, howe wiselye they haue sped, Such is the end of those, that seke this curious Dame to wed. Hoh hoh hoh. Act 4. sena 3. VVill. Recreation, VVitte. VVill. Rub and chafe him. For goddes loue hast, see loe where he doth lye. Recreation. He is not cold, I warrant him, I. Singe. Gie a legge, geue an arme, aryse, aryse, Hould vp thy head, lift vs thy eyes, 1 A legge to stand vp right 2 An arme to fyght a mayne, 1 The head to hould thy braynes in plight, 2 The eyes to loke agayne. A wake ye drowned powers. Ye sprites for dull wyth toyle: Resyne to me this care of yours, And from dead sleape recoyle. Thinke not vpon your lothsome luke, But arise and daunce with vs a plucke. Both sing giue a legge, as is before. 2 What thoughe thou hast not hit, The toppe of thy desyre, Tyme is not soo farre spente as yit To cause the o retyre, A rise and ease thy self of payne And make thee stronge to fight agayne, Singe bothe. Let not thy foes reoyse, Let not thy frendes lament, Let not thy Ladies ruful voice, In sobbes and sighes be spent, Thy ayth is plight forget it not, Twixt her and the to knit the knot. Singe. Gyue a legge &c.
This is no deadly wounde, It may be cured well. Se here what Phisicke we haue found, Thy sorowes to expell. ¶ VVitte lyfting himselfe vp, sitting on the grounde The way is plaine, the marcke is fayre, Lodge not thy selfe in deepe despaire. VVill. What noise is this that ringeth in my eares, Her noyse that greueth my myshap with teares, Ah my mishap my desperate mishap, In whom ill fortune poureth downe, all mishap at a clappe, What shall become of me, where shal I hyde my head? Oh what a death is it to liue for him that would be dead? But since it chanceth so, what euer wyght thou be, That fyndeth me here, in heauy plight, goe tel her this from mée. Causles I perishe here, and cause to curse I haue. The time that erst I lyued to loue, and now must die her slaue, The matche was ouer much for me, she vnderstoode, Alas why hath she this delite, to lap in giltles blode. How did I giue her cause to shewe me this despyght, To matche me wher she wist full wel, I should be slaine in fight. But go and tell her playne, although to late for me, Accursed be the time and hower, which first I did her sée. Accursed be the wyght, that wilde me first thereto, And cursed be they all at once, that had therwith to doe. Nowe get the hence in hast, and suffer me to die. Whom scornfull chaunce & lawles loue, haue slaine most trayte∣rouslye Recreation. O noble Witte the miracle of God, and eke of Nature: Why cursest thou thy selfe, and euery other creature. What causeth the thine innocent deare Lady to accuse? Who would lament it more then she, to here this wofull newes. Why wylt thou dye, wheras thou mayst be sure of health? Wheras thou séeth a playne path waye, to worship and to wealth. Not euery foyle doth make a fal, nor euery soyle doth slaye, Comfort thy selfe be sure thy lucke, wyll mend from day to daye. VVill. This gentil newes of good Will, are come to make you sound,
They know which way to salue your sore, and how to cure your woūd Good sir be ruled by her then, ad pluck your spirite to you: There is no doubt, but you shall find, your louing lady true. VVitte. Ah Wyll art thou aliue, that doth my hart some ease, The sight of the swete boy, my sorowes doth appeace: How hast thou scapte, what fortune the befell? VVill. It was no trusting to my handes, my héeles did serue me wel I ran wyth open mouth, to crye for helpe amayne, And as good fortune would, I hit vpon these twayne. VVitte. I thanke both thee and them, what wyll ye haue me do. Recreation To ryse and daunce a litle space with vs two? VVitte. What then. Recreation. That done, repayre agayne to Studie and Instruction, Take better hould by their aduise, your foe to set vpon. VVitte. Can any recompence recouer this my fall? Recreacion My life to yours it may be mended all. VVitte. Speake Wyll. VVill. I haue no doubt sir it shalbe as you would wishe. VVitte. But yet this repulse of myne, they wyll lay in my dishe. Recreation. No man shall let them know therof, vnlesse your selfe do it. VVitte. On that condicion a gods name, fall we to it. VVill. Naye stande we to it, and let vs fall no more. VVitte. Will daunsig serue, and I will daunce vntil my bones be sore, Pype vs vp a Galiard mynstrel, to begynne,
Let vvill call for daunces, one after an other. VVill. Come Damsell in good fayth and let me haue you in Let him practise in daunsing al things to make himselfe brethles. Recreation. Enough at once, now léeue, and let vs part. VVitte. This exrcise hath done me good, euen to the very hart. Let vs be bould with you more acquaintaunce to take And daunce a round, yet once more for my sake, Enouge is enoughe, farewel, and at your néede: Use my acquaintaunce if it may stande you in stéede. Right worthy Damsels both, I knowe you seke no gaynes, In recompence of this desert your vndeserued paynes. But loke what other thinge my seruice maye deuise, To shewe my thankefull harte in any enterprise. Be ye as bolde therwyth, as I am bold on you, And thus wyth hartye thankes, I take my leaue as nowe. Recreation. Farewell frend Witte, and since you are relieued, Thynke not vpon your foyle, whereat you were so grieued. But take your hart to you, and giue attempte once more: I warrant you to spéede, much better then before. Act 4. sena 4. VVitte, VVill, Idlenes, Ignoraunce. VVitte. One daunce for the and mee, my boye come on. VVill. Daunce you sir if you please, and I wil loke vpon. VVitte. This geare doth make me sweate, and breath a pace. Idlenes. Sir ease your selse a whyle, heare is a restinge place. VVitte. Home Will and make my bedde, for I will take a nappe. Ignoraunce. Sure and it please youre mastership here in my Dames lap.
Idlenes syngeth. Come come lye doune and thou shalte see, Non lyke to mee to entertayne, Thye bones and thee opprest wyth payne, Come come and ase thee in my lappe, And yf it pleace thee take a nappe, A nappe that shall delight thee soo, That fancies all wyll thee forgoe, Bye muinge styll what canst thou fynde, But wantes of wyll and restles mynde, A mynde that marres and mangles all, And breadeth iarres to worke thy falle, Come gentle Witte & thee requyre, And thou shalt hytt thy chiefe desyre, Thy chiefe desire thy hooped praye, Fyrste ease thee here and then away, VVitte. (Falle doune in to her lapp.) My bones are styff and I am wearyed sore, And still me thynck I faynte and feble moore and moore, Wake mee agayne in tyme for I haue thinges to doe, And as you wyll mee for myne ease, I doe assent thereto, Idlenes. (Lul hym.) Welcome wyth all my harte: Syr boye houlde here thys fan, And softly coole his face slepe sowndly gentleman, Thys chayer is chared well now ignoraunce my sonne, Thou seest all this howe fittlye it is done, But woste thou whye? Ignoraunce. Nay bumfaye mother not I, Well I wotte tis agaye whorchit tricke and tryme, Choulde reiounce my harte to chaunce cootes with hym, Idlenes. Doste thou remember how many I haue serued in the like sorte, Ignoraunce. It doth my hart good to thyncke on this sporte Idlenes. Wylte thou see thys proper fellowe serued soe, Ignoraunce Choulde geue twaye pence to see it and tway pence moore,
Idlenes. Come of then, let me sée thee in thy voublet and thy hose. Ignoraunce. You shall sée a taule felow mother, I suppose, Idlenes. Helpe of with this sleue softly, for feare of waking, Wee shal leaue the gentilman, in a pretie takinge. Giue me thy Cote, hold this in thy hand: This fellowe would be maried to Science I vnderstād. But or we leaue him tll me an other tale: Now let vs make him loke, some what stale. There laye and there bée, the prouerbe is verified, I am neither idle, nor yet wel occupied. Ignoraunce. Mother must I haue his Cote, now mother must? Chal be a liuely lad, with hey tistye tosty. Idlenes. Sleape sound and haue no care, to occupie thy head, As neare vnto thy body now, as if thou hadst ben dead. For Idelnes hath wonne, and wholly the possest, And vtterly dishabled thee from hauing thy request. Come on wih me my sonne let vs goe coutche againe, And let this lusty ruffling Witte, here like a foole remayne. Act. 5 sena 1. VVitte, Science, Reason. VVitte. Up and to goe, why sleape I here so sound: How fals it out that I am left vpon the naked ground. God graunt that all be well, whylest I lye dreaming here: Me thinckes all is not as it was, nor as I would it were, And yet I wot not why, but o my fancies giues mee That some one thinge or other, is my tryer that grees mée. That are but fancies let them goe, to Science now wyll I, My sute and busines yet once againe, to labor and aplye. Science. What is become trow yée, of Witte, our spouse that would be: Rason. Daughter I feare all is not, as it sould ée.
VVitte. Yes yes haue ye no doubt, all is and shalbe well: Reason. What one art thou? therof howe canst thou tell. VVitte. Reason most noble sir, and you my Lady deare: How haue you done in all this time, since first I sawe you here? Science. The foole is mad I wene, stand backe and touch me not. VVitte. You speake not as you thinke, or haue you me forgot, Science. I neuer saw thee in my life, vntil this time I wotte, Thou art some mad braine, or some foole, or some disguised Scot. VVitte. Gods fishe hostes and knowe you not mee. Science. I had bene well at ease in déede, to be acquainted wyth thee. VVitte, Hope haliday, mary this is préety cheere, I haue lost my selfe, I can not tell where An olde sayd sawe it is, and to true I finde, Soone hot, sone cold, out of sight, out of mind. What maddam, what meaneth this sodaine change, What meanes this scornefull looke, this countenāce so straunge. It is your fashion so to vse, your louers at the furst: Or haue all women this delite, to sould and to be curst. Reason. Good felow whence art thou, what is thy name? VVitte. I wéene ye are disposed to make at me some game. I am the sonne of Lady Nature, my name is Witte. Reason. Thou shalt say soe longe enough, or we beleue it. Science. Thou Witte? nay thou art some madde braine out of thy wit. VVitte. Unto your selues, this triall I remit. Loke on me better, and marke my personne well,
Science. Thy loke is like to one, that came out of hell: Reason. If thou be Witte, let sée, what tokens thou canst tell. How comst thou first acquainted here? what sayd wée? How did we like thy sute, what intertaynment made wée? VVitte. What tokens? Science. Yea what tokens? speake and let vs know? VVitte. Tokens good store I can reherse a rowe. First as I was aduised, by my mother Nature: My lackey Will, presented you with my picture. Science. Stay there? now loke how these two faces agrée: VVitte. This is the very same that you receyued from mée. Science. From thée? why loke, they are no more like: Then chalke to cheese, then blacke to white. Reason. To put thee out of doubt, if thou thinke we saye not true, It weare good for thee, in a glasse thy face to viewe. VVitte. Well remembred, and a glasse I haue in deede, Whych glasse you gaue me, to vse at neede. Reason. Hast thou the glasse, which I to Witte did gyue. VVitte. I haue it in my purse, and will kepe it while I lyue. Reason. These markes me muse, howe should he come therby: VVitte, Sir muse no more for it is euen I. To whome you gaue the glasse, and here it is. Reason. Wee are content thou trye thy case by this. VVitte. Eyther my glasse is wonderfully spotted,
Or els my face is wonderfully blotted. This is not my Cote, why wher had I this wéede, By the Masse I loke like a very foole in éede. O heapes of happes, O rufull chaunce to me, O Idlenes woo worth the time, that I was ruled by thee. Why did I lay my head, within thy lappe to rest? Why was I not adud by her, that wissht and wil me best. O ten times troble blessed wights, whose corpes in graue do lye: That are not driuen to behould, these wretched cares which die. On me your furies all on me, haue poured out your spite, Come nowe and slay me at the last, and ridde my sorowes quite. What coast shall me receyue, wher shal I shew my head: The world wyll saye this same is hée, that if he list had sped. This same is he that toke, an enterpryse in hand, This same is hee that scarce one blow, his ennemy did withstand. This same is he that fought, and fell in open field: This same is he that in the songe, of Idlenes did yelde. This same is he that was in way, to winne the game To ioyne himselfe wherby he should haue won immortal fame. And now is wrapt in woe, and buried in dispayre, O happye cace for the if death would rid the quite of care. Act. 5 sena. 2. Shame, Reason, Science, VVitte. Reason. Shame. Shame. Who calls for shame? Reason. Here is a marchant Shame, for thee to tame. Shame. A shame come to you all for I am almost lame, Wyth trudging vp and downe to them that lose their game, Reason. And here is one whom thou must rightly blame, That hath preferde his folly to his fame. Shame. Who? this good fellowe, what call you his name? Reason. Witte? that on wooing, to Lady Science came.
Shame. Come aloft child let me sée, what friscoles you can et, Reason. He hath deserued it, let him be well bet. VVitte. O spare mee wyth the whippe, and sley mée with thy knife: Ten thousand times more deare to mée, were present death then lyfe Shame. Naye naye my frend, thou shalt not die as yet. Reason. Remember in what case, Dame Nature left thee Witte, And how thou hast abused the same. Thou hast deceaued all our hope as all the world may sée. Shame. A shame come to it. Reason. Remember what fayre words, and promises thou diddest make, That for my daughters loue, no paynes thou wouldest forsake. Remember in what sorte, we had a care of the: Thou hast deceyued all our hope, as all the world may see. Shame. A shame come to it. Reason. Remember how Istruction, should haue bene followed styll, And howe thou wouldest be ruled, by none but by Wyll. How Idelnes hath crept, and raigneth in thy breast, How Ignoraunce her sonne, hath wholly thee possest. Shame. A shame come to it. VVitte. O woofull wretch to whom shall I complaine, What saue may serue to salue my fore, or to redresse my payne. Naye I an tell the more: remember howe, Thou was subdued of Tediousnes right nowe. Remember with what rakes thou went vnto hys denne, Against the good aduise, and Counsell of thy men, What Recreacion did for the, in these thy rufull happes, And howe the second tyme, thou fell into the lappe.
Shame. A shame come to thee. VVitte. O let me breath a whyle, and hold thy heauy hand, My greuouse faultes with shame enoughe I vnderstande. Take ruthe and pittie on my playnt, or els I am forlorne, Let not the world continue thus, in laughing mee to scorne. Madame if I be hee, to whom you once were bente, With whom to spend your time, sometime you were content. If any hope be left, if any recompence, Be able to recouer this for passed negligence. O helpe mee now poore wretche in this most heauy plight, And furnishe me yet once agayne, wyth Tediousnes to fyght. Science. Father be good to these yonge tender yeares, See howe he doth bewayle his folly past with teares Reason. Hould slaue take thou his Coofe for thy labor, We are content at her request, to take you to our fauor. Come in and dwell with vs, til time shall serue: And from Instruction rule, loke that thou neuer swerue Wythin we shall prouide, to set you vp once more, This scourge hath taught you, what defaulte was in you hereto∣fore Act 5 sena 3. VVill. Once in my life I haue, an od haulfe hower to spare: To ease my selfe of all, my trauaile and my care. I stoode not still so longe this xx. dayes I weene, But euer more sent forth on messages I haue bene. Such trudging and such toyle, by the masse was neuer seene, My body is worne out, and spent with labor cleane. And this it is that makes me loke so leane. That lettes my groth, and makes me seene a squall, What then althoughe my stature be not all. Yet I am as proper as you, so neate and clenlye, And haue my ioyntes at commaundement full of acteuitie, What should a seruaunt do, wyth all this fleshe and bones, That makes them runne with leaden heeles, & stur them self like stoones Giue me a proper squier much after my pitche
And marke howe he from place, to place will squitee. Fayre or foule, thicke or thinne, mire or dusty, Clouds or rayne, light or darke, cleare or mystie. Ride or runne, to or froe, badde or good, A neate litle fellowe, on his busynes wyll scud. These great labores are neyther actiue nor wyse, That féede till they slepe, and sleape out their eyes. So heauy, so dul, so vntoward in their doinge, That it is a good sight, to see them leaue working. But all this while, while I stand prating here, I sée not my mayster, I left hym snorting here, Act 5. sena 4. Science, VVitte, VVill, Instruction Studie Diligence Tediousnes. Science. Myne one deare Witte, the hope of mine auaile, My care, my comfort, my treasure and my trust, Take hart of grace, our ennemye to assaile, Lay vp these thynges, whych you haue hard discust. So doinge, vndoubtingly you can not fayle. To winne the fyeld to scape. all these vnhappy shewers, To glad your frendes, to cause your foes to wayle, To matche wyth vs, and then the gayne is youres. Here in this Closet our selfe, wil sette and sée, Your manly feates, and your successe in fyght: Strike home couragiously, for you and mée, Learne wher and howe to fende, and howe to smite: In any wyse, be ruled by these thrée, They shall direct both you, and Wyll aryght. Farewell and let our louing counsell bee At euery hande before you in your fyght, VVitte. Here in my sight good Maddam sitte and viewe: That when I lift, I may loke vppe on you. This face this noble face, this liuely hiew, Shal harden mee, shal make our enemye rue. O faythful mates, that haue this care of mee: How shal I euer recompence, your paynes wyth gold or ée. Come now and as you please, enioyne me how to doe it, And you shall see me prest, and susable to it.
VVill Why mayster whyther way, what hast am I no body? Instruction. What Will, we maye not mysse thee, for no money. VVitte. Welcome good Wyll, and doe as thou art bydde, This daye or neuer, must Tediousnes be ridde. VVill. God spede vs well, I will make one at all assayes Instruction. Thou shalt watche to take him at certayne bayes, Come not in the thronge, but saue thy selfe alwayes. You twayne on eyther syde, first wyth your sword and buckler. After the first conflict, fight wyth your sworde and daggers, You sir with a Iaueling and your Targett in your hand, See how ye can, his deadly strokes wythstand. Kepe at the soyne, come not wythin his reache, Untyll you see, what good aduauntage you may ketche. Then hardly leaue him not, tyll time you strike him dead, And of all other partes, especially saue yonr head. VVitte. Is this all, for I would fayne hae done? VVill. I would we weare at it, I care not how sone. Instruction. Now when ye please. I haue no more to tell, But hartely to praye for you, and wyshe you well. VVitte. I thancke you, goe thou and bidde the battayle Wyll. VVill. Come out thou monster fell, that hast desire to spill, The knot and linked loue, of Science and of Witte, Come trie the quarel in the fyeld, and fyght with vs a fitte. Act. 5 sena. 5. Tediousnes, VVitte, VVill, Instruction, Studie, Diligence. Tediousnes. A doughte durte these iiii. oyes will doe, I will eate them by morsels two and two.
Thou fyghteste for a wyfe a rod a rodde, Had I wist this, I would haue layed on loade, And beate thy brane and thys my cloobe together, And made thee safe inoughe for retourninge hyther, VVill. A foule horesone what a sturdie thife it is? But we wyll pelt thee knaue vntill for woe thou pisse, Tediousnes. Let me come to that elfe. VVitte. Nay nay thou shalt haue worke inoughe to saue thy selfe, Fight. Instruction. Take breath and chaunge your weapones playe the men, Some what it was that made thee come agaen, Thou stickest some what better to thy takling I see, But what, no force ye are but Iack sprot to mee. VVitte. Haue houlde heare is a morsell for thee to eate, Studie, Instruction. Here is a pelt to make youre knaues hart freete, Dilignce. There is a blowe able to fll a hogge, VVitte. And here is a foyne behynde for a madde dogge, Let will trippe you downe. Houlde houlde houlde the lubber is downe, Tediousnes. Oh VVill. Stryke of his hed whyle I houde hym by the crowne, VVitte. Thou monstrous wretch, thou mortall foe to me and mne, Which euermore at my good lucke and fortune didest repyne, Take here thy iuste desert and payment for thy hire. Thy hed this day shall mee prefer vnto my hartes desyre, Instruction. O noble Witte, the prayse, the game is thine,
Studie. Houe vp his head vpon your speare, soe here a ioyfull signe. Diligence. O valiant knighte, O conquest full of praye. VVill. O blest of god to sée these happie dayes. VVitte. You you, my faithfull Squiers deserues no lesse, Whose tried trust, well knowen to mee in my distres. And certain hope of your fixt fayth, and aste good will, Made me attempt this famouse fact most nedefull to fulfill, To you I yeald great thancks, to me redownds the gaine. Now home a pace, and ringe it out, that Tediousnes is slayne. Say all at once, Tediousnes is slaine. Act. 5 sena. 6. Science, VVitte. Science. I heare and sée the ioyfull newes, wherin I take delight, That Tediousnes our mortall foe, is ouercme in ight. I see the signe of victorye, the signe of manlines: The heape of happy happes: the ioy y• tongue cannot expresse. O welcome fame from day to day for euer shal arise. VVitte. Auaunt ye griping cares, and lodge no more in mee, For you haue lost, and I haue wonne continuall ioyes and sée. Nowe let me fréely touche, and fréely you embrace, And let my frendes with open mouth proclame my blisfull case. Science. The world shall know doubt not, and shal blow out your fame, Then true report shall send abrode, your euerlasting name. Nowe let our parentes déere, be certifyed of this, So that our mariage may forth with procede as meete it is. Come after mée all fiue, and I will lead you in. VVitte. My payne is paste, wy gladnes to beginne, My taske is done, my hart is set at rest,
My foe subdued, my Ladyes loue possest. I thancke my frends, whose helpe I haue at neede, And thus you see, howe Witte and Science are agréed, Wée twaine hence forth one soule, in bodyes twayne must dwel Reioyse I praye you all with mee, my frendes and fare ye well. FINIS.
