17552 99837416 1735
STATVTES COMPYLED FOR THE BETTER OBSERVATION OF THE HOLY RVLE OF THE MOST GLORIOVS FATHER AND PATRIARCH S. BENEDICT Confirmed by the ordinary Authoritie of the right ho∣norable ād Reuer. Father in Chr. the Lo. MATTHIAS HOVIVS Archbishop of Macklin and Primate of the Netherlands &c. as alsoe by authority from the Pope his Holynesse delegated to him, and by him deliuered to the English Religious VVoemen of the Monastery of our blessed Lady the perpetuall Virgin Mary in Bruxelles and to all their Successours; Quis est homo qui timet Dominum; legem statuet ei in via quam elegit. Psal. 24. VVhat a kinde of person is that, who feareth our lord hee will constitute him a law, for that State of life where of hee hath made choyce. Printed att Gant by IOOS DOOMS.
THE FIRST PARTE OF THE STATVTES OF THOSE THINGS THAT Appertayne to common Disciplyne AND ARE TO BEE OBSERVED OF ALL CHAPTER 1. Of Piety. 1. WHERE as the cheifest scope and end of Euery Religious Order is to aduance the Profes∣sours there of to the Saluation and spirituall perfection of their Soules, the∣refore all that enter this Congregation, must dilligently apply themselues, that by meete and conuenient, meanes, they may attayne to the proposed end of their Vocation: the cheife meanes where of are, the exercises of true piety, and deuotion, as often prayer, me∣ditation,
confession of their Sinnes, the holy Communion, and the Mortification of them∣selues; 2. Besides the tyme appoynted for the accomplshing of the deuyne Office, and reading of spirituall bookes, euery one shall each day imploy one whole hower in men∣tall prayer▪ the which tyme that they may fruytefully spend, to the comfort of their Soules; the Abbesse shall endeauour that thy may bee instructed by such spirituallmen, as are well experienced in that godly exercise that they may not onely stirr vpp in them∣selues, such affections as may further them to vertue, but that they may alsoe the better discouer the illusions of the Ghostly Enemy and know how to auoyde them; 3. If any of the Religious bee found vn apt for this kinde of exercise, lett her bestow the afforesayd tyme, either in vocall prayer, or in some other deuoute imployment, ac∣cording to the Iudgment of the Ghostly Father; 4. They shall confesse and Communi∣cate once euery weeke, the which they shall doe alsoe vppon the cheifeste Feasts of the Church, and the Order; except the ghostly Father shall iudge some tymes otherwise, for some in perticuler, and more then this they may bee permitted; as the Abbesse
with the approbation of the Ghostly Father shall thinke good; 5. When they haue made their vowes and profession, for three dayes they shall re∣ceaue the holy Eucharist; that they consi∣dering the greatnesse of the benefitt which they haue receaued▪ they may become more gratefull to the king of heauen to whom they are espowsed. 6. Out of the tyme of Confession none shall speake with her ghostly Father vppon any pretence whatsoeuer, but in such man∣ner and tyme as to the Abbesse, and Superiour shall seeme meetest, and then leaue shalbee graunted to conferr with him soe oft, as the Abbesse or Superior shall per∣ceaue that it will bee for her good, that re∣questeth licence: which licence the Prio∣resse, Mistris of the nouices, ād Cellarier may grante to those that are vnder their seuerall Charges: soe that first they know the gho∣stly Father his opinion whether, and in what manner hee shall thinke it profitable for them; 7. The Lady Abbesse must sett downe a certayne tyme for their confessions, and shee must see that all goe to one ghostly Father (whom the Bishopp shall appoynte them for that purpose) if the number will permitt it, otherwise shee with her Conuent shall
choose another approued by the Ordinary, vnto whom that parte of the Conuent shall confesse, which the Abbesse shall thinke good to appoynte; 8. None of the Religious shall presume to censure her Confessor, either in the way of praysing or discommending him before others, neither by Comparison to prefer the one aboue the other, or to manifest their de∣fects, but onely to the Abbesse; and if hee haue giuen Counsayle or aduise to any of them, lett her not discouer it in any such sort, that any hurt or detrimēt may enue thereof; 9. They shall all confesse to their Ordi∣nary Ghostly Father, and to noe other, except the Abbesse giue them leaue, and all shall confesse twice or thrice euery yeare to that Preist that the most Reuerend lord Bishopp in speciall manner for that purpose shall appoynte; alsoe the Lady Abbesse shall pro∣uide some three or fower Preists (according to the number of the Couent) vnto whom, by her leaue they may confesse, as often as shee shall deeme fitting for their spirituall good, hauing notwithstanding still good re∣gard, that shee disturbe not the good order of her Monastery hereby; And this confor∣mable to the decree of Clement the VIII. made for Superiours of Monasteryes in th yeare of our lord 1594.
10. Let the Abbesse appoynte them a certayne tyme for the dayly examination of their Consciences, that thereby they may the better Consider of the state of their Sou∣les, and what fruyte they reape by their holy Exercises; 11. If the Abbesse perceaue that some doe not soe much attend to their spirituall proffitt, as they should, and thereby giue her lesse satisfactiō, let her in a mother like man∣ner exhort them to vse more dilligence for the tyme to come, and therefore it will much proffitt them, that at lest once a yeare all the Religious liue retyred from the rest (but not all at one tyme) that they may the better Recollect and confirme themselues in Spirit, but this wilbee most expedient for them, that make lesse progresse and aduan∣cement in vertue and Religious life; 12. None shall seeke for any spirituall aduise or receaue any such directions, but from those which the Abbesse shall approue neither shall shee receaue any Instructions for that purpose without the expresse con∣sent of her sayd Superiour; 13. Lett the Abbesse haue especiall care that noe bookes that sauour not of a Reli∣gious Spirit, or which doe not helpe there vnto, bee at any tyme brought into the Mo∣nastery; And lett the Catoloque of all the
bookes of the Monastery bee examined of some learned discreete man, whoe may dis∣cerne whether they are profitable for Reli∣gious Spirits or noe▪ and lett her allow but some few for euery one, commaunding the rest to bee kept by one of the Religious, to bee communicated vnto others as neede shall require; 14. None without the leaue of the Su∣periour shall vse vppon herselfe any Corpo∣rall austeritie, ouer and aboue that which the rule and Statutes doe appoynte, or which the ghostly Father shall not approue; yet the Lady Abbesse may not onely permitt, but alsoe enioyne some austeritie to her Reli∣gious Subiects, when shee shall Iudge it meete for their spirituall good; 15. If the Abbesse see any one of her Religious giuen to more austeritie then the rest, and to bee more feruent in her good Exercises, shee must endeauour to aduance and helpe her in her good desires, yet soe that all bee done with in the limitts, of pru∣dence and discretion; And all the Religious of this Congregation are to vnderstand that there is nothing appoynted in any other Religious Order, which may helpe for the increase of Gods holy Spiritt, which shall not alsoe bee most willingly permitted to them of this holy Congregation, if soe bee
it shall bee thought expedient for them; 16. They that are permitted to ve vppon themslues any bodyly affliction, or mortifi∣cation, must soe endeauour to conceale the same, that (as farr as lyeth in them) it may not bee knowne to the rest, except the Ab∣besse for some other good respects shall otherwise appoynte 17 Once euery weeke each one shall make a disciplyne for soe long a tyme as the Ab∣besse shall thinke good, and it is to be done on Friday at night, except the Abbesse some tyme sall appoynte some other day; 18. Although the Abbesse may apply the prayers and deuotions of her Religious, for the obtayning of gods assistance and grace▪ or for some other benefitt from his deuine goodnesse, yet shall shee bring in noe new obligations, but with great moderation▪ or with very great Consideration; 19. They shall say or sing their howers, and the deuyne office, according to the Ro∣mane vse, they shall say the litle Office of our blessed lady, the Office of the deade, the Graduall Psalmes, the seuen penetentiall Psalmes, and Litanies, in such sort as is ap∣poynted in the breuiary of Rome; 20. They shall sing the Mattines, laudes ād the rest of the howers vppō the princi∣pallest Feasts of the yeare, kept either by the
precept of the Church; or vppon Custome, vppon the Feasts of their Patrones; and Pa∣tronesses, both of their Order and of their perticuler Churches▪ and of the Feast of the dedication of the same, alsoe they ae to sing euery day their conuentuall Masse, except the Abbesse for iust causes for a tyme or∣dayne otherwayes, both in these latter, as alsoe in the former Solemnities; Once euery weeke a Masse of the holy Ghost is to bee sung, or sayd, and as often as the Office of he blessed Virgin is sayd on the Saturdayes, soe often a Masse is to bee celebrated of our bles∣sed Lady, for this end that the Conuent may obtayne of our lord spirituall progresse and aduancement 22. Whyle they sing, or say the deuyne Office, lett them obserue due grauitie and Modesty, and decent composition of their cariage, neither may they post oure their seruice▪ but they must pronounce each wor∣de with moderate leisure, distinctly, and truly, and with soe loude a voyce, that they may bee well herd and vnderstoode by those that are out of the Quire; 23. None may intreate or labour to haue leaue to intone or reade any thing, but as it shall bee appoynted her, neither may shee any wise refuse any thing that shee is willed to sing or reade, except shee first make know
her impediment to the Superiour; to who∣se Commaundement shee is wholly to submitt her selfe; 24. They may some tymes vse Musicke in the deuyne office, yet it must bee with great Moderaion, togeather with the good edification of the hearers, and only such Songs they are to sing as are truly graue and modest; 25. If vppon iust hindrance any shalbee absent from the other Canonicall howers, yett all must bee present at Complyne, ex∣cept some vrgent Cause shall excuse them, or that the Abbesse shall iudge some other businesse to bee more necessary and im∣portant; CHAPTER 2. Of Pouertie; 1. ALL such as make their profession of Religion in this Congregation, must vnderstand that they can haue nothing in propriety, euen as the Rule hath enacted; what soeuer therefore is giuen them by ther frends and kinsfolkes▪ is to bee applyed to the vse of the Conuent and Communitie; But if the Abbesse will permitt any to haue
any thing of smale price as a memory of their Frends, it may not bee any thing that is made of gould or Siluer, and much lesse of pretious stones, sett either in gould or Siluer; 2. Goulden or Siluer Vessells may not bee vsed in this Congregation, except for the Church or Infirmary, and for this latter in meane and smale quantitie and number; Neither may the Abbesse vse such Vessell in her Cell, or in the Refectory, but this may bee permitted for the intertaynment of Guestes, (when it shalbee thought expe∣dient to vse any such entertaynment) yet with this moderation, that in them all va∣nitie and secular pompe is to bee eschewed; 3. They must auoyde all notable singula∣ritie and curiositie in their apparell, Images, and all other Furniture of their Cells, and they are to haue only those things, which be∣fitt religious decency, and are for their he∣alth, and they must willingly imbrace what soeuer appertayneth to their diett and Ap∣parell according to true Religious pouertie; 4. There woolen or linnen apparell may not bee made of any fine Costly Cloath, yea though itt bee giuen them, or bee by their parents bestowed vppon them, but they are to weare those things, that are of a moderate price, and are lasting; 5. They shall not giue or receaue one of
another any thing, without the lady Abbesse o the Superiours licence, ye the Prioresse, Mistresse of the Nouices, and Celarier may some tyme giue leaue to those that are vn∣der their charge, to giue or take one of ano∣ther, some matter of litle moment or value; 6. Let none begg any thing of her frēds or Parents, for her proper vse, but if her frēds or Parents will giue any thing, lett it bee soe done that it may bee applyed to the Communitie, or left to the will and disposi∣tion of the Abbesse, that shee may bestow it vppon them as shee shall thinke good; 7. It may not bee lawfull to lend or grāt any thing appertayning to the Monastery to any abroade, without leaue from the Ab∣besse; 8. Each Religious shall once euery yeare (to witt before the first Sunday in lent) goe to the lady Abbesse and with due humilitie and reuerence declare vnto her, that what soeuer they haue, they willingly offer it vnto her, leauing it to her Will, whether shee will suffer them to re∣tayne, restore, or otherwise dispose ther of in the best sort, as in our lord, shee shll thinke most meete, and if the Abbesse will take a vew of each thing in perticuler, they shall bring them all vnto her, in all Fide∣litie, neither may they haue any thing loc∣ked
vpp in Chestes or Coffers, without the leaue and knowledge of the Abbesse; 9. And to the end euery one may stricktly and carefully keepe their vow of pouerty, it is enacted, that if any after her death (which God forbidd) should bee found a Proprietary and to haue any thing of notable value for her vse, or in the Custody of any other, with∣out the Abbesses knowledge, she shalbee infallably depriued of Christian Buriall; CHAPTER 3. Of Chastitie; IT is very fitt the Spouses of Christ imitate all Angelicall puritie, which may con∣serue in them the integritie of their bodyes and myndes; therefore they must fly all such things which may any wayes cause any im∣pression in their myndes, contrary to puritie 2. They shall conceale noe greiueous temptation, which they shall not manifest to their ghostly Father yea and to their im∣mediate Superiour, or to the Abbesse, if they thinke they may receaue from them any comfort or helpe; lett them shew all mode∣sty and humilitie in their wordes, Counte∣nances, gestures, and Actions, and lett them
behaue them selues each to others wih due respect, and Religious grauitie, and euery one is to behould as it were Christ himselfe in er Sister; CHAPTER 4. Of Obediece; 1. AS the Religious haue vowed to God and to their Superiours them selues, and wat soeuer els they haue, soe must they suffer themselues to bee guyded and gouerned by their Abbesse, and Supe∣riour, as the Interpretours of Gods holy will; therefore let them wholy giue themselues to perfect holy obedience, and let them la∣bour to bee excellent in the same, not onely willingly and promptly, performing those things that are enioyned them, but fullfil∣ling them in such sorte and fashion, as they thinke to bee most conformable to the Su∣periours Will; 2. Euery one must bee ready to vndergoe all base Offices and exercises, what soeuer the Abbesse shall thinke good to impose vppon them, neither may they thinke them∣selues exempt from this by any office, degree or Qualitie, nor may they expect any priui∣ledge,
but in case of Necessitie onely, but euery one is to know that all are to liue equally vnder one and the selfe same Rule of Obedience, without exception of any persons or person; 3. When the Superiour commaundeth any thing, that may bee hurtfull to their he∣alth, or an hindrance, of a greater good, or that it cannot bee performed within the tyme allotted them, then let them soe ma∣nifest the difficultie to her, that yet withall, they leaue all to her Iudgment and discre∣tion, and soe obey, if it may bee done with∣out manifest Sinne; 4. If any should request any thing of her Superiour which shee thinketh needefull for the health of her body or Soule, or for the performance of any duty and charge enioyned her, lett her first commend the matter to God, and with a resigned mynde lett her open the case to the Superiour, and after it hath beene some two or three tymes denyed her, lett her neuer mention the mat∣ter more, except shee verely thinke, her Superiour hath for gott it, and that shee will take it well, that shee bee put in mynde there of; 5. They shall not onely obey the lady Abbesse, but alsoe all others of the Conuent, whether they bee of the Quire or Conuerse)
whoe from her receaue power and Autho∣riie▪ otherwise none may commaund, or re∣prehend another, without expresse leaue from the Abbesse, and of her hee is to vn∣derstand how farr she may proceede in commaunding, or in her reprehension. 6. If any bee commaunded any thing by the subordinate Superiour, which is diffe∣rent from that which the cheife Superiour or Abbesse did commaunde or apoynte, let the Inferiour manifest to the Subordinate her Superiours Will, and Order, and lett her without further Contradiction reuerently obey, if shee see her persist and coninew in her commaunde, but let the subordinate af∣terwards informe her Superiour of the Case if any error or fault happen thereby. 7. If at any tyme happyly the subordinate Superiours, commaunde diuersly any one, in things appertayning to their charges, lett them represent their difficulties, each one to the other, without all contention: and if the case soe require it, with externall and mu∣tuall shew of Reuerence, lett hm remitt it to the arbitrement of the Abbsse, or Supe∣riour laying barely open the Case without further dispute, and soe lett them thinke that to bee best whic the Abbesse or Superiour, sufficiently informed, shall iudge to bee soe;
8. What soeuer is denyed by any subordi∣nate Speriour, shee may not aske the same of the Abbesse, except alsoe shee declar vnto her, that the Subordinate Superiour did deny it, togeather ith the reason of her sayd deniall, soe far as shee knoweth or can guesse; 9. They are to obey her that commaun∣deth anything in the lady Abbesses name, al∣though in very deede shee haue noe such authoritie soe to commaunde, and ordinary∣ly in thir Commaundements, they are ra∣ther to vse the Abbesses name, then their owne, except onely the mother Prioresse, Mistresse of the Nouices, and Cellarier, to∣wards those of their charge; CHAPTER 5. Of the Inclosure; 1. THey must haue a speciall care of keeping their Inclosure, soe much commended and (with vehement words expressing the necessitie thereof) comma∣unded by the sacred Counsell of Trent: mo∣reouer seing they haue bound themselues by vow to the obseruation thereof, they must hold it necessary to bee kept;
2. Their Inclosure must bee enuyroned with high Walls, which may contayne that parte of the Church, to witt the Quyre al∣lotted to their proper vse, togeather with the Cloyster dormitory Refectory, and all the Offices and buyldings, which are appertay∣ning to the proper vse of the professed Re∣ligious; togeather with the Gardens, Or∣chards, and such like, soe that none from abroade may enter into this Inclosure, by any Stayres, or Gates, but onely by one dore or Gate, if it may bee any wise so contriued commodiously; 3. Noe professed Religious may goe out of this Inclosure▪ but vppon constrayne of Fyre, extreme famyne, Warr, ruyne of the buyldings, and such like greueous dange∣rous cases, and for other Cases approued vppon vrgent necessitie, or commaunded by the lord Bishopp, or the Visitor; yet when the Schollers of Religion are to receaue their Religious habitt, or the Nouices are to make their Profession, the Abbesse with some few of her Religious, may goe out of the Quier, and enter into the outward parte of the Church, that they may assist them in that solemne Action; which is alsoe permitt∣ted to the Abbesse newly chosen▪ that with a decent Company of her Religious, shee may alsoe enter the same, to receaue the
Bishopps Benediction: for which, and for some other necessary Causes and vses, there may bee a Conuenient passage bet∣wixt the Quier and the outward Church. 4. All that are not Religious or not of the Conuen of what sex, age, or Condition soe∣uer they bee, may not enter into the Inclo∣sure but vppon necessary Causes, approued and licenced by the Bishopp in writing, without which licence according to the decree of the Counsayle of Trent, both the person that entreath, and the person that admitteth him, incurreth the payne of Ex∣communication; 5. Other Religious weomen of the same Orderliuing vnder these Statutes, being sent by their Superiours to some other place, may in their passage be receaued in to any Mona∣stery of this Congregation, and therein they may stay for two or three dayes, or longer, as according to prudence and Charitie it shalbee thought conuenient; 6. The Visitours accompanyed with cer∣tayne modest and graue Clergy men may enter in, to performe their Visitation, or for any other necessary businesse; 7. When the ghostly Father entreth into the Monastery to visite the sicke, or for some other necessary matter, one or two Religi∣ous appoynted by the Abbesse for that pur∣pose
shall allwayes bee present with him, and if any Religious bee to bee buryed, soe many fom abroade may bee present at that Office, as shalbee thought needefull. 8. The Phisition, Surgeon, Workemen, Gardiners, Porters, Carters, Masons, and all such as haue any necessary imployments within the Monastery may bee suffred to enter; they must keepe accompt in what number they entr, that in the same num∣ber they may departe, and those that enter must bee accompanyed by two or three of the Religious to those places where they are to bee ymployed, none of the Religious may approach to those that are entred with∣out the expresse licence of the Abbesse, the which not withstanding shee may not graunt to any one alone. 9. When the people from abroade haue leaue to speake with the Religious, lett it bee done at a Grate when neede shall re∣quire▪ within the Grate lett a Curtayne hang which may soe hang shutt, or bee drawne to lett the Religious bee seene, or not to bee seene, as the Abbesse shall thinke best ex∣pedient. 10. In the place where the Religious make their Confessions, lett a Gloth bee soe drawne and fastned, that the penitent may
not see the Ghostly Father, nor yet bee seen by him; All that the Religious are to receaue into the Inclosure, lett them receaue it by a Turne, except it bee of that kinde, that by the Turne they cannot receaue it; the Turne with in must bee locked and made fast, in such sort that it may not bee tourned about, but at such tymes as any thing is to bee recea∣ued in thereby; CHAPTER 6. Of Silence; 1. IN such place and tymes as soueraig∣ne silence is to bee kept; (to witt, in the dormitory, Reectory, Chapter house, Quier, and Cloyster, and in the howers assi∣gned for silence, as are to bee seene after∣wards in the twelueth Chapter, and in the 7. 8. and 9. Numbers, and after Complyne vntill Prime ended, none may speake but vppon vrgent necessitie, and that by noe other meanes shee can expresse her mea∣ning, and make her selfe vnderstoode, for then shee may speake, but yett with a low voyce and with all breuitie; 2. At what tyme they worke togeather in the Common worke house they may speake, but yett onely of things necessary
and with a low voyce; 3. If any should seeke for another, lett her goe and seeke her, but without noyse, ād shee may not call her with a loude voyce, and if shee finde her with others, lett her deliuer vnto her the Superiours commaun∣dement, that others may not vnderstand it, and shee that is called for to another place, lett her giue notice thereof to the Superiour of that place to the end shee may know whe∣ther shee goeth; 4. Soe often as they speake togeather, they must haue good care that they may not bee heard out of the place where they are at that present; In their Recreations (when they are permitted them) lett them bee soe myndefull of modesty and Religious de∣cency, that one push and thrust not another, noe nor soe much as touch her, soe farr as lyeth in her; In their speeches and Conuer∣sation lett them auoyde and fly all shew of contempt and litle esteeme of others, all kinde of mocking, and scoffings, and all other things what soeuer, whereby either throughe their wordes or actions, any kinde of occasion of brabble or displeasure may arise; 5. And for as much as here mention is made of the Recreations of the Religious; it is prohibited that within the Inclosure
any kinde of beasts bee kept or fedd, but for the vse of the Communitie, and not for the priuate Recreation of any one alone, neiher vppon any coulor or pretext what soeuer may they permitt any dwarfes, diotes, or young Infants to bee nourished or brought vpp within the Inclosure. 6. Their mutuall conuersation must bee vsed for their health, and Conseruation of Charitie, and herefore it must bee vsed in publike, and not in Corners, or in their Cells neher may the Religious vse any speech of such matters, which they haue heard o se∣cular people abroade, except they e of such, which may yeald Edification, and spi∣rituall Comfort and proffitt to the hearers. 7. In their Conuersation lett thē so shew loue and Charitie to euery one, they withall they take good regard that they shew not themselues mare singularely affected to one then to another, and lett them doe eue∣rence to euery one, according as their State shall require, neither may thy shunn the speech and Conuersation of any whoe soeuer. 8. They must bee very carefull that they talke not of their Stocke, and Nobilitie of their kindred, nor of plightes, Controuersies and debates, among their Parents, kindred, and Families, or dispute of them, yea they
may not admitt any talke among themselues (but with great warynesse) of the Iarrs or enmities that one Prouince or Country hath with another. 9. None may speake of the imperfection of any other, but onely to the Abbesse, or Superiour, or to those from whom they may expect helpe and redresse; and if any damma∣ge or hindrance by any ones defect, may bee thought to fall vnto the Monastery, and that by noe other way it can bee remedied, all shalbee bound to informe the Abbesse there of, that in good tyme both the hurt that may be fall vnto any person in perticuler, or the mischeife that may happen to the whole Conuent in generall may bee hindred. 10. None shall heare any thing of any Religious vppon Bond of secrecy, and vppō that Condition that the Abbesse may not know it, yea rather they ought to hould it a thing right gratefull and pleasing to them, that shee should bee informed of all matters that may any wayes aduance, and sett for∣ward the good gouernment of the Mona∣stery. 11. None may enter into the Office or Cell of another, without leaue, or vppon commaundement of the Superiour, and ne∣ther may they then enter, before they haue giuen a signe by knocking at the doare and
haue receaued an answeare to enter, lett te dore stand open soe long, as they talke and bee togeather within, except the Superiour doe expressely appoynte it otherwise; 12. Whyle they speake one to another, or of another, they may not call them by their bare names, but the Abbesse, Prioresse, Mistris of the Nouices, and Celarier shall call their Subiects Sisters, the professed of the Quier shall call alsoe the Conuerse, Sisters; but the professed of the Quier, must call them dames speaking of others that are professed of the Quier, the Prioresse must bee called of all Mother; the Mistrisse, of her No∣uices must bee called Mistrisse, the Cellarier is alsoe to bee called Mother of those that are vnder her charge; But the Abbesse of all is to bee named lady: that by these names due honour and Reuerence may bee yealded each one in that Vocatiō, ād degree in which shee is placed by our lord ād Sauiour Christ; 13. As they meete one with another lett them doe Reuerence each one to the other by an Inclination and bending of their bodyes, and lett each one endeauour to preuent the other with honour according to due Religious modesty; and all thoughe the Iuniour professed ought principally to vse this preuention to her elders, and more Ancient in Religion by honoring and Reue∣rencing
them▪ yet none but Superiours may exact it of them; 14. Inspeaking lett none vnmannerly interrupt anothers speech, or in twight her Sister of Errours: but in there Conuer∣sation lett them bee myndfull to vse all due modesty, and decent cariage, with all Ciui∣litie auoyding both in their Words and be∣hauiour, all Rudenesse, sowernesse, or light∣nesse, as alsoe all secular vanity and affe∣ctation: which noe wayes standeth with the grauitie, which appertayneth, vnto Religi∣ous persons; let alsoe their speech bee very sparing, and for the most part lett it bee about spirituall matters, or at lestwise about such matters as may sauour of spiritt, and nourish the same; 15. In their going and shutting of the doores, lett them make noe noyse, as much as lyeth in thē, but this they must beware of in tyme of soueraigne Sylence, and whē the Religious are at their reading ād meditaion; 16. When any (hauing obtayned leaue) visitt the Sicke, lett her soe behaue herselfe, that shee may recreate and ease them; and to the end shee may not bee trouble some vnto them, shee must first learne of the In∣firmare by what meanes hee may best Cō∣fort them, and auoyde to bee greiuousto thē 17. When secular people come, and (by
the Superiours permission) speake with the Religious at the Grate, lett them signify vnto the Abbesse eiter by themselues▪ or by such as are appoynted to accompay them, those things whereof they had talke as the matter shall require; And then let them auoyde long conference, if it may bee done wihout offence, or except the matter bee of that mo∣ment and consequence, that longer speach may bee permitted. 18. Whyle they speake with secular people, and those that come vnto them from abroade; if the Prefect of the Turne, or her Companion cannot be present, let them haue another appoynted by the Superiour, who may heare and see all that is spoken and done, who may neuer departe or leaue them alone till the speech bee fully ended. 19. Although nothing ordinarely ought to bee sayd which hey would not haue herd and vnderstoode, yet when the case requi∣reth Secrecy, and that the Religious cannot goe commodiously to the Abbesse, lett her request leaue by the Thourere to speake in∣secrett, and by her lett her deliuer the causes for which shee requireth such secrett con∣ference, and of her shee is to expect an an∣sweare how shee must proceede. 20. If any Religious bee not permitted to speake with any at the Greate, none may
tell her that shee was called for any ab∣roade, and that shee was denyed to speake with them. 21. None may speake with people ab∣roade of the domesticall affayres of the Mo∣nastery, except they bee such matters as euery one may well vnderstand them, or which they know the Superiour will not bee vnwilling they should bee made knowne vnto them: and if any Externe should request the assistance of any of the Religious in any affayre, yet lett her not take vppon her to doe or write any thing without the lycence the Abbesse; 22. Whyle the Religious are in the speaking place, lett them speake with soe lowavoyce, that they may bee onely heard of their Companions, and of the persons with whō they speake; More ouer lett them endeauour to behaue them selues there with all edifica∣tion, and to apply some parte at lest of their talke to a spirituall end, neither lett them show that in such Conuersation they seeke for their omne priuate solace and Comfort, but rather for the Comfort of those that come to Visitt them, finally lett them soe bestow that tyme vppon others, that at the first peale they depart to the Quiar, from which none may bee absent, without the ex∣presse licence of the Abbesse or Superiour;
23. In lent and in tyme of Aduent this accesse of externes may not bee permitted, as neither vppon the dayes of Confession and Communion, and then the Religious may not bee seene of them, if vppon any oc∣casion they bee permitted to speake with them except some important great reason shall require the contrary; CHAPTER 7. Of the Fasts, and the Common diett; 1. IN Aduent they must fast except the Sundayes, on which they obserue ab∣stinence, and from Quinquagesima Sunday, included vntil Easter (excepting all Sun∣dayes) they shall Fast, and abstayne from white meates; except the approued Custo∣me of the Country, and the dearth of lenten meates doe perswade otherwise; 2. From Septuagesima included vntill Quinquagesima they shall abstayne from all flesh, in which tyme vppon Mundayes, Vednesdayes ād fridays they shall fast, except some double Feasts fall on those days; Alsoe frō the Feast of the Ascention of our lord excluded, vntill the Vigill of Penticost they shall keepe Abstinence;
3. From the Feasts of the Natiuity of our blessed lady excluded, vntill Easter they shall Fast euery wednesday and from the Kalends of Noumber excluded, they shall fast alsoe Mundayes, except vppon those ferias (out of lent) a double Feast bee celebrated; 4. From the Feast of the Resurrection of our Sauiour Christ, till the Feast of the Natiuity of our blessed Virgin Mary included they may receaue twoe Refections euery day excepting Notwithstanding Fridayes, on which they shall obserue the approued Cu∣stome of the Prouince where in they liue, or els they shall fast; 5. They must appoynte the howers of their Meales according to the Differences of the tymes of the yeare, or according to the de∣uine Seruice, and the holy Office of the Masse, as is sett downe in the Roman Missal 6. In the Fasts and abstinences of the Rule and Statutes, the Abbesse may dispence with such as are weake, and aged, and whēsoeue any perticuler reason may perswade he there vnto, soe that Flesh bee not eaten in the Refectory,Vnlett at a table part. and that the grant passe not into a custome: but vppon those dayes tht are bidden by the Church, their approbatio  to bee required who aue authoritie , according to the Custome of each ;
7. Vppon due Consideration of the paynes and labours that are to bee sustayned in this Congregation, as alsoe of the Sex, but especially of the weake Complextions, and educations of very many which are admit∣ted into this order those things that apper∣tayne to their dyett, are so to bee mode∣rated and tempered, that the Religious may with more strength goe forward in the performance of the deuine Seruices, and burthens of their Institute, and with more alacrity perseuer and continue in the same; therfore ordinaryly vppon Sun∣dayes, Tuesdayes, and Thursdays through out the yeare, as alsoe vppon Chrismasse day falling vppon a friday, or Saturday, they may eare flesh, excepting hereafter according to the Rule they shall altogeather abstaine from flesh. 8. The measure of their meate and inke shall depend vppon he Iudgment of Abbesse, and as shee is not to permitt any superfluyty in their dyett, soe is alsoe to haue care that nothing bee ting according to Religious decency, ch persons necessity, as on the cōray haue a speciall regard, that whilst sh  auoreth to priuide for euery one in  essaryes, shee permitt not super∣fl and take place amongst thm
yet ordinarely when they eate flesh, shee may giue to each one an Antipast, or sallet, a pittance of flesh of halfe a pound, and a post past in fruyte, or some what els in sleade of fruyte, when thy fast, besides the afforesayde (if they may bee had) lett her endeauour or giue vnto the Conuent what may bee got∣ten, or may well serue for their necessitie, If besides this the Phisition thinke any thing more, and aboue to bee giuen to any or that their necessitie or infirmity doe re∣quire any thing in perticuler, lett her ende∣auour to performe it towards them, with all pitty, charitie, and alacritie, soe that it bee not done in the Common Refectory, but ei∣ther at the Superiours or infirme table or in th Infirmary; 9. Out of tymes of Refection they may not eate or drinke any thing, without the leaue of the Superiour, neither may they re∣fuse those things that are appoynted them by their Superiour for their health and com∣fort, yet in these things the Prioresse, Mi∣stresse of the Nouices, and Cellareir may giue leaue vnto those that are vnder their seuerall Charges; 10. If by experience it bee found, that the Comon dyett is not whole some for some lett that bee made knowne to the Abbesse, who shall prouide therefore, as in our lord
shee shall thinke good, and shee shall euery yeare declare vnto the Visitor what forme and manner shee obserueth in these things and withall lett her not suffer any to keepe any sweet meates, conserues, or Confections in their Cells, except the Phiition thinke that they must haue often vse thereof; CHAPTER 8. Of the Apparell of the Religious and of those things that appertaine to their bedding; 1. FOR their apparell they may vse that which the Abbesse (hauing re∣gard of tymes and places) shall approue; 2. Besides the vpper or greate habitt they may haue two vnder Coates whereof the one or both in Winter may bee lyned with Furr; 3. The greate habitt must bee longer then their other Garments, which must reach to the ground, yet it may not bee soe long that it may hinder them in going, or bee dragged on the ground, and soe worne; and soe it must bee made, that the sleeues must bee three foote large, and what soeuer couereth
the body must bee looe; 4. This greate habitt must bee blacke, and soe must the Scapular, and inward coate next to the Scapulare, if they vse any other coates or garments, it shall litle im∣porte of what colour they bee, soe they bee either white, or blake or some other brownish or darke Colour; 5. Their Cloathes which are vnder their scapulare must bee open from the shoulders downe to the gird le and soe clasped, and for their sleeues they must not bee two wide, nor yet soe straight that they may not put their hands easly into each sleeue, neither in any of their garments, may they vse any buttons or any silke; 6. They must not haue or weare any linnē next their bodyes, without leaue from te Abbesse or Superiour, or except their neces∣sitie, or health should otherwise require; 7. The habitts of the Conuerse Sisters must bee like that of the Quiar: excepting onely that the sleeues of their greate habitt must bee straighter by the halfe and when they weare their greate habitt they must gird them to their bodyes; 8. All must put on their greate habitt when they goe to the Quier, Refectory, Chapter house▪ and speaking place, in such sort and soe oftē as in their Ceremonyes is expressed
9. Euery one must haue a note of all their Cloathes, where of the Guardroabe must haue a Coppy, that they may bee able to render an accompt of them, when it shall∣bee demaunded; they may not sett any letters of their names on their Vayles of Garments which they are to weare, but rather certayne numbers or other Carecters, they must not bee two carefull of hauing new Cloathes, but lett them permitt themselues to bee prouided for herein, by the Abbesse, as in other matters; 10. At what tyme soeuer they shal chance to haue a new Garment, they must giue vpp their old, neither must they bee desirous to haue more then may bee serui∣ceable for their health, and necessitie and what soeuer cloathes they receaue, lett them haue regard to keepe them carefully, and clenly as those things that appertayne to th poore of Christ; 11. In the night they are to take their rest in their Cloathes, hauing on their Scapulars, and stokens that they may bee the readyer to rise vnto mattins; The professed must weare their white and blake Veyles, but the Nouices must sleepe in their white: yet when the heates are greate, or when they are sicke, they may leaue of their Cloathes and stokens and lay their Scapulars on their bedds, yet
may they not then bee without their Veyles, and they are dilligently to keepe, and obserue all other things what soeuer is appoynted and set downe in the holy Rule; 12. Euery one must sleepe apart vppon a straw and a Wollen Matrice: for their Co∣uerlets and Curtaynes they must stand there into the Iudgment of the Abbesse in what sort they are to haue them: they mustly in Wollen, except through the Indisposition of their Corporall health, the Abbesse shall thinke otherwise; 13. Those that are in health may not haue the vse of Feathers but in their pil∣lowes, which may bee couered with linnen Pillow beeres, and they may admitt nothing in their Cloathing or bedding, which hath any shew of singularitie: but onely they may haue such things as are af a meane price, and best indureth! CHAPTER 9. Of letters and Messages. 1. NOe Religious may receaue any let∣ters writings or tokens, either for her selfe or for any other, for that is the Office onely of the keeper of the Parlow; what soeuer is deliuered, the Abbesse or
by her permission the Prioresse shall see▪ and they shall deliuer or retayne it as they shall thinke good: neither may any tell that such letters or tokēs were brought to any, ex∣cept the Abbesse or Prioresse (by the consent of the Abbesse) shall iudge otherwise! 2▪ When they write to their frends, lett them study to write those things which bee seeme their state and profession, and lett them doe it discreetly and prudently, that that i frends may receaue Edification, and spirituall proffitt from them. 3. They must not bee very easy to wri∣te often to their frends, or parentes, except vppon necessitie, or for some spirituall good that may seeme to ensue thereof, yea a Religious person ought to bee very spar∣ing in that kinde, as benig one dead to the world, and that desyreth onely to liue to Christ alone. 4▪ They may not write to their frends or parents before they haue leaue, ne∣ither may they prepare for them any to∣kens, without the knowledge of the Ab∣besse, and without her consent; It is alsoe forbidden all of them, to bestow any Newyeares gift vppon any; yet the Ab∣besse may send somewhat to the Common Frends of the Monastery or bestow some∣whatt vppon others inway of gratitude!
5. What writings letters, or Tokens soeuer they are to send lett them deliuer to the Abbesse and lett them leaue it to her iudgment, whether shee wll send them or noe; neither afterwards may they curiousty inquire in what sort shee disposed of them! 6. None may carry any Messages or Salu∣tatios from people abroade to any of the Monastery wthout the Abbesse commaunde them soto doe! CHAPTER 10. Of the Chapter; 1. The Chapters were instituted and ap∣poynted for the exercise of humi∣litie, Conservation of Monasticall disci∣plyne, and for the aduancement of the Com∣mon good of the Conuent: There fore very great heede must bee taken that the peace tranquillitie, and due subordination (whereby increase of spiritt, and due or∣der is wont to bee gotten and conserved) may not thereby bee disturbed! 2. Once eery weeke Chapter is to bee kept, and that vppon friday, except some solemne Feaste fall vppon that day, for then it must bee kept vppon Manday, or Wednesday not hindred with the like
Feast except some of the ensuing Vigils come that weeke, or some other iust occa∣sion hinder it; 3. They are to meete in Chapter vppon the Vigils of Christmasse, and Easter and the Assention of our lord, and on the Vigi∣les of Penticost of the Assumption of our blessed lady, and of the Patrone of their Or∣der, and of their Church, and so often like wise as the Abbesse shall thinke good whe∣rein they are to performe the things that are sett downe in their Ceremonyes, both for the manifesting of their defects, and for the Correction thereof, as alsoe for the or∣dering businesses, and affayres as may occurr! 4. In the Chapter the Religious are to accuse themselues of the breach of their Ru∣le, or Statuts, or of their negligencs or de∣fects, which when they doe, lett them doe it in such orte, that those that heare and see them, may bee edefyed by the Exemple of their humilitie! if it may bee doubted whe∣ther they may bee rather offended then edi∣fyed, lett them not accuse themselues in pu∣blik thereof, vntill they have consulted with the Superiour about the same! 5. Ordinarely they are to accuse them∣selues of those things that they committed in ublike, or which they thinke in tyme will ome to the notice of others; therefore lett
them no publish their secrett faults, and de∣fects, except the matter bee of smale mo∣ment, or for their greater mortification, or which they thinke may proue of great edifi∣cation vnto others, which notwithstanding they shall first declare vnto the Superiour, that from her they may haue leaue to doe the same! 6. It properly appertayneth to the Prio∣resse, Mistris of the Nouices, and Cellarier to informe the Abbesse of those persons that are subiect vnto them, and to accuse them in the Chapter, although others of the Religious alsoe may, and must in forme the Abbesse about them, when they see any tking com∣mitted domageable for the spirituall good of any or contrary to the common good, or re∣putation of the Conuent, or that they per∣ceaue that these things are not marked by others, or to bee neglected by them! 7. If any bee commanded to accuse ano∣ther lett her doe it with due modesty, mo∣deration laying aside all bitternesse of myn∣de, and exageration of Wordes, but rather see they doe it with great shew of Charitie, and beneuolence! 8. In the Chapter none may bee accused of any fault, which is onely knowne to the accuser her selfe, or which cannot bee pro∣ed by the Testimony of two at the least,
yet all may tell the Abbesse or Superiour of the Faults of any, though neuer soe secrett, except perhapps priuate admonition, may more proffitt the offendors, and there fore may wel suffice, whereby it may bee Iudged to bee preferred and first to bee vsed! yea euery one is to know that it is most seuerely prohibited them to accuse any, or blame them to the Superious, without sufficient ground and knowledge of the matter! 9. None may either by worde or deede tax any Sister, or gird at them for any fault, or defect, whereof they haue beene admoni∣shed by the Abbesse, or Superiour or for which they cōiecture or suspect that they ha∣ue beene reprehended, or punished! for they are to thinke that that admonition, re∣prehension, or Correction proceeded of Charitie, togeather with an intention to vphold good discipline and Order; and that it was alsoe receaued of the party offen∣dent, with full purpose to amend and refor∣me her selfe thereof, for the tyme to come! 10. The Sister accused may not refute the saying of her that accuseth her, except the Superiour commaund her to declare the Sta∣te of the matter; neither may they contend, or preume after wards to brabble amongst thē selues vnder punishment of a great Pen∣nance, which the Superiour is to impose on
them; which thing is alsoe to bee obserued, when any may cance to bee accused out of the Chapter, As the faults whereof they are accused, some are greater, then other some; in like manner for the better auoyding and redressing of them, greater and smaler pe∣nances are to bee enioined, which is left for the most parte to the Discretion of the Supe∣rior, to enioyne such penances for euery of∣fence which may bee thought conuenient who is to haue regard shee seeke notto afflict∣or trouble any but rather to endeauor their amendment, for the greater honour of God, and her Charges proffitt, None must thinke them selues exempt from these Penances, but as all are tyed to the same Rule and Sta∣tutes, soe must they thinke them selues sub∣iect to the same Penances, for their negligen∣ces in obseruation of disciplyne, or exerci∣seing vertue: and there fore the Abbesse may not in these things bee more in∣dulgent or faoureable to one, then to ano∣ther, but shee is to beare an euen hand ouer all, seeking fo the spirituall good and prof∣fitt of all! 12. For as much as Penances are not one∣by to bee giuen for the correction of faultes, but for the exercise of Vertues, and mortifi∣tion of their Passions (as hath beene sayd) there fore whoeseouer shalbee reprehen∣ded
at any tyme by the Abbesse or Superiour, or shall by them receaue any Pennance for any Fault, for which the Rule or Statutes haue sett downe nothing expressely, lett her giue noe shew of impatience, soe farr ort as lyeth in her, nether lett her frame answeares, or excuses for her selfe except perhapps the reasons of those things for which shee is reprehēded and punished; bee demanded of her, or that somewhat bee to bee revealed which was not knowne, but let her endure all without murmuration, and with as great peace of mynde as shee may much lesse it may bee lawfull for any to ex∣cuse her that is reprehended, and (espeially in her presence) seeke to extenuate her fault, although shee may after wards certify the Abbesse of all that hath passed; if soe bee that it may seeme soe expedient; And to the end all occasion of murmuring may bee taken away none may complayne to any of the Re∣ligious, or to any other person, but onely to her from whomshee may expect redresse, and if any feele any disgust for any matter, lett her make her recourse to the lady Ab∣besse, or to the Superiour, who shall with Compassion giue eare to her Playntes, and performe that towards her which shalbee iudged to bee according to Iustice! 13. If shee that is penanced, or any other
for her at some tyme, will not confer about her with the Superiour or Abbesse, for that they may thinke that they cannot deale with them in such free manner as were necessary, then may they goe to the Assistants, or to so∣me one of them, and make knowne to them those things, whereof they would haue their Abbesse or Superior to bee informed 14. For smaller faults such penances as these following may bee enioyned by the Abbesse or Superiour vnto the offenders as the sayd Superiours shall thinke good: to witt certayne prayers, kneeling on the gro∣und, and eating on the same, to serue in the Refectory or Kitchin, to abstaine from some parte of their meate, and such like And if any committ often any error, or through Custome or contempt fall into greater tres∣passes, shee may bee punisted with fasting, with publick or priuate disciplynes, and with other such like Chastisements yet noe Religious may giue a discipline to an other, but the offendor is to inflict it vppon her sel∣fe, except the Abbesse for some great cau∣se doe otherwise appoynte 15. For most greweous faults let those things bee done, which are appoynted in ano∣ther place for the correction of such faults, without exception or regard had to any de∣gree, or Office what oeuer, although wee
hope that (throughe the grace of God) this Congregation wilbee allwayes cleere and free from all such faults! 16. When in the Chapter they are to con∣ferr about the affayres of the Monastery▪ lett euery one deliuer their opinions with all Religious simplicie and sinceritie, as god shall put in their myndes, and shee that hath once finished her speech, may not speake a∣gae except shee haue new leaue granted her, neither may any presume to argueor dis∣pute aginst the saying of any other Sisters! 17. The professed of the Quier haue voy∣ces in the Chapter, and their they sitt each one according to the order of their Profes∣sions, except the lady Abbesse, the mother Prioresse, the deames, and the Mistris of the Noices, who take their places, both here and in all places where the Conuent mee∣teth, in that order as here they haue beene named; for the most part the Iuniors or younger professed speake first, that with greater liberty they may vtter their opinions concerning those affayres, that are then in deliberation; 18. In matters of great moment the Ab∣besse shall fore warne the Chapter of them some two or three dayes before, if the mat∣ter will suffer soe long delay; But in those maters where in the Religious may confer
among them selues, they may take their light and information onely from the Ab∣besse, Prioresse, Assistents, or the Officers, if the matters to bee deliberated vppon, ap∣pertayne to their Charges and Iurisdictions; 19. what by the Chapter is approued or de∣nyed, the same the Abbesse is to approue or deny, except in some cases hereafter speci∣fied; 20. That both the Abbesse, and alsoe the whole Conuent may procede in their Con∣sultations, and determinations with more sweetenesse, light▪ and assurednesse; it is expedient that they haue some one prudent and vertuos man, but especialy well practi∣sed in regular life and discipline, with whom they may conferr and consult in matters of greater difficulty and wight; And this Man∣must bee such an one; as may bee according to the liking and Iudgment of the Religious, and by their suffrages hee is to bee elected; 21. If it soe happen that the Religious disagree in their opinions about some mat∣ter; lett the sayd difficultie bee propounded either in Worde or writing to the chosen person in the presence of the Abbesse▪ of the Assistents, and of some other two of the Cha∣pter, vnto whom the saye Chapter shall com∣mitt this affayre, and all shall bee bound to follow that Order and Resolution, which hee
hee shal iudge expediēt, vntill the right Re∣uerēd lord Bishopp or the Visitor shall other wayes ordayne; But hee shall deliuer in wri∣ting to the Conuent his sayd Iudgment, that afterwards to the Bishopp or Visitor it may better appeare howand in what termes the whole businesse passed; 22. If the Abbesse would appoynte any thing which the Conuent doth not like of, or would not doe that which the Conuent would haue done, and if shee would procee∣de in some cases cōtrary to the Iugdment of all her Assistēts, or will not assemble thē to∣geather (for some secrett Cause which shee thinketh good not to communicate with them) if the matter bee of great momente shee must cōsult with the afore sayde hosen person, and shee may proceede according to his Counsayle deliuered her in writing; 23. Out of Chapter none may seeke to dis∣proue the saying of any vttered in Chapter, neither may any manifest vnto any that was absēt from the Chapter, that which was sayd or done by her selfe, or any other, which may any wayes touch her or any other whoe soe∣uer; They are to bee absent from the Chap∣ter, about whom there is any question to bee propounded in Chapter, or any thing to bee handled about them: as all those (if the Chapter thinke it meete) whoe are neere in
bloode or kindred to them; and the Supe∣riours are to warne and commaunde such persons, as are to bee soe absent, that cu∣riousty they doe not enquire what was any way handled concerning them selues; CHAPTER 11. Of the sicke and infirme Sisters. 1. When any feeleth her selfe more gre∣iued in her bodely health then accu∣stomed, lett her warne the Superiour and Gouernour of the the Infirmary thereof, and when shee hath fully informed her of her State, with due humilitie and quietnesse of mynde, lett her suffer hir selfe to bee dispo∣sed of by them, as they shall thinke goode; 2. Lett none refuse any thing ordayned them by the Phisitions, but hauing made kno∣wne her difficulty to the Abbesse, shee must leaue it to her what shee will determyne of her case, and soe shee must bee obedient to her, with all patience and shew of religious resignation; 3. See that shee bee not greivous to the Infirmere and others that haue care of her, neither may shee bee over importune in cra∣ving of those things which by thē shee shall vnderstand not to bee expedient for her;
Whyle shee vseth corporall remedyes for the recouery of her health, let her not for∣gett her spirituall good, which allwayes is to bee more prised; there fore shee must ha∣ue regard to arme and shengthen her selfe inwardly with the holy Sacraments of Con∣fession, and of the blessed Eucharist; and if shee perceaue, that the force of her Disease with perill to grow vppon her lett her en∣deauour to call for the Sacrament of Extre∣me Vnction, and for the holy Viaticum, according as the Abbesse, and Confessarius shall thke best for her; 5. Shee must take noe medicine which the Phisition or Superiour shall not approue, nether may any of the Religious Councell her to receaue any medicine, nor may the sicke her selfe aske the Counsayle or advise of any other, without the Superiours kno∣wledge; yea noe Religious may bee soe pre∣sumptuous, as to finde fault with the vsage of the sicke person▪ in her hearing. 6. As it is expedient that the sicke vse such dispensations as by the Superiour are granted them whyle they are infirme and weake, yet they must beware that they bee not ouer care full of them selues; yet all may vse a discreete and prudent liberty, vn∣till they bee sufficiently recouered, and re∣stored to their former strength, and such as
are in their Recouery (if they bee many) must sitt togeather with modsty at one Table▪ and in the beginning of their meales some spirituall thing must bee read vnto them; CHAPTER 12. Of the distribution of their Tyme and howers; 1. TO the end they may proceede in the Seruice of God with greater alacritye, and that their spirituall Exercises doe not ouerpasse their bodely strength and health, it is thought meete and conuenient, that euery one haue granted her seuen who∣le howers to take her rest, and sleepe, and that from eight of the Cloke at night, vntill three in the morning or from ten till fiue ex∣cept hereafter it bee thought more fitt ād ex∣pedient, that thy rise to Mattins at midnight; 2. There fore they shall rise to Mattins at three, vnlesse the sayd ouer night, and when they haue ended the sayd Mattins with the lade euery one must repayre to their Celles in good and fitt tyme (ād as the Abbesse shall ∣poynte) they shall bestow an hower in Me∣ditatiō or mentall prayer, after which hower ended they must cōtinue in their Celles vtill
nen in soueraigne silence. 3. At seuen of the Clocke they beginne Prime after wich hower ended ordinaryly they keepe Chapter when it is to bee kept, al thoughe the Abbesse may call a Chapter at any oher hower, when neede shall require. 4. After Prime▪ or the Thirde, a Masse is to be sayd, at which all are to bee present, excepte some Officer vppon necessitie bee excused. 5. After nyne of the Clocke (when they doe not fast) they must recite their third: after their Third, their Conuentuall Masse is to bee sung, or sayde; after Masse the Sixt is sung or sayd: after that hower is ended they goe to the Refectory; But when they Fast according to their Rule, or according to the Commaundment of the Church the Prime, or the Third being sung, or sayd after seuen of the Clocke a Masse is to bee celebra∣ted, if there bee a Preist to celebrate at that tyme; after ten of the Clocke they must sing or say their Sixt, their Conuentuall Masse and Nynth; In lent after their Sixt, Nynth and Conuentuall Masse, the Censong is to bee song or sayd. 6. Lett them soe end their Masse and ho∣wers before noone, that when they fast not, they may din at the halfe hower before a eleuen; but when they fast according to the
Rule, they may dine at a eleuen; but when it is a fast of the Church according to the Custo∣me of the Country, they dine at the halfe hower before twelue: but in lent they are to dine at twelue: and Whyle they are at the Table their must bee allwayes reading; The∣refore at the first Table whether it bee at dinner or Supper, the Benediction, and after∣wards Grace, must bee allwayes sunge or sayde; But at the second Table euery Religi∣ous shall performe this by her selfe; But the reading both at the first and second Tables must bee performed after the same manner and altogeather with the same obseruation of silence and then they are to reade whom the lady Abbesse, or Superior, or shee who shall haue the Charge shall appoynte. 7. After dinner an hower is permitted thē for Recreation, and afterwards at Noone or somewhat after, they sing or say the Nynth, but soe that vppon those dayes in which they fast not, they may bee all in si∣lence about one of the Clocke after Noone, that their for the space of an hower they may recollect themselues▪ or occupy them∣selues in prayer, or in the reading of some spirituall bookes: But vppon fasting dayes this hower of silence is put of vntill foure of the Clocke. 8. Out of lent they are to sing or say their
Euensong at three of the Clocke after noo∣ne, which ended they may spend the rest of their tyme till supper or Collation accor∣ding to their discretion, or deuotion; yet allwayes in silence except the Abbesse shall thinke good to vse their helpes and assistan∣ce in some businesse or Office: but if they fast then they keepe their silence from foure till fiue, as hath beene sayde. 9. When it is not fasting day they goe to Supper halfe an hower before fiue, but when it is a Fast they receaue their Colation at fiue which being ended an hower of re∣creation is permitted them; halfe an hower after six they must all goe o Complyne, frō which time they are to keepe soueraigne si∣lence vntill the end of Prime the next day; as alsoe the sayd silence is to bee kept, from the first Peale to all the howers and Euēsong vntill they bee ended▪ except for some very great reasons the contrary bee thought some tymes requisit. 10. They are to haue allowed them a quartir of an hower after Complyne for the exami∣nation of their Consciences, ymmediately after they are to reade or heare the matter of their meditation for the next day. When they haue ended that they must for∣thwith depart to their dormitoryvn lesse they say mains. and soe apply the Remnant of their
tyme in their necessary affayres, as at eight the may bee in bede. 11. Wee haue thus breifly comprised the∣se matters in this place which are more am∣ply and perticulerly sett downe in their Ce∣remonies, what tyme soeuer shall bee Va∣cant and free from the deuine Office, from Silence, and from their other affore saide Obseruances, the Religious must imploy in such labours and Workes as by the Abbesse and Superior shalbee appointed soe that they worke noecurious, vayne, and seculer things for wordly vses, as are purses, Bandes handchercheifes and the like. 12. When they come to the Worke house the Mother Prioresse, or the more ancient deane in her absence beginneth the Prayer Actiones nostras &c. after which followeth some short Lesson or reading in some Spiri∣tuall booke, from the hearing where of no∣ne may bee absent without leaue This ended euery one is to bee dismissed or licenced to their workes, labours, or Offices as it shal∣bee appointed them, all they must indeauor to accomplish with due silence, except per∣happs neede require that they speake some what breifely, and by the way of such mat∣ters as appartayne to their Offices and busi∣nesses, Finally when they leaue of their wor∣ke the prayer Suscipe Clemenissime Deus, being
sayd, they are in all peace to depart to their other Obediences. CHAPTER 13. Of such prayers as by Obligation are to bee sayd for the liuing and the dead. 1. ONce euery Month a Masse is to bee sung or sayd for your Benefactors that are aliue, and soe often euery Religious shall say for them one Rosary, or the third parte of the Psalter of our blessed Lady, contay∣ning fiue Pater nosters and fifety Aues with a Greede. 2. When the Abbesse hath rendred her Soule to her Creator, euery Religious in fitt tyme when they shall haue opportuni∣tie shall say fifeteene Rosaryes in manner before specified, and the Conuent shall take care to procure that therty Masses bee sayd for her. 3. Thirely in their Church after the who∣le Office of the dead a solemne Masse must bee sung for the Abbesse deceased: like wi∣se
a solemne Masse (without the Office of the dead) is to bee sung on the third, seuenth, and thirtith dayes after her decease, or vppon some other dayes more fitt. 4. Alsoe euery yeare vppon the Friday of the first weeke of Aduent, not hindred with a Feast, other wise vppon some other day in like manner not hindred, they shall sing the Euensong and the Nocturne, with the Laudes, and a solemne Masse for all the Abbesse of ther monastery departed this life. 5. When any professed Religious dyeth, in her Monastery, at the first opportunity the whole Office of the dead, and a solemne Masse is to bee sung, and the like is to bee performed for her vppon the Third, Seuenth, and Thirtith dayes (but without the Office of the dead) or soe many Masses shalbee sung for her vppon some other dayes more fitt for the performance there of, and other seuen Masses are to bee sayd for the some, Moreouer euery one of the Conuent shall say fiue Rosaryes for her, and euery day after Matines and Euensong for the space of a moneth they shall say de profundis with the Prayer Absolue, both for the Ab∣besse as alsoe for the Soules of their Sisters deceased. 6. Vppon the Friday after the first Sun∣day in Lent, not hindred with a double
Feast, otherwise vppon another fitt day next following, a solemne Masse shalbee sung for them tat haue dyed in the Monastery as alsoe the Euensong of the dead with one Nocturne and the Laudes shalbee sung or sayd for them, the which may bee per∣formed the day before the afforesayd so∣lemne Masse bee celebrated. 7. One solemne Masse, with the whole Office of the dead, shalbee sung for those Nouices, who in their Nouishipp shall depart out of this life, after they haue re∣ceaued the habitt of holy Religion. 6. Such Scollers as haue entred in to the Monastery with intention to goe forward in Religion, shall haue granted them after the Euensong and whole Office of the dead, a solemne Masse to bee offered and cele∣brated for them. 9. Once euery yeare in Aduent after the Masse celebrated for the Abbesses (as hath beene sayd) another shalbee sung in due tyme for the Soules departed, of such Reli∣gious of other Monasteryes as are of your Congregation, and liue vnder the same Rule and Statutes with you. 10. For the founder departed this life, all those things are to bee performed which are appointed for an Abbesse deceased, and for a perpetuall memory they shall ing his
Anniuersary Office with a solemne Masse and both aliue and dead ee is made per∣taker of all the Merritts of the whole Con∣gregation. 11. When the Father or Mother of any professed Religious depareth this life, a Masse must bee sung for euery one of them. 12. For the right Reuerend Bishopp in whose diocesse they reside they shall sing the whole Office of the dead, and vppon the Third, Seuenth, and Thirtith dayes, or some other three more fitt dayes▪ they shall sing three other Masses, and euery one shall say a Rosary for his Soule: all which must bee performed for their Ghostly Father, who hath much laboured and taken pay∣nes in aduancing the good of the Mona∣stery, and hee may bee made pertaker of the mirritts of the Conuent, if soe to the Conuent it shall seeme expedient. Other Benefactors and frends when they dy, be∣sides this Offices and Masses which the Conuent may grant them in perticuler they shall al soe bee made pertakers of all those Masses which (according to the Missall of Rome) are sayd or sung euery Munday by your Chaplaine. 13. If any thing be thought expedient to bee further granted to any of the afforesayd, lett it bee done vppon deuotion, and accor∣ding
to their deserts, with this prouiso, tha noe burthen bee imposed vppon the Con∣uent for any long space. 14. The Abbesse and Conuent shall found noe Masse for any person in perticuler: yet they may mayntayne a Chaplaine whoe may say Masse for such persons deceased, as ap∣pertayne to the Monastery, yet soe, that the Fundation may not bee thought to bee ma∣de for any one in perticuler. 15. Let a Register bee made, where in the names of all the Benefactors both liuing and dead who haue notably aduanced the temporall good of the Monastery may bee sett downe, In the same al soe are to bee sett downe all the names of such Religi∣ous as in the Monastery departed this life, and in the same also is to bee written if any thing of noate hapned to them, either in their life or at their death that it may serue for an Example to Posteritie, and lett these things bee reade the day before their yeares yndes, or Annyuersaryes, that peculiar care and memory may bee had of them. 16. And for as much as after holy de∣uoute Prayers, Almes deeds doe much hel∣pe for the extinguishing of the Paynes in Purgatory, it is here ordayned that in that monastery, where in any of the professed
Religious passeth out of this life, all such meate and drincke as is giuen to the rest of the Religious, bee dayly sett on the Ta∣le in the Refectory, in the same place where the fore sayd Religious was wont to sitt, as if shee ware yet liuing; all which or as much as the Lady Abbesse or Supe∣rior shall appoynte, afterwards is to bee giuen in Almes to some one poore person or to diuers, for the space of thirty dayes and that for the benefitt of the Soule de∣parted, Neither may any other sitt in that place, but it being left voyde, lett a litle Crosse bee placed on the Table couered with a blacke Cloth, and another blacke Cloath bee made fast to the Wall in the vacant place in Remembrance of the dead Religious Sister, that the rest may bee mo∣ued to due Compunction by the memory of death, and bee the more excited to pray with greater feruour for her that is dead, and finally may there by bee stirred vpp to lead their liues more carefully and per∣fectly for the tyme to come▪
THE SECOND PARTE OF THE STATVTES▪ OF THE OFFICERS OF the Conuent, and of certayne other persones belonging to the Monastery. AT GANT. Printed by IOOS DOOMS. 1632.
CHAP: THE FIRST. Of the chousing of the Abbesse. 1. ALL Order of good disciplyne, and almost the whole good and Conseruation of the Monastery dependeth vppon the prudent gouernement of the Abbesse, therefore it appertayneth to euery one, for the good desire they beare to the good aduancemēt of the Conuent, to bee very carefull in this poynte, that they chouse such an one for the Gouernesse of all, whoe is likest to pro∣uide for the peace and tranquillitie of all, and especially for the setting forth of God his honor in all things; Therefore such Religious as are professed for the Quier, (for such onely haue actiue and passiue Voyces in the chusing of the Abbesse, and cheifest Officers) shalbee bound as in a matter of soe great moment and weight, to make election of her whom in their Consciences they thinke most fitt for that Office.
2. None may bee chosen for Abbesse that is vnder fourty yeares of age, and who hath not liued laudably for eight yeares, after their expresse Profession, as the holy Coun∣cell of Trent hath decreed; except in Case such a one cannot bee found in the Mo∣nastery, then by grant of the same Coun∣sell, another fitt person may bee chosen whoe is aboue thirty yeares ould, and that hath beene professed for the space of fiue yeares, and hath all requisitt Conditions for this dignitie, soe that with all the Bi∣shopp doe yeald his consent there vnto. 3. They shall obserue that Order in deli∣uering their Voyces that is sett downe in that Counsell, which is, that they are to deliuer them at the Grate, and moreouer the Elect must haue two parts of three of the Voyces, according to the Bull of Gre∣gory the 13. sett forth the 7. of Aprill▪ in the yeare of our Lord 1574. 4. The Abesse (be sides those Conditions where of mention is made in the second, and sixty foure Chapters of the Rule) must bee such a one, as of whom their hath bee∣ne had noe sinister opinion, either since her comming to the Conuent, or before whyle shee hiued in the World, that shee bee en∣dewed with the Giftes of body and mind
as may best retayne Authority, that shee be in especiall manner free from all in∣ordinate Passions, and finally that shee bee such a one, that shee may bee udged fitt and able to gouerne, and administer well the Temporalities and Spiritualities of her Monastery. 5. Albeit it may soe fall out that shee which is vnlawfully be gotten, may bee admitted into this Congregation; yet is not expedient to promote any such to the go∣uernement of the Manastery; Wherefore shee shall not haue passiue Voyce to this dignitie, except very great Reasons doe vrge the contrary: and when it shall seene re∣quisite to procede otherwise, shee must haue for her election, three partes of all the Voyces of the Choosers, as in like manner that Religious whoe is within three degrees of Conanguinitie to the next precedent Abbesse, must haue the same number of suffrages for her Eliction. 6. Noe perticuler Religious may haue a double Voyce for the Election of the Ab∣besse, or of any other Officer of the Mo∣nastery, as neither shee that is absent out of the monastery hath any Voyce to chouse al though the sayd absent Religious may haue passiue Voyce. But the Religious that
is soe sicke that shee cannot bee present at the Scrutiny must deliuer vpp her Suffra∣ge and Voyce by those Scrutatrices, that for that tyme shall bee chosen by the Con∣uent. 7. None of what dignitie, Nobilitie, or degree soeuer besides the Religious of the same Monastery professed for the Quier may haue any Voyce to elect. If therefore any other person either by word or wri∣ting shall commend any one to bee elected by the Conuent they must all take good eede that they deliuer not their Voyces in regard of that Commendation: as alsoe shee may not succeede te deceased Ab∣besse, for whom the saide Abbesse did in her life tyme solicite the Conuent, except hee bee chosen in such sort as before hath beene declared. 8. The Prioresse when the Abbesse is wanting must gouerne the Monastery, vn∣till an other Abbesse bee elected. Shee shall certify the right Reuerende Lord Bishopp of the death of her Superior, whom shee shall dilligently hasten to the election of her that is to succede, the which ought to bee done with in a Moneth, at the most, if the Bis∣hopp cann bee present or conueniently appoynte an other, whoe in his place may
assist as the Election. 9. The Prioresse shall certify the Conuent what answeare shee hath receaued from the right Reuerende the Lord Bishopp, and if shee receaue from him any letters lett her carefully see they bee read to the Conuent, as alsoe all such Statutes cōcerning the Electiō, neither may any aske any Counsayle of any person for he Election of any but onely of the ghostly Father, to the End shee may bee the better directed in her Conscience yet soe that the Religious consult not one with another about the promoting or put∣ting downe of any, if they shall doe other∣wise, they shall not onely euer bee depri∣ued of actiu and passiue Voyce, but shee shall endure all whatsoeuer other Censu∣res the Prioresse and Conuent shall in flict vppon her. 10. It shall not bee lawfull for the Prio∣resse or any other Religious to speake with Externes except some most important caue perswade the Contrary; and how often soeuer they are then to speake with them two of the Deanes shalbee present who toge∣ather with the Prioresse shall heare, and see whatsoeuer is sayd or done; and what soeuer of speciall moment hapneth after the Abbesses decease, shee shall diligently
declare to the Bishopp or to his Vicegerent. 11. For as much as they incurr priuation of Actiue and passiue Voyce, as also other penalties who haue sollicited to gett the Voyce of another to the promotion of any, soe all shalbee obliged to reueale all such practises vnder the same penaltye; and it shall belong to the Bishopp to discerne and determyne what words and procedings are to bee held for direct or indirect solliciting. 12. Althoughe they may haue an Eye to the Nobilitie, and honor of the kindred of any that is to bee elected, yet the Conuent must bee very carefull, that they doe not neglect the spirituall good of their Mona∣stery, whyle they regard the temporall commodity. 13. To the End the election may the bet∣ter proceede, and that they may procue for them selues God his holy assistance in that which soe much maketh for their com∣mon good, after the Funeralls of the de∣ceased Abbesse the Conuent shall apply all their prayers▪ and Exercises for this End. 14. When they are to deliure their suf∣frages they shall abstayne from mutuall Conuersation for the space of three dayes, neither shall they come to geather but to the celebrating of deuine seruice, to the reading,
and to the Refectory; and vppon the very day of the election, after they haue song a Masse of the holy Ghost, they shall retyre themselues to their Cells, vntill they bee called to giue their Voyces. 15. To the end noe Error happen in de∣liuering their Suffrages, the Prioresse shall deliuer the names of all the professed in writing that haue any Voyces, either to the Bishopp or to him whoe supplyeth his place and in the sayd writing shee shall sett downe ther age, the yeares and tyme of their pro∣ffession, togeather with all such Exceptions or Canonicall impediments, as the Statutes haue sett downe against their Election. 16. Two or three mature graue and Re∣ligious men are to bee chosen by the Chap∣er, whoe for the more honor of that Action may bee present with the Lord Bishopp at he Election, and the Bishopp or hee, who (at the Bishopps appoyntement) shall pre∣ide at the Election hauing obserued all that s sett downe in the Statutes, shall declare t the Grate the person elected; But if in it he first two Scrutinyes sufficient suffrages oe not agree, then lett those three which ad the most suffrages in the last Scrutiny ee proposed to the Conuent, and in the ird shee that by balloting or by Boules
shall haue sufficient Voyces, is to bee held for Elect. And if againe in all the sayd three Scrutinyes they haue equall, or not uffici∣ent suffrages▪ then the more Ancient prof∣fessed among them is to bee preferred and to bee denounced Abbesse. 17. The election ended, and declared by him that presided, all the Religious are to retyre themselues into the Chapter: where (after the Elect hath according to the man∣ner accused herselfe in generall of all her defects) shee must according and to the te∣nor and forme of that writing that is sett downe in the booke of Ceremonyes, pro∣mise that shee will neuer suffer any further libertie to bee brought into the Congrega∣tion, then the holy Rule and Statuts doe permitt; but that shee will endeauor toge∣ather with the grace and assistance of God that the Congregation bee conserued in Spirritt, and aduanced in the same, and if shee shall espy that it fayleth in any thing other wise then it ought, that shee will labour (calling those to counsell by whose prudence and authority shee may best worke reformation) to reduce and restore it to the former good estate, and to all this shee is o signe and subscribe, After this protesta∣tion made, lett the Rules and Statutes bee
reade which concerne the Abbesse, and then by the Prioresse, or (if the Prioresse be thosen) by the ancientest deane lett her bee placed in her Seae, and aftherwards ath one in perticuler shall doe her that Reuerence▪ and in such manner as is decla∣red in the booke of Ceremonyes, and from that tyme euer afterwards, shall yeald duti∣full Obedience to all hir Commandements; and all the Officers shall in publike resigne to her their Offices, leauing it to her Free∣dome, either to confirme them in their Of∣ficers, or according to the Statutes by suffra∣ges to appoynte new Officers, euen as in our Lord shee shall thinke most expedient. 18. The Elect is absolutely forbid and prohibited to inquire of any whether shee gaue her suffrage for her Election, neither may shee either directly or indirectly sifte what passed by her Subiects in the matter of her Election, neither may any tell to any of the Religious, or to the Abbesse, or to any other, either directly or indirectly vppon whom shee bestowed her Voyce; If the Abbesse shall offend herein, shee is to vn∣derstand that there by shee hath lost all Iu∣risdiction, but if others signify soe much either to the Abbesse or to any others, in soe doing they loose both actiue and passiue
Voyce for euer; 19. The Elect, before her benediction, for the space of some dayes shall liue sepe∣rate from the rest▪ that well and dilligent∣ly shee may examyne her owne defects and that shee may imploy that tyme in Con∣templation of spirituall matters, where by being illuminated by thy spiritt of Gods light, shee may the better imploy her selfe in those things that appertayne to her Of∣fice: and principally to obtayne of him the guift of Wisedome, and humilitie, and a fer∣vent and burning zeale of his deuine ho∣nour, and that shee may endeauour to Cor∣rect and reforme her owne defects, or any such perticuler abuses, as shee shall note to haue crept into the Congregation. 20. In fitt tyme (when the Lord Bishopp shalbee at leisure) lett the accustomed Be∣nedictiō bee parformed, either in the Church of her owne Monastery, or in some other as hee shall appointe: at which some foure professed Religious (at the lest) elected by the Conuent shalbee present, and those Ex∣pences (by consent of the Chapter with regard had of Religious pouerty) are to bee made, as may seeme fitt and seemely for such an Action. 21. The Abbesse of this Congregation must
bee perpetuall, except through age, notable Infirmity, or (which god forbied) for some greuious Fault, (as here after is sett downe) shee shalbee iudged by the Voyces of two parts of three of the Conuent, togeather with the Verdict of the Ordinary to bee vnfitt for gouernment. 22. It may not bee lawfull for the Ab∣besse or Elect (that is accused of any ault for which shee may bee brought into dan∣ger of deposition (either by her selfe or others, to seeke out who gaue their Voy∣ces against her. If shee shall doe otherwise euen thereby shee shalbee depriued of her dignity, and they whoe either directly or indirectly discouered what others haue done there in conceruing her, shall loose both actiue and passiue Voyce for euer after. 23. If the Abbesse would resigne her Of∣fice because shee findeth her selfe much broken in age, and in her strenght, or that shee might the better attend to her owne spirituall good, shee may not obtayne leaue to doe it, except two of three parts of the Conuent, togeather with the consent of the Ordinary do yeald there vnto. 24. If the Abbesse shall obtayne leaue to resigne, shee shall make her sayd Resigna∣tion in the presence of the right Reuerend
Lord Bishopp, or of him whom hee shall substitute in his place▪ And because it is pre∣sumed, that shee hath done this for the com∣mon good of the Couent, the Abbesse tha shall succede, must vse her as aperpetuall Assistant about her, and to bee subiect to none but to her selfe onely; and in her die all such allowance must bee giuen to her as is accustomed to the other Abbesse, and the rest are to vse the sayde Reuerences to her, as they are accustomed to their other Abbesses, and when shee dyeth shee is to enioy all those priuiledges, which they enioy that dy in their Offices, and shee is to haue a double Voyce in the Election of her Suc∣cessor, (but for her owne Resignation shee shall haue noe voyce) as alsoe shee must haue a double Voyce in the election of all the other Officers, which by the Conuents Voyces are to bee chosen. 25. If the Abbesse espy any Error com∣mitted by her predecessor, lett her soe hand∣le the matter, that shee seeke still to con∣serue her Reputation, and as often as shee maketh mention of her deceased Predeces∣sor, shee must neuer name her but in hono∣rable manner, as shee must likewise hau care that all her Subiects doe the same.
THE II. CHAPTER. Of the chosing of the other Officers. 1. NOe Religious may haue passiue Voy∣ce for the principall Officers, except hee haue liued laudably foure yeares at the least in Religion, after her Profession; and bee fiue and twentie yeares ould complea∣te, except vrgent necessitie bee to the contrary. 2. The principall Officers, to witt the Prioresse, deanes Mistresse of the Nouices, Assistants, depositary Cellarier, Sacristane, Chantresse, Portresse, Thourier, Infirmare, and Guardrobe, must bee chosen by more then halfe the Voyces of the Conuent, their Voyces must bee sett downe in writing, and the sayd writings must bee perused by the Abbesse, and the Scrutatrices, and they are to bee publickly reade in the hearing of all either by the Abbesse or by one of the Scru∣tarices, whom shee will appoynte, and the sayd writings are all to bee burned before they departe out of the Chapter. 3. If any difficulty arise about the deliue∣ring of their Suffrages, and that it happen
that sufficient Voyces doe not agree, lett that Order bee taken as before was sett downe in the Election of the Abbesse, when the like case doth fall out. 4. Shee tht shall endeauour to procure for her selfe, or for any other, by any meanes the Voyce of any for any of the afforesayd Offices, shee shalbee depriued of all actiue and passiue Voyce whyle she liueth; which punishment shee shall alsoe incurr, that by vn iust perswasions and complayntes shall labour to hinder any from any Office, ex∣cept shee make her complaynts onely to the Lady Abbesse. 5. These before named Officers are to bee chosen euery third yeare, and therefore at a tyme for this appoynted (to witt vppon the first Munday in Lent not hindred by a Feast, otherwise vppon the next day follo∣wing) they shall all resigne their Offices in the Chapter house, and the Conuent must chouse others in their places; Yet it is per∣mitted that the Conuent may onely once confirme the selfe same person in her Of∣fice; where in notwithstanding shee shall not continue more then for fix yeares; But if any one is able to fullfill and well ac∣complish diuers Offices, it is left to the Con∣uents libertie to constitute fewer.
6. The terme of three yeares is limited onely for those Officers as haue well per∣formed their Offices: but if any bee found not sufficiently fitt for her Office, shee may bee discharged of her Office, whensoe∣uer the Abbesse and Conuent thinke fitt. 7. The Sister of the Lady Abbesse may not bee chosen for Prioresse, deane, Assi∣stant, depositary; Cellarier, Thourier, or Portresse, whyle the Abbesse liueth, except shee hath the third parte, of foure of the Voyces of the Conuent. 8. The Inferior Officers, whoe are not sett down among the afforenamed princi∣pall Officers, and are appoynted for diuers Functions in the Conuent, may bee cho∣sen for such offices by the Abbesse her selfe alone, and whereas they may bee of∣ten changed, as the rest, yet if any haue laudably behaued her selfe in her charge shee may the longer bee contynued in the same, yet soe, that this bee done rather vp∣pon necessitie, then vppon any priuate and perticuler affection. 9. None may confer with any about the etting vpp or taking away of any Office, but with the Abbesse alone▪ or in publike Chapter, and if she proceede otherwise, she is to bee punished at the discretion of the
Abbesse and Conuent. 10. All the Officers are to reade or heare once euery moneth all such Rules, dire∣ctions, and Statutes as appertayne to their Offices: and the Inferior Officers are to haue them written, and sett vpp in some place in their Offices. THE III. CHAPTER. Of the Office of the Abbesse. 1. FOr asmuch as the Abbesse is by almightie God appoynted Go∣uernesse ouer the Spowses of Iesus-Christ, to direct and confirme them in the way of his holy Commandements and of a perfect Religious life, there fore shee ought to excell all her Subiects in Charity, Fayth, Chastitie, Wisedome, and notable humilitie, that shee may aduance and sett them forwards to the due keeping and ob∣seruance of their holy Rule and Constitu∣tions and to the topp of all perfection noe lesse by her exemplar life, and behauiour then by the authoritie and dignitie of her Office, Where vppon shee must carry to all a motherly harte and affection, and endeauour to make them familier and tyed
in loue towards her selfe, that with grea∣ter confidence they may make their recour∣se vnto her, as to their common mother and there by submitt themselues to all her Commandements, and Councells, and per∣forme all things, drawne rather by the spiritt of loue, then by feare and force of Constraynt; 2. Euery day in perticuler manner shee ought to imploy some tyme where in shee may seriousty consider with her selfe, by what manner and meanes, shee may best sett forward the Common good and prof∣fitt of her charge. And shee ought to endea∣uour (soe farr forth as the sundry burthens and businessesfo the Monastery will permitt) to assist with the rest and bee present in the Quier and other places of Obseruances, and to obserue all those things vnto which the rest are tyed. 3. Shee must haue a care of the spiri∣tuall and Corporall good of all, yea and of euery one in perticuler, shee must suffer each of them to haue a free accesse vnto her, soe often as they shall request it, or as shee shall know or vnderstand it wilbee profitable vnto them, and that shee her selfe may well and fittly attend there∣unto.
4. Shee must receaue and intertayne suc as come vnto her with all suauity and gent∣lenesse; and shee must bee very wary that by her Countenance, or vehemency of her words, or manner of carriage and pro∣ceeding shee doe not at any tyme feare them, that with freedome and Confidence they may not discouer and lay open their diffi∣culties vnto her. 5. Lett her shew a motherly affection to such as any way offend, that they may see that heir fault and not their person is dis∣pleasing to her, and lett her carry her sel∣fe, that shee may not bee noted to bee dis∣gusted with any one; finally in giuing of Penances lett her haue an Eye to the spiri∣tuall good of euery one, and that noe wayes shee seeke their trouble and vexation, allwayes diligently and maturely thinking and casting with her selfe, by what meanes the pennances which shee enioyneth may helpe to aduance their spirituall good. 6. In such things as touch the Common disciplyne, lett her shew her selfe firme and constante, and lett her not at any tyme suf∣fer any thing to bee violated and infringed; where vnto they are bound by Rule or Sta∣tute. But in those things that are heldlesse essentiall lett her not bee to hard, and dif∣ficill
in dispensing, and soe lett her mayntay∣ne good Order and disciplyne, that shee may discretely and prudently apply her pensations to the solace of her Subiects, and the more seruice of almighty God. 7. Lett her often enquire of the Prio∣resse and conferr with her, concerning the State of the Conuent, and alsoe of the Mi∣stresse of the Nouices, depositayre, and Cel∣larier, concerning all such matters as be∣long to their Charge; and shee must com∣maunde them to repayre to her so often as neede shall require. 8. Shee shall once euery moneth, either by her selfe or by some ohers, whom shee shall appoynte, (especially the deanes) visit all the Offices of the Monastery, but especial∣ly of the depoitayre, Cellarier, Sacristane, Guarderoabe and Inirmair; alsoe once eue∣ry moneth shee shall visitt by her selfe, or by her sayd assignes the Cells of all the Reli∣gions, and the peculir offices of all vnder Officers, that shee may see how in al things Religious dcency, cleanlynesse, and order bee kept, and obserued; 9. Lett her be vigilant that all the Of∣ficers execute and performe their Offices with great sweetnesse, Charity and humi∣lity, and lett such bee put from their Offi∣ces,
that behaue them selues trouble somely therein; and are found harsh and greuious to other; yet lett her not giue casy eare to Inferiours against their Superiours, and what shee heareth lett her maturely and dil∣ligently wayghe and examyne, and wit∣hout very reasonnable cause Inferiours are not to haue accesse vnto her, for those mat∣ters, which the subordinate Officers can sufficiently per forme by them selues, and would doe soe if the sayd Inferiours would come vnto them. 10. Althoughe shee ought much to con∣fide vppon her Officers, yett lett her bewa∣re that nothing bee permitted to their inor∣dinate Passions, and if at any tyme any Con∣tention or dispute should happen among them, whereby auersion of mynds and indi∣gnation may bee feared, lett her carefully seeke to hinder this Inconuenience, by ma∣king peace among them, and by procure∣ing that they allwayes shew such signes of humilitie, and Charitie each to other, as may nourish and increase religious affection, and loue among them. 11. Shee must haue a speciall care of such as are sicke and infirme, and those shee must often visitt, and endeauour to confort, and in all things (as much as lyeth in her power)
lett her haue care of peruerty, but yett soe that Religious decency bee still mayntai∣ned. 12. Lett her frequent the common Refe∣ctory with the rest, soe often as by her health, or her other great affyres shee may and at Table lett her haue some meate aboue, and different from the rest, whereof shee may imparte to those whom shee shall thinke to bee most infirme and weake, and when shee is absent from the Refectory▪ lett her by tur∣nes inuite such Religious, as by this way shee shall thinke their weakenesse and infirmitie may bee holpen or conforted. THE IV. CHAPTER. Of the Office of the Prioresse. 1. THE Prioresse is chosen to ase the Abbese of a great parte of her burthen, shee, in her speach especially, and in her conuersation, ought to study how to edify euery one, whoe as shee is a guide to others, soe much shee bee a Rule of all good Vertuous life and behauior, not making any shew of affected Superioritie or permit∣ting the same to any other, that the Infe∣riours being conioyned with Elders and Su∣periours
may serue each other in sincere hu∣militie; and therefore albeit shee bee the mother of the rest, yet according to her Of∣fice is shee to labour to serue the rest; 2. When the Abbesse by reason of her other hindrances cannot execute those things that appertayne to her Office, then it belongeth to the Prioresse, to doe all those things which the Abbesse her selfe should haue done, if shee had beene present, as to giue the Benedictions in the Quiar, to grant leaue to speake with Externes, to receaue and giue presents, and such like; where of afterwards shee is to certify the Abbesse in sitt tyme, yea commonly shee may doe all those things, which in these Statutes are saide, and sett downe, that by the Superiour they may bee done, especially then when they cannot haue accesse to the Abbesse her selfe. 3. In the Absence of the Abbesse shee is to commaund according as matters occurr in the Quiar, Chapter house, Refectory, dortu∣re, and Worke house, yea and in all other places, where the Conuent is in any tyme assembled; In these places shee is allwayes to bee present with the Conuent, or if shee cannot bee present, shee shall haue care that some one of the deanes may supply her place
4. In her Wordes and externall beha∣uiour lett her demeane her selfe with all sweetenesse, and lett her take diligent care that in the Chapter house (where in the ab∣sence of the Abbesse shee is to reside as hath beene sayd) nothing be done either by her selfe or others, that may giue iust occasion of offence, but lett her endeauour to induce her Sisters with all suauitie, and externall shew of loue to the accomplishing of those things which are expedient, and lett her offer her selfe ready to yeald them all comfort and satisfaction, making herselfe familiar vnto them yet retayning her due grauitie, that by those meanes all may reuerence her and with their dutifull cariage acknowledge her for their Superiour. 5. Once euery moneth shee shall goe to the Abbesse to acquainte her with those things, which shalbee thought requisitt shee should vnderstand. 6. Lett her not thrust her selfe in to meddle whith those Offices, whose care and Charge, are by the Abbesse and Conuent committed to others, neither lett her offer to dispose of the Conuerse Sisters. 7. She must not suffer such as haue Offi∣ces to dispose of themselues without her knowledge, yet may shee not hinder them in
their Functions, and Offices; that soe all matters may bee performed in the best Or∣der, and without Confusion. 8. Shee must not permitt that any thing bee infringed or innouated, and when shee perceaueth or feareth any great inconue∣nience to ensue, lett her acquaint the Ab∣besse therewith, that according to her ap∣poyntement some remedy may bee prouided for the same. 9. Although shee may reprehend and correct her Subiects for lesser faults, as the Mistresse of the Nouices may the Nouices and Schollers, and the Cellarier the Con∣uerse Sisters, yet if any faults bee doubtfull or more greiueous then ordinary, or of that Consideration that they may seene worthy of more seuere Chastisement. then shee (as alsoe those two others) shall make them knowne to the Abbesse, that it may bee pro∣uided for according to her Iudgement, and by her authoritie. 10. Lett her dilligently put in Executio what soeuer is appoynted and ordayned b the Abbesse, and in her proceedings an Actions lett her wholly submitt her Iudgment and opinion to hers, persuading al others to doe the same, not contradictin or improuing her Ordinances; if shee do
other wise, besides due Correction (vnto which shee is subiect) shee must vnderstand that shee may bee deposed from her Office as vnworthy thereof. 11. Lett her not permitt any to bee in the Cloyster, or Garden without leaue, nor in the Garden without a Companion; in tyme of Recreation lett her haue care that all mee∣te togeather, that shee may see what soeuer passeth; finally at night when they goe to bedd, either by her selfe or by some other, shee is to visitt all their Cells. 12. Shee shalbee exempt from seruing in the kitchin, and Refectory, except the Ab∣besse for the increase of her humilitie, shall otherwise ordayne or permitt. THE V. CHAPTER. Of the Deanes. 1. TE Deanes haue noe other Of∣fice in the Monastery, then pru∣dently to obserue, if there happen any thing in the behauiour, or procedings of the pro∣fessed Religious, that may neede correction or amendement, yet may they reprehend none, but that which belongeth to their Of∣fice, is this, to helpe all by their Counsayle,
and their mature Iudgment if soe bee that they may thinke they bee able to helpe them with their frendly admonition; but if by that way they finde that they doe them litle or noe good, then lett them make it knowne to the Abbesse, or Prioresse, or Cellarier that they may apply more forcible and neces∣sary Remedyes to the spirituall disease. 2. Alsoe of these deanes the Assistentes are chosen, and if all the deanes cannot bee Assistentes (because the number of the dea∣nes may bee greater then the number of the Assistents, which may bee but foure) then they that are the more ancient professed, mnst bee preferred before the rest. If the deanes are fewer then the Assistants, then those Religious who haue noe other Office in the Monastery may bee elected to make vpp the number of the Assistants. The lady Abbesse is to appoynte ten Reli∣gious, or thereabouts to the ca of these dea∣nes: soe that all the professed (onely the lady Abbesse and Prioresse excepted) must bee vnder their charge; euery one of the profes∣sed vnto these deanes (as all the Religious to the lady Abbesse, and Prioresse: and the Conuerse Sisters to the Cellarier; and the No∣ices to their Mistresse) must doe that Reue∣rence
and shew that respect, which the holy Rule in the seuentie one Chapter com∣mandeth to bee done to their Ancients, and in that case, these onely are to bee esteemed their Ancients. 4. The deanes in the absence of the Lady Abbesse and Prioresse, are to preside in all places of obseruances, and to beare the pla∣ce of their Superiour, which euery one of them are to performe, according to the an∣tiquitie of her profession; as alsoe in the ab∣sence of the deanes the more ancient pro∣fessed must beare the same Office, except the Abbesse or Prioresse shall appoynte o∣therwise. THE VI. CHAPTER. Of the Mistresse of the Nouices. 1. ALL singuler shew of Vertue, toge∣ather with a great Zeale, and sesire of perfection must appeare, and brightly shyne, in the life and behauiour of the Mis∣tresse of the Nouices, that by her good Ex∣ample shee may the better excite and stirr vpp those, that are vnder her charge, vnto all those things which their State of life requireth of them; In her cariage lett her
allwayes giue shew of sweetenesse, and loue▪ and in her words, lett her haue a speciall care to auoyde all bitter contumelious, and disgracefull language, and lett her accom∣modate her commandements to tymes, per∣sons, and places, well considering with her selfe what euery one is able to doe, and not onely what they ought, or should doe, seing they come to Religiō, that desire to bee there in perfected, and are not as yet perfect. 2. As euery one commeth to the Mona∣stery, let her soe dispose of her as the Ab∣besse shall appoynte, and shee shall haue care that such as haue entred doe examyne and discusse their life past very dilligently and soe make their generall Confession, as soone as they can possibly. 3. Whatsoeuer they that come bring with them, lett her receaue it of them, to bee deliuered to the depositary, and what soeuer shee receaueth or deliuereth, lett her setr downe in writing, which writing euery one that entreth shall subscribe with their owne hand, of all which things they must dispose a litle be fore they make their profession. 4. She must haue care that the Nouices and Schollers haue a good methode in me∣ditating deliuered vnto them, and shee must
see they bee taught how they may vse vocall prayer fruytefully, shee is to teath them the Caechisme and Christian doctrine, and the manner how to examyne their Consciences and the way how to roote out all Vices and to ouercome all euill habittes and Cu∣stomes, and finally to mortiy their Passions that togeather with the contempt of them∣selues, they may increase in the loue of God. 5. After they are entred, shee shall decla∣re vnto them, what they are to vndergoe, and what the Congregation expecteth at their hands, shee shall often reade vnto them those Rules and Statutes which apper∣tayne to them and belong to common disci∣plyne; then shall they deliberate with them∣selues (weying duly the forces of their bo∣dyes and myndes) what is most expedient for them, and if they continue in their for∣mer purpose, then they are by holy medita∣tions to prepare and arme themselues for those things, which they are to take vppon them, in the holy State of Religion. 6. Moreouer the Mistrisse of the Nouices must teach those that are vnder her go∣uernment a Religious manner of carriage touching their standing, going, looking, spe∣aking, eating, and all other such Actions; that they shew therein a Religious decency
and comelynesse; to witt, that in their gate they bee not two hasty, except vrgent ne∣cessity force them that in talking they vse noe gestures with their hands, especially whyle they speake to their Superiors, and to Externes, but either they are to hould them vnder their Scaplare, or within the Sleeues of their great habbitt, that they al∣togeather fly and auoyde all affected speath, and whatsoeuer may sauour of secularitie, or Courtly Vanitie and Curiositie, which alsoe in their outward be hauiour they must dilligently eschew▪ that they cast or fasten not their eyes vppon the Countenances of their Supriours, or of Externes, neither houlding them to much vpward, or downe∣ward, that they speake not to lowde, or burst out into to much intemperate laugh∣ter, especially when at the Grates they spea∣ke with Externes, the which liberty they mut vnderstand is seldome to bee granted or permitted them, that they eate, not two fast, to slowly, or to greedily, or that they looke not about them whyle they eate, that whyl they drinke they hould their cupp with both their hands, that they seeke to preuent euery one in doing them honour, and Reuerence that they carry themselues with grauitie, and staydnesse, that they haue
care to keepe cleanelynesse in their Cells nd Garments, and that in their Counte∣nances they shew myrth and Alacritie, that wyle they turne, they turne their body as well as their heade; and finally that they crry themselues gratefully and louingly to all; and if their bee any thing vnhansome in their natures, Customes, or Education, lett the Mistrisse endeauour to reforme it, nd bring them to a better fashion, and lett her haue a care to instruct them exactly, in the holy Ceremonyes of the deuyne Serui∣ce, and in all the Obseruances of their Re∣ligious State. 7. If shee see any to bee Drawne to doe their duty vppon feare, shee is to vnder∣stand that such are not very fitt for Reli∣ligion, although a moderate feare (especially of God) doth not a litle healpe and condu∣ce thereunto. 8. Shee must labour to encourage such as are deiected, and pusilaminous, yet if shee see any to bee of sufficient Spirit and Courage, shee must not for all that vrge them to much; lett her bee wary and Circumspect in all her proceedings towars them, and lett her perswade them to discouer their dif∣ficulties to their Ghostly Father, that they may the better bee grounded in their Voca∣tion,
and consequently bee the more secu∣rely guyded and Directed in the Scope and end which they ought to ayme att. 9. The Nouices and Schollers must bee tryed in base and humble Exercises, soe often as may bee thought expedient, yet they shall not bee sent to the places appertayning to the charge of other Officers, except the sayd Officers consent thereunto; and lett the sayd Schollers and Nouices bee warned, that the Conuent ought and will seeke to bee infor∣med of their humilitie, Obedience, and de∣sire of the Contempt of themselues. 10. Lett her not perswade or oblige any of them to any kinde of austeritie, but by the Counsel of the Abbesse. 11. She must beware that they bee not ouerthrowne and carryed away with their first feruour, whyle therein they passe the limitts of discretion, and therefore shee shall admonish the Ghostly Father hereof, if their happen any it cause therein. 12. To the end all may bee the better in formed of the natures and dispositions of the Scholers and Nouices, and that they that enter for such may better knowe the vnitie Cha∣ritie, modesty, and Religious manner of life which the Religious embrace and lea∣de, the Mistr (by Commaundement from
the lady Abbesse) shall make choyce of such to conuerse and conferr with her Nouices and Schollers, whoe either by their beha∣uiour, experience, or good example, are best able to edify instructe and helpe them. 13. The Mistris is to bee subiect in all thinges for domesticall disciplyne to the Prioresse, soe farr forth as shee bee not hin∣dred from the Execution and accomplis∣hing of her Office, where by shee is obliged to teach her Scollers, and Nouices, to sing, reade, pronounce a right, and the like; Soe alsoe the Nouices and Schollers in the Quier, Chapter house, Resectory, and in all such places, where the whole Conuent must bee subiect to the sayd Prioresse, wherefore the Mistresse may not commaunde them there in any matter, that there by shee may yeald the more Reuerence and respect to the Su∣periour, and if any difficulty or inconueni∣ence happen here by or that the Mistrisse bee hindred from the due Execution of her Office, lett her seeke to the Lady Abbesse, for the Remedy there of.
THE VII. CHAPTER. Of the Assistans. 1. LET such Assistants bee chosen, as vppon whose prudence, and Co∣unsayle the Abbesse may very well rely, in such difficulties as may occurr: whose alsoe may well Guyde and direct such Religious as come vnto them at any tyme for comfort, or would informe them of matters occurring according to the Statutes. Therefore they must bee very discreete and circumspect, noe ways headdy, free from all inordinate Passions, Zealous of the common good of the Con∣uent, which they ought to sett foward ac∣cording to their best skill, and they ought to bee very care full mayntayners of what soe∣uer maketh for the peace and good disciply∣ne thereof. 2. For asmuch as the Prioresse is wont to bee admitted to the Consltations, foure Assistants wilbee sufficient, and they are not to exceede the number of foure, and the younger professed among them, must first in Order deliuer her opinion, before the Abbesse declare her mynde, or what shee would haue concluded; lett them all well and maturely ponder the matter propoun∣ded,
and if soe bee that the matter may suffer delay, and bee of great Consequence, lett them haue longer tyme to discusse and con∣sider it with themselues, that thereby it may bee the better determyned. 3. Once euery weeke or at least twise euery Moneth, they must bee called to Con∣sultation at that houre which the Abbesse shall appoynte, where shee her selfe must alsoe preside, and bee present; and one of these Consulters and Assistants must euery weeke haue accesse to the Abbesse, to know of her when the Assistants are to bee called to Consultation. Before the Consultation begin, Veni Creator Spiritus &c. with the prayer. Deus qui corda fidelium &c. is to bee sayd, and the Consultation being ended; Suscipe clemen∣tissime Deus &c. 4. The things that are handled in Consul∣tation most commonly are these, The Causes and Remedyes of disciplyne broken or ne∣glected; the defects of Officers in their Offi∣ces; the trouble or disgust of any one concea∣ued against any Officer; want of health in any through indiscretion; dissentions, se∣cretts meetings, and whisperings; what manner is to bee obserued in enioyning of Penances; the Receauing or deliuering of Messages or writings to Externes; the depo∣sing
of Officers; or appointment of new Officers; the Measure of their diett, to grea∣ther with the defect or excesse committed in the same; what persons are to bee pro∣pounded to the Conuent, and such like. 5. Lett them permitt nothing that may weaken disciplyne, and if they consult about the enioyning of any Pennance, after the thing hath beene maturely determyned, lett them not afterwards interpose themsel∣ues for any moderation. But if vppon better Information they finde the Case, to stand other wise then when they consulted about-it, and that thereby they feare any hurt or inconuenience may ensue, they must make it knowne to the Abbesse, and soe committ it wholy to her discretion. 6. Of those things that are propounded vnto them they may not debate among them∣selues out of the place of Consultion, and then noe otherwise then in the presence of the Abbesse; and soe in like manner of those things about which they haue had Consulta∣tion. If they shall offend in the contrary, they must endure the same penance, that he other professed should incurr, if they offen∣ded in the like Case, much lesse may they communicate vnto others, either within, or without the Conuent, what hath passed
in Consultation, or which may any wise touch any person of the Conuent; and if any should vnderstand that Consultation hath beene had about her selfe, yet none shall tell her what resolution hath beene taken about her, but they shall remitt it to the Relation of the Abbesse her selfe, except the Abbesse doth otherwise ordayne. 7. In their Iudgments lett them con∣forme themselues to the Commaundement of the Abbesse neither may they contend among themselues, or stand to stbborne∣ly in their owne opinions, they must an∣sweare each other with meaknesse, and propose their reasons with all humilitie, yet alsoe with Religious freedome and li∣berty. Where vppon the lady Abbesse must bee willing to heare their aduises, and must permitt them to haue their necessary liber∣ty in speaking their mynds; yea moreouer shee must inuite, rnd incourage them, that herein they carefully doe their Office, and duty, and if any thing chance to bee spo∣ken by any of them, that may bee distast∣full to her, lett her rather winke thereat, then that the Assistants bee made afrayde to deliuer with fredome their opinions, as they are obliged to doe in matters apper∣tayning to the common good: neither
ought the Abbesse to departe from that they all Counsayle her, but vppon sufficient ground and reason. 8. If nothing occurr whereof they should consult yet the Abbesse ought to call them togeather to see if her onsul∣ters haue any thing to propound vnto her, and if nothing of worth doe occurr they may bee dismissed. 9. When the Religious will declare to the Assistants their mynds concerning those things which they are not willing to declare to the Abbesse her selfe, whereby see may bee the better informed, let the Assi∣stants, (naming none) performe this with all charitie, and sinceritie, and bring them an answeare and resolution as the Case re∣quireth. 10. Euery one must know that they may not deale about any matter with the Assistants, but vppon this Condition, that what they declare vnto them, should bee made knowne vnto the Abbesse, neither may they giue are to any thing vnder Con∣dition that it bee kept secrett and vnknow∣ne to the Abbesse. 11. After the Assistants leaue their Offi∣ces, yet they may not discouer to others in any sort those things that haue beene done
or vttered in their Consultations, except onely such matters as by the Abbesse were made common be fore and imparted to o∣thers, and if they shalbee found faulty here in, there by they shalbee disinabled t haue this Office againe for eur after; and to the end the assistants may bee more free in de∣liuering their opinions, by the Statutes it is for bidden, that the Abbesse doe manifest vnto others, what was sayd or counsayled her by any of the assistants, but onely (as the Case may require) shee may tell the Conuent what was counsayled her, yet soe that shee discouer not vnto them, the name of her that gaue her Counsayle or aduese there in. THE VIII. CHAPTER. Of the despositayre. 1. THE Office of the depositayre is to keepe all such things as belong to the necessary prouision of the monastery, as Woolen, linnen, money, and the like: and shee is to render an exact accompt of all Re∣ceipts and expenses to the Abbesse, whom shee is to certify of all such things of mo∣ment which shee receaueth, or spendeth▪
and there in shee is to follow her order and and appoyntment. 2. Shee must haue a Chest with two loc∣kes, one of the keyes the Abbesse must kee∣pe, and shee the other, soe that it may not bee opened withot them both. In this Chest all the money of the house must bee kept, and from thence it must bee taken as neede requireth, except the Abbesse will keepe by her some smale somme, for such vses as some tymes may occurr. 3. Shee must haue the keeping of the great Seale of the Conuent, and therewith shee may Seale nothing without the Consent of the Conuent, shee alsoe must keepe all Ori∣ginalls and other writings, and Euidences in a Coffer with a double locke, where of the Abbesse must haue one key and shee another. 4. Once euery yeare the depositor toge∣ather with the Guardroabe must see what euery one hath, and what they want, they must sett all downe in writing, that after∣wards they may consult with the Abbesse, how they may prouide for the necessitie of eah one, and lett them labour to carry an euen hand to all▪ And to the end all Con∣fusion may bee aoyded, a certayne ho∣wer must bee appoynted, at which tyme
ery day all the Officers and the Religious ust repayre to the depository for their Ne∣essities. 5. When shee deliuereth by appoyntment f the Abbesse any thing to the Cellarier, ardroabe, or Cater, lett her demaund a writing of the person that receaueth it, whe∣re in the Receipt is contayned, and lett her shew her selfe prompt and easy to execute those things, vnto which shee is bound by her Office, and in noe wise must shee shew her selfe wrangling or contentious; yet if in her opinion, shee thinketh that any thing may bee better done, or that shee espyeth, that any thing is more spent then ought to bee, lett her make Relatiō there of to the Abbesse. 6. Lett her take care that all Prouisions bee made in their due tymes; for which cause shee must some tymes conferr with the Ab∣besse, and Procurator of the Monastery, as alsoe with the Cellarier, conceruing those things which are vnder her charge, and which shee is to vse. 7. Shee must gather togeather all ould things of the Monastery, as the ould lockes ould Iron and such like, alsoe shee must keepe an accompt of all the Reuenewes, and sommes of all the perticuler debts, and of such things as are owing to any; or by
any to the Monastery, and what tyme th sayd payments are to bee made. 8. Once euery yeare shee shall render a exact accompt of all her Receips and Ex∣penses, where of shee is to deliuer a Cop∣py to the Abbesse, whoe shall alsoe writt it downe in her booke, and shee must see∣ke to haue the Abbesse subfigne to her yearely Reckonings, whereby it may ap∣peare that shee hath approued all, and that all things haue passed according to her Or∣der and well liking. THE IX. CHAPTER. Of the Cellarier. 1. THE Cellarier must often con∣ferr with the Abbesse about those things which appertayne to her Office, and shee must performe that both for quantitie and qualitie of the meate, which shee shall appoynte; shee must see that all things bee well keept in the Spence and Buttery, that nothing bee negligently spent or wasted in meate drinke or any other thing com∣mitted to her charge, and with a speciall care shee must endeauour that what soeuer belongeth to her Oice▪ bee kept cleane
nd hand some. 2. In the manner of dressing and seaso∣ing her meate, shee must looke to that which is most whole some, and lett her oyde all Curiositie and excesse in all things ll beeseeming a Religious estate; yea if any thing bee superfluons lett her keepe it care fully, to bee spent, and vsed in due tyme and Season. 3. Lett her foresee what is to bee pro∣uided for the day following, and lett her certify the Cater thereof, and that by wri∣ting▪ soe likewise lett her inquire in good tyme of the Cooke▪ what shee wanteth, that in due tyme Prouision may bee made thereof; and if the depositair shallbee wan∣ting to her in any thing, shee shall onely signify it to the Abbesse. 4. If at any tyme any of the Professed of the Quier bee sent vnto her for any thing, shee is to deliuer vnto them that which they haue neede of with all due Charitie and sweetenesse as her abilitie will permitt her. 5. Shee must soe dispose all her busi∣nesses that shee may bee still present at the deuine Office, soe farr forth as shee can possible. 6. The Conuerse Sisters both Schollers,
Nouices as also the professed, and all th Sruantes of the house are vnder her charge, and shee must bee very watchfull t keepe them all in peace and Concord, dircting them with all meakenesse and gentlenesse, taking care that they bee not tw much ouer charged with their labour, an that nothing bee wanting to their spiritual proffitt and good; but especially of her Con∣urse Sisters. 7. Sh must instruct her Conuerse Sisters in the Catecisme, and Chritian doctrine, and how to pray and make their Confession, and to  to the sacreed Communion with and proffitt. . Ltt her s that such Conuerse Sisters s re appaynted for sundry Offices haue their directions written in their seuerall Of∣fices, which shee must take care that once euery Moneth they bee read vnto them, shee must alsoe haue an Inuentory of all such things, as eueryone vnder her charge doth vse, and shee must often visitt them all, that shee may see that nothing bee bro∣k or ned reption. 9. Lett her not behaue her selfe conten∣tionsly r distastfully to others, but rather endeauour to mayntayne both her selfe and all her charge in ward peace, and lett
hr seeke by her Religious outward tem∣prate goernment, moderation, and man∣r of speach to giue edification to others, by the example of her vertuous nd true religious life. THE X. CHAPTER. Of the Portresse. . IT is the Office of the Portresse to kee∣pe the key of the Gate oft the Mona∣y, the locke where of must haue two eyes, soe that it may not bee opened wit∣out them both. One of these keyes must bee kept by the Abbesse, and when soeuer y person is to enter into the monastery, or any thing is to bee brought in, someone Religious is to bee sent by the Abbesse whoe may bring with her, her key, and there with open and shutt the sayd Gate, and soe car∣ry it backe to the Abbesse againe. 2. If any are to enter into the Monastery from abroade, the Portresse togeather with her Companion whom the Abbesse or the Superiour shall appoynte (for fewer then shall neuer accompany them) must bring them to the place whether they are
to go, and none may speake vnto those persons but in a word or two, and as it weare, Obiter, or by the way, neither may the Portresse permitt euery one to open the Gate, or deliuer her key to any, but to her whom the Superiour shall appoynte. 3. If there shalbee more Gates to th Monastery then one, euery one of them must allwayes haue two keyes, where of the Abbesse must haue one, and the Por∣resse another; and the Portresse must bee very carefull to see they bee allwayes well shutt; and that whosoeuer are lett into the Monastery, doe allwayes enter and departe at full day light, except some most vrgent Causes of necessitie doe e∣xact the contrary, and after Complyne shee is to giue vpp her keyes to the Cu∣stody and keeping of the Lady Abbes∣se. THE XI. CHAPTER. Of the Thourier, or the Prefect of the speaking place. 1. THIS Officer must haue a Cell neere vnto the speaking place▪
hat shee may bee the readyer to answeare uch as come, and to deliuer such messages as are requisitt. 2. Shee must demaunde the names of such persons as come to the speaking place (if shee know them not) and shee must endeauour to informe the Lady Abbesse, or Prioresse of the qualitie of such persons, as require to speake with any one. 3. Shee shall call noe Religious to spea∣ke with Externes at the Grate without the the lycence of the Prioresse at the least, and what soeuer shee receaueth of Externes, shee must deliuer it to the Abbesse or to the Prioresse soe soone as well shee may. 4. When the Religious are called to speake with Externes shee must notify vnto them the quality of the persons, that if they bee persons of qualitie they may goe vnto them in their great habitt, and when shee cal∣leth any to the Parloy or speaking place, lett her ignify vnto her what Companion shee is to haue, according as the Abbesse or Prioresse shall appointe; and if the Con∣uersation seeme to bee vnprofitable or in∣conuenient lett either her Companion or the Prefect of the place prudently and dis∣creetely call her thence. 5. If any Externe bee denyed to speake
with any, lett her in good Religious man∣ner seeke to giue the person due satisfa∣ction, by her yealding those reasons that are for that purpose, and in her speeches, or answeares, lett her haue care of edisica∣tion, and religious Ciuilitie, and being by the Bell called to the Parloyre, lett her make hast to goe thither, and make answeare to the person that called, and see that there shee vse noe other talke, then that which is necessary and conuenient. 6. Shee may not suffer any to execute her Office, but onely that Religious whom the Superiour shall appoynte. 7. Shee may receaue noe writing or message to bee sent to any, except the Abbesse, Prioresse, or Conuent bee ac∣quaynted ther with, except it bee to bee sent and addressed to the Bishopp, or Visitours, as hereafter in the third parte, and first Chapter shalbee decla∣red.
THE XII. CHAPTER. Of the Chantresse. 1. ALL the bookes that appertayne to the Quiar must bee in the Cu∣ody of the Chauntresse, whoe must haue care that in their singing and reading, the hearers may bee edifyed, and euery weeke vppon Wednesday shee shall sett vp a Paper, wherein there names are to bee written, that in the weeke following must sing, or reade any thing in the Quiar, Shee must make choyce of the more skillfull ac∣cording to the solemnitie of the Feasts, and in all things lett her take that Course and methode in her proceedings, that shee bee not ouer greiueous or troublesome to any. 2. Euery weeke vppon Saterday lett her sett vpp in writing the Order of the Offi∣ce for the weake following, and withall the extraordinary obligations, both for the li∣uing and the dead; for which cause shee must ue the keeping of that booke wherein the sayd Obligations are contay∣ned.
3. Lett her bee very wary and Circumspect before shee begin to sing, or intone any thing, and lett her vse the same war∣rynesse in euery thing els, that if any erro happen shee may seeke to amend it wit Zeale, yet without any signe of impatien∣ce, soe farr as shee can possibly. 4. If they shall sing any thing in Mu∣sicke in the Church, hose are to bee ap∣poynted by her (or by some other who per∣happs may bee fitter for this Office) that must sing, neither may any other presume to sing, but such, as by her are appoyn∣ted. THE XIII. CHAPTER. Of the Sacristane. 1. THE Sacristane must bee very dil∣ligent to see that what soeuer be∣longeth to the Church, Cloyster, Chapter house, and Sacristy bee kept very carefully and han somely. 2. Lett her carefully prouide that the wine which must seru for the most holy Sacrifice, bee good and pure and drawne the same day; that the Chalices, Purifica∣toryes,
Corporalls, Cruetts, Water, Towells and all the furniture and appurtenances of the Church, bee whole and very cleane, shee must carry holywater to the Cells, and the accustomed places of the Monastery▪ where euery weeke shee must put it into Vessells, that there are appoynted to con∣tayne the same. 3. Lett her appoynte the tyme when euery one is to goe to Confession, by the aduise of the Abbesse, and lett her see that all the Masses bee sayd in fitt tymes, if they haue sundry Prists to celebratt. Lett her make the hosts as fayre as shee can pos∣sibly, which shee must prouide may bee sufficient for the Masses, and the Commu∣nicants, and shee must see that shee all∣wayes haue them in readynesse, as neede may require. 4. Shee must kepe the kyes of the Turne, and Grate of the Church, or Sacristy, nei∣ther may shee receaue or deliuer any thing by them, but onely such things as apper∣tayne to the Aultar, the holy Sacrifices, or Church, lett her see that this grate or Turne bee all wayes well shutt and locked, except in tymes of Communion, or when any thing is to bee deliuered, or receaned by the same.
5. Shee must not speake or talke with any at the Grate, but onely about those things that necessaryly appertayne to her Office and if any Externe demande any thing of her which concerneth not imme∣diately the Church, lett her send him to the Tourier, and when shee speaketh with any at her Turne or Grate, lett her doe it with a low voyce, and lett her bee still ready to deliuer those things, which belong to the Seruice of the Church. 6. Shee must deliuer euery Euening to the Abbesse, the keyes of her Office, and in the morning lett her demaunde them of her at a competent tyme. 7. See that with due care and Dilligen∣ces hee write downe in some booke all such donations, as haue beene made to the Church, togeather with the names of the giuers, and shee must take an Inuentory of all such things as are committed to her charge.
THE XIV. CHAPTER. Of the Infirmaire. 1. THE Infirmayre must assist the sicke with singuler Charitie, and seeke to procure their confort accordingly, where∣fore shee must endeauour to performe all those things, that may tend to the ease and comfort of the diseased, with very great alacritie. 2. About the sicke all things must bee neat, and decent, and the Infirmaire must haue an Inuentory of all such things, as belong to her Office. 3. Shee must haue all medicinable things and what soeuer els are neceessary for the sicke in some conuenient place, and shee must often visitt them, to see that nothing bee corrupted, and to procure by Order from the Superiour that new bee had in due tyme. 4. If the disease soe require it, lett her send for the Phisition, yet with the consent of the Abbesse, and lett her punctually obserue his prescriptions, and ordinations, concer∣ning the diett and Phisicke of the Patient, She
must alsoe haue certayne common Rules and instructions▪ according to which shee may proceede, when the disease seemeth not to require the presence or aduise of the Phisition. 5. If the disease increase lett the Abbesse bee crtifyed there of, that other Phisitions bee sent for in due tyme, if it seeme neede∣full, or if the disease bee infectiue, that o∣thers bee for bidden to haue accesse to the diseased, or to conuerse with her. 6. If the Sicke bee in any danger shee must prouide that in fitt tyme they bee ar∣med with the holy Sacraments, and assisted whith the deuoute prayers of the Religious and withall may bee excited with holy ad∣monitions to endure patiently the greife of their disease, and willingly to embrace the will of almighty God in all things. 7. Some holy Pictures and Images must bee had in the Infirmary, and shee must see that a Table bee decently adorned and pre∣pared when the most blessed Sacrament is to bee brought thither, and shee is to make it ready and to prepare all other necessaryes for the Communion of the sicke, soe often as the ghostly Father shall thinke it expe∣dient, that they communicate. 8. Shee may not change or omitt any
thing that the Phisition hath appoynted, except some euident reason moue her to the contrary, and lett her haue a booke where in all must bee sett downe that hee prescribeth. 9. Whensoeuer the Phisition or Surgeon commeth to the Monastery, by some signe the Conuent shalbee aduertised of their comming, that if any haue neede of their helpe, by the Superiours licence they may come vnto them. 10. When the Ghostly Father, the Phisi∣tion, or Surgeon enter the Infiary, shee or some other, with a Companion, must bee present, who shall neuer departe out of the place, till they bee thence departed. 11. Shee must not dismisse those that are on their Recouery, till shee see thē strong and able to vndergoe their accustomed la∣bour. 12. Shee must haue a Care that they ob∣serue due modesty, whyle they are vnder her charge, lest that whyle they seeke to restore their corporall strenght, they loose their Zeale and Spiritt, yet they shall not soe much imploy themselues in their me∣ditations and deuotions as before, vntill that they may bee able to retourne to their for∣mer Exercises, in perfect health, and with∣out
any inconuenience. THE XV. CHAPTER. Of the Guarderobe. 1. THE Guarderobe must keepe all such Cloathes as the Religious doe not vse: s alsoe all linnen, and woollen which are applied to their bedding or to any other Mo∣nasticall vses, the which shee must dilli∣gently looke vnto, as to those things which are belonging to the poore. 2, Shee must keepe an accompt of all such things that are vnder her charge, as of all those things whereof the Religious haue the vse, and if shee bee to make prouision for any, either in linnen or in Woollen, lett her acquainte the Lady Abbesse therewith, nei∣ther may shee deliuer to any a new gar∣ment, or any thing els that is new, without the consent of the Lady Abbesse. 3. Lett her haue great care of cleanely∣nesse, and handsomenesse, and shee must haue commodious places, to lay vpp those things that appertayne to her custody, the which shee must looke vnto, that by noe meanes they bee spoyled.
4. When shee deliuereth out any thing to bee washed, or which is already washed, shee must deliuer them by accompt, and by accompt shee must receaue them backe againe; alsoe all such things as are depu∣ted, for the vse either of the Refectory or of the kitchin, and when shee deliuereth any linnen or Woollen to the Religious, she must deliuer them on Saterday, and shee shall keepe written what and when, and to whom, any thing is deliuered, that euery one may receaue their necessaryes in due season. 5. Lett her seperate and keepe a parte that which is new, from that which is ould, and put euery thing in their seuerall places, and distinguish by certeyne figures or numbers, what soeuer is granted for the perticuler vse of each Religious. But if any thing cannot bee accommodated for the vse of the Reli∣gious, lett her make the Abbesse know the∣reof, that shee may dispose thereof accor∣dingly. 6. Shee shall haue care to see that the Garments bee mended, and shee shall at the appoyntment of the Superiours deliuer them to bee mended by those whom the Superiour hall please to name. 7. Shee must haue care of all their Shooes▪
and shee must see that they bee mended in due tyme, and new must bee giuen to euery one, according to their necessitie and as the Superiour shall appoynte. 8. In her Office lett her carry her selfe meeke and gentle, neither must shee suffer any to endure any Want in Clothing and Garments. 9. Shee must eschew and auoyde all no∣ueltie, secularitie, and Curiositie in all things and therefore a certayne Patterne of their habbits, Vayles, and other garments, must bee made and prescribed, the which shee must keepe in her Office of the Guadroabe, shee and all the rest shall bee bound and obliged to obserue this fashion, neither may any bee soe bold, as to presume to make, or fashion, or haue any thing but according to the sayd Patterne, according vnto which euery thing must bee praecisely made and accommodated. THE XVI. CHAPTER. Of the Conuerse Sisters. 1. THE Conuers Sisters are admitted into this Congregation, that by their pious labours they may serue their God and
Creator, and that they may assist those, whoe haue dedicated themselues to his holy Ser∣uice, and soe serue with them the selfe same soueraigne Lord, vnder the selfe same Statutes, Rules and Sacred Vowes; there∣fore they must endeauour to draw that spiri∣tuall proffitt and commoditie from their sayd Labours, in such sort that they may fully ac∣complish all their ymployments to the glo∣ry of almightie God, and to the Saluation of their omne Soules. 2. The Conuerse Sisters (being noe lesse Religious then are those of the Quier) must in like sort bee prouided for in all things that appertayne to ther spirituall and Cor∣porall good: as both aliue and dead they enioy all those Graces, and prouiledges which the others enioy, onely those excep∣ted, which speciall and perticuler exception is made in the Stautes, whereof, by rea∣son of their sundry imployments, busines∣ses, and impediments that are incident to their estate, they cannot be capable. 3. They must know that all such Statutes, that any wise touch the Religious of the Quiar▪ doe alsoe appertayne vnto them, soe farr forth as by their State they may bee accom∣modated vnto them. 4. They vnto whom any perticular Offi∣ces
are inioyned must receaue their speciall directions from their Superiour in writing, the which they must haue sett vpp in the pla∣ces of their Offices. 5. Euery day they must attend to mentall and vocall prayer, for soe long a tyme as the Superiour shall appoynte them, which may bee longer or shorter as their Labours, and businesses will permitt them, If they shall perceaue that they are not soe apt for men∣tall prayer as they might wish, let them acquaint their ghostly Father therewith that they may imploy the tyme of prayer in some other exercise of deuotion. 6. Lett them pay to our Lord God a day∣ly taske and oblation of their Prayers, to witt for their Nocturnes and Mattins, they shall say thirty Pater Nostrs, and soe many Aue Ma∣rias; for their Prime, Third, Sixt, None, and Compline for each of these seuen Pater No∣sters, and seuen Aue Marias; and they shall re∣cite the sayd Pater nsters and Aue Marias twlue tymes ouer, in stead of their Euensong; But they that are able, and can finde leisure may say the Office of our blessed Lady, or of the dead, or the seuen penitentiall Palmes, with the Litanies, insteed of those Pater nosters and Aue Marias prescribed. 7. They that are admitted for Conuerse
Sisters, after they haue made their Profes∣sion, may neuer passe to the State of the Professed of the Quier, and therefore they may not learne to sing, read or write, nor yet may they bee taught to doe the some. 8. They may vse all religious freedome with their Superiours, for which cause they may confidently repayre vnto them if they want any thing, or in their labours finde them selues ouercharged aboue ther streng∣thes, and both Superiour as alsoe all the rest must loue them as their most deare Si∣sters, and carry them selues towards them in all Charitie, beneuolence, and true lo∣uing affection. 9. If at any tyme the Nouices bee sent by their Mistresse, or the Professed of the Quiar by the Superiour to serue in the kit∣ching or such like places, the Conuerse must soe seeke to direct them in their la∣bours, that withall they carry them selues towards them with all religious gentlenesse humilitie and discretion, neither may they take more vppon them then is meete in their proceedings or speeckes, but they must with sweetnesse teach them, when they see any rhing worthy to bee amended in them, but in those things which! appertayne not to their Offices, lett them in forme their Su∣periours
of them. 10. Let them auoyde all bitternesse among them selues, but rather lett them seeke to nourish that mutuall charitie, which bee seemeth them, lett them behaue themsel∣ues with all obedience towards their Su∣periours, whom they must reuerence in most humble manner, the Religious of the Quier they must honour and respect each one according to that Estate where in shee is. 11. They must bee very dilligent and warry that there happen noe danger by their Fyre or Candle in the places of their Offices, they must see that all things bee neate nd cleanely, they must haue a noate of all such things as are deliuered to their vse and Custody, that they may make a due accompt and reckoning of all things when it shall bee required of them. 12. They must bee very carefull and dil∣ligent that nothing bee vnprofitably wasted or spoyled in their Offices, they must alsoe bee very great louers of Pouerty, and in all the places of their labours they must speake very sparingly, and for the most parte of things necessary, and then they must speake with a submissiue and lowe Voyce.
THE XVII. CHAPTER. Of those that are admited in to the Mo∣nastery to receaue the Habitt, and to make holy Vowes, and Pro∣fession of Religion. 1. AS the Conditions and dispositions of those are, that are admitted into this Congregation, such alsoe will the whole Congregation bee, therefore with great choyce must they admitt such as offer themselues to the Congregation, lest by ad∣mitting such that are vnfitt their spirituall progresse and vigour of disciplyne fall and decay: 2. Therefore they are especially to bee admitted into this Congregation, whoe haue giuē some shew or proofe of their Vertuous life, in the places of their education and former Conuersation, and whose reputation was alwayes held for good, whyle they li∣ued in the World. 3. They that are notably defectiue either in body or mynde may not bee admitted,
nor they that are in danger of continuall sicknesse, the Abbesse and the Conuent must bee Iudges whether they bee in these things defectiue: but yet where there may bee any doubt or question, they must seeke for the Counsayle of those, whose Iudgment and experience may assist them in these matters. 4. Widdowes, Sisters, or such as are neere of bloode, may not bee receaued with∣out great Cause, nor they very easely whoe haue had gouerment ouer others in the world, and were subordinate to none, because such are not gouerned but with great difficultie. 5. They that are entred into the lawfull bond of Matrimony, although they haue not consummated the same; may not obtayne admittance without very great warynesse and deliberation, nor they whoe haue beene suspected to take vppon them this State of life, by the hard and vnkinde vsa∣ge and dealing of their Frends, wherefore if any such shall enter, and shall conceal these things, they must know that they cannot continew in the Monastery, if these things doe afterwards come to light; but if the Conuent shall see any somewhat con∣strayned here vnto, and proceede afterwards
to a true and an assured spiritt of Religion, shee may bee admitted, after hath yealded due profe and experi∣mente of her sincere Vocation. 6. Shee that is vnlawfully begotten or is held for such, ought not to bee admitted, except some reason of especiall moment may bee alleadged for her, which reason must bee aproued by the most Voyces of the Religious, before shee bee permitted to enter in. 7. Shee that is in debt or in Processe, may not enter, vntill the debt bee payed, and the Processe ended. 8. Shee that hath receaued the Habitt of nother Religious Order, or hath liued in any Monastery of this Order, that obserue not these Statutes and hath there receaued the Habitt of Religion may not bee taken into this Congregation, except vppon most important Reasons. 9. None may easely bee receaued that are aboue seuen and twentie yeares old, yet if they bee such that are expert in reading and song, and are knowne to bee of strong and healthy bodys, they may bee admitted, although they bee thirty yeares ould. 10. For as much as the impediments of those that seee to enter among you may
bee often very secrett, and hard to bee knowne, lett her that offereth her selfe to this Congregation bee demaunded, if shee haue any such impediments, whether shee bee able to passe with the common dyett, whether shee bee often or seldome sicke, and what sicknesse that may bee, of what health or strenght shee findeth her selfe for the present, whether their parents had any disease, which may bee feared to bee hereditary vnto her, whether shee bee sub∣iect to any Obligation vppon any contract whatsoeuer, whether shee hath publikely celebrated any spowsales, or plighted her promise of mariage to any man, of all which the Congregation must bee planely and per∣ticulerly informed. 11. Further more shee must bee demaun∣ded what it was that induced her to haue this desire, why shee rather desireth to bee in this Conuent then of another. If perhap∣pes, for that shee hath here of her kindred, or some Sister, or Cozens in the Congre∣gation, who might much inclyne her here vnto, or for the place, Country, or Educa∣tion, moreouer it must Bee inquired of her whether shee bee content to bee ymployed in the baser sort of labours, and to bee perpetally exercised there in according to
her State and degree▪ whether shee bee resolued to endure those things which may helpe to bring her to humilitie, patience, and contempt of her selfe, what qualities shee hath, what difficulties shee hath suf∣fred in making her Resolution▪ finally what shee hath to dispose of, and what satisfac∣tion shee hath giuen to her Frends, out of all which, if the Abbesse and Prioresse (whoe are both seuerally to examine those that would enter) can draw any thing that may seeme worthy of great deliberation, they shall remitt it to the Iudgement of the whole Conuent. 12. They that after their entrance giue litle hope of their good proceeding in Spir∣ritt, must bee dismissed in good tyme, but with great Charitie, but they that yeald some hope, and yet not soe certayne and assured as may bee wished, their clothing may bee soe long deferred vntill the Con∣uent bee sufficiently satisfied, yet the Con∣uent is not bound vppon Charitie to retayne, and mayntayne such among them whoe may rather bee a burthen vnto them then that they are like to make that proffitt in spi∣rit which they should. 13. Acertayne number of Religious as alsoe of the whole family must bee appoyn∣ted,
according to their certayne temporall meanes and Reuenewes, neither may they admit more then their Ordinary Reuenewes or Almes are able well to entertayne and nourish. 14. None may bee admitted to bee either of th Quier, or a Conuerse, vppon indis∣creete pitty and Compassion; as neither that person ought to bee admitted to bee of the Conuent, whoe hath not a mynde to vnder∣goe, and endr what soeuer is according to Religion. 15. The Schollers must haue a Vayle deli∣uered them, before they can bee permitted to come to the Quiar, or Refectory as alsoe a certayne kinde of habitt conuenient the state and Vocation. 16. Such as are admitted must ordinarely haue a whole yeare before they receaue the holy Habitt of Religion, if it happen other∣wise that this tyme bee either preuented or prolonged, lett the Conuent approue the Cause and Reason, that afterwres it may not happen to bee turned in to a Custo∣me. 17. Shee that is admitted may not vrge, or bee to ernest to receaue the Habitt, but lett her onely shew her propension, and good desire to proceede in her holy course, and
leaue the rest to the disposition of the Con∣uent. 18. They shall admitt none to receaue the holy habitt of Religion, before shee bee twelue yeares ould, nor may they permitt her to make her Profession before shee bee sixteene yeares old full compleate according to that which is decreed in the holy Counsayle of Trent, in the twentie fift Session and in the fourth Chapter; and ordinarily lett none bee receaued, that after two yeares cannot make her Profession. 19. The Schollers and Nouices must liue in silence seperated from the rest, at lest for the space of eight dayes before their Cloa∣thing and Profession that they may seriously and maturely consider of the greatnesse of the matter they are to take in hand; againe after three dayes are expired after their cloa∣thing, they must retourne to their former silence, for at lest eight dayes more, that they may well ponder and cast with them, by what meanes they may best with fruyte vse that benefitt of god his holy Grace and fauour which hee hath bestowed vppon them and how they may Zealousty accom∣plish those things, which to the honor and seruice of God they had before purposed and dermyned with themselues.
20. The place of Recreation for the Schollers and Nouices must bee different from that of the professed; neither yet may they conuer∣se with those, whoe although they liue in the Monastery, yet are not there with intention and prpose to bee Religious, except for sometyme the Abbesse ordayne otherwise. 21. They must not ordinaryly bee admitted to make their Profession before they bee eighteene yeares ould, although reason may sometyme perswade the contrary; as when their Iugdments and forwardnesse may sup∣ply the defect of their yeares, and shee that after the yeare of her Probation i found vn∣fitt must bee dismissed. 22. All the Religious must receaue from the Mistris of the Nouices information, con∣cerning the dispositions, Vertues, and apt∣nesse, of the Schollers, and Nouices, espe∣cially when otherwise they cannot haue suf∣ficient notice and knowledge thereof; But as touching the Conuerse Sisters, they must inquire of the Celarier, concerning what soeuer may occur touching them. 23. When the Religious deliberate among themselues in Chapter concerning the ad∣mission of any either to the habiti or profes∣sion the Sister or kinsewoman of the party within the third degree (yea although it bee
the Abbesse her selfe) may not bee present, as neither the Mistris of the Nouices, or Cel∣larier, whyle the Religious doe there debate among themselues concerning those that are vnder their seuerall charges, yet they must bee present when by balloting they all are to deliuer their suffrages and Voyces. The Suffrages of the Religious for those that are to bee admitted for cloathing or Profes∣sion, must not bee deliuered by writing, but by Bowles, and they that are to bee admitted must haue more than halfe the Voyces of the Cōuent, and the Cōuent must giue these their Voyces some six Weekes before their Cloa∣thing ād Professiō, but especially before the Professiō, that the Lord Bishopp or his deputy may bee certifyed in fitt tyme of those that a∣re to bee admitted, that hee may examyne thē according to that which is decreed in the fife ād twēty Sessiō of the holy Counsell of Trent. 24. They must dispose of al things that any wyse appertayne vnto thm, before the day of their Profession, and if they shall not bee found fitt, all what soeuer was any wayes bestowed vppon the Monastery must bee rendred to them backe againe, as in the holy Counsayle of Trent, in the 25. Session and 16. Chapter is enacted. 25. After the Profession the Mistris shall
informe the Prioresse of their natures and dispositions, soe farr forth as it is conueni∣ent for her to know them, and after their Nouitiate shee shall ordinarely leaue them to the Prioresse to dispose of them and to bee subject vnto her in all things, in such sort as the rest of the Profested for the Quier are. 26. If at any tyme young Children bee receaued into the Monastery for their edu∣cation, let that bee done with great choyce and in regard of a greater good, and whose good education (in regard of those things which passe in Religion) may proue to ad∣uance them to a greater good: they may not bee receaued before they are seuen yeares old, and they may not bee retayned in the Monastery after they are past fifteene, they may not bee admitted with any burthen to the Monastery, excepted it bee otherwise suf∣ficiently prouided for. 27. Whyle these Children liue in the Mo∣nastery they may not bee curiousty cloathed or adorned, but the Habitt which they are to vse must bee decent, and fitly beesee∣ming the place; they may not conuerse with the Schollers, Nouices, or Professed, but as the Lady Abbesse and Prioresse shall giue them leaue, neither may they speake or
haue any Conuersation with such as come vnto them from abroade, and when this latter shalbee permitted them, lett them doe it at a certayne Grate, that must bee pecu∣liarely appoynted for them, and they must allwayes haue there some graue Religious ordinarely to accompany them, and to bee present with them.
THE THIRD PARTE. OF THOSE MATTERS that are more extrinsecally and externally appertayning to the Congregation, and Monastery, and are belonging to the Temporalities of the same. AT GANT. Printed by IOOS DOOMS. 162.
THE FIRST. CHAP: Of the Visitor, and Visitation of the Monastery. 1. THE Abbesse with her Con∣uent shall propose to the Bis∣hopp, that hee would vouch∣safe to appoynte and constitute some one Visitor of the Monastery, whose authoritie shall wholly in all things de∣pend of the Bishopp; and the place of his ordinary residence must bee at the most but one dayes Iourney from the Monastery, and he must yearely make a visitation of the mo∣nastery and that must bee within the Feasts of S. Iohn Baptist, and of the Assumption of the blessed Virgin Mary, if it can possi∣bly bee soe. 2. If at any tyme the Visitation cannot bee made at the ordinary appoynted tymes, the Abbesse shall certify the Conuent of the hindrance, and when the tyme of the Visita∣tion approacheth; shee must ve that forme of writing to the Visitour, which is sett downe in the booke of Ceremonyes.
3. The Conuent must chouse one that is skillfull in the practise of Religion, and is a Religious man, who may assist at the Visi∣tation. And because the Abbesse is likelyest best to know who may bee most fitt for this purpose, after shee hath deliberated of the matter with her Assistants, shee shall propose two or three to the Conuent, lea∣uing free vnto them to chuse one of them or some other, as may seeme meetest to them. 4. During the Visitation all must yeald their accustomed obedience to the Abbesse, and other Superiors, in those things that ap∣pertayne to ordinary disciplyne, neither may they require of the Visitor leaue to doe any thing before they haue first warned the Ab∣besse thereof. 5. The Abbesse must deliuer a noate of all the names of her Religious and Family to the Bishopp or Visitor, when hee com∣meth to visitt, and shee must write downe what Office, euery one beareth in the Mo∣nastery. 6. To the end that euery one with bet∣ter aduise may declare to the Visitor their mynds, and difficulties, they shall deliuer vnto him in writing what they would say vnto him. And all must haue free accesse
to the Visitor, that in any sort appertayne to the Monastery. But they that cannot wri∣te, may explicate to him their myndes by word of Mouth. 7. They shall auoyde and fly all kinde of exagerations in those things that they write and propounde, and they shall onely make a naked Relation of the matter, and they must maturely ponder with themsel∣ues, whether their Superiors could not ha∣ue sufficiently of themselues amended and reformed those things which they declare vnto the Visitor or whether at leastwise the Superiors vnderstoode the case, that they might thereby haue prouided some remedy for it. 8. Those things that are to bee confer∣red about whith the Visitor (besides that which of himselfe he may enquire or exa∣men) may bee reduced to these heads. The defects of good obseruation of the Rule, or Statutes, those things that belong to Chasti∣tie, Pouerty, Obedience, and Clausure to much Conuersation with seculer people, danger of scandale, occasion eithēr offered or permitted of breach of peace, and dis∣union of myndes, want of necessaryes for their life and dyett, comming from those whoe of duty should haue mad due
prouision, vnprofitable expences and ex∣cesse in anything: notable defectes in the Abbesse, ghostly Father, Chaplaynes, or in the rest of the Superiours, Officers, and whatsoeuer els may seeme to bee great∣ly hurtfull to the good of the Monaste∣ry. 9. The bookes of accomptes, and the some of the Prouision they haue made, must bee shewed to the Visitor, as vnto him al∣soe must bee declared, what is lett, and in what manner and by whose ayde and assistance, more ouer hee must see the Or∣ders left them by former Visitours, and es∣pecially those of the last Visitation (if any thing were left in writing) all which their Orders and Ordinations are to bee commit∣ted to writing, but yet they may not bee ioyned to the Statutes, because they are to bee thought onely such things, as are onely accommodated to certayne tymes and per∣sons. 10. If any would deliuer her Complaynte to the Visitor, lett her see that shee doe it vppon a good ground, freing her mynde from all Passion, and shee must onely men∣tion those things that are of moment. If any thing bee found to bee deuised, or to discouer in them any notable Passion, the
offendor must expect a good Pennance (which the Visitour is to impose) accor∣ding to her desertes. 11. If any Complaynte should bee deli∣uered vpp against the Abbesse, or any of the Superiors, or of the Religious▪ the accu∣sed may neither directly or indirectly, goe about to finde out the Authors of the sayd Complaynte; neither may shee shew any si∣gne of any greife or disgust against any, if by any circumstances she may thinke that she haue discouered the Author there∣of. 12. When the Visitor entreth in to the Inclosure the Abbesse; Prioresse, and Assi∣stants shall allwayes accompany him, why∣le there hee remayneth, neither may they conceale any thing from him, which hee ought to see, or wherewith hee ought to bee acquainted. 13. None may tell vnto any other any thing that the Visitor inquired of her; or where of hee examined, neither shall shee signify her suspicion of any thing that was sayd, or done with the Visitor, and if by any meanes the sayings, or doings of others shall happen to come to her know∣ledge, shee may not bewray it to any other, except the Viitor giue her leaue, vnder
payne of being disabled to all offices after∣wards and of other punishment which the Visitor shall please to enioyne. 14. What soeuer shall bee suggested or ordayned by the Visitour the Abbesse and Conuent must receaue with due reuerence: neither may they directly or indirectly make their recourse to any other seculer or eccle∣siasticall person, but to him selfe or his Assistant (before named) or to the Bishopp, or his Superior; and if at any tyme any shall dare to seeke for remedy of those things, that belong to the Oice of the Vi∣sitour and Bishopp, by seeking to any se∣culer or Ecclesiasticall Princes, or Magistra∣tes, the Abbesse and Conuent shall iudge and condemne such for vnquiett persons, for as much as they trouble the common peace of the Conuent, and soe punish them by separating and debarring them from the Conuersation of the rest. 15. If any of the Professed would at any tyme write to the Bishopp or Visitour, shee shall haue free liberty to doe the same, and shee may deliuer her letters to the Thourier, who may not (vnder payne of losse of acti∣e and passiue Voyce for euer, and of other punishments which by the Chapter may bee enioyned her) discouer to any, that euer
shee receaued any such letters to bee ad∣dressed vnto them, except the Religious that deliuered them vnto her, doe leaue it in her freedome and discretion; what shee recea∣ued to bee sent vnto them, shee must see tht shee deliuereth to a fayth full Messenger, or to him whoe is esteemed such an one, soe that it will not bee likely that the sending of such letters will euer come to the notice of the Superiors, or of others by his meanes. 16. Neither may the Abbesse or any other Superiors either Directly, by any wayes, signes or outward shew of Coun∣tenances, hinder the free writing of their Religious to their Superiors (to witt the Bishopp or Visitour) vnder payne of sus∣pention from their Offices, and other grea∣ter penalties to bee inflicted on them by the Bishopp. THE II. CHAPTER. Of the Family of the Monastery and of such as liu out of the Inclosure. 1. THE Monastery must haue for their Ghostly Fathers such as are mo∣dest, prudent, and learned, and first the Conuent must bee well informed of their
sufficiency, Vertue, and honesty before they are to bee admitted; alsoe their Cha∣playnes, Phisitions, and Chirurgions, must bee of modest life and good fame. 2. The Conuent must entertayne noe seruant that is not modest, or is noted for any perticuler cryme, or in his apparell and outward cariage is lighter then reason would. 3. All these Seruants must goe to Con∣fession and the holy Communion once eue∣ry Moneth, and they must obserue all such Ordinances, as they shall receaue from the Abbesse, Visitor, or the Cellarier. 4. Noe woman of what soeuer State, dignitie or Condition shee may bee, can bee permitted to liue or dwell with those of the family: that all occasion of ill suspiion and badd toungs may bee wholly takē away. 5. Hee that is chosen for the Steward or Procurator of the Monastery by the Con∣uent, must bee such a one, as is graue, godly, prudent, and hee must not bee charged with wie, or Children, hee must dilli∣gently attend to the Affayres of the Mona∣stery, procuring still the proffitt thereof▪ with the good edification of such abroade as hee dealeth with all and the Abbesse and the Conuent must bee assured of his hone∣sty,
and fidelitie, in those things that are committed to his care and disposition. 6. Hee must bee obedient in all things to those Officers that haue authoritie from the Abbesse to commaunde him, and hee must haue some certayne howers, where in hee must repayre vnto them, but espe∣cially to the depositair, and Cellarier, vnto whom the care of the dayly prouisiones doe principally belong. 7. Hee must haue a booke where in hee is to sett downe all his receipts and xpen∣ces, and once a weeke hee must words of the depositair, that which shall suffice for the necessary prouisions of that weeke; and when hee receaueth any money, hee must deliuer her a Bill where in hee shall ac∣knowledge the receipt and for what vse hee receaued it. 8. Hee is to vnderstand that hee can take nothing vppon creditt, without the leaue of the Abbesse deliuered him in writing except for some matter of litle moment, and hee shall incontinently pay for what hee receaueth, or take care that it bee payd, neither may hee euer bee debtor for aboue twentie Florens, except the Abbesse and dispositayre bee consenting there vnto. 9. If hee shall receaue any money due
to the Monastery, vppon what title soeuer, hee must deliuer it vpp presently to the de∣positayre and of her receaue an Acquittance for the receipt there of. 10. Hee may not vndertake noe Processe or call any into law without the knowled∣ge of the Abbesse and Conuent; and if att any tyme hee shall vndertake any such mat∣ter, hee must demaund the Counsayle of such as are skillfull, whose aduise hee may follow, and before any Suytes bee com∣menced (hauing first acquainted the Supe∣riour there with) lett him offer to put the matter to agreement, and Compremise. 11. Hee must often render an accompt to the Abbesse of those things, where in hee dealeth, and hee must like a good and faythfull Seruant in forme her of all such things, as hee thinketh wilbee profitable for the Monastery, and hee must suggest vnto her at what tymes all Prouisions are to bee made, that by these meanes, Costs and Charges may bee moderated; and lett him see that what hee buyeth bee good and profitable for the Monastery. 12. Hee shall certify the Abbesse of what∣soeuer hee findeth to want neede of repa∣ration; and if hee shall thinke any thing fitt to bee sould, or otherwise to bee imployed,
lett him not attempt any such thing with∣out her knowledge, or in lesser matters, without at least the knowledge of the de∣positayre. 13. Lett none bee admitted to eate with the Chaplaynes or Seruants without the Consent of the Abbesse, who must not grant easely hospitalitie to seculer people (except some singuler obligation require the same) and then lett it bee done in some place without the Bowndes and Circuit of the Monastery, where notwithstanding due re∣gard and care must bee hadd of religious Frugalitie. 14. The Steward must not permitt that any thing bee vnprofitably spent and con∣sumed, and if any thing bee ouerplus, lett him take care that it bee brought backe againe, to bee kept for those vses the Su∣periors shall approue; and hee must haue care of all the Seruants, and must dilligently see that euery one doe their duty and that they liue not idlely. 15. At what tyme soeuer hee requireth of the depositayre any Originall Writings, Registers, Charters, or other Instruments, lett him sett downe in writing that hee receaued them from her, vppon such a day, which writing shee must deliuer againe
vnto him, when hee hath restored the affore∣sayd things. THE III. CHAPTER. Of bestowing and letting the Goods of the Monastery. 1. WHatsoeuer is giuen to the Mona∣steryes vse, through the pious li∣beralitie of good people, is to bee esteemed as applyed to Christ our Lord, or to the Religious as his poore membres, that there by being freed from all care of temporall mattes, they may the better attend to the Seruice of his diuine Maiesty; and there∣fore they must interprett that whatsoeuer temporall goods they haue, or receaue, they must imploy in such sort as may best stand with the honour of God, and may seeme to bee most agreable to the Inention of the giuers. 2. If the Rents of the Monastery, and donations of good people should grow to that greatenesse, that, (the number of the persons liuing in the Monastery, and the difficulties which may happen well consi∣dered) they may seeme superfluos or not
necessary, nor decent for a Religious State; then the Abbesse with the consent of the Conuent may apply them to some pious vses, as to the sustentation of poore fami∣lies, bringing vpp of poore Schollers in learning and all such like godly workes, as may best aduance the good of Religion and seruice of God. 3. The Abbesse her selfe and by her owne authority, may dispose of those things that are of lesser valew, or giue some things in way of gratitude, yet shall shee sett do∣wne in a booke, what, to whom, and to what end, shee hath giuen any thing, that it may bee shewed to the Visitor if it should seeme necessary. 4. The Abbesse may not giue vppon co∣lour and praetext of Seruice done, more then Iustice beeseeming a Religious State may exact. And if at any tyme any peculier Consideration bee to bee had of some perti∣culer person, and that some notable thing is to bee added to his wages, lett that bee done by the consent of he Conuent. 5. The Abbesse must haue in her keeping a Register of all the Lord shipps, landes, and possessions of the Monastery, and of the yearely Reuenew which shee draweth from euery one of them, what was receaued
when they were last let, whether any posses∣sion bee lett for terme of yeares, together with the names of such persons as occupy them. 6. The Abbesse may not lett any posses∣sions of the Monastery, without the consent of the Conuent, whom shee must in forme how much they yeald yearely, and what the opinion of those that are most practicall in such affayres is here in, and lett such men bee herd by the Abbesse, Prioresse, and depositary, who are skillfull and of good Iudgment in such affayres, that the Conuent may bee the more fully informed, and soe may the better iudge there of, and let the Conuent vse such persons, whom none may suspect that they will draw any thing to their owne priuate lucre, and gaine, or to the benefitt of their Frends. 7. They must vnderstand that noe Eccle∣siasticall goods can bee lett aboue the terme of nyne yeares, without the obseruation of such solemnities, as according to law are required, in the alienation of the Church goods, neither may any letting bee renued during the tyme of the former lease, more then for one yeare for the Tythes, and at most for three yeares in respect of other proffitts, before the end of the Rent that
neth, neither may they take more then Florens for an earnest penny, for re∣wing of the sayd Rent. . If any lettings of such goods should made by anticipating the Rent before ▪ they may noe wayes bind ther Succes∣sors, as is dcreed in the 11. Chap▪ of the 2. Session of the Counsayle of rent. Therefore the Monastery will lett forth their posses∣sions for any long tyme, or bynde themsel∣es for any money receaued; it must bee done by them whoe according to law are ble to grant it. 9. In the Monastery nothing may bee made by the Religious to bee ould▪ except ter pouerty want or necessitie driue th thereto. 10. If their Originall writings, Registers, Instruments, and monuments should hap∣pen through ouldnesse, Rottennesse, or euill keeping to bee spoyled or corrupted, the Ab∣besse and depositaye must take Care to haue them authentically coppyed out, and well kept, and if it happen that the sayd writings are to bee communicated or shewed to any lett him testify vnder his hand and writting what hee hath receaued; neither may the Abbesse and depositayre deliuer to any the sayd publicke Instruments whithout the Conuent bee alsoe assenting there vnto.
1. Those that are to per vse▪ their wi∣ings must bee very fayth full▪ of whose h∣nesty and fidelitie there may bee noe doubt▪ and the Conuent must haue certayne trusty Frends whom they may vse in this mattr▪ neither is it conuenient tha they committ their affayre and State, onely to hyrelings. THE IV. CHAPTER. Of the translation of the Religious from one Monastery to another. 1. THE translation or change of the Re∣ligious from one Monastery to an∣other may▪ not bee made, except very great reasons perswade the same; and the sayd reasons must bee allowed by the Bishopp and by the Conuent, from which they are sent, as alsoe by that Conuent whether they are to goe, and it must bee very profitable for the peace and quiett, or at lestwise for the spirituall good of both. 2. None may deale either directly or indi∣rectly: with any person about her own translation; but onely with her Superiors, and that, onely by proposing the matter vnto them, but noe wayes vrging there vnto, that soe they may leaue it in their full liber∣tie
to determyne therein, what they shall thinke good. 3. When any new Monastery is to bee be∣gunn, it shallly in the power of the Abbesse and Conuent to make choyce of those persons hat are to bee sent to the beginning there of. 4. When any of the Religious are sent to supply the want of another Monastery, it must bee done with the consent of the Bis∣hopp, Abbesse, and Conuent, from whence they are taken, and when but one is granted, shee shall haue an other Religious to accom∣pany her thither, and with her some graue matrone, with whom the sayd Religious may retourne backe againe, if shee bee to retourne backe againe. 5. When they are to goe from one Mo∣nastery to another, they must receaue in writing from the Bishopp, or the Visitor by what way they are to passe, neither may they goe out of that way, and they must allwayes repayre to the Rellgious houses especially of their owne Order and Con∣gregation, if conueniently they may. 6. The Religious that is sent from one Monastery to another of the same Order and Congregation, shall make her Vou of Obedience in Chapter to the Bishopp and Abbesse where shee shall reside, and there
hee shall obserue all the laudable Custo∣mes of the same place. 7. Shee that is sent shall haue her place in the Conuent according to the tyme of her Proession, and shee shall participate of all the priuiledges of the Monastery to which shee is sent; and if the day of her Profession, fall vppon the same in which some of the Monastery were professed, the, professed of that Monastery shall preside and haue the Prioritie. 8. Shee that is translated to another Mo∣nastery may not speake of any of the defects of any of that Conuent from which shee was translated, neither may shee extoll the Religious of one Conuent, that shee may seeme there by to detract or diminish any thing from the Creditt of the other, and if shee perceaue any thing to bee in vse and obseruation in the other Monastery, which is not obserued in the Monastery where shee dwelleth, shee may propose it to the Visitor, Abbesse, or Superior but shee may neither directly or indirectly speake there of to the other Religious except from the affore sayd Superiors shee haue licence to doe the same. 9. Shee that for her greater peace and more perfection is sent to another Mona∣stery,
if shee trouble the peace and quiett of that Monastery▪ and carry her selfe in rouble some manner, shee must bee sent backe againe to her former Conuent, that there the Superiours may soe dispose of her as in our Lord they shall thinke best for her owne good, as alsoe for the good of the Conuent. THE V. CHAPTER. Of the vnion and Combination of the Monasteryes of this Cougregation amongst themselues. 1. A Combination and vnion of diuers Monasteryes liuing vnder the same Rules and Statutes doth make very much for the increase of Religion▪ good disci∣pline, and true Charity amongst those that liue in them; Therefore the Superiours of the seuerall Monasteryes of this Congrega∣tion must endeauour to nourish among thē∣selues by their often mutuall correspon∣dence, writing, and letters this pious Con∣iunction and charitable affecion, whereby it will come to passe that where as the se∣uerall Conuents of this Congregation will
make one body among themselues by mea∣nes of this Combination soe will they alsoe be made partakers of all those priuiledges, graces and such like holy meriorious wor∣kes, which the rest either ioyntly or seue∣rally doe enioy or exercise. 2. Therefore these Monasteries liuing vnder the same Rule and Statutes▪ shall heal∣pe and assist each the other, when they suf∣fer any necessitie; as may happen through plagge, fier, vniust persecution, and the like; yet that must bee performed herein by each Monastery, which by the Iudgment of the right reuerend Lord Bishopp▪ and Visitor shalbee appoynted and deermyned. 3. When soeuer any Monastery of this Congregation shall chance to bee viustly wronged or oppressed, the rest shalbee obli∣ged ioyntely to defend their right▪ and in thē their common good; and they must dilgently labor that▪ what soeuer may appertayne to the spirituall or temporall good there of, they may by any good manner deliuer from the vniust assaults and oppressions of others. 4. The Religious by those Conuents with whom they haue this Society, must bee in∣tertayned in their Monasteries▪ and they shall bee subiect to the Abbesse▪ or Sup∣rior, soe long as they remayne therein.
5. If any Religious in this sort intertayned in any Monastery, should chance there to nd her life, let that bee there performed concerning her buriall, which is accustomed to bee performed to those, that are resident in the same Monastery; But the Monastery from whence shee came, must fullfill those Masses, and suffrages for her Soule, which it doth for others. 6. When in any Monastery of the Congre∣gation an Abbesse is to bee chosen, the other Monastaries whoe shall haue notice of this election, shall sing o cause to bee sayd a Masse of the holy Ghost for the same; and he Superiours shall write one to the other of the decease of such Religious as depart this life in their seuerall Monasteryes, that there by they may bee made partakers of the merits, and deuoute prayers of their fellow Sisters. 7. Who soeuer is chosen Abbesse of any Monastery must with all conuenient expe∣dition write to the other Abbesses of this Congregation; and shall offer them her assi∣stance in all those things▪ hat may any wayes concerne the spirituall and temporall com∣mon good of the whle Congregation. 8.
first proceeded, or to which they were co∣ioyned by the admission of the same Statu∣tes; soe that they must deferr the prioritie to the same, and they shall beare it a pe∣culier respect, and whatsoeuer (concerning Religious perfection) is done there in, the rest must follow and perfome the same, framing and forming themselues to the imi∣ation and gouernment there of. 9. If any Monastery by not obseruing fully the Statutes shalbe notably alred, and changed from the first, and soe from the rest▪ It shall bee depried and loose all those priuiledges▪ which is enioyed by reason of this Vnion, recept it recall and reforme it selfe. 10. If the first Monastery should notably fayle in disciplyne and Spirrit (which God for did) it shalbee depriued of the priui∣ledge of priority ouer the rest, and the pri∣orie shalbee transferred to the second, and if that should in like sort proue defectiue then it must goe to the Third, and thus in all the rest; otherwise the prioritie must stand according to the antiquitie of the Mo∣nasteryes, and of their vnion and Combi∣naion with the rest. 11. These re the Statutes and Consti∣tutio
for the more perfect and better obser∣uation and keepeing of the most holy Rule of the most glorious Father and Pariarch Sainte BENEDICT, which all though they ought to bee of highe esteeme and authoritie with the Religious, and Childen of this Sodalitie, and consequenly to bee prcisely kept by them, soe farr forth as their diuers and sundry regular imploy∣ments may require, or occasion may bee offered, yet they impose not further obli∣gation vppon their Consciences, then the very nature of the things, and reason it selfe shall require or in force, yet they are greatly obliged in Conscience to obserue those things that are appoynted touching the Election and deposition of the Abbesse as alsoe those things that concerne the Correction of most greueous faultes, where by any may deserue to bee seperated from the Company o the rest; moreouer euery one is obliged neuer to require or to per∣mitt that more liberty bee admitted, then the Rule and the Statutes will yeald vnto: but if any thing bee brough in, or prac∣tised, which is not stt downe in the Rule or Statutes, that must bee to greater perfec∣tion and austeritie; and it shall onely be∣long to the right Reuerend the Lord Bis∣hopp,
or Visitor, to explicate the sense and meaning of the words and Clauses con∣tayned there in, if there may happen any doubt or Controuersy there in; to whose Verdict and Iudgment euery one must stand in this matter; therefore for as much as all the professed Religious in this Congrega∣tion ought to obserue all the Statutes ac∣cording to that sense and me aning▪ which the Bishopp or Visitor shall admitt (as hath beene sayd) none may bee suffered to ma∣ke their profession amog you, whoe shall not first promise in the Chapter house (ac∣cording to a certayne forme of writing eet downe in the booke of Ceremonyes) that they will accept of any reformation, proceeding from the Bishopp conformable and agreable to the Rule and Statutes, and that they will not admitt any greater liber∣ty, then the Rule and Statutes will permitt▪ and this their purpose sett downe in writ∣ting they shall confirme with their owne hand, and deliuer it to bee kept in the pla∣ce of their other principall writings and monuments. The End of the Statutes.
THE CONFIRMATION O THE STATVTES. MATHIAS by the grace of God, and of the holy Sea Apo∣stolike Arch Bishopp of Machlin welbe loued Daughters in Christ Abbess and Conuent of he lessed Mary of he Order of St. Bnedict eding in the Citty of Bruxlles subiect to vs by ordinary right helth in our Lord. Although the Rule f the holy Father Saint Benedict which you pro∣fesse bee written, nd
, soe that it truly deser∣th, nd ought to bee estemed  of it selfe to bee an absolute and perfect gide  directory of good life, to such as follw the same; Yet for as much as diers praecepts there of are some what generall, and therefore are diuersly vnderstoode, and obserued by diuers, according to the diersitie of their nat∣res, ad Countrayes, yor piety and eale of perfection was such, that spplication to the Father the Soeraigne Bishopp of , that by vs you Stattes and Constittions, in the sayd Rule, to bee by vs to yo, confired for you, and by or  to bee imposed vpp  that (as by the motion of desire) yo
ay by the bee directed to the exact and vnifore obseruation of the sayd Rle;  wee knowing right well our owne perfection, would not trst only to or seles in this atter, bt wee would vse the helpe  Consayle of diers men well seene and experienced in Mo∣nasticall manner of life, for the best com∣piling of these Statutes, yea and whe they were soe compiled, wee would not soe hastely commaunde you to keepe them except that first you had fully tryed for more then the space of a whole yeare, whethere your hane and naturall in∣firmitie could obserue them; after which your triall, when you had declared and made knowne to vs your promptitude and willing myndes, wee thought good to confirme them by the authoritie of the sayd holy Fater delegated vnto vs for
NOTE that the wordes inter∣liued in a diuers Carecter are onely obserued by this monastery of Gand, by grant of his lordshipp whoe att lest for the present iudged it fitter. For vs to singe our office ouer night and keepe onely one refectory though some for health are ordained to eate flesh when the comunity eateth fish.
