1891.5 S1177 21540655 24767
THE HARMONIE OF holie Scriptures. VVith the seuerall Sentences of sun∣dry learned and vvorthy VVriters. Collected for the comfort of all such as are desirous to seeke after theyr soules health. ❧ By I. B. Vnum est necessarium. Ecclesiastes. 12. verse. 1. Remember now thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth; whiles the euill dayes come not, nor the yeeres draw neere, wherein thou shalt say, I haue no pleasure in them. AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Nicholas Ling, and are to be sold at the West doore of Paules. 1600.
To the right Honourable VVilliam Ryder, Lord Maior elected for the Citty of Lon∣don: And to the right Worshipfull Ma. Thomas Smith, & Ma. Thomas Cambell Esquires, Sheriffes of the same Citty: All happines wished in our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. IT may be thought great boldnes in mee (right Ho∣norable & right Worshipfull) beeing one altogether vnknown to you, that I should thus presume to seeke the patronizing of these my poore endeuours, vnder the protection of your Honorable and Worshipfull coun∣tenaunces, and so in some sort I doe my selfe acknow∣ledge. But if the name and nature of my booke be but rightly considered, and your dignitie of place and office therewith iustly equalled: that boldnes (I hope) wil be thought in mee but modest dutie, and your kinde accep∣tance heereof, the true testimonie of religious deuotion. You are chosen in this Citty as cheefe Magistrates for this yeere ensuing, first, to see that God may be rightly honoured, her Maiesties lawes iustly administred, the people in peace & loue discreetly gouerned, and sin and
iniquitie duly punished. All which depending one vpon another, as the parts in Musique doe, and that you your selues, (with the rest of your worshipful brethren) are the ground of this Oeconomicall Musique, for all the rest that be vnder you to sing sweetly in tune by, (as example is the best guide to order, and order can∣not bee kept where example wanteth:) euen so this Harmonie of holy Scriptures, (in my poore opinion) doth rightly challenge you as Patrons, beeing drawne from the true foundation of your seated authoritie: for whatsoeuer is not to Gods glory, ought most carefullie to bee shunned. In this regard I humbly desire, that your Honour and Worships will but listen to this Har∣monie, and giue it such entertainement as it worthilie deserueth: not for any matter of attribution to my selfe any way, but for his sake to whose honour it is meant & intended: who blesse you and yours with all happinesse in this world, and make you partakers of farre greater blessednes in the world to come. Your Honors and Worships in all dutie, Iames Bentley.
To the Reader. SInce it hath beene obserued as a custome (curteous Reader) in all times heeretofore, that in the publication of bookes, some method or other of the VVriters meaning, should be expressed for the Readers better vnderstanding: I, being bound (as it were) to that ceremony, though no way distrustfull of thy kind opini∣on and iudgement, first, wishing thy health and happinesse in Christ, and next intreating thy christianlike con∣sideration of mee and this present la∣bour, pray thee to take notice of these few lines following. These gathered places out of the most sacred Scriptures, marshalled in the best manner that I could deuise, concerning those nine necessarie poynts, which in the page next after this Epistle are more at large expla∣ned;
likewise the graue & religious Sentences of the Doctors & Fathers, as also the sweete sayings of sundr Philosophers: Though they haue cost me more paines then here I will expresse, & haue proued to my com∣fort, as I pray they may to thine, yet if thy freendly acceptance aunswere but my good meaning, & ouer-rash reading deliuer not as rude censu∣ring, I doubt not but our benefite hereby will proue both alike; and all redound to his honour, in whose re∣uerence it was vndertaken. If thou demaund a reason, why I entitle it by the name of The Harmo∣nie of holy Scriptures, my aunswere is, that all the sentences heerein sette downe, both in sounde, sence, and sweetnes, doe sauour of a musicall imitation, and concord together af∣ter the nature of a diuine harmonie, as from the beginning to the end of each section thou maist easily per∣ceiue.
Secondly, as in Musique, be there neuer so many parts, yet all must agree & make a perfect Vnison: euen so do these aunswere to one an∣other as in report, all tending to one effect and purpose, and all at full ap∣prouing the argument handled. First the Scriptures being the ground and plaine-song, the Doctors following thereon in sweet diuine descant, and the Philosophers bearing a by part a∣mong to make vp the melodie, and all in one sound, sing to Gods glory. As for the Heathen authorities heerein alleaged, albeit they expresse not onely singuler wisedome, but likewise sauour of a very deuoute (though ignorant) zeale: they are not inserted with any intent in mee, that by them should be prooued the very least principle of Christian Reli∣gion; but rather to declare, howe neere such men as came short of any right knowledge of God, yet by the
bare light of Nature onely, aymed at the truth; and made a kinde of reli∣gious vse to themselues, of a further desire to know that truth. If in the first poynt handled, it shall be obiected, that I haue not so iustly obserued the order of an har∣monie, as in the other following, by vsing needles wordes of the Fathers, as saith such a one, and such a one: I did the more willingly slip from my course in that case, because the words are none of mine owne, and I could not (in my conceit) giue right enough to them that owed them, or sufficiently deliuer, howe soundlie their sentences approued euery allea∣ged place. Now, if any nice eare, (whom no note can please, & to whom the very best musique seemeth vnpleasant,) shall in this flowing age of right skil∣ful Maisters in Gods musicke, whose number (for his Names sake) may
hee more and more increase; if such a one I say, doe obiect what I freelie confesse, that here wanteth such arte & schollarship, as such a serious sub∣iect worthily deserued: let me thus aunswere for my selfe; As there be maister workmen in Gods buildings, so there must be some to cary stones, lime and morter, of which place nei∣ther though I account my selfe any way worthy, yet let not the poorest labourers paines in such a seruice be despised. I did it diuers yeeres since for my owne instruction, & thought to haue kept it onely for my priuate comfort, till others thinking better thereof then I my selfe can, woulde needes preuaile with mee to haue it published: which since I coulde not well denie, let this serue for all obiec∣tions whatsoeuer. The reuerend re∣gard of Gods Name, in me both be∣gan and finished the work, desire to benefite others as simple as my selfe,
was the cheefe marke I aymed at, & the hope I haue that some good may ensue heereof, is the onely recom∣pence I request for my paines. Hee then that began and ended, thou that readest and art comforted, all that see my good intent and there-with are pleased; First his blessed Name be honoured, thy comfort daily increa∣sed, & all our saiths for euer through Iesus Christ established. Thine I. B.
❧ The contents of the whole booke following. 1. OF God: that he is great in power: rich in mercie: slowe to anger: iust in iudgement: righteous in all his wayes: and wonderfull in all his works. 2. What Man is by nature: how short and vncertaine the dayes of his life are: And how sure it is, that after this life ended, we must all appeare before the Iudgement seate of God, to receiue euery one accor∣ding as his works shall be. 3. Of Christ: why he came: and what profit we haue by his Death: Resurrection: and Ascention. 4. Of Faith, Feare, and Loue: beeing three princi∣pall vertues, necessarilie belonging to euery true Christian. 5. What the will & desire of Almighty God is concer∣ning men: and how louinglie he admonisheth euery one to come to repentance: promising mercy & for∣giuenesse to all those that amend. 6. What manner of seruice is required of vs, during this life, both towards God and our Neighbour.
7. Of trouble and affliction: whereby God trieth the harts of all those that faithfully feare and loue him. 8. Of the manifold benefites of God, bestowed vpon the godly heere in this life: with the promises of their euerlasting felicitie in the world to come. 9. Of the heauie wrath of God, against the wicked and vngodly heere in this world, with the threatnings of their eternall torments in the world to come.
❧ The Names of all the Authors mentioned in this Booke. Christian Authours. SAint Ambrose S. Augustine. S. Ierome. S. Chrisostome. S. Gregory. Clem. Alexandri. Epiphanius. Hillarius. Origen. Cyprian. Cyrill. Isidorus. Basill. Beda. Anselmus. Bernard. Erasmus. Constantius. Vincentius. Lactantius. Ignatius. Tertullian. Theophilactus. Ireneus. Iusti. Martyr. Cassianus. Cassiodorus. Eugenius. Euagoras. Fulgentius. Fulgotius. Luther. Pet. Ramus. Marlorate. Plotinus. Pacuuius. Caluine. Lyra. Boetius. Virgilius. Orosius. Rauisius. Pet. Lombardus. Polion. Maxentius. Carolus Magnus. Sigismundus. Arnobius. Anth. Gueuara. Bullenger. Leo. Aeneus Siluius. Pet. Martyr. Phil. Melancthō. Martin Bucer. Hemingius. Becon. Osorius. Beza. Granado. Iunius. Tremelius. Vrsinus.
Heathen Philosophers. SOcrates. Plato. Hermes. Plutarch. Pythagoras. Solon. Cicero. Macrobius. Cleobulus. Seneca. Crates. Thales. Chilo. Bias Menander. Protogenes. Antisthenes. Anaxagoras. Heraclitus. Pyndarus. Marcus Aurelius Gallen. Hipocrates. Alex. Seuerus. Euripides. Aristides. Demonax. Valerius Max. Dion. Theophrastus. Salust. Quintilian. Zenophon. Isocrates. Xenocrates. Diogenes. Aristotle. Anacharsis. Herodotus. Thucidides. ❧ Faultes escaped. Page 14, line 4, for setteh, reade setteth. Page 39, line 4, for wondefull, read wonderfull. Page 63, line 25, for or God, read our God. Page 265, line 28, for & that that it, read & that it. Page 352, line 17, for body, read belly. Page 500, line 25, for misciefe, read mischiefe. Page. 512, li. 20, for imagination, read imaginations.
❧ The Harmonie of holie Scriptures. ¶ Of God: that hee is great in power: rich in mercy: ow to anger: iust in iudgement: righ∣teous in all his waies: and wonderfull in all his workes. VISDOM 15. verse. 3. For to know GOD, is perfect righteousnesse, and to knowe his power is the roote of immortalitie. Of God. &c. §. 1. MOyses, the seruaunt of the li∣uing GOD, (after hee had seene many miracles, and vvrought diuers vvonders, through Diuine assistance, before the face of Pharao, King of Egipt, and the children of Israel in the vvildernes) talking on a time familiarly with his Maker, (amongst many other petitions,) humblyExo, 33. 18, besought the Lord to hew him his glorie: Wherevnto, the Almightie returned this swere, saying; Thou canst not see myExo, 33, 20. or there shall no man see mee & liue.
No man (saith S. Iohn) hath seene GodIohn, 1, 18, at any time: the onely begotten Son which is in the bosome of the Father, he hath de∣clared him. No man knoweth the Son, (saith Christ)Math, 11, 27 but the Father, neither knoweth anie man the Father, but the Sonne, and he to whom the Sonne will reueale him. §. 2. What man hath seene GOD, tht theEccl{us}, 43, 31 might tell vs? (saith the Wiseman,) o who can magnifie him as hee is? Who shall de∣clare * vnto vs the power of his greatnes?Ecclus, 18, 4 or vvho will take vpon him to tell ou his mercie? Canst thou, (saith Zophar vnto Iob) byIob, 11, 7, 8, 9, searching finde out God? Canst tou find out the Almightie to his perfection? The Heauens are hie, (saith he) what canst thou doe? It is deeper thē Hell, how canst thou knowe it? The measure thereof is longer then the Earth, and it is broader then the Sea. By which kinde of questioning, the ho∣lie man seemeth to tell vs, that if we be not able to comprehend the height of heauen, the depth of hell, the length of the ea or the bredth of the sea, which are but tures,
it wilbe much more vnpossible for vs, to vnderstand the perfection of the Crea∣tor, which is God himselfe. For hee, (as Si∣rach rightly saith) is * aboue all his workes.Eccl{us}, 43, 28 §. 3. Salomon, as we reade of him, was the ri∣chest man in wisedome that euer liued, and one that gaue his minde to knowe as much as man might know, yet could he not by all his diligence, come neere the perfection of the Almightie, but plainely (euen in his Booke of Wisdome) confesseth both his owne, and all other mens imperfections in that poynt, where he sayth; Hardly can we discerne the things that are vpon the earth,Wisd, 9, 16. & with great labour find we out the things which are before vs, who can thē seeke out (saith he) the things that are in heauen? For like as the grounde is appointed to beare the wood, and the Sea to carrie his2, Esdr, 4, 21 floods, so they that dwell vppon the earth, can vnderstand nothing, but that which is vpon the earth, and they that are in the hea∣uens, the things which are aboue the height of the heauens. §. 4. Wisedome willeth vs therefore, (as Ful∣gosiusFulgosius. sayth) not to bee ouer-quisitiue in
searching out, either the secretes of Gods hidden counsell, or the greatnesse of his in∣comparable maiestie, for feare wee be sud∣dainly smitten, with the thunderstroake of his glorie. But let it rather suffise vs in knowledge, (touching the proportion of his person) to say as Plato that diuine Phylosopher saide:Plato. God is without any body, invisible, and al∣so immortall; whose forme cannot be de∣prehended with the eyes of mortall men, nor yet described by any sensible knovv∣ledge. Or, to say, as learned Hermes Trismegi∣stusHermes. sayd; That is God, which lacketh be∣ginning and ending: which God, beeing made of none, hath by his own power crea∣ted all things. Or els, to say as much as a more worthie man then any of them both, namelie, holie Iob sayd; Behold, God is excellent, & weeIob, 36, 26, know him not, neither may the number of his yeeres be searched out. He only hath immortalitie, & dwelleth in1, Tim, 6, 16 the light that none can attaine vnto, whom neuer man saw, neither can see. He is Alpha, and Omega, the beginningReue, 22, 13 and 1, 8. and the end, the first and the last, which is,
and which was, and which is to come, euen the Almightie. §. 5. Before me, saith the Almightie, there wasEsay, 43, 10, 11, 13. no God formed, neither shall there be after me; I, euen I, am the Lord, and beside me there is no Sauiour. Yea, before the daie was, (saith he) I am: and there is none that can deliuer out of mine hand. I am the first, and I am the last, (saith theEsay, 44, 6, Eternall,) & without [or besides me] there is no other God. I am the Lord that made all thinges, thatEsay, 44, 24, spred out the heauens alone, and stretched out the earth by my selfe. Yea,] I, (saith the euer-liuing God) haueEsay, 45, 12. made the earth, and created man vpon it. Surely, my hand hath layde the founda∣tionsEsay, 48, 13, of the earth, and my right hand hath spanned the heauens; when I call thē (saith he) they stand vp together. §. 6. Vnderstand therfore this day, & cōsiderDeut, 4, 39, (as Moses saith) in thy hart, that the Lord our God, he is God in heauen aboue, & vp∣on the earth beneath, there is none other. Hee is God of Gods, & Lord of Lords,Deut, 10, 17 a great GOD, mightie and terrible, which
accepteth no persons, nor taketh rewarde: who doth right vnto the fatherlesse & wid∣dow, and loueth the stranger, giuing him foode and rayment. Yea, the Lord our God, as the same Mo∣sesDeut, 6, 4, saith vnto Israell, is Lord onely. And there is, (as the Apostle truelie af∣firmeth)1, Cor, 8, 4, none other God but one. Though there bee that are called Gods,1, Cor, 8, 5, 6 whether in heauen or in earth, as there be many Gods, and many Lords, yet vnto vs there is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him: and one Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. ¶ Of the mightie power of God. §. 1. THE Lord raigneth, (saith Dauid)Psal, 93, 11, & is clothed with maiestie, the Lord our God, is clothed and girded with power. Who is like, saith he, [or may be compa∣red]Psal, 113, 5, vnto the Lord our God, which hath his dwelling on high? Which couereth himselfe with light, asPsal, 104, 2, 3, 4, 5. with a garment, and spreadeth out the hea∣uens
like a Curtaine; VVhich layeth the beames of his Chambers in the waters, and maketh the clowdes his Chariot, and wal∣keth vpon the winges of the wind. Which maketh his spirits his messengers, and a fla∣ming fire his ministers. Which giueth the Sunne for a light toIere, 31. 35, the day, and the courses of the Moone, and of the starres for a light to the night. Which breaketh the Sea when the waues thereof do roare. His Name, (as saith the Prophet) is the Lord of Hostes. Hee, (as the Psalmist saith) is high abouePsal, 113, 4, all Nations, and his glory aboue the hea∣uens. Hee hath prepared his throne in heauen,Psal, 103, 19 and his kingdome ruleth ouer all. Hee, by his power, hath placed the earthLactantius. vpon her firme foundations. And he hath set bounds about the vva∣ters,Iob, 26, 10, vntill the day & night come to an end. §. 2. There is a GOD, (saith Cicero) whichCicero. doth rule and gouerne all thinges, which maintaineth the course of the Starres, the changes of times, the alteration & order of all things, beholding both Sea and Land: Who also plainely seeth, both the liues and
doings of all men that dwel vpon the earth, and whatsoeuer else hath any being in the vvorld. The same God, is our God, (as BaruchBaruch, 3, 35 the Scribe saith,) and there shal none other be compared vnto him. For hee it is vvhich hath prepared theBaruch, 3, 32 earth for euermore, & hath filled the same with foure-footed beastes. Hee it is, which by his ovvne almightyMar. Bucer. power hath created all kinde of creatures, and by his wonderful prouidence they liue and are preserued. Yea, hee, (as Daniell saith) is the liuingDan, 6, 26, God, & remaineth for euer: his kingdome shall neuer perrish, and his dominion shall be euerlasting. Hee [also] it is which rescueth & deliue∣reth:verse, 27, and he worketh signes and wonders in heauen and in earth. VVhen hee sendeth out the light, it go∣eth,Baruch, 3, 33 and when hee calleth it againe it obey∣eth him with feare. The starres also shine in their watch, andverse, 34. reioyce; and when hee calleth them, they say, Heere wee be; and so with cheereful∣nesse they shewe light vnto him that made them.
§. 3. He that formeth the Mountaines, (saythAmos, 4, 13▪ Amos) and createth the winde, and decla∣reth vnto man what is his thought; vvhich maketh the morning darknesse, and wal∣keth vpon the hie places of the earth, the Lord God of Hostes is his Name.Nahum, 1, 3 He hath his way in the whirle-wind and in the storme, and the Clowdes are the dust of his feete.Psal, 104, 32 He looketh on the earth, & it trembleth, hee toucheth the Mountaines, and they smoake.Esay, 40, 22, Yea, hee sitteth (as Esay sayth) vpon the circle of the earth, & the inhabitants of the whole world, (in comparison of him) are as it were a companie of Grashoppers. Hee stretcheth out the heauens as a Curtaine, & spreadeth them out as a Tent to dwell in.verse, 23, 24. Hee, bringeth the Princes to nothing, & maketh the Iudges of the earth as vanitie. As though they were not planted as thogh they were not sowen, as though their stock tooke no roote in the earth: For as soone as he bloweth vpon thē, they wither, and fade away, as the stubble doth in a whirlewind. Hee [also,] is wise in heart, and mightieIob▪ 9, 4, in strength. For vvho (as Iob saith) hath
been fierce against him, & hath prospered? Hee remooueth the Mountaines, and theyverse, 5, 6, 7, 8. feele not when hee ouerthroweth them in his wrath: he remooueth the earth out of her place, that the pillars thereof doe shake. He commaundeth the Sunne, and it riseth not: he closeth vp the starres as vnder a sig∣net. Hee, himselfe alone, spreadeth out the heauens, and walketh vppon the height of the Sea. &c. He doth great things, and vnsearchable,Iob, 9, 10. 11, 12, yea, meruailous thinges without number. Loe, when he goeth by mee, I see him not, and when hee passeth by, I perceiue him not. Behold, when hee taketh a pray, who can make him to restore it? [Or] who shal say vnto him, What doost thou? For,] all Nations before him, are as no∣thing:Esay, 40, 17 and they are counted to him, lesse then nothing, and vanitie. §. 4. Againe; The Lord our GOD, (as Da∣uidPsalm, 95, 3, 4, 5, saith) is a great God, and a great King aboue all Gods: in his hands are all the cor∣ners of the Earth, and the heights of the Mountaines are his. To him the Sea be∣longeth, for hee made it, and his hands for∣med the dry Land.
Knowest thou not, or hast thou notEsay, 40, 28, 29, heard, saith Esay, that the euerlasting God the Lorde, hath created the endes of the earth? hee neyther fainteth nor is wearie, there is no searching of his vnderstanding: but he giueth strength vnto him that fain∣teth, and vnto him that hath no strength he increaseth power. Hee, (as Nehemiah saith) is Lord alone:Nehe, 9, 6, he hath made heauen, and the heauen of all heauens, with all their host, and the earth, and all that therein is, the seas also, and all that are in them: and hee preserueth them all, and the host of the heauen worshippeth him. Yea, all thinges (as himselfe saith) vvere2, Esdr. 6, 6. made by him alone, and by none other: by him also they shall be ended, & by none other. §. 5. The vvorld (saith the Almighty) is mine,Psal, 50, 12. and all that therein is. I haue made the earth, the man and theIerem, 27, 5, beast that are vppon the grounde, by my great power, and by mine out-stretched arme; and I haue giuen the same, sayth he, vnto vvhom it pleaseth mee. And that wee may the better be perswa∣ded
to beleeue his speeches, and some-what the more willingly mooued, heerein to ad∣mire his wonderfull great might, hee pre∣sently confirmeth his saying with the exam∣ple of Nabuchadnezzer, King of Babel: Into whose handes, for a time, (as IeremieIere, 27, 6, 7. writeth) God gaue all Lands, and beastes of the fielde, & all Nations; for to serue him, and his sonne, and his sonnes sonne. And for the maiestie that GOD gaueDan, 5, 19. him, all people, Nations, and Languages trembled and feared before him. He put to death whom hee would; hee smote whom he would; whom he would, he set vp; and whom he would, hee put downe. But, vvhen his hart was puft vp, and hisverse, 20, 21, minde hardned in pride, hee was deposed from his kinglie throne, and they tooke his honour from him. And he was driuen frō the sonnes of men, and his hart was made like the beastes, and his dwelling was with the wilde Asses; they fedde him with grasse like Oxen, and his body was wette with the dew of heauen; till he knew (saith Daniell) that the most high GOD bare rule ouer the kingdome of men, and that he appoin∣teth ouer the same whom soeuer hee plea∣seth.
Vnto Saule, likewise, God gaue a great and mighty Kingdome, selecting him for1, Sam, 9, 21 Prince and Ruler ouer his owne chosen & beloued people, the Children of Israell: he being before, (by his owne confession,) but of a small Trybe, and very poore familie: yea, such a fellowe, that (as the Text sayth) he went wandring about the Countrey, to enquire and seeke after his Fathers Asses that were lost. A man trulie in humaine iudgement, (by reason of his basenes) verie vnlikelie to prooue a King: Notwithstan∣ding, God which can doe whatsoeuer plea∣seth him, bestowed the cheefest kingdome vnder the Sun vpon him. And afterward, when (through his disobedience) he fell frō the fauour of God, the Almighty, as wel to make manifest his power in displacing him, as for other causes best knowne to his se∣crete wisedom, rent the fore-said kingdom from him, and gaue it vnto his neighbour1, Sam, 15, 28. (saith the holie Ghost) that * vvas better then hee. Well may we therefore confesse, and sayPsal, 145, 3. and 147, 5, vvith the Psalmist, Great is the Lord our God, and most worthy to be praised: great is his power, his wisedome is infinite, and his greatnesse is incomprehensible.
His Name, (as Daniell saith) be praysed for euer and euer: for wisedom & strengthDan, 2, 20, 21, 22. are his. He changeth the times & seasons, hee taketh away Kinges, and hee setteh vp Kings: hee giueth wisedome vnto the wise, & vnderstanding to those that vnderstand: hee discouereth the deepe & secret things: hee knoweth what is in the darknesse, and the light dwelleth with him. §. 6. VVho is GOD, besides the Lord?2, Sam, 22, 32. saith Dauid, Or, who is mightie, saue our God? With him is wisedome and strength, heeIob, 12, 13, 14. hath counsell and vnderstanding. Behold, he will breake downe, & it cannot be built, hee shutteth a man vp, and hee cannot be loosed. Behold, he with-holdeth the waters, andverse, 15. they dry vp, but when hee sendeth them forth, they destroy the earth. With him is strength and wisedome, heeverse, 16, that is deceiued, & that deceiueth, are his. Hee causeth the Counsellors to goe asverse, 17, 18, 19. spoyled, and maketh the Iudges fooles: hee looseth the collar of Kings, & girdeth theyr loynes with a girdle: hee leadeth away the Princes as a pray, and ouerthroweth the
mightie: hee taketh away the speech fromverse, 20, 21, the faithfull Counsellors, and taketh avvaie the iudgement of the auncient: hee pow∣reth contempt vpon Princes, and maketh the strength of the mightie weake. Hee discouereth the deepe places fromverse. 22, 23 theyr darknesse, and bringeth foorth the shadowe of death to light: hee increaseth the people, and destroyeth them: hee en∣largeth the Nations, and bringeth them in againe. Hee taketh away the harts of them thatverse, 24, are the cheefe ouer the people of the earth, and maketh them to wander in the Wilder∣nesse, out of the way. &c. Hee [also] giueth raine vpon the earth,Iob, 5, 10, 11, & powreth downe water vpon the streets: hee setteth vp, on hie, them that be of lowe degree, and exalteth the sorrowfull to sal∣uation. Hee scattereth the deuises of the craftie,verse, 12, so that theyr hands cannot accomplish that which they doe enterprise. Yea, he taketh the wise in their craftines,verse, 13, 14 and ouerthroweth the counsell of the wic∣ked. Insomuch, that they meete with dark∣nesse in the day time, and grope at noone day, as in the night.
Hee [also] putteth his hand vppon the Rocks, and ouerthroweth the MountainesIob, 28, 9, 10, 11, by the rootes: hee breaketh Riuers in the Rockes, and his eye seeth euerie precious thing: hee bindeth the floods that they doe not ouer-flowe, and the thing that is hid, bringeth he to light. Hee it is that maketh poore, and hee it is1, Sam. 2, 7. that maketh rich: hee bringeth lowe, and hee exalteth. Yea, hee (as Hannah sayth) raiseth vpverse, 8. the poore out of the dust, and lifteth the begger from the dunghill, to place them a∣mong Princes, and to make them inherite the seate of glorie. For the pillers of the earth (saith shee) are his, and hee hath sette the round world vpon them. §. 7. Behold now, saith the Almightie, for I,Deut. 32, 39 I am the Lord, and there is no Gods vvith mee, I kill, and giue life▪ I wound & make whole: and there is none that can deliuer out of mine hand. I destroy the tokens of the Soothsayers,Esay. 44. 25, and make them that coniecture, fooles: I turne the Wisemen backward, and make theyr knowledge foolishnes. I forme the light, and create darknesse:Esay, 45, 7.
I make peace, and create euill: I the Lord, (saith hee) doe all these things. §. 8. Our God is in heauen, faith Dauid, andPsal. 115. 3, he doth whatsoeuer pleaseth him. The heauen is his seate, and the earth isEsay, 66. 1. his footestoole. Hee remaineth for euer, his throne isLam. 5, 19. frō generation to generation. * And there1. Sam. 2, 2. is no God like our God. For hee▪ (as Salomon saith,) hath theWisd, 16. 13 power of life, and death; he leadeth down, euen to the gates of hell, and bringeth vp againe. §. 9. God that made the world, and all thingsActs, 17, 24, 25. that are therein, (saith the Apostle) seeing that he is Lord of heauen and earth, dwel∣leth not in Temples made with hands, nei∣ther is he worshipped with mens hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gi∣ueth to all, life and breath, and all things. For in him we liue, and mooue, and haueverse, 28. our beeing. Yea, hee, (as Plato saith) by his almightyPlato. power is in all things, and in euery part of the world, & by his prouidence, all things are preserued, gouerned, and moued: and
hee himselfe, is of none other, either moo∣ued or gouerned, but is the first incompre∣hensible mouer. The eyes of all things, waite vpon him,Psalm, 145. 15, 16. and he giueth them theyr foode in due sea∣son: hee openeth his hand, and filleth with his blessing euery liuing thing. But if he hide his face, they are troubled:Psalm. 104, 29. if hee take away their breath, they die, and returne to their dust. For in his hand, is the soule of euerie ly∣uingIob, 12. 10. thing, and the breath of all mankind. §. 10. The earth, is the Lords, saith Dauid, andPsal. 24. 1, all that therein is, the world is his, and so are all they that dwell therein. Prosperitie and aduersitie, life and death,Ecclus, 11, 14, 15. pouertie and riches, come of the Lorde: Wisedome, and knowledge, and vnder∣standing of the Lawe, are all of the Lord: loue and good workes come of him. For hee only is the Authour of all good∣nesse,Hermes. and the giuer of all good gifts. Yea, euery good and perfect gift, as SaintIames. 1. 17. Iames saith, is from aboue, and commeth downe from the Father of lights, with whō is no variablenesse, neyther shadowe by turning.
For the diuine nature and substance ofAristotle. God, suffereth neither change nor end, be∣cause, as Aristotle truly sayth, it is both im∣mutable and infinite. §. 11. To come to preferment also, is neytherPsalm, 75. 6, 7. from the East, nor from the West, nor yet from the South: but the Lorde (as Dauid saith) is the Iudge, hee putteth downe whō he will, and hee setteth vp whom hee plea∣seth. It is the Lorde that giueth, and it is theIob, 1, 21, Lord that taketh away: euen as it pleaseth the Lord, so commeth things to passe. §. 12. VVe read in the second booke of chro∣nicles that when Asa, King of Iudah, was2. Chron. 14 9, 10, 11. vrged to giue battaile against an Armie of tenne hundred thousand Ethiopians, first, before he beganne the fight, hee made his humble supplication to the Almighty; and in his prayer, (to shewe that the conquest consisted not in the great companie of his enemies souldiers, but only in the might & power of him that made both heauen and earth,) he said: Help vs, ô Lord our God: It is nothing with thee, to saue with manie or with no power; helpe vs, ô Lorde our
God, for we rest on thee, and in thy Name, (saith hee) are wee come against this multi∣tude. Ionathan likewise, venturing by stealth1. Sam. 14, 6 to set vppon the Philistians garison at vna∣wares, and beeing accompanied with none but onely his Armor bearer, for his better encouragement he told him, that it was not hard with the Lord, to saue with many, or with few. For the victorie of the battell, dependeth1. Mac. 3. 19. not on the many thousands that are in the host, but the strength commeth from hea∣uen. And is onely at his pleasure to be dispo∣sed, whose power, as * Iudith saith, stan∣dethIudith. 9, 11. not in the multitude of Souldiers, nor his might in strong men. As may more at large be perceiued, by reading the happy successe, which folowed the enterprises, of the aforesaide King Asa, and Ionathan the Sonne of Saule, against theyr enemies. §. 13. Another example also, concerning the power of Almightie God in this poynt, is set downe in the booke of Iudges; whereIudges. 7, 12 Gedion beeing appointed by the Lord, to
goe & fight against the Midianites, (which were so mightie an host, that as the Text sayth, they lay in the valley like a company of Grashoppers, and theyr Cammels were without number, as is the sand by the Sea∣side for multitude,) mustred vp an ArmieIuges. 7. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. of thirty two thousand men. And when he had done thus, the Lord God called vnto him, and said; Gedion, the people that are with thee, are too many for me to giue the Midianites into theyr handes, least Israell make their vaunt against me, & say, Mine hand hath saued me. Now therefore, (saith the most Mightie) proclaime in the audi∣ence of the people, and say; Whosoeuer he be that is timerous, or fearefull, let him re∣turne, and depart. Then saith the Text, there departed of the people twentie two thousand, and ten thousand remained. And the Lord called againe vnto Gedi∣on, and sayd; The people are yet too ma∣nie, bring them therefore downe vnto the water, & I will try them for thee there: and of whom I say vnto thee, this man shal goe with thee, the same shall goe with thee, and of whomsoeuer I say vnto thee, this man shall not goe with thee, the same shall not goe. So Gedion, according as he was com∣maunded,
brought downe the people to the water, and the Lord said vnto him: As many as thou shalt see to lap the water with theyr tongues, as a dogge lappeth, put thē by themselues, and euery one that shal bow downe on his knees to drinke, put them likewise apart. Now, among those tenne thousand that came to the water to drink, there was found but onely three hundred which lapped the vvater, by putting their handes to theyr mouthes; by which 300. men, God most miraculously saued Israel, & deliuered the Midianites into their hands. So that both by this example, & the for∣mer, that sentence of our Sauiour is verifi∣ed, where hee sayth: * The things whichLuke. 18, 27 are vnpossible with men, are possible with GOD. And surelie, (as Plato sayth) hee alone isPlato. most worthy to be taken for a God, which is not onely a Creator, but also a Preseruer, a Sauiour, a Comforter, and a Deliuerer in time of neede. §. 14. I knowe, (saith Dauid) that the Lord isPsal. 135. . 6. great, and that our God is aboue all Gods: Whatsoeuer pleased him, that did hee, in
heauen, and in earth, in the Sea, and in all the deepes. He hath made the earth by his power, &Ierem. 10. 12, 13. established the world by his wisedom, and hath stretched out the heauens by his dis∣cretion: he giueth by his voyce, the multi∣tude of waters in the heauen, & he causeth▪ the clowdes to ascend from the ends of the earth: hee turneth lightnings to raine, and bringeth forth the windes out of his trea∣sures. Hee giueth peace and prosperitie vntoAeneus Sil∣uius. such as serue him, and sendeth trouble and aduersitie, to thē that disobey him: hee lif∣teth to honour whō hee liketh, & bringeth to base estate whom hee pleaseth: he ma∣keth manifest his might on whom he will, by what meanes hee will, and at what time hee will, no man beeing able to withstand his power. For when hee giueth quietnes, who canIob, 34, 29▪ make trouble? Or, whē he hideth his face, who can behold him? whether it be vpon whole Nations, or vpon one man onelie? §. 15. VVith the Lorde our God also, and inPet. Mr.  his only power, (as Peter Martir affirmeth) it resteth to pardon our offences, and for∣giue
vs our sinnes. For who is hee, (as the Scribes said vntoMark, 2, 7. Christ) that can forgiue sinnes, but GOD onely. No man, as Saint Ambrose saith, can beAmbrose. partner with God, in forgiuing of sinnes: for it is Christes onely office▪ that hath ta∣ken away the sinnes of the whole world. Yea, it appertaineth onely vnto GOD, (faith he) to forgiue sinnes, and to giue the holy Ghost: hee alone forgiueth sinnes, which alone died for our sinnes. Also; that the Lorde might euidentlieAugustine. shewe, (saith S. Augustine) that sinnes be forgiuen by the holy Ghost, (whō he hath giuen vnto his faithfull, & not by the mer∣rites of men;) hee sayth in a certaine place, Take * yee the holy Ghost: and straight∣wayIohn, 20, 22, 23. after these words vttered▪ hee said this saying; If yee forgiue any man his sinnes, they are forgiuen. That is, the holy Ghost forgiueth, and not you. §. 16. Besides, this poynt may be further proo∣ued, by the speech of Almighty God him∣selfe, where speaking by the mouth of his Prophet vnto Israell, he saith; I, euen I amEsay, 43, 25, he, ô Israel, that putteth away thine iniqui∣ties
for mine owne sake, and will not re∣member thy sinnes any more. Againe; I haue put away thy transgres∣sionsEsay, 44. 22. (ô Israel) like a clowde, and thy sinnes as a mist, (saith the most mercifull,) turne vnto me, for I haue redeemed thee. Againe; I am the Lorde thy God (ô Is∣rael)Hosea, 13. 4. from the Land of Egipt, & thou shalt knowe no God but me: for there is no Sa∣uiour besides me. Also; sundry times may be found in the booke of Psalmes, with what thankfulnes the Prophet Dauid confesseth the pardon of all his sinnes to proceede onely from the mercy of his Maker: As namely amongst the rest, in the 103. psalme, where he saith:Psalm, 103. 2. 3. 4. Praise the Lord, ô my soule, and forget not all his benefites, which forgiueth all thy sin, and healeth all thine infirmities, which re∣deemeth thy life from destruction, and crowneth thee with mercy & louing kind∣nesse. §. 17. Moreouer; there is, as the Apostle affir∣meth,Iames. 412, one Law-giuer, which is able to saue, and to destroy. And that Law-giuer is God, vnto whō, as Iob saith, it * certainly appertaineth, toIob, 3431.
say, I haue pardoned, I will not destroy. Blessed therefore, and most happy is hee,Psalm, 32, 1, whose wickednesse is forgiuen, and whose sinne is couered. Yea, blessed is the man, (as the Psalmistverse, 2. saith) vnto whom the Lord [our GOD] imputeth not iniquitie. §. 18. The Lord our God, is terrible, and verieEccl{us}. 43, 29 great, saith Sirach, and meruailous is his al∣mightie power. He is to be feared aboue all Gods; for allPsal, 6. 4, 5, the Gods of the Heathen are Idols and va∣nitie; but the Lord [our God] made the heauens. Hee is the liuing God, & an euerlastingIere. 10. 10. King. At his anger the earth shall tremble, and the Nations cannot abide his wrath. For, who can stand (as Nahum saith)Nahum. 1, 6. before the wrath of the Lord? or who can abide in the fiercenesse of his wrath? His wrath is powred out like fire, and the rocks are broken by him? Yea, the pillers of heauen, tremble and quake at his reproofe: the sea also is madeIob 26. 11. 12. calme by his power, and by his vnderstan∣ding he smiteth the pride thereof.
§. 19 Behold, as Sirach saith, the heauen; yea,Eccl{us}. 16, 18 the heauen of all heauens, which are for God, the deepe, the earth, & all that there∣in is, shall be moued when he shall visite. All the world, which is created & madeverse, 19 by his will, the mountaines also, & the foun∣dations of the earth, shall shake for feare, (saith hee) when the Lord looketh vppon them. And, this whole speech of Sirach, (in ef∣fect,) is likewise further witnessed, by the wordes of God himselfe, in the prophecie of Esay, where speaking in prayse of his owne power, hee saith: Behold, at my re∣bukeEsay, 50, 2, 3 I dry vp the Sea, I make the floods desert, their fish rotteth for water, & dieth for thirst▪ I clothe (saith hee) the heauens with darknesse, and make a sacke theyr co∣uering. And for some proofe of his power, ac∣cording to the tenure of this speech, vvee finde, that his might was sufficientlie made manifest by example, when hee sent such a * palpable darknesse ouer all the Land ofExod, 10, 22 23, Egypt, (the place where the children of Is∣raell dwelt onely excepted,) that for the space of three dayes, no man could see an∣other,
neither could any one rise vp, from the place where he was. He also by his power, after this, parted in sunder the Red-sea, and made the watersExod, 14. 16. &c. thereof to stande like two walls, and a path of dry ground to appeare in the middest, whiles all his people had safe passage, from the furie of Pharao and his mightie host, which speedily pursued after them, to their owne destruction. §. 20. Moreouer, the Lord our God, in the last booke of Moises, both to terrifie the rage of Tyrants, & comfort in calamities as ma∣ny as put their confidence in him, vttereth this fearefull menace following, against all the wilful contemners of his power & glo∣rie, saying: * If I whet my glittering sword,Deu. 32, 41. 42. and my hand take holde on iudgement, I will execute vengeance on mine aduersa∣ries, and will reward them that hate me: I will make my arrowes drunke with blood, and my sword shall eate flesh, for the blood of the slaine, and of the captiues, when I be∣gin to take vengeance on the enemy. And, to make yet a little more manifest the might of our God, and his preuailing power against the disturbers of his peoples
peace, the Prophet Dauid, (after his victo∣ries obtained, in foure great battailes which2, Sam, 2. hee had with the Philistians) declareth the same most pithilie in the second booke of Samuell, by the description of a tempest, saying; In my * trouble did I cal vpon the2. Sam. 22. 7. Lord, and cry to my God, and hee heard my voyce out of his Temple, and my cry did enter into his eares. Then the earth trembled & quaked, theverse, 8, 9. 10, 11. &c. foundations of the heauens mooued and shooke, because hee was angry: Smoake went out of his nostrils, & consuming fire out of his mouth, coales vvere kindled therat. He bowed the heauens also, & came downe, and darknesse was vnder his feete: He rode vpon the Cherub and did flie, and he was seene vppon the wings of the wind. He made darknes a Tabernacle rounde a∣bout him, with waters gathered together in thicke clowdes. At the brightnesse of his presence, the coales of fire were kindled: the Lord thun∣dred from heauen, & the most High gaue his voyce: hee shot arrowes and scattered them, to wit, he sent lightning & destroyed them. The chanels also of the Sea appea∣red, and the foundations of the world were
discouered, by reason of the rebuking of the Lord, & thorow the blast of the breath of his nostrils. &c. §. 21. By the which speech of the Prophet, & sundry other like precedent places to this purpose, euery Christian Reader may in∣differently perceiue the power of his Pre∣seruer: and by often contemplating the same, be the better encouraged, (according to the example of holy Ieremie) boldlie to confesse his Makers almightines, saying: There * is none like vnto thee, ô Lord ourIerem, 10, 6, God, thou onely art great, and thy Name is great in power. VVho woulde not feare thee, ô King ofverse. 7, 8. Nations? For vnto thee appertaineth the dominion. Among all the Wisemen of the Gentiles, and in all theyr Kingdoms there is none like thee, but altogether they doate and are foolish. For the stock is a doctrine of vanitie. But thou (ô Lorde) hast euer had great strength & might, and who can withstandWisd. 11. 18, 19. the power of thine arme? For as the small thing that the ballance wayeth, so is the world before thee; and as a droppe of the
morning dewe, that falleth downe vppon the ground. Thine ô Lord, is greatnes, & power, and1. Chro. 29, 11. glory, and victory, and prayse: for all that is in heauen and in earth is thine. Both riches & honour come of thee, and1. Chro. 29, 12. thou raignest ouer all: In thine hande also is power and might, and in thine hand it is to make great, & to giue strength vnto all. ¶ Of the Wisedome of God. §. 1. WHere, (saith Iob) is WisedomeIob, 28, 12, 13, 14. to be founde? Or, where is the place of Vnderstandings habi∣tation? Surely, no man can tell, (saith he) how worthy a thing Wisedome is, neither is shee to be founde in the Land of them that liue. The deepe saith, shee is not with me: the Sea saith, shee is not with mee. Shee cannot bee gotten for the purestverse, 15. 16, gold, neither may the price of her be valu∣ed with any siluer. She shall not be bought with the wedge of the gold of Ophir, no vvith the precious Onix, nor the Saphir.
No Golde nor Christall may be compa∣redverse, 17, 18 vnto her: neither shal her exchange be for plate of the finest Golde. For perfect Wisedome is more worth then any Golde or Pearles. &c. From whence then cōmeth Wisedome?Iob, 28, 20. 21. and where is the place of Vnderstanding? Seeing shee is hid from the eyes of all men liuing, and from the foules of the ayre? Destruction and Death say, VVee haueverse, 22, 23▪ 24, &c. heard the fame of her with our eares, but it is GOD that vnderstandeth her way, & he knoweth her place. For, hee beholdeth the ends of the world, and looketh vpon all that is vnder heauen. VVhen he wayed the windes, and mea∣suredverse, 25, 26, 27. &c. the waters, when he set the rayne in order, and gaue the mighty floods a lawe, then did hee see her, then declared hee her, prepared her, and knew her. And vnto man he sayd; Behold, to feare the Lord, is Wisedome: and to depart frō euill, is Vnderstanding. §. 2. There is one wise, (saith Sirach) euen theEccl{us}, 1, 8, 9, most high God; the Creator of all things; the Almightie; the King of power, glorie, and maiestie; (of whō men ought to stand
greatly in awe,) vvhich sitteth vppon his throne. Hee is the Lord that hath created Wisedome through the holy Ghost: Hee hath seene her, numbred her, and measu∣red her. He also hath powred her out vppon allverse, 10, flesh, according to his gift: and hee giueth her aboundantly vnto thē that loue him. It is likewise the lord our God alone, that by wisedome, (as Salomon saith) hath laydProu, 3, 19, 20. the foundation of the earth, and stablished the heauens through vnderstanding. By his knowledge the deepes are broken vp, and the clowdes drop downe the dew. Hee onely, (as S. Augustine saith) is theAugustine. Author of all perfect wisedome & know∣ledge; and he of his goodnes, giueth wise∣dome & vnderstanding vnto whō it plea∣seth him. Science, (as Aristotle saith) may be hadAristotle. by diligence, but wisedome and discretion commeth from God. For, hee giueth vvisedome: out of hisProu, 2, 6, mouth commeth knowledge and vnder∣standing. Yea; all wisedome commeth from God,Ecclus, 1, 1, and hath beene euer with him, and is with him for euer.
§. 3. Wisedom, (as Sirach saith) hath been cre∣atedEcclus, 1, 4, frō the beginning, and the vnderstan∣ding of Prudence from euerlasting. Shee is the mother of beautifull loue, ofEcclus, 24, 20, 21, feare, of knowledge, and of holy hope. In her, is all grace, life, and truth: and in her, is all hope of life and vertue. For shee, (as Salomon saith) is the breathWisd, 7, 25, of the power of God: & a pure influence that floweth from the Almightie: therfore can no defiled thing come vnto her. Yea; Shee is the brightnes of the euerla∣stingverse, 26, light: the vndefiled mirrour of the maiestie of God, & the Image of his good∣nesse. Shee, beeing one, can doe all things: andverse, 27, beeing stedfast herselfe, shee reneweth all: and according to the ages, she entereth in∣to the holie soules; and maketh them the freendes of God, and Prophets. For GOD loueth no man, but him inverse, 28, whom Wisedome dwelleth. Wherefore, if any man lacke Wisedom,Iames, 1, 5, let him (as the Apostle counselleth) aske it of God, which giueth to all men liberallie, and reprocheth no man; and it shall bee giuen him.
For it is he that leadeth vnto Wisedome,Wisd, 7, 15, 16. and teacheth howe to vse the same aright. In his hand are both wee and our wordes: yea, all our wisedome, our vnderstanding, and the knowledge of all our workes. §. 4. If riches (saith the Wiseman) bee a pos∣sessiōWisd. 8, 5, 6 to be desired in this life, what is richer then Wisedome, that worketh all thinges? For if Wisedom worketh, what is it among all things that worketh better then shee? If a man loue righteousnesse, her laboursverse, 7, are full of vertue: for shee teacheth sober∣nesse, prudencie, righteousnes, & strength, which are the most profitable thinges that men can haue in this lyfe. If a man desire great experience, she canverse, 8. tell the things that are past, and discerne the things that are to come: shee knoweth the subtilties of words, and the solution of dark sentences: she foreseeth the signes & won∣ders or euer they come to passe, & the suc∣cesse or end of all times, & ages to ensue. Who so awaketh vnto her betimes, shallWisd, 6, 14. haue no great trauaile in seeking her, for he shall finde her sitting at his doores. To think vpon her, is perfect vnderstan∣ding,verse, 15, and who so watcheth for her, shall be
soone without care. For, shee walketh about, seeking such asverse, 16, bee meete for her, and sheweth herselfe cheerefully vnto them in theyr wayes, and meeteth them in euery thought. Shee is an infinite treasure vnto men,Wisd, 7, 14, which who so vse, become pertakers of the loue and freendship of Almighty God: & are accepted for the gifts of knowledge, & vnderstanding. All Gold is but grauell, in respect of her,Wisd, 7, 9, and Siluer shall be counted but clay before her. She is more worth then precious stones,Prou, 8, 11. yea, all things that thou canst desire, are not to be compared vnto her. She hath her dwelling with knowledge,verse, 12, and prudent counsell is her owne. By her, Kings doe raigne, and Counsel∣lersProu, 8, 15, 16, make iust lawes: through her, doe Princes beare rule, and all the Iudges of the earth execute iudgement. By her also, wee may be preserued fromSolon. the many perrils of this world, and through her, wee may attaine vnto a happy end. §. 5. To conclude; Of all the giftes that euerPlato. God gaue vnto man, saith Plato, Wisedom
is the most excellent: For, shee is the de∣fence of the soule, and the mirrour of rea∣son: she is the ground & roote of all good endeuours: she ordereth the mind of man, and instructeth his vnderstanding: she di∣recteth his life, and ruleth the works there∣of: shee teacheth what ought to be doone, and what to be left vndone: and vvithout her, (saith he) no man liuing can be safe. Also, this likewise knew Salomon (a far better Diuine then Plato,) to be most true, as appeareth in his prayer which he so ear∣nestly made vnto the Lord for wisedome: and where, vvithall, in the same place hee plainely confesseth, that * although a manWisd, 9, 6, be neuer so perfect among the chyldren of men, yet if the wisedome of GOD be not with him, he shall be nothing regarded. For, the wisedome of this world, is foo∣lishnes1, Cor, 3, 19, with God. Because (as the Apostle saith) it is earth∣lie,Iames, 3, 15 sensuall, and deuilish. But the vvisedome that is from aboue,verse, 17. is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easie to be intreated, full of mercie, & good fruites, without iudging, and without hipocrisie.
¶ Of the knowledge of Almightie God. §. 1. THe Lord looketh downe from hea∣uen, saith Dauid, and beholdeth allPsalm, 33, 13, 14. the children of men: From the ha∣bitation of his dwelling, hee behol∣deth all them that dwell vpon the earth. Hee facioneth the harts of euery one ofverse, 15. them, & he vnderstandeth all their works. For, hee is, (as Hannah saith) a God of1, Sam, 2, 3, knowledge, & by him enterprises are esta∣blished. Yea; from the beginning of the world,Acts, 15, 18, saith S. Iames, the Lorde our God know∣eth all his workes. He also, vnderstandeth and seeth, bothPet. Lomb. the deedes, and the thoughts, of all men li∣uing in the world: and frō his knowledge no secrete can be hid. For, his eyes, as Sirach saith, are ten thou∣sandEccl{us}. 39. 19 times brighter thē the Sun, beholding all the waies of men, and the ground of the deepe, & considereth the most secret parts. * Hee knewe all things or euer they vvereverse, 20. made, & after they be brought to passe al∣so, hee looketh vpon them all.
The works of all flesh are before him, &Eccl{us}, 39, 19 20. nothing can be hid frō his sight. Hee seeth from euerlasting to euerlasting, and there is nothing wondeful [or hard] vnto him. For, his wisedome is great: he is mightieEccl{us}, 15, 18 in power: and he beholdeth all things con∣tinually. So that nothing can be doone in heauen,Caluine. earth, or hell without his prouidence. Neither is there any creature which is notHeb, 4, 13, manifest in his sight, but all thinges are na∣ked, and open, to the eyes of him, concer∣ning whom we speake. For, his eyes are vpon the wayes of man,Iob, 34, 21. & he seeth all his goings. * His eyes, in e∣ueryProu, 15, 3, place behold the euill & the good. And hee onely knoweth the harts of all1, Reg, 8, 39 the chyldren of men. §. 2. Behold, saith Esdras, the Lord [our God]2, Esdr, 16, 46. knoweth all the workes of men: their ima∣ginations, their thoughts, & their harts. Yea; hee knoweth our inuentions, andverse, 55. what we think or imagine in our hart, whē we sinne, and would hide our selues. No thought may escape him, neytherEccl{us}, 42, 20 may any word be hid from him. For, he * vnderstandeth euery hart.Eccl{us}, 16, 20
Hell, with her paine, (saith Salomon,) isProu, 15, 11 knovvne vnto the Lord, hovve much more the harts of all the sonnes of men? The graue [likewise,] is naked beforeIob, 26, 6, him; and destruction cannot bee couered from him. The wayes of all men in the worlde, areBernard. knowne to him: the words of all mouthes in the world, are heard of him: and the thoughts of all harts in the world, are plain∣ly perceiued of him. There is nothing so secrete, but he seethP. Melanct. the same, nor any purpose so priuilie prac∣tised, but it is openly knowne vnto him. The righteous, and the vnrighteous, areBullenger. both in their doings of him regarded: and hee discerneth the counterfeite Christian from the faithfull professor. §. 4. Saint Paule the Apostle, writing vnto his Scholler Timothie, in his second Epi∣stle and second chapter, (both for his con∣firmation & comfort against the doctrine of false Teachers.) telleth him, That * the2, Tim, 2, 19 foundation of God remaineth sure, and hath this seale; The Lord knovveth vvho are his.
And, the Almightie himselfe, talking with his seruant Moises, saith; * Thou hastExod. 33. 17 found fauour in my sight: & I know thee by name. Likewise, vnto the Prophet Ieremie, in the very beginning of his booke, hee vseth these words; * Before I formed thee in thyIerem, 1, 5. mothers wombe, I knew thee; and before thou cammest out of the wombe, I sancti∣fied thee & ordained thee to be a Prophet vnto the Nations. §. 5. Now, as by these few former places, wee finde it most apparantly prooued, that the freends and seruaunts of Almightie God, are alvvayes knowne vnto him; so may we likewise by this ensuing example & speech of the Prophet to Senacharib, certainly assure our selues, that the Lord God know∣eth vvho are his enemies also. For, when that proude-daring King of2, Reg, 18, 28. 29, 30.  the Assvrians, sent Rabsaketh his foule∣mouthed messenger, to blaspheme the Ho∣lie one of Israell, the Almightie returned him this aunswere by the mouth of Esay, saying: * I knowe thy dwelling; yea, thy2. Reg. 19, 27, 28. going out, and thy comming in, & thy fu∣rie against mee: And because thou ragest
against mee, and thy tumult is come vp to mine eares, I will put my hooke in thy no∣strils, and my bridle in thy lippes, and will bring thee backe againe the same way thou cammest. Moreouer; the Lord [our God,] as Es∣dras affirmeth, knoweth all them that sinne2, Esd. 15. 26 against him: and therefore deliuereth hee them vnto death and destruction. For, there is (as Iob sayth) no darknesse,Iob, 34, 22, nor shadow of death, that can hide the wic∣ked dooers from his sight. Hee declareth the things past, and theEccl{us}. 42, 19 things that are to come: he also discloseth the path of those things that are secrete. Hee searcheth the ground of the deepe,2. Esd. 16. 49 and the treasures thereof: hee hath measu∣red the Sea, and [knoweth] what it con∣taineth. §. 6. Let all men therefore, (as Cicero vvell sayth) in this be truly perswaded, that God Cites. is the onely moderator & gouernour of all things: and that all things also be done by his power and appoyntment. And that he it is, which most cleerely beholdeth euery man, both what hee doth, what he admit∣teth in himselfe, with what minde and god∣lines
he doth loue & fauour Religion: and that hee hath also a respect to the procee∣dings, both of all godly and wicked men. Yea, the Lord our God onely, (as Silui∣usSiluius. saith) by his eternall wisedom hath made all: by his euerlasting prouidence hee pre∣serueth all: and by his most absolute vn∣derstanding he knoweth all. For, of him, and through him, and forRom, 11, 36 him, (as the Apostle saith) are all thinges: to him be glory for euer. Amen. ¶ Of the great mercie and louing kind∣nesse of God. §. 1. THE Lord our God, (according toNehe. 9. 17, the confession of the Leuites, in the ninth of Nehemiah,) is a GOD of mercies; gracious, and pittifull: of long suffering, and of great mercie. Hee is (as Dauid saith) good to all: andPsal, 145, 9, his mercies are ouer [or aboue] all the rest of his workes. Yea; hee is full of compassion & mercy,Psal, 103, 8, 9. slow to anger, and of great kindnesse. Hee will not alway chide, neither will he keepe his anger for euer.
Hee hath not dealt with vs after our sins, nor rewarded vs according to our iniqui∣ties.verse, 10, 11, 12, 13, For, as high as the heauen is aboue the earth, so great is his mercie toward thē that feare him: and as far as the East is from the West, so farre hath he remoued our sinnes from vs. * As a Father hath compassion onverse, 14. 15. his children, so hath the Lord compassion on them that feare him: For, hee knoweth whereof we be made, hee remembreth that wee are but dust. §. 2. Where, (saith Micah) is there anie GodMicah, 7, 18 like vnto the Lord our God, that taketh a∣way iniquitie, and passeth by, [or winketh at] the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage? He retaineth not his wrath for e∣uer, because mercy pleaseth him. Hee is, (as Salomon saith) gracious andWisd, 15, 1, true, long suffering, & gouerneth al things by mercy. Hee is, (as Sirach saith) kinde & pittiful:Ecclus, 2, 12 hee pardoneth and forgiueth sinnes: hee saueth in the time of trouble: hee is a de∣fender of all thē that seeke him in the truth. And, * as his greatnes is, so is his mercy.Eccus, 2, 21 Cyrill. For, he can no more cease to be mercifull, then he can cease to be God.
The mercie that a man hath, (saith Si∣rach)Eccl{us}, 18, 12 reacheth vnto his neighbour, but the mercy of the Lord is vpon all flesh. He is the Father of mercies, & the God2, Cor, 1, 3, of all comfort. His mercie reacheth vnto the heauens, &Psalm, 36, 5, his faithfulnesse vnto the clowdes. His mercie is euerlasting: and his truthPsal. 100. 5. endureth from generation to generation. §. 3. Oh how excellent, (as Dauid saith) is thePsalm, 36, 7, mercy of the Lord our God! therefore the chyldren of men (saith he) put theyr trust vnder the shadow of his winges. The very remembrance of Gods mercie,Bernard. (saith Bernard) maketh glad the harts of all the godly: and the hope of heauens helpe is comfortable to euerie penitent person. The tongues of all men liuing, (saithMarlorate. Marlorate) cannot tell out Gods mercie: nor the pennes of all the VVriters in the vvorld, sufficiently expresse the same. His wrath, (as Erasmus saith) is alvvaiesErasmus. giuen by weight; but is mercie is infinite, without either end or measure. Besides; if wee aske yet further, after theAugustine. seuerall workes of Gods mercy, wee shall
finde, (as S. Augustine saith) that they passe all number, as there can be no nūber made of our miseries, and daily necessities. For, what man liuing, (saith Becon) canBecon. tell how often through frailtie he hath of∣fended, or truely reckon, how many waies he hath been preserued frō perrill, through the onely mercy of the Almightie exten∣ded towards him? Also; If the sinnes of all the world, were (as S. Chrisostome saith) in one man, yetChrisostome. would they be nothing to the mercy of the Almightie: but the burthen of them, in comparison of his mercie, woulde seeme like the Spyders webbe, before the boyste∣rous winde. Yea; the multitude of all mens offences, Fulgentius. in respect of Gods mercie, is like a small drop of raine to the greatest Sea. §. 4. Furthermore; the mercy of the LordeChrisostome our God, is (as S. Chrisostome saith) both generall, and speciall. It is generall, in sup∣plying the present wants, both of the iust and vniust. It is speciall, in succouring the iust onely. It is likewise temporary, (saith he) in spa∣ring the wicked for a time: and it is euerla∣sting,
concerning the euerlasting saluation of the godly; not only in choosing, but al∣so in regenerating, in iustifying, and in glo∣rifying them. Also; King Salomon, as we reade in his booke of Wisedome, after some mention made of Gods almighty power, vttereth these speeches following in praise of his loue and mercie, saying; Thou (ô Lord)Wisd. 11. 20 21, 22, 23. hast mercy vppon all, for thou hast power ouer all, and makest as though thou sawest not the sinnes of men, because they should amend. For, thou louest all the things that are, and hatest none of them whō thou hast made: For, thou vvouldest haue created nothing that thou hadst hated. And, how might any thing endure, vnlesse it were thy will? or, howe coulde any thing be preser∣ued, except it were called of thee? But thou sparest all, for they are thine, ô Lord, which art the louer of soules. And * for that thouWisd, 12, 16 art Lorde of all thinges, it causeth thee to spare all things. And, not much vnlike to this saying of Salomon, is the confession of Esdras vnto the Angell, which was sent to instruct him, where hee saith; I knovve (Lord) that the2, Esdr. 7. 62 63, 64. &c. most High is called mercifull, in that hee
hath mercy vppon them which are not yet come into the world. And, that he hath pit∣tie on those that walke in his Lawe. And, that hee is patient: for hee long suffereth those that haue sinned, as his creatures. And, that hee is liberall, for hee will giue as much as needeth. And, that he is of great mercy; for hee ouercōmeth in mercy, those that are present, those that are past, & them that are to come. For, if hee were not a∣boundant in his mercies, the world coulde not continue▪ nor they that haue the pos∣session thereof. He pardoneth also; for if he gaue not of his goodnesse, that they which haue doone2, Esdras, 7. 68, 69, 70. euill, might be releeued from their wicked∣nesse, the ten thousand part of men should not remaine aliue. And, if hee beeing Iudge, forgaue not those that be healed with his word, & tooke away the multitude of their sinnes, there should be very fewe people left, among an innumerable multitude. §. 5. Moreouer; the Lorde our God is so full of pitty and compassion, that (as GueuaraAnth. Gue∣uara. saith) hee neuer sendeth downe his wrath vpon any people, as a punishment for their
offences, but hee first seeketh, rather by admonishment, to bring them to his mercy and fauour, through their true humilitie, and vnfained repentance. And, many also are the testimonies which we finde in holie Scripture, concer∣ning the great kindnesse and compassion of Almighty God to the penitent: but a∣mong sundry other, I suppose (for breui∣ties sake) that this one example following may sufficiently serue to instruct vs. Ionas beeing sent of God to preach andIonas. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, &c. denounce his iudgements against Niniuie, the cheefest Citty of the Assyrians, entred into the same a dayes iourney, (saith the Text) and he cryed, and sayd; Yet fortie dayes, and Niniuie shall be ouerthrowne. Whereupon, the King beleeuing the speech of the Prophet▪ descended from his princely throne, and speedily caused thys Proclamation to be made, that neither man nor beast should taste any foode, nor drink any water, but let man & beast (quoth he) put on sackcloth, and cry mightilie vnto God: yea, let euery man turne from his e∣uill wayes, and from the wickednesse that is in their hands. And, * when the Almigh∣tieverse, 10. saw theyr workes, that they repented, &
turned from theyr euill waies, hee repented himselfe of the euill that hee had saide hee would doe vnto them, and he did it not. Which thing, (as the Text saith) displea∣sed Ionas exceedingly, and hee was angry. Notwithstanding, he prayed vnto the lord, and said: I pray thee, ô Lord, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my countrey? Therefore I preuented it, and fledde vnto Tarshish, for I knew, sayth hee, that thou art a gracious God, and mercifull, slowe to anger, and of great kindnesse: repenting thee of the euill. &c. After this, Ionas went out of the Cittie,Ionas, 4, 1, 2. and sate him downe vnder the East side thereof, expecting what should bee doone vnto the same. And the Lord in one night, caused a Gourde to spring vp ouer Ionas, that it might be a shadow ouer his head, & a defence for him against the heate of the Sunne: but the next morning, hee prepa∣red a Worme also, which smote the Gourd and it withered. Then Ionas perceiuing himselfe bereftIonas, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, &c. of this succour, and wexing faint through the extreame heate of the Sunne, wished in his hart to die, and sayd; It is better for me to die, then to liue.
But the Lord God called vnto him, and said: Ionas, doost thou well to be angrie? Thou hast pitty on the Gourde, for which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it to grow, which came vp in a night and pe∣rished in a night: and should not I, (sayth the most merciful) spare Niniuie that great Cittie, wherein are six-score thousand per∣sons, that cannot discerne betweene theyr right hand and their left, and also much cattle? By the which speech of the Almightie, and example of his clemencie, most plain∣lie it is approued, that the Lord our God, as S. Iames saith, * is very pittifull & mer∣cifull.Iames, 5, 11, And that (as Ieremie saith,) * hee doothLam, 3, 33. not punish willingly. Nay more; so prone is the Almighty to pardon, and so much inclined to mercie, that although (through mans vnrighteous∣nesse) he be highly prouoked to anger, and euen ready (as it were) to execute his fierce wrath vpon the vngodly: yet notwithstan∣ding, it sometimes pleaseth him to spare a great company of wicked offenders, by reason that some fewe righteous persons haue theyr habitation among them.
As may for example be seene in the eigh∣teene of Genesis, where we finde, that (ac∣cording to the sixe seuerall peticions of the Patriarch Abraham) hee was content to graunt, first, that if fiftie; secondly, that if fortie-fiue; thirdly, that if fortie; fourthly,Gene. 18. that if thirtie; fiftly, that if twentie; lastlie, that if but tenne righteous men coulde bee founde in all Sodome, the whole Cittie shoulde bee spared for those tenne mens sake. §. 6. Thus proue we our God to be, as Dauid saith, a pittifull God, and mercifull: slowePsal, 86, 15 to anger, and great in kindnes and truth. Yea, such a God, whose compassion also is of no short cōtinuaunce, but as the Psal∣mist saith, * endureth for euer & euer, vp∣ponPsal, 103, 17 them that feare him: and his righte∣ousnesse vppon theyr childrens children. Shewing mercy vnto thousands of themDeut. 5. 10. that loue him, and keepe his commaunde∣ments. All yee [therefore] that worshippe theDan, 3, 90. Lord, blesse the God of Gods: praise him, and acknowledge him; for his mercy en∣dureth world without end. And onely by the reason thereof, all men
liuing are preserued: according to that speech of Ieremie in his Lamentations, where hee sayth: * It is the Lords merciesLam, 3. 22. that we are not consumed: because his cō∣passions faile not. For, hee hath mercy, on whom hee willExod, 33, 19 haue mercie, and hee hath compassion, on whom he will haue compassion. ¶ Of the iustice of Almightie God. §. 1. AS it is a matter most needfull, for eue∣rie Christian beleeuer to knowe, that God his Creator, is very kinde and mercifull; so is it likewise greatly ne∣cessary for him to remember, that the Lord of euerlasting glorie, is also iust and true. For, he that dooth continue in his sin, run∣ning the race of his life in all kind of wilful negligence▪ and buildeth the whole burden of his iniquities, vpon the perswasion of his Makers mercie, without any reckoning or regard of his iustice; such a man for cer∣taintie, liues in a most lothsome state, and is ready, at euery step which hee treadeth, to set his foote with Pharao, in the perrilous
path of presumption. Contrariwise, he that doth acknowledge God to be iust, seuere, and true, & by too much hammering the same in his braine, looseth, or letteth slippe, the sweete taste, & feeling comfort of his vnspeakeable loue and mercie, entertaineth by this meanes, a seruaunt more then he needeth, who way∣ting continually at his elbowe, neuer cea∣seth to prompt and perfect his maister in * Caines part, vntill the disquiet of hisGene, 4, 13, minde, driue him to the soule-destroying sinne of desperation. Wherefore, sith we haue already found, (in our short discourse of Gods mercy) the precious potion, which presently cureth the dangerous disease, of all such trouble∣some and distempering thoughts: Let vs now likewise, by expressing some few spee∣ches of Gods iustice. seeke out such sim∣pls▪ as may dreadfully keepe vs, from the offence of too much boldnes, in ouer-pro∣uing the great patience, of our most migh∣tie Preseruer. §. 2. Vnderstand therfore, that when the Al∣tie discended from heauen in a clowde, & proclaimed his Name vnto his seruaunt
Moises in Mount Sinai, (because he would haue him know, that hee was the God of iustice, as well as the Lord of mercie,) hee vttered these speeches as he passed by him, saying; * The Lorde, the Lorde, strong,Exod, 34, 5, 6, 7, mercifull, and gracious; slow to anger, & aboundant in goodnesse and truth: reser∣uing mercie for thousands, forgiuing ini∣quitie, and transgression, and sinne. Then followeth;] And, not making the wicked innocent; visiting the iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the chyldren, & vpon childrens children, vnto the third & fourth generation. The same Moises likewise, that he might cause the people to consider Gods iustice, as wel as make them mindful of his mercy, forgetteth not in his repetition of the Law to tell them; That the Lord theyr God, is aDeut, 5, 9, 10. iealous God, visiting the iniquitie of the Fathers vpon the chyldren, euen vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate him: and shewing mercy vnto thou∣sands, of them that loue him, and keep his commaundements. And, to the intent also that Gods iustice might be as well remembred as his mercie, the Prophet Ieremie, in his prayer which
hee made vnto the Lord in prison, spareth not to speake of them both together, say∣ing: * O Lord our GOD, it is thou thatIerem, 32, 17, 18. hast made heauen and earth by thy great power, and by thine out-stretched arme, and there is nothing hid from thee; Thou shewest mercy vnto thousands, and recom∣pencest the iniquity of the Fathers, into the bosome of theyr children after them. Besides, the Prophet Dauid in the ninth Psalme, plainely affirmeth, that * the LordPsalm, 9, 16 our God is knowne by executing iudge∣ment. §. 3. Saint Chrisostome (as we read) speaking generally of the iustice of Almighty God, maketh breefely this definition therof, say∣ing; The iustice of God is that, wherby allChrisostome. those good things be performed, which do belong vnto a true God, and can be doone by none but by him alone: As namely, his creating and making of those things which be not; and his breeding, increasing, go∣uerning, & continuall preseruing of those things which be. But Saint Ambrose, speaking more par∣ticulerly of Gods iustice, deuideth the same into three parts, saying; The first is, that asAmbrose.
hee is God, so hee is the onely Creator and conseruer of all things; vvhich is nothing else, but the goodnes of his own nature. The second is, that as he is Lord & mai∣ster, so he gouerneth all things by iust au∣thoritie, according to the pleasure of his owne will. The third is, that as hee is Iudge, so hee will deale rightly in iudgement with all men, and revvarde euery one at his death, according to the workes which hee hath doone in this life. And, like as S. Ambrose maketh men∣tion of three sorts of iustice to bee in God, so S. Augustine speaketh of three speciallAugustine. causes, which daily mooue men to sinne a∣gainst their Maker. The first is, saith he, when we foolishlie flatter our selues in our iniquities, & thinke that the Almighty seeth not our sinnes. The second is, when wee perswade with our selues, that GOD careth not for our sinnes. The third is, because we weigh not Gods iustice, but supposing him to be onely mer∣cifull, we will therefore of purpose, vvexe more and more sinful. But let not (my brother) saith S. Bernard,Bernard.
the subtilties of sathan so seduce thee, that by too much buzzing in thy braine the greatnes of Gods mercy, he thereby cause thee cleane to extinguish, the remēbrance thou should'st haue of thy Creators iu∣stice. Neither bee thou dravvne at any time, through his inducements, to tempt and a∣buseAmbrose. the patience of the most Mighty: for it is the next way to shutte thee out of the grace of saluation, & vtterly to disappoint thy selfe, of all the mercy and fauour which the Almighty was minded to haue vsed to∣wards thee. §. 4. VVe read in the fift of S. Iohn, that our Sauiour Christ, hauing by the onely power of his worde, miraculously made vvhole a man which had beene diseased eyght and thirty yeeres, chaunced afterward to finde the same fellow in the Temple, and before they parted, hee gaue him this kinde and freendly admonishment to forewarne him, saying; * Beholde, thou art made vvhole,Iohn, 5, 8, 14, sinne no more, least a worse thing come vnto thee. The like counsaile also in effect, giueth Sirach vnto all men, in the fift of his booke,
where he saith: Because thy sinne is forgi∣uenEccl{us}, 5, 5, 6. thee [my sonne] be not without feare, to heape sinne vpon sinne: neyther say vn∣to thy selfe, The mercy of God is great, he will forgiue my manifold sinnes: for, mer∣cie and wrath come from him, and his in∣dignation commeth downe vpon sinners. And, * as his mercy is great, so is his pu∣nishmentEccl{us}, 16, 12 also: for, hee iudgeth a man ac∣cording to his workes. §. 5. Perfect, (as Moises saith) is the vvorke ofDeut, 32, 4. the mightie GOD: For, all his waies are iudgement. God is true, (saith he) & with∣out wickednes: iust and righteous is he. If thou sinne against him, and prooueOsorius. truly penitent, hee will be found readie to graunt thee forgiuenesse: but, if thou per∣sist in euill, and presume vpon his mercie, the path thou walkest in is very perrillous, and thou daily standest in danger of his heauie wrath and iudgement. For, although it sometimes please God,Mar. Aur. (as Marcus Aurelius affirmeth) to forbeare the sinnes and transgressions of diuers per∣sons, that persist in theyr euill liuing a great while, yet notwithstanding, wee ften see by example, that hee dooth not sare at
length, suddainly and vnawares, to chastise such offenders, vvith so much the greater chastisement, according to the measure of theyr many iniquities. For, God is in his corrections (saith he) like vnto a man that giueth a blowe to an∣other body, the higher that hee lyfteth vp his hande, vvith the greater force falleth downe the stroake: semblably, the more yeeres that the Almightie forbeareth our sinnes, the more will he afterward afflict vs with punishment for them, vnlesse we re∣pent. §. 6. It is not (as Melancthon saith) the greatPhil. Mel. wealth of worldly rich men, that can cause theyr Creator to with-hold his wrath from the wicked: neyther is it the magnificence of mighty men, that can procure him to proue partiall in iudgement. For, there is no iniquitie with the Lorde2, Chro. 19 7. our God, saith Iehosaphat, neyther respect of persons, nor receiuing of reward. Hee, being Lord ouer all, will spare noWisd. 6. 7, person, neyther shall he feare any greatnes: For, he hath made the small and great, and careth for all alike. Hee, hath no respect vnto the persons ofIob, 34, 19
Princes, neither regardeth he the rich more then the poore: for they be all the vvorke of his hands. Hee, (as Tobie saith) is iust, and all hisTob, 3, 2, workes, and all his vvayes are mercie and truth: and he iudgeth truly and iustlie for euer. For his eyes, are vpon all the wayes of theIere, 32, 19, sonnes of men, to giue to euery one accor∣ding to his wayes, and according to the fruite of his workes. Whosoeuer he be therefore, (as Vincen∣tiusVincentius. saith) that walketh in the vvay of the wicked, and yet notwithstanding looketh for the reward of the righteous, foolishlie flatters himselfe with a false hope: and hath more neede of good counsaile to reclaime him from error, then hee hath of badde en∣couragement, to cause him continue his course. §. 7. Beholde, saith the Almightie, all soulesEzech, 18, 4, 20. are mine: both the soule of the Father, and also the soule of the sonne are mine. The same soule that sinneth, it shall die: the sonne shall not beare the iniquitie of the Father, neyther shall the Father beare the iniquity of the sonne: but the righteousnes
of the righteous shall be vpon him, and the wickednes of the wicked shall bee vppon himselfe. For, euery man shall beare his own bur∣den.Gala, 6, 5, And, as his workes are founde, so shallLuther. his reward be giuen. Also; It is most certaine, (saith Iob) thatIob, 34, 12, the Lord our God will not doe wickedlie, neither will the Almightie peruert iudge∣ment. Hee will not cast away an vpright man,Iob, 8, 20. neither wil he take the wicked by the hand. For, as he is called the * God of iudge∣ment.Esay, 30. 18, So hee is termed the rightfull * Iudge ofGene, 18, 25 all the world. And therefore, hee will vndoubtedly, as Dauid sayth, * iudge the worlde in righte∣ousnesse,Psalm, 9, 8. and the people with equitie. §. 8. Diuers examples also may bee collected from the Scripture, concerning the iustice of almighty God, and the expressing of his punishments vpō offenders: but these few folowing shew proofe enough to perswade vs. As namely: how he punished * AchanIosua, 7. the sonne of Carmi, for his theft.
Nadab and Abihu, for presuming to of∣ferLeuit, 10, 1, * strange fire before him. The two sonnes of Eli, * for abusing the1, Sam, 4, Priestes office. King Saule * for his disobedience, in spa∣ring1, Sam, 15, Agag. Gehazi, the seruaunt of Eliah, * for his2, Reg, 5, couetousnesse. Ananiah and his wife Saphira, for * ly∣ingActs▪ 5, vnto the holy Ghost. By which examples and the like, we may coniecture, that as the mercy of the Lorde is meruailous great, to those that feare and loue him, so is his punishment also, vppon such as walke in wickednesse, and wilfully presume to offend him. For, as the Angell said vnto Esdras, there2. Esdr, 7, 19 is no Iudge more iust then God, nor anie more wise then the most High. ¶ Of the wayes of Almighty God. §. 1. THE * vvay of the Lorde or God,2, Sa. 22. 31, (as Dauid sayth) is vncorrupt. And * all his pathes are merciePsal. 25. 10. and truth.
Vnto such as * keepe his couenaunt, &Psal, 103. 18 thinke vpon his commaundements to doe them. §. 2. God hath not (as Caluine saith) madeCaluine. manifest vnto man one way onely, but he hath shewed vnto vs all his wayes: that is, all that is needful to make vs walke aright: so that wee can neuer goe amisse, if we fol∣lowe the direction which hee in his holie Word hath set downe before vs. §. 3. The wayes of the Lorde our God, (as S.Augustine. Augustine saith,) are to bee taken for all manner of his dooings: and how soeuer it pleaseth him at any time to remoue things, first to one side, then to another, yet his wayes therein are alwaies righteous, and he best knoweth wherefore he doth so. Besides, It is not to be doubted (saith he) that God doth well: yea, when soeuer hee suffereth to be done, whatsoeuer things are euill done; for, hee doth not suffer this, o∣therwise then by iust iudgement: and sure∣lie, all that is iust is good. Although there∣fore those things that be euill, inasmuch as they bee euill, be not good, yet it is good,
that there should be things not onelie that are good, but also that are euill. For, except it were good, that there should bee thinges that are euill, the Almightie goodnesse woulde by no meanes suffer them to bee. For, it is (no doubt) as easie a thing to him, not to suffer that thing to be, which hee woulde shoulde not be, as it is to doe that, which he is willing to doe. Therefore, whatsoeuer happeneth heere at any time against our wills, wee ought to vnderstande, that it hapneth not but by the will of God, by his prouidence, by his de∣cree, by his commaundement, and by his Law. And, although wee know not, vvhy and wherfore it is done; yet we must con∣sider, it is done according to his wisedome that gouerneth all things, and that it is not done without some speciall cause. For, the Lord our God, is righteous (asPsal, 145. 17 the Psalmist saith) in all his vvayes, and ho∣lie in all his workes. Yea; his vvayes are righteous; & the iustHose, 14, 10 shal walke in them, but the wicked shall fall therein. For, as his wayes are plaine and right vn∣toEccl{us}, 39, 24 the iust so are they stumbling blocks vn∣to the wicked.
§. 4. But, to the end wee should not imagine the wayes of Almightie God to be like our wayes, nor his secrete intents, to resemble, our deuises, it hath pleased the Lord him∣selfe (in the prophecie of Esay) fully to as∣sure vs of the contrarie by his owne speech, where he saith; * My thoughts ô house ofEsay, 55, 8, 9 Israell, are not your thoughts, neyther are your wayes, my waies: For, as the heauens are higher then the earth, so are my wayes higher then your wayes; and my thoughts aboue your thoughts. And, an example partly to approue this speech of God, may be founde in the first Booke of Samuell: where wee reade that when the Prophet (according as hee vvas appointed) went about to annoynt a nowe King in steed of Saule, ouer Israell, he first, after he came to Bethlehem, called for E∣lihab,1, Sam, 16, the eldest sonne of Ishai, a goodlie tall fellowe; and presently supposed him, because he was of an high stature and com∣lie countenaunce, to bee the man whom God had chosen. But, when the Lorde refused him, ee called for the second sonne, and after that, the third, & so in order, vntill he had seene
seauen of Ishais sonnes; & at the last, when there remained onely but one more, named Dauid, the most vnlikely amongst all the rest, to be elected King, the Lord (far con∣trary both to the expectation of his Father and the Prophet,) as soone as the lad came into their presence, called vnto Samuell, saying: Arise, and annoynt him, for this is hee. Giuing vs hereby to vnderstand, that he respecteth not (as wee doe,) the outvvarde appearance, & comly proportion, of eue∣rie beautifull person, but rather the godlie inclination of mans minde, and the feruent affection of his hidden hart. §. 5. Now, although indeede we are not able, (as S. Ierome saith) by reason of our manieIerome.  infirmities to conceaue Gods wonderfull counsels, or attaine to the knowledge of his hidden purposes, for that his secrete deter∣minations seeme like a deepe Gulfe vnto vs; yet must we alwayes in duetie acknow∣ledge him, (in whatsoeuer hee doth) to be iust and true in all his wayes; and humblie confesse, that he keepeth an vpright and e∣uen hand, in the performing of all his pro∣mises whatsoeuer.
And, far more fitly also wil it become vs, reuerently to admire the meruailous vvor∣kings of the Almightie, then ouer busily to beate our braines, about matters that are beyond our capacity: saying in all humility of spirit, as the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romaines saith; * O the deepenesse ofRom, 11, 33 the riches, both of the wisedome & know∣ledge of God! howe vnsearchable are his iudgements, & his wayes past finding out? ¶ Of the Word of God. §. 1. THE Worde of the Lord our God,Heb, 4, 12. (as saith the Apostle) is liuely, and mightie in operation, and sharper then anie two edged sword. It entereth through, euen vnto the deui∣ding in sunder of the soule and the spirit, and of the ioynts and the marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts, and the intents of the hart. §. 2. The Word of God, (as Saint AmbroseAmbrose. saith) is the pleasant Garden of Paradice, where, the Tree of knowledge is appoyn∣ted
by God vnto all the elect: In the midst whereof, standeth the Tree of Life, which is Christ our Sauiour. No Cherubin with a fierie sword (saith hee) keepeth the ente∣rance, but it is opened by the instinct of the holy Ghost, and the light of the Gospel to all that are hungry. In it, are the Riuers of liuely vvater, by which, the Church of all the faythfull is o∣uerflowne and cherrished, and the mindes of the godly inriched with the treasures of heauenly graces. Therein also, are Trees of all sorts, verie faire and fruitfull; that is, the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, planted by Gods owne hand: and the voyce of God conti∣nually walking, earnestly seeking the salua∣tion of mankinde, and leading them vnto the way of life. §. 3. The Word of God, (as Saint AugustineAugustine. sayth) is the vvombe of God, vvherein all his Children are conceaued, carried, borne, and nourished. It is the Lanthorne, vvhereby our feeteFulgentius. may bee directed: and the true Light, by vvhich our pathes may bee guided vnto Christ.
It is, as it were the Lydian Touchstone,Ambrose. which rightly tryeth all the opinions and teachings of men, whether they be true, or counterfeit. It is (as the Apostle saith) the * sword ofEphe, 6, 17 the Spirit; And the * power of God vntoRom, 1, 16, saluation, to euery one that beleeueth. It is the mistery or secrete of the vvill ofRom. 16. 25 GOD. And his Letters, or freendly Epistles, sentAugustine. vnto vs from our heauenly Countrey, to instruct vs in fayth, and godlines of life. It is the liuelie meate or foode of mansAmbrose. soule, with the which it is nourished, fedde, and daily gouerned. It is the wholsome doctrine of the holieIerome. Ghost, wherein is contained, whatsoeuer is needful to be knowne of vs in this life, con∣cerning our future felicitie in the vvorld to come. §. 4. The very authoritie of Gods Worde a∣lone, is (as S. Augustine saith) more thē allAugustine. the sharpnesse of mans imagination or in∣uention: for it hath one constant, plaine, simple, & holy meaning, wherein the truth consisteth; by vvhich onely wee fight and ouercome.
And, whatsoeuer in argument (saith S. Gregorie) hath not authoritie from theGregory. Word of GOD, it may well be auoyded, vvith the same ease vvith vvhich it is affir∣med. For, as whatsoeuer gold is vvithout theOrigen. Temple, is not sanctified: so vvhat-soeuer sence is without the holy Scriptures, al∣though vnto some it seeme wonderfull, yet it is not holy, because it is not contayned in the sence of the Scriptures. §. 5. The entrance, as Dauid saith, into thePsalm 119. 130. Word of the Lord, sheweth light: and gi∣ueth vnderstanding vnto the simple. For, it is * prooued to bee most pure. ItPs. 119, 140. Ecclus. 1. 5, Ps. 119, 160 Psalm. 119, 72, 104, is * the wel-spring of wisedome. And the * beginning of it is truth. The Lawe of thy mouth, ô Lord, sayth hee, is better vnto mee then thousandes of golde and siluer. By thy precepts haue I gotten vnderstanding. And, by thy cōmaundements, thou hastPsa. 119, 98 made me wiser then mine enemies. Therefore loue I thy commaundementsPsalm, 119 127, aboue gold: yea, aboue most fine gold. I reioyce [also] at thy Word, as one thatPsalm, 119. 162. findeth a great spoyle.
And, my soule (ô Lorde) hath kept thyPsalm, 119. 167. testimonies; for, I loue them exceedingly. §. 6. Againe; The Lavve of the Lorde [ourPsalm, 19, 7, 8, 9, 10. God] as the Psalmist saith, is perfect, con∣uerting the soule: the testimonie of the Lord is sure, and giueth wisedom vnto the simple: the statutes of the Lorde are right, and reioyce the hart: the commandement of the Lord is pure, and giueth light vnto the eyes. The feare of the Lorde is cleane, and endureth for euer: the iudgements of the Lord are truth, they are righteous alto∣gether; and more are they to be desired thē gold: yea, then much fine golde, they are sweeter also then Honey, and the Honey combe. By them, ô Lord, (saith he) is thy seruantPsal, 19, 11 made circumspect, & in keeping of them, there is great reward. §. 7. VVhat-soeuer thinges are written aforeRom, 15, 4, time, are written (as the Apostle sayth) for our learning: that vvee through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures, might haue hope. For, the whole Scripture, (saith hee) is2, Tim, 3. 16 17. giuen by inspiration of God: and is profi∣table
to teach, to conuince, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be absolute, beeing made perfect vnto all good workes. Yea; vvhat-soeuer is required for our sal∣uation,Chrisostome. is already contained (as S. Chriso∣stome saith) in the holy Scripture. He that is ignorant, shall finde there what hee may learne: hee that is stubborne and a sinner, may find there scourges of the iudgements to come, the which he may feare: and hee that is troubled, may finde there the ioyful promises of euerlasting life; through the beholding of the which, hee may be stirred vp to doe good workes. Finally, the Scripture of God, (as S. Ba∣sillBasill. saith) is like vnto an Apothicaries shop, full stored with medicines of sundry sorts: so that euery man may there choose, a con∣uenient remedy for his disease. And surely, (as Beda saith) without theBeda. vnderstanding of the will of God, by the sacred Scriptures, our sight is but blindnes, our knowledge, ignorance; our wisedom, foolishnes; and our deuotion, deuilishnes. §. 8. Nowe, although indeede, (as GranadoGranado. saith) wee must confesse with Saint Peter,
that there are some places in the Booke of God, * hard to be vnderstood: yet may we2. Pet. 3, 16. likewise (saith hee) say with the same Apo∣stle, that those places are hard, to such as are vnlearned and vnstable, which peruert and wrest them to theyr owne destruction. For, euerie worde of God, (as SalomonProu, 30. 5. saith) is pure. And, the precepts of the Lord are plaine,Prou, 8, 9. to him that vvill vnderstande: and easie vnto all them that desire to finde knovv∣ledge. Nay more; It cannot be possible, (saith Vincentius) that, that man, vvhich with earnest studie, and feruent desire, often rea∣dethVincentius. the holy Scriptures, should euermore be forsaken, (or, left vvithout vnderstan∣ding of Gods holy will:) For, although he want the instruction of learned men, yet God himselfe from aboue, entering into his heart, by his holy Spirit lightneth his minde, poureth his beames of grace into his wits, openeth those things that before were hidden, and becommeth vnto such a man a Schoolemaister of that he knew not, only if he wil do so much as lieth in him. Besides; the holy Ghost, as S. AugustineAugustine. saith) hath by his wisedome, so notably and
wholsomely tempered the Word, that hee might with the easie places thereof, satis-fie the greedy hunger of men, and vvith the darkest places of it, take away our lothsom∣nesse. For, there is no point almost founde of the darkest meaning in one place, but it is plainly spoken of, and easie to be vnder∣stood in another. So that if the Gospell of Christ bee yet hid, it is hid, as the Apostle saith, * to them2, Cor, 4, 3, 4. that perrish: whose mindes, sathan, the god of this world, hath blinded, to the end, the light of the glorious Gospell of Christ, which is the Image of GOD, should not shine vnto them. The certaine truth of which Gospell, is so highlie to be esteemed, and reuerentlie regarded, that if an Angell from heauen,Gala, 1, 8, should come and preach vnto vs any other doctrine, then what we finde therein alrea∣die contayned, we ought for his tydings to count him accursed.
¶ Of the workes of God. §. 1. THE workes of Almightie God, al∣thoughChrisostome. of themselues (as S. Chriso∣stome saith) they are infinite in nū∣ber, yet may they all be reduced in∣to these fiue heads following: namely, his worke of Creation: his worke of Conser∣uation: his vvorke of Redemption: his vvorke of Iustification: and his vvorke of Predestination. §. 2. By the vvord of the Lord, saith Dauid,Psal. 33, 6, 9, were the Heauens made, and all the host of them, by the breath of his mouth: For, hee spake, and it was done; he commaun∣ded, and it stoode. As soone as hee saide, Let the Earth be2, Esdr. 16, 47, made, it was made: Let the Heauen bee created, and it was created. By his vvorde [also,] vvere the Starresverse, 48, established, & he knoweth the number of them. Yea; hee * counteth the number of thePsal, 147, 4. starres, and calleth them all by their names. At his commaundement [likevvise] theEccl{us}, 39, 17
water stoode as an heape: and at the word of his mouth, the vvaters gathered them∣selues. He also, hath shut the sea, in the midst of2. Esdras, 16 50. the vvaters: and vvith the vvorde of his mouth, hath hee hanged the earth vppon the waters. §. 3. Thy worde, ô Lord, saith Dauid, endu∣rethPsalm, 119. 89, 90, 91, for euer in heauen: thy truth also re∣maineth from one generation to another: thou hast layd the foundation of the earth, and it abideth. They continue euen to this day by thine ordinaunces, for all thinges serue thee. The Heauens are thine; the earth also isPsal, 89. 11 thine; thou hast layd the foundation of the World, and all that therein is. Thou spakest expresly in the first crea∣tion,2, Esdras, 6, 38. (euen the first day) and cōmaundedst that the Heauen & Earth should be made, and the vvorke followed thy word. &c. Vpon the second day, thou createdst the2, Esdr. 6, 41. heauenly ayre, and commaundedst it, that, going betweene, it should make a deuision betvveene the vvaters; that the one part might remaine aboue, and the other be∣neath.
Vpon the third day; thou cōmaundedst, that the waters should bee gathered toge∣ther2. Esd. 6, 42. in the seauenth part of the earth: sixe parts hast thou dryed vp, and kept them, to the intent that men might sowe, and oc∣cupie husbandy therein. Vpon the fourth day, thou createdst the2, Esdr. 6. 45. 46. light of the Sunne, and of the Moone, and the order of the Sarres: and gauest them a charge, that they should doe seruice, euen vnto Man that was for to be created. Vpon the fifth day, thou sayd'st vnto2, Esdr. 6. 47. 48. the seauenth part, where the waters vvere gathered, that it should bring forth beasts, as foules and fishes; and it was so. For, the dumme waters, and without life, brought foorth lyuing thinges, at the commaunde∣ment of GOD, that the Nations might prayse thy wonderous works. Vpon the sixth day, thou gauest com∣maundement2. Esdr. 6. 53 vnto the Earth, that before thee it should bring forth beasts, cattell, & creeping things. And besides this, Adam also, whomverse, 54, thou madest Lorde ouer all the workes vvhich thou hast created. Of him come wee all, and the people also whom thou hast chosen.
§. 4. Hee that liueth for euer, made al thingesEcclus. 18. 1, 2. together, (saith Sirach) the Lord, who on∣lie is iust: and there is none other but hee, and hee remaineth a victorious King for e∣uer. He ordereth the world with the power of his hande, and all thinges obey his will: for, hee gouerneth all things by his power, and deuideth the holie thinges frō the pro∣phane. O hovve delectable (saith he) are all theEcclus, 42, 22, 23, workes of God, and to be considered euen to the sparkes of fire: they liue all, and en∣dure for euer: and when soeuer neede is, they are all obedient. They are all double one against another,verse, 24, 25 he hath made nothing that hath any fault: the one commendeth the goodnesse of the other, and who can bee satis-fied with be∣holding Gods glory? For, all the workes of the Lord our GodEcclus, 39, 33, 34, are good, and hee giueth euery one in due season, and when neede is: So that a man neede not say this is worse then that, for in due season; they are all worthie praise. §. 5. The heauens declare the glory of God,Psal, 19, 1, 2, (saith Dauid) and the firmament sheweth
his handie worke: Day vnto day, vttereth the same, and night vnto night, teacheth knowledge. The Sunne also, a meruailous instru∣ment,Ecclus, 43, 2, 3, 4, when it appeareth, declareth at his going out, the worke of the most mightie God. At noone, it burneth the earth, and who may abide the heate thereof? It bur∣neth the mountaines three times more then hee that keepeth a fornace with continuall heate. It [likewise] casteth forth fierie va∣pours, and with shining beames it blindeth the eyes. Great is the Lord our God that made it,Eccl{us}. 43, 5, and by his commaundement hee causeth it to runne hastily. For, it turneth round about heauen, in1, Esdr. 4. 34 one day, and runneth againe into his owne place. The Moone also, hath hee made to ap∣peare,Eccl{us}, 43, 6. 7 according to her season: that shee shoulde be a declaration of the time, and a signe for the world. The remembrance of solemne feasts areverse, 8. appoynted by her: she is a light that dimi∣nisheth, and increaseth againe. The month is called after the name thereof: and shee groweth wonderously in her changing.
The Armie of Heauen also, is in theEccl{us}. 43. 9 height in the firmament of heauen: it gi∣ueth a cleere and glorious shine. This is the cleerenes of the starres, the beautifull ap∣parrell of heauen; and the ornament that shineth in the high places of the Lord. By the commaundement of the Holieverse, 10, one, they continue in their order, and not one of them faileth in his watch. Looke vpon the Raine-bow, and prayseEccl{us}, 43. 11 him that made it, very beautifull is it in the brightnesse thereof. It compasseth the heauen about vvith averse, 12, glorious circle, and the handes of the most High haue bended it. Through his commaundement also, heeEccl{us}. 43, 13 maketh the snowe to fall, and the thunder of his iudgement to smite speedily. At the worde of his mouth, the treasuresverse, 14, are opened, and the clowdes flee foorth as the fowles. For, in his power hath hee strengthenedEccl{us}, 43, 15 the clowdes; and by his might hath he bro∣ken the haylestones. The Mountaines melt at the sight ofverse, 16, him; and the South-winde bloweth accor∣ding to his will. The sounde of his thunder beateth theEccl{us}, 43, 17
earth, & so doth the storme of the North: The vvhirle-winde also, as byrds that flie, scattereth the snow; and the falling downe thereof, is as the Grashoppers that light vp∣on the ground. The eye meruaileth at the beautie of theverse, 18, whitenes thereof, and the heart [of man] is astonished at the raine of it. Hee also, poureth out the frost vpon theEccl{us}, 43, 19 earth like salt, and when it is frosen, it stick∣eth on the toppes of pales. When the colde North-winde blovveth,verse, 20. an Ice is frosen of the vvater, and it abideth vpon all the gatherings together therof: & couereth thē ouer, as it were with a breast∣plate. It [likewise] deuoureth the mountaines,Eccl{us}. 43. 21 and burneth the Wildernesse, and destroy∣eth that, that is greene, like fire. But, the remedy of all these, (saith Sirach)verse, 22, is when a clowde commeth hastily: and when a dew commeth vppon the heate, it refresheth it. §. 6. VVith all manner of liuing beastes, (as the vviseman saith) hath the Lord our GodEccl{us}, 16, 30 couered the face of the earth; and they shal all be turned into it againe.
In the desert [likewise] hath hee made2, Esdras, 16, 52, 53, springes of vvater, and Pooles vppon the toppes of Mountaines, to poure out floods frō the high Rocks, to water the ground. Yea, he hath made Man also, and put his hart in the midst of his body; and giuē him breath, life, and vnderstanding. So that among all the vvorkes of God,Augustine. his creation of Man (as S. Augustine saith) is the cheefest, and hath the most princi∣pall, or first place. For, in creating all other creatures butAmbrose. Man, hee saide, FIAT: Let this be, and that be; but, in creating Man, hee spake in the person of the Trinitie, saying; FACI∣AMVS, Let * vs make Man, according to our similitude. &c. (But, heere by the way, vvee ought thus much to vnderstand; that Man, as BezaBeza.  saith, is the Image of God, neyther as tou∣ching his body, neyther yet as touching his soule; but as touching the principalitie and dominion, that God hath giuen him. For, GOD calleth the principality andChrisostoms. lordship that he gaue to Adam, his Image and likenes; because hee made him Empe∣rour & Ruler, ouer all things vpon earth.
Besides, the Image of Almighty God, in Man, is referred, as S. Augustine saith, vn∣toAugustine. the workes of righteousnesse, and true sanctification of our liues. As the speech of God himselfe importeth in the Law, where he sayth: Be * ye holy; because I the LordLeuit, 19. 2. your God am holy. And, the very wordes likewise of the A∣postle, testifie asmuch vnto vs, vvhere hee saith: * Put yee on the new man, vvhichEphe, 4, 24 after God is created vnto righteousnes, and true holines.) Moreouer; God hath created Man, as S. Bernard saith, foure seuerall waies. TheBernard. first, without Man and Woman, as Adam out of the earth. The second, of man with∣out woman, as Eue of Adams ribbe. The third, of man & woman, as we are all now borne into the world. The fourth and last, of a virgine without man, as Christ our Sa∣uiour, of the blessed virgine Mary. And, of all the creatures of GOD vn∣der the Sunne, (saith Lyra) there is noneLyra. more noble and greater then Man: for, all things in the VVorld are ut vnder his power.
§. 7. O Lord, how manifold are thy workes!Psalme, 104. 24, 25, (saith Dauid) in wisedome hast thou made them all; the earth is full of thy riches: so is the sea, great & wide; for, therin are things creeping innumerable, both small beastes and great. There goe the shippes, and the Leuia∣thanverse, 26. also, whom thou hast made to play therein. They that saile ouer the Sea, tell of theEccl{us}, 43, 24, 25, perrils thereof, and when we heare it with our eares, we meruaile thereat: For, there be strange and wonderous workes; diuers manner of beastes; and te creation of Whales. Yea; such men see the vvorkes of thePsalm, 107, 24, 25. 26, 27, &c. Lord, & behold his wonders in the deepe. For, hee cōmaundeth and rayseth the stor∣mie winde, and it lifteth vp the waues ther∣of. They mount vp to the heauen, and descend downe to the deepe, so that theyr soule melteth for trouble. They are tossed to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and all their cunning is gone. Then they cry vnto the Lorde in theyrverse, 28, 29 trouble, and he bringeth them out of theyr distresse. He turneth the storme to calme,
so that the wau ereof are still. When they are quieted, they are gladde;verse, 30. and he bringeth them to the Hauen where they would be. Let them therefore confesse before theverse, 31, Lord, his louing kindnesse, and his vvon∣derfull workes before the sonnes of men. And let them exalt him in the congrega∣tionverse, 32, of the people, and prayse him in the assembly of the Elders. For, by his word, hee stilleth the vvinde:Eccl{us}, 43, 23 and by his counsel he appeaseth the deepe, and planteth Ilands therein. §. 8. Beholde, (saith Salomon,) the vvorke ofEcclesi. 7. 15 GOD: for, vvho can make straight, that which he hath made crooked? I know, saith hee, that whatsoeuer GodEcclesi. 3. 14 shall doe, it shall be for euer; to it can no man adde, and from it can none diminish: for, God hath doone it, that they shoulde feare before him. §. 9. Among the Gods, saith Dauid, there isPsalm, 86, 8, none like vnto thee, ô Lorde: neyther is there any that can doe like thy workes. Thou hast made thy wonderfull workesPsalm, 40 5. so many, that none can count in order to
thee, thy thoughts towards vs: I vvoulde declare and speake of them, (saith hee) but they are moe then I am able to expresse. §. 10. VVho can, (as the Psalmist saith) de∣clarePsal, 106, 2, the noble actes of the Lorde [our God?] or shew forth all his prayse? Which made heauen; & earth; the sea;Psa, 146, 6, and all that therein is. [And,] which kee∣peth his fidelitie for euer. VVhich [also]verse, 7, executeth iustice for the oppressed: and giueth bread vnto the hungry.Psalme, 147 8, 9, Which couereth the heauē with clowdes, and prepareth raine for the earth, and ma∣keth the grasse to growe vpon the Moun∣taines. Which giueth to beasts their foode, and feedeth the young Rauens that cry vn∣to him. Prayse him, & magnifie him as much asEccl{us}, 43, 30 ye can yet doth hee far exceede: exalt him with all your power, and be not weary, yet can ye not attaine vnto it. Neither may the number of his workes be counted. For, * his works, are wonder∣full:Eccl{us}, 11, 4, his works are glorious: secrete & vn∣knowne are his workes among men. And * wee haue seene but a few thereof.Eccl{us}, 43, 32 Eccl{us}, 16, 21 For, the most * part of them are hid.
§. 11. To finish therfore this first poynt; I will say, as Iesus the sonne of Sirach saith: As for the wondrous works of the Lord, thereEcclus, 18, 5, 6. may nothing be taken from them; neither can any thing be put vnto them; neyther may the ground of them be found out. But vvhen a man hath done his best, hee must beginne againe: and when hee thinketh to come to an end, he must returne againe to his labour. Also; * when vve haue spokenEccl{us}, 43, 27 much, vvee cannot attaine vnto them: But this is the summe of all, that GOD is all. Hee [onely,] hath set his works in goodEccl{us}, 16, 26 order frō the beginning; and part of them hath he sundred from the other when hee first made them. Hee hath garnished them for euer, andverse, 27, 28 theyr beginnings so long as they shall en∣dure: they are not hungry, nor wearied in theyr labours, neither cease from their of∣fices. None of them hindereth another; neither was any of them disobedient vnto his words. For, all his workes are exceeding good,Eccl{us}, 39, 16 and all his commaundements are doone in due season.
A man neede not to say; VVhat is this?Eccl{us}. 39, 21 VVherefore is that? For, hee hath made all things for their owne vse. Yea; hee [alone,] hath garnished the ex∣cellentEccl{us}. 42, 21 vvorks of his vvisedome. And, he is frō euerlasting to euerlasting, & for euer: vnto him may nothing be added; neyther can hee be diminished: hee hath no neede of anie Counseller.
¶ What Man is by nature: how short and vn∣certaine the dayes of his life are: And howe sure it is, that after this life ended, we must all appeare before the Iudgement seate of God, to receiue, euery man his wages or reward, accor∣ding to the works which he hath doone in this life. WISDOM. 2. verse, 23. 24. God created Man without corruption, and made him after the Image of his owne likenes; Neuer∣thelesse, through the enuy of the deuill, Death came into the world. ¶ Of Man: and of his naturall incli∣nation. §. 1. WE reade in the third of Genesis, that when Almightie GOD pronounced the heauie sen∣tence of his great displeasure, conceiued against our first Father Adam, for tasting the fruite of the forbidden Tree, hee closed vp the end of his speech with this Period; telling Adam, that (as concer∣ning his body) hee was created of no better thing then the very dust of the earth: andGene. 3. 19. that into dust he should be turned againe.
VVee reade also, that the Prophet Da∣uid, in the 144. psalme, demaunded of God this question, saying; Lord, what is Man,Psal. 144. 3. that thou regardest him? or the sonne of Man, that thou thinkest vpon him? And, being sufficiently instructed by the holy Ghost, hee presently giueth aunswere in the same place to his owne question, say∣ing: * Man is like to vanitie; his dayes areverse, 4. like a shadow that vanisheth. §. 2. VVhat is Man? saith Sirach, WheretoEccl{us}. 18. 7 serueth hee? What good or euill can hee doe? Surely, all Men are vaine by nature: andWisd. 13. 1. are ignorant of God. Euery Man is a beast by his own know∣ledge.Iere, 10, 14. And in his best estate, hee is altogetherPsalm, 39, 5, vanitie. §. 3. By one Man, namely, by Adam, (saythRom, 5, 12. the Apostle) sinne entred into the world. And, by nature, wee are all the chyldrenEphe, 2, 3, of vvrath. For euerie man from his youth is giuenEccl{us}. 17, 14 to euill: and theyr stonie hearts cannot be∣come flesh.
§. 4. I know, ô Lord, (saith Ieremie) that theIere, 10. 23, way of Man is not in himselfe, neyther is it in Man, to walke and to direct his steps. The heart of Man purposeth his vvay;Prou. 16, 9. but the Lord doth direct his steppes. For, the steppes of man, are ruled by theProu. 20, 24 Lord: hovve can a man then vnderstand his owne wayes? Yea; the Kings hart [also,] is in the handProu. 21. 1. of the Lord: and as the Riuers of vvaters, he turneth it wheresoeuer it pleaseth him. §. 5. A mortall man, (saith Sirach) hath but aEccl{us}, 18, 29 dead heart. And his naturall inclination leadeth himRom, 7, 23. captiue vnto the law of sinne. The imagination of mans heart [also] isGene, 8, 21. euill, euen from his youth. Yea; al the imaginations of the thoughtsGene, 6, 5, of mans hart, are onely euill continually. And, like as when one sifteth any thing,Eccl{us}. 27, 4. the filthines of that which he sifteth, remai∣neth in the bottome of the Siue: so the vn∣cleannesse of man, continueth still in his thought. For, the very hart of man, is defiled andArnobius. vncleane: and all manner of sinnes com∣mitted
by man, proceede from thence; as from a Fountaine full of all euill and mis∣chiefe. For, euery sinne committed, is con∣ceiued first in the heart, and afterward fini∣shed in the word or fact. Yea; from thence, euen out of the heartMarke, 7, 21 22, 23. of man, proceede euill thoughts; adulte∣ries; fornications; murthers; thefts; coue∣tousnes; wickednes; deceit; vncleannesse; a wicked eye; backbyting; pride; foolish∣nesse. All these things, come from within, and defile a man. §. 6. Man is borne in iniquitie, (saith Dauid)Psalm, 51, 5, and conceiued in sinne. For, the Corne of euill eede, hath beene2, Esdr. 4▪ 30 sowne in the heart of Adam, from the be∣ginning. And, in many things we sinne all.Iames. 3, 2. §. 7. Certainly, saith Salomon, there is no manEcclesi. 7. 22 iust in the earth; that dooth good, and sin∣neth not. For, wee haue already prooued, that all,Rom, 3, 9. 10. both Iewes and Gentiles, are vnder sinne. As it is vvritten; There is none righteous: no, not one.
If we say, we haue no sinne; we deceaue our selues, and the truth is not in vs. [Nay1. Ioh. 8. 10, more,] If we say, we haue not sinned, vve make God a lyer: and his vvord, [or doc∣trine] is not in vs. For, vvho can say, I haue made my hartProu, 20, 9, cleane: I am innocent from my sinne? Seeing] all men are gone out of the way:Psalm, 14, 3, they are all corrupt; there is none that doth good; no, not one. § 8. What is man, (saith Iob) that hee shouldIob, 15, 14, be cleane? and hee that is borne of a Wo∣man, that he should be iust. Behold, God founde no stedfastnesse inverse, 15, 16, his Saints; yea, the heauens are vncleane in his sight: howe much more then, is man abhominable & filthy, which drinketh ini∣quitie like water. Behold, God founde no stedfastnesse inIob, 4, 18, 19, his seruaunts, and layd folly vpon his An∣gels; how much more, in them that dwell in houses of Clay, whose foundation is in the dust, which shall be destroyed before the Moth? The Moone also, and the starres, are vn∣cleaneIob, 25, 5, 6. in the sight of GOD, howe much
more, man, a vvorme? euen the sonne of man, which is but a vvorme? §. 9. Verilie, (saith Esdras) there is no man a∣mong2, Esdr. 8, 35. them that be borne, but hee hath doone wickedly: nor any among the faith∣full, which hath not done amisse. For, there is no man that sinneth not.2, Chr. 6. 36. But as in euery Pomegranate, there is somePlato. graine rotten: so is there no man, but hath some euill condition. Yea; vvhat soule so-euer is borne in theOrigen. flesh, it is vndoubtedly defiled, with the filth of wickednesse and sinne. And, mans hart also, is so sette vpon euil,Ierome. euen from his child-hoode, that the nature of man, is not one day from his birth, free without sinne. §. 10. VVee haue all, (as Esay saith) been as anEsay, 64, 6, vncleane thing: and all our righteousnesse, is as filthy and polluted clowtes. Yea, such is the corruption of our vvic∣ked nature, (by reason of originall sinne re∣ceiued by discent from our first Father A∣dam) that * we are not able of our selues, to2, Cor, 3, 5, thinke any [good] thing, as of our selues: but our sufficiencie, is of God.
And, it is he that worketh in vs, both thePhilip, 2, 13, * will & the deede; euen of his good plea∣sure. For, vvee, of our selues, haue neyther li∣bertieAugustine. nor abilitie to doe the will of God: but are subiect to sinne, and shutte vp vn∣der the burden thereof. And, euer since that free will hath beeneGregory. corrupt in our first father Adam, vvee are not able to wil any good thing; except we be holpen by the grace of God. All manner of euill, we are indeede mostMusculus. prone to practise, and ready to runne into by nature: but it is God onely, that direct∣eth our minde to goodnesse; and giueth vs the grace to doe well. Yea; all the knowledge that wee haue ofCaluine. Gods holy vvill, and our obedience there∣vnto, commeth onely by the grace and fa∣uour of God towards vs: vvho teacheth vs by his Word; giueth vnderstanding by his Spirit; and frameth our harts, through his gracious assistance, to obey him. VVee ought therefore, to boast of no∣thing;Cyprian. because vvee haue nothing of our ovvne that is good. For, the first man Adam, hauing a wic∣ked2, Esdr. 3, 21 hart, transgressed, and was ouer-come:
and so are all they that are borne of him. Vpon which consideration also, of mans infirmitie, through Adams fall, vvee finde that the holy man Esdras, in the 7. chapter of his second Booke, (euen as it were in the anguish of his hart) vehemently cryeth out, saying; O Adam, what hast thou doone?2, Esdr. 7, 48. For, in that, that thou hast sinned, thou art not fallen alone; but the fall also redoun∣deth to vs that come of thee. And; by reason that Adam hath sinned,Augustine. through his owne free will, (saith S. Augu∣stine,) hee hath thereby cast both himselfe, and all that come of his stocke into neces∣sitie. So that [now againe] if wee liue well, orAugustine. that wee vnderstand aright, wee haue it of God: of our selues wee haue nothing but onely sinne; that is within vs. And surely, deserued paine, [through A∣damsAugustine. fault,] would bring al men into euer∣lasting death: vnlesse the vndeserued grace of God, [through fayth in Christ] deliue∣red some from it. §. 11. All men, in the first man, namely Adam, vvere created of God, (saith S. Ambrose)Ambrose. without vice, or fault; & all our nature was
sound, and in health: but by the sin of the same man, we haue lost it. Also; We say truly, in affirming, that theAugustine. first man onely could fulfill that he would, when as yet his free-vvill of choyse vvas sound, and whole, before the fault. But man misvsing his free-will, lost bothAugustine. himselfe, and his will. The first man, vvas created in nature,Augustine. without blame in nature: without fault, he was created vpright: he did not make him selfe vpright: It is knowne what hee made himselfe; falling out of the hande of the Potter, he was broken. For, hee that made him, did gouerne him, but hee was willing to forsake him that made him, and God suf∣fered him so to doe, as it were, saying thus: Let him forsake me, that he may find him∣selfe; and that he may by his misery proue, that without mee, he can doe nothing. By this meane therefore, would God shew vn∣to man, what free-will is able to doe vvith∣out God. Free-vvill before the fall of Adam, vvasAugustine. an vpright free-will: before which, fire and water was layde of God, and the first man did reach his hand vnto which hee would: hee did choose fire, & forsooke vvater. See
therefore the righteous Iudge; the same which man beeing free, did choose, he did receiue; hee would haue euill, & the same did follow him. We had free-will before sinne, to workeChrisostome. well, but after sinne we had none; because we were not able by our owne power and strength, after sinne, to escape from the power of the deuill. But as a ship when the sterne is broken, is driuen hether and the∣ther where the tempest will: so by the de∣uill wee are driuen from one sinne to ano∣ther; neither hetherto can vvee doe any thing, but euen as the deuill will. And ex∣cept GOD doe deliuer vs with the strong hand of his mercie, we shall remaine in the bonds & chaines of sinnes vnto death. For, by our owne willes and negligence wee are bound; but it is onely by the mercies of al∣mighty God, that wee are loosed, and set at libertie. §. 12. No man can beleeue, hope, or loue; vn∣lesseAugustine. he will; (saith S. Augustine) yet euen the selfe same will, to beleeue, hope, and loue, commeth not of our selues, but from God.
Wee (indeed) thinking, beleeue; think∣ing, we speake; thinking, we doe whatsoe∣uerAugustine. we doe: But, as touching that, that ap∣pertaineth vnto the way of godlinesse, and true vvorship of God, wee are not able to thinke any thing, as of our selues; but our ablenesse commeth of God. For, our own harts, and our owne thoughts, are not in our owne powers. Also; that we should beleeue in GOD, & liue godly; it lyeth not in the wil or run∣ningAugustine. of man, but in the grace and mercy of God: Not, that we ought not, both to wil, and to runne; but, because that God him∣selfe, (by his holy Spirit) doth worke in vs, both to will, and also to runne. §. 13. Mans naturall free will then, vve doe ve∣rilyMaxentius. beleeue (saith Maxentius) is of no more value, but onely for carnall or worldly de∣sires: or such deseruings, which possiblie may seeme glorious among men, but not with God. For, those things which belong vnto euerlasting life, we can neither thinke, neither will, neither desire, neither per∣forme; except it be by the infusion and o∣peration of the holie Ghost.
Besides; our prayers are alwayes madeAmbrose. in vaine; if it be in our owne free-wil, to do what we will. Let no man (therefore) flatter himselfe;Augustine. for, of his owne, hee is a very sathan: hee hath that of GOD onely, whereby hee is blessed. §. 14. There is a sentence in Salomons Pro∣uerbs, where the Wiseman thus speaketh, saying; * The preparations of the hart, areProu, 16, 1, in man: but the aunswere of the tongue, is of the Lord. Vpon which wordes, S. Augustine thusAugustine. writeth. Some, not vnderstanding thys place wel, are deceiued, insomuch that they beleeue, that to prepare the hart, that is, to beginne goodnesse, without the helpe of the grace of God, pertaineth vnto man. But God forbid, (saith he) that the chyl∣dren of promise should so vnderstand it, as though thereby they woulde confute the Lord, whereas they haue heard him, saying; * Without mee, yee can doe nothing. AndIohn, 15, 5, say, Behold, we are able of our selues to pre∣pare our hart, & by that to think som good∣nes. God forbid that any man should vn∣derstand
it so; saue the proude defenders of their will. For, therefore it is written: It is the mans part to prepare the hart, & the aunswere of the tongue is of the Lord; be∣cause the man prepareth the hart: yet for all that, man cannot prepare his hart, with∣out the helpe of God. For, God dooth so worke in the harts of men, and in their free will it selfe, that euery good thought, good counsaile, and all good motions of the will or minde, is of God. Hee doth first preuent vs with his grace,Gregory. that wee may be willing, (to leaue euill, and doe good,) and afterward, with his helping hand also he doth folow vs, least we should will in vaine. Yea; It is God that worketh in vs, bothAugustine. to will, & also to worke. We will then, but it is God that worketh in vs, euen to vvill. We work then, but it is God also that doth worke in vs, the worke; euen freelie, of his own good will. It is expedient for vs, both to beleeue this, and also to confesse this. This is godly; this is true, that our confes∣sion may be humble, and lowly: and that all goodnes may be ascribed vnto GOD alone.
No man can come vnto me, saith Christ,Iohn, 6, 44, except the Father which hath sent mee, draw him. Neither can any man say, that Iesus is the1, Cor, 12, 3 Lord, but by the holy Ghost. For, to beleeue, is the gift of God. AsMat, 16, 17, Christes owne wordes testifie vnto Peter, where he sayth; * Blessed art thou Simon, the sonne of Ionas: For, flesh and bloode hath not reuealed this vnto thee, but my Father, which is in heauen. Also, It is written in the Prophets: AndIohn, 6, 45. they shall be all taught of GOD. Euery man therefore, that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, commeth vnto me. Yea;] All that the Father giueth mee▪Iohn, 6, 37,  shall come to mee: and him that commeth vnto mee, I cast not away. §. 16. Moreouer;] Except a man be borne a∣gaine,Iohn, 3, 3. saith Christ, hee cannot see the king∣dome of God. That is, as our Sauiour himselfe expoun∣deth it: Except that a man bee borne of Water, and of the Spirit, hee cannot enter into the kingdome of God.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh:Iohn, 3, 6, and that, that is borne of the Spirit, is Spi∣rite. A man can receiue nothing, except it beIohn, 3, 27. giuen him from heauen. §. 17. Why doe men [then] presume so muchAugustine. of the possibilitie of nature? (saith S. Au∣gustine) seeing it is wounded; it is ang∣led; it is troubled; it is lost. It behoueth vs rather, truly to confesse it, then falsely to defend it. For▪ in our flesh the euill lurketh; andBullenger. out of vs iniquitie ariseth. Whereupon, the Apostle in his Epistle to the Romaines, saith; * I know, that in mee, that is, in myRom, 7, 18, 19. flesh, dwelleth no good thing. For, to wil, is present with mee: but I finde no meanes to performe that which is good. For, I do not the good thing, which I would, but the euill▪ which I would not, that doe I. Also, it furthermore seemeth, that the ve∣rie cōsideration of this our weake & sinfull nature, where-vnto we are yoked, was the only cause, which enforced the same Apo∣stle, within 5. verses following, vehemently to breake forth into these speeches, saying:
O wretched man that I am; vvho shall de∣liuerRom, 7, 24. mee from the body of this death? But comforting & recouering himselfe, through faith in his Redeemer, he present∣ly maketh this reply in the next verse after, saying: * I giue thanks vnto God, throughRom. 7, 25. Iesus Christ our Lord. For, hee deliuereth vs from the wrath of1, The. 1. 10 God to come. And GOD hath giuen vs the victorie1, Cor. 15, 57. through him. Yea; the victory is wholely gotten in hisAugustine. Name, that hath taken man vpon him, and hath liued without sinne: that in him, and through him, being both the Priest & the Sacrifice, remission & forgiuenes of sinnes should be obtained and giuen. That is to say, by the Mediatour of GOD and Man, that man Iesus Christ, by whom the purg∣ing of our sinnes beeing made, wee are re∣conciled vnto God. For, men bee not se∣perated from God, but by sinnes; whereof the purging is not made, or which are not purged in this life, by our owne vertue and strength, but by the mercie of God: by his pardon & clemencie, and not by our own power. For, the same small vertue and strength, that is called ours, is graunted and
giuen vnto vs, by the mercifull goodnesse of Almightie GOD. Thus much, onely to shewe vvhat Man is of himselfe by nature. ¶ Of the shortnesse and vncertaintie of Mans life. §. 1. IT followeth next to be cōsidered what the life of Man is; and so consequently, how short and vncertaine the same. To beginne therefore first with Mans life, vve finde in the fourth of S. Iames, that the Apostle doth not there compare, or liken it to smoake; but plainly saith, * It is euenIames, 4, 14. a vapour [or smoake▪] that appeareth for a little time, and afterward vanisheth awav. We read also in the second Booke of Sa∣muell, that the subtile woman of Tekoah, pleading with King Dauid for the recon∣cilement2. Sam. 14. 4 of his sonne, compareth the life of Man to no better thing then water spilt vp∣pon the ground: which being once down, can neuer be gathered vp againe. Besides; the Prophet Esay, with the a∣fore-said S. Iames, & S. Peter, doe all three
agree in one sentence about the life of man,Esay▪ 40, 6. lames, 1. 10. 1. Pet. 1, 24, saying; * All flesh is grasse; and the glorie of man, is as the flower of grasse. Euen as a flower of the fielde, so flori∣shethPsalm, 103, 15, 16. Man; for, the winde goeth ouer it, and it is gone: and the place thereof shall know it no more. §. 2. Man, that is borne of a woman, saith Iob,Iob. 14, 1, 2. is of short continuaunce, and full of trou∣ble: hee shooteth forth like a flower, and is cut downe; he vanisheth also as a shadow, and continueth not. The daies of his life are determined; & theIob, 14, 5. number of his monthes are known to thee, ô Lorde: thou hast appointed him his boundes, beyonde the which hee cannot passe. §. 3. The time of Mans life, (saith the Psal∣mist)Psal, 90, 10, is threescore yeeres and tenne: and if they be of strength, foure-score yeeres: yet their strength is but labour & sorrow: for, it is cutte off quickly, and we flee away. If the number of a Mans dayes doe a∣mountEccl{us}. 18. 8, to an hundred yeres, it is very much. And, no man liuing, hath any certaine knowledge of his death.
But, euen as fishes, when they think thē∣seluesEcclesi. 9. 12 in most safetie, are taken vvith the hooke: and as birdes are caught in a snare, when they thinke nothing lesse: so death suddainly smiteth men in an euill season, when Granado. they are least mindfull of any such matter. §. 4. Now, if we consider, by the authoritie of these few former places onely, what, and hovve short the life of Man is; seeing the longest terme thereof, (according to the saying of the Psalmist) passeth not three∣score and tenne, or foure-score yeeres: (for, all the rest, if any mans life be drawne a lit∣tle longer, is but labour and sorrow:) andGranado. abate out of this, (saith Granado,) the time of our infancie, vvhich is rather a lyfe of beasts then men; and withall, the time that we spend in sleep, at which instant we haue not the vse of our sences and reason: vvee shall finde, that this life of ours is a great deale shorter then it seemeth vnto vs. For, wee cannot well reckon the time of our infancie for any part of our life; be∣cause the life of infancie, when we are not yet come to the vse of reason, (which only sheweth vs to be men) is as it were the lyfe
of a young Goate, that goeth wantonly a∣bout, leaping and skipping, in diuers pla∣ces at pleasure. And especially, because we plainly perceiue, that in all that age, there is nothing either learned or doone, that may well beseeme the dignitie of a man. And, as for the time we spend in sleepe, that may much lesse, bee counted any part of our life; seeing it is the cōmon custome of men, to sleepe the third part of the day and night, which is eyght vvhole howres. VVhere-vppon it followeth, by thys ac∣count, that the third part of our life is con∣sumed in sleepe; and so consequently, that during that time, we doe not liue. Besides all this, if wee doe compare thys life of ours, with the eternitie of the life to come, (which endureth euerlastingly,) we shall finde, that it vvill scarcely seeme so much as a minute. Very well therefore, and aduisedlie, did that Philosopher write, vvho likened the life of man to lightning; which cōtinuethCrates. but a flash: and the largest date of his daies, to no longer abiding then a bauens blaze. And, with good consideration also, dyd that Wiseman silently make aunswere, who beeing demaunded what he thought of the
life of man? Suddainly turned himselfe a∣bout, before them that asked the question,Solon. and presently departed out of their sight. Giuing them thereby to vnderstand, that our life is no more but onely a turne about, and of short continuance. §. 5. Short is Mans life; (saith Aurelius,) andMar. Aur. vpon very short and suddaine vvarning, we are commaunded to leaue the Worlde, to close our eyes, and to follow the common course of death. Yea; assoone as thou art borne to pos∣sesse the earth, incontinent Death issuethBasill. out of his Sepulcher to finde thee: and, al∣though thou art vncertaine, and knovvest neyther when nor where he will meet thee, yet must thou remember, that alwayes, and in euery place he seeketh for thee. And, when thy last howre is come, neces∣sitiePolion. carrieth thee hence; though thou bee neuer so much vnwilling to depart. For, Death is a thing that cannot beePythagoras. eschewed; and therfore it ought of all men the lesse to be feared. §. 6. VVhat man liuing in this vvorld, (saithThales. Thales) can eyther by his power or policie
preuent the suddaine stroake of death? or vvho can assure himselfe of so much cer∣taintie, as to performe tomorrow, what he left vndone to day? For, man hath no as∣surance of his owne life; but liues vncer∣taine of his last howre, finding nothing in this world that he may boldly leane or trust vnto. Hee vvanders alwayes vp and downeSocrates. among most vncertaine and doubtfull chaunces, onely comforting his mind with hope; but neuer knowing certainlie vvhat shall befall him, or howe, when, or where, he shall leaue his carkasse. When hee goeth out of his house, hee isSeneca. not sure to returne into the same againe: and when he entereth into his house, hee is asmuch vncertaine to goe foorth againe. Likewise, when he sitteth downe to meate, he knoweth not that he shal rise vp againe, and lying down in his bed at night, he can∣not promise to come safe from thence the next morning. But this thing onely, of all other in theDemonax. world, is most certaine to man, that death is common to all; though to some one way, and to some another.
§. 7. Lastly; if we well weigh with our selues, how fraile, short, and vncertaine the life of man is, we shall finde small cause to blame Zerxes that great King of Persia for wee∣ping; whē from the toppe of an high Hill hee behelde his whole Army, and fell into this remembrance with himselfe, that with∣in fewe yeeres following, there should not one man among so many thousands in that huge company, be left aliue. With as little reason also, may vvee re∣proue Thales the Philosopher, for saying: The life of man, is no more but euen as it were the shooting of a starre, that passeth at a trice, and is quickly gone out of sight: and, within a little vvhile after, the verie signe thereof which was left behind, vani∣sheth out of sight also. So fareth it vvith man; For, within few daies after he is dead, the very remembrance of him dyeth with his life, though the party (in this worlde) were neuer so great and honourable. Besides; this is very certaine, that there isSalust. nothing in this tottering world among mē, perpetuall; nor any thing firme & stable: but all thinges passe & repasse continually, like vnto the ebbing & flowing of the Sea.
And, all things at the last, haue an end byMar. Aur. Death; saue onely Death himselfe: whose end is vnknowne. For, black vglie Death, maketh al thingsAugustine. subiect to the rigour of his Law. And, as there is nothing among men,laeto. more certaine then death; so is there no∣thing more vncertaine to man, then the howre of his death. ¶ Of the many miseries happening to Man in this life. §. 1. GReat trauaile, saith Sirach, is createdEcclus, 40, 1, 2, 3, 4. for all men, and an heauy yoake vp∣pon the sonnes of Adam, from the day that they goe out of theyr Mo∣thers vvombe, till the day that they be bu∣ried in the earth, the common Mother of all things. Namely, theyr thoughts, and theyr feare of hart; theyr imagination of the thinges they waite for; and the day of theyr death. Euen from him that sitteth vpon the glori∣ous throne, vnto him that is lowest, & the most simple vpon earth. From him that is
gorgiously arrayed and weareth a Crowne,Ecclus, 40. 5, 6, 7, 8, &c. euen vnto him that is but homly, & porelie clothed: there is nothing but wrath, enuie, trouble, vnquietnesse, and feare of death; with rigorous anger and strife. Also, in the time of night, vvhen Man should take his rest vpon his bed, the sleep changeth his vnderstanding and knovv∣ledge: so that little or nothing is mans rest in his sleepe, as well as in the day of his la∣bour. For, hee feareth, and is disquieted in the vision of his hart; like vnto one that runneth out of a battaile. And, when all is past, he awaketh out of his sleepe, and meruaileth that the feare was nothing. Such things as these, happen vn∣to all flesh, both man and beast: but seuen times more vnto the vngodly. And this also, is the state or condition of Mans life, sette downe by the holy Ghost himselfe in the booke of Iob; That whileIob. 14, 22. man liueth, he shall be sorrowfull: and, so long as his soule is in him, it shal mourne. Onely the Sunne, the Moone, the starres,Marlorate. the Sea, & the Land, are pleasant; because they are by nature beautifull: but all other thinges are doubtfull, and greeuous. And, Man aboue them all; for, if any good thing
happen vnto him, hee feeleth (vndoub∣tedly) there-withall, som inward sorrowe and discontentment. Yea; the whole life of man, is of it selfe aMenander. most greeuous thing: ful fraught with mi∣serie; and continually accompanied vvith innumerable cares and griefes. So that it is counted no better thing, butPlato. euen a miserable fetter, which chayneth the pure and euerlasting soule, to the vile, sin∣full, and corruptible body. §. 2. Certainly, (saith Hermes) God hath soHermes. ordained for man-kinde, that vvee should liue in care: For, wee see by often experi∣ence, that among all things liuing & moo∣uing vpon earth none is more miserable or wretched, then Man. All manner of beastes, are (during thysMenander. life) farre more happy & wiser then man: For, behold the Asse of beasts, no doubt a most simple and miserable creature; yet hath hee no harme through his owne de∣fault, saue what doth hap to him by nature. But wee, besides our naturall euils, dailie procure vnto our selues many other: For, vvee are angry for euery little misfortune;
displeased at euery euill worde; amazed at euery strange chaunce; and afraid of euerie shadowe. Yet is there none either so great an Ora∣tour,Plato. or so mightie an Enchaunter as the life of Man is; for, it subtilly perswadeth vs the contrary of that which wee often both see in others, and feele in our selues: For, notwithstanding that we knowe our owne frailetie, and that wee must die; yet vvhat wrongs, what hatreds, what labours of the body, and molestations of our minde, doe we greedily deuise, and daily begin afresh? euen as it were in hope, or rather full assu∣raunce of so much time of life, as shall be sufficient to finish our determinations, and suffer vs to enioy the desired fruite of our enterprises. Rightly therefore saith the Phylosopher,Socrates. that the cheefe cause of all euils that hap∣pen to man, is man him-selfe: for hee, through his greedy lusts, and couetous de∣sires, is both troublesome to himselfe, and offensiue to all other creatures. VVhat a shame and folly is it then, forTheophr. men to complaine of God, for the short∣nesse and many miseries of their life, when as they themselues, through riot, malice,
contention, murder, and vvarres, make it much more shorter, and fuller of troubles then otherwise it would be, both in them∣selues, and sundry other men. §. 3. If man would consider well his life, saithMarcus Au∣relius. Aurelius, hee should surely finde that there is nothing in it, but trouble of hart, vexati∣on of minde, combersome businesse, and carefull thoughts. One while, prouiding things necessary to defend the body from cold; another while seeking meanes needfull, to protect it from too much heat. To day diligent, in casting plots which way hee may best augment his wealth; to morrow circumspect▪ howe hee may safely keepe, the goods which he hath alreadie gotten. Sometime, very prouident for the foode of his belly; next, altogether mindfull, for clothes to his backe. In the day time, molested with a thousand cogita∣tions; in the night time, disquieted vvith fantasies and visions. So that hee is neuer apt of himselfe, toBias. keepe any meane or measure in his actions, concerning either gladnesse or sorow: but is continually driuen and carried away by the violence of affection; sometime vvith
compassion; and sometime with rage and furie; euen as his desire present doth ouer∣rule and gouerne him. VVhereby it is manifest, that miseries inHerodotu. this world haue power ouer man: not man ouer miseries. And sooner shall vvee want teares to la∣ment,Senec. then cause of sorrowe to complaine, during this life. Wherefore; if we reckon our life by theMelancthon. yeeres of nature, howe long wee may liue; wee shall finde the time very short: but if we count it according to the cōtinuall cares and troubles therein, we shall thinke it too too long. And surely, were it not for the hope weeBernard. may haue heere, to attaine at last to the kingdom of heauen, this life of ours would seeme little better then the life of hell it selfe. §. 4. O life, (saith Pythagoras) how, or whichPythagoras. way may a man gette from thee, vvithout deaths helpe? Thy euils are infinite; and no man is perfectly able, either to auoyde or to abide them. For, there is no kinde of life in this world,Menander. but it may be exceedingly discommended,
as hauing in it no notable, vvoorthy, or ho∣norable thing: but all mingled with frailty, weakenes, and many molestations. VVhat life then should a man leade? Abroad, that is to say in offices, he is oftentimes combe∣red with strifes, and many troublesome ac∣tions: at home, he is vexed with greefes: in the fielde, wearied with labours: on the sea, molested with feare: in wandering or our∣nying, if it be voyde of perrill, yet shall hee finde it painfull and tedious. Art thou a maried man? then canst thou not liue without cares. Art thou vnmaried, then is thy life vaine & solitary. Hast thou chyldren? they bring with them many sor∣rowes. Hast thou none? the want of them makes thy life seeme vnpleasant. Art thou a young man? youth is wanton, wilde, and foolish. Art thou an olde man? age is fro∣ward, weake, and feeble. §. 5. Alas, alas, (saith the vveeping Phyloso∣pher)Heraclitu. how many are the miseries. & strange the calamities, that diuers wayes happen to men in this life? One, beeing in the mor∣ning in wealthy estate, is by some suddaine accident, ere night, made miserably poore and neede; wofully bewayling the losse of
his children, wife, and goods. Another, la∣menteth the lacke of his health, libertie, or necessary liuing. A third, labouring for his liuing, mayneth himselfe by mischaunce with his owne working-toole, whilst hee is earnestly plying his busines. The idle person, is pined vvith famine, bitten with dogs, imprisoned and whipped in euery good Towne. The gamster, brea∣keth his leg in dauncing, his stones in vaul∣ting, his lunges in running; his arme, his shoulder, or his necke in wrestling. The adulterer consumeth himselfe with botches and filthy lepry. The dicer, is sud∣dainly stabbed in with a dagger. The stu∣dient, is continually troubled vvith the rewme, or the gowte. VVhat man is free from the strokes of theeues and murthe∣rers? or from the woundes, slaughters, and violence of souldiers? Besides all these, wee often see iust & in∣nocent men wrongfully punished; impri∣soned; banished; and some-time put to a shamefull kinde of death. Chyldren are smothered in the cradle, fall into the fire, are drowned in the vvater, ouer-run vvith beastes, poysoned with Spyders, murthe∣red, plagued, or infected with the corruptiō
of the ayre. And besides these also, we are subiect to diuers sicknesses, and casuall mis∣haps; as falling of houses, dearth, famine, thunderbolts, lightning, floods, and many moe troublesome chaunces, vvhich sud∣dainly light vpon all mankind indifferent∣lie. The consideration whereof, caused Ari∣stotleAristotle. to say; That Man is the patterne of frailety; the spoyle of time; the play of for∣tune; the image of inconstancie; the tryall of enuie and misery; and all the rest of him fleame and choller. ¶ Of the causes why God suffereth man to be so much subiect to misery. §. 1. THE many miseries happening toGranado. man in this life, are ordained of God, (saith Granado) as a punishment for our sinnes, and a meanes to vvith∣draw our harts from the inordinate loue of this present world. Yea, the very cause (saith he) why God would haue vs to be so often molested and vexed in this life, is, that wee might the more willingly forsake it; and
sigh continuallie for the true life, vvhich is only to be enioyed in the world to come. For, little reckoning would we make, &Hrmes. small regard would we haue, of the blessed life of the soule, which it entereth into after it is parted from the body, if this life had a∣ny certaine pleasure in it. Wherefore, hee that thinketh to liue inPlato. this world without labour and sorrowe, is a foole: for, GOD hath so appointed our state, that we, by vertue of our soule, should suffer, & subdue all kinde of aduersities. Yea; God hath purposely ordained, theEuagoras. greefes, miseries, & sorrowes of this life, to be so many and so great; and the pleasures thereof so small and fewe: to make vs the more desirous of the heauenly life, which is nothing els but ioy and pleasure. And surely, it seemeth by the speech of the Apostle, that he knew well which was the better choyse of the twaine; vvhen hee said: * I desire to be dissolued, [or loosedPhilip. 1, 23, from this flesh,] and to be with Christ: which is best of all. For, we know (saith he) that if our earth∣ly house of this tabernacle be destroied, we2, Cor, 5, 1, 2 haue a building giuen of God: that is, an house not made with hands, but eternall in
the heauens. And therefore doe wee sigh, desiring to be clothed vvith our house which is from heauen. §. 2. These things being thus, ô howe happieRauisius. were it nowe (saith Rauisius) for vnhappie man, if forgetfulnesse deceiued him not, to remember the sickle estate of his life: both how short it is, and also how full of miserie, vanitie, and woe: an approued exile, and hath nothing in it permanent. But is euen a continuall conflict, strife, &Mar. Aurl, warre; a wandering wildernesse, and a vale of wretchednesse; wherin we are continu∣ally compassed, with most terrible, fierce, and feareful enemies: to the deadly woun∣ding, sleying, and ouer-throwing, both of body and soule into hell. All these miseries considered, why should man then haue any desire to liue in this wretched world, & to abide in such a loth∣some and laborious life? VVere not death much rather to be desired? VVere not the howre of death much better then the con∣tinuaunce of such a life? For, to the godly, death is no death, but rather the most hap∣pie messenger, and quick dispatcher of all such displeasures: the end of al trouble and
sorrow: the bedde of all rest: the doore of good desires: the gate of gladnesse: the port of Paradice: the hauen of heauen: the entrance to felicity: the manumission from all griefe and misery: and the beginning of euerlasting ioy and blessednes. Death therefore, ought rather to be desi∣redHrmes. then despised: for, it changeth vs from this world of vncleanenes & shame, to the pure world of worship and worth: From this transitory life, to life euerlasting: from a worlde of folly and vanities, to a worlde of wisedome, reason, and truth: and from a world of trouble, trauaile, and paine, to a world of rest, comfort, and consolation. Let each man therfore wisely consider ofPacuuius. his own estate: let him also feare to offend the maiestie of Almightie God: and not feare the day nor howre of death: but al∣wayes abide with patience his appoynted time: and vvhen hee perceiueth that his turne is come, let him giue thanks vnto his Maker for his change.
¶ Of the parting of the soule from the bodie: and of the immortalitie thereof. §. 1. TO all thinges (saith Salomon) thereEccles. 3, 1. 2 is an appointed time; and a time to euery purpose vnder the heauen: a time to be borne, & a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck vp that vvhich is planted. For, here haue we no continuing Citty:Heb. 13, 14, but we seeke one to come. All flesh waxeth old as doth a garment;Eccl{us}. 14. 17 and this is the condition of all times: Thou shalt die the death. For,] vvhat man is he that liueth, & shalPsal, 89, 48. not see death? Sith that law is generall, which cōmaun∣dethSalust. to be borne and to die. §. 2. All things that are of the earth, (saith Si∣rach)Eccl{us}, 40, 11 shall turne to earth againe: and they that are of the waters, shall returne into the Sea. But the soule or spirit of man [being im∣mortal]Eccles. 12. 7 shal returne vnto God that gaue it.
For, as the beginning of our creation cō∣methAristotle. from GOD, so it is meete, that after death, our soule returne vnto him againe. §. 3. GOD hath created (saith Beda) threeBeda. kindes of liuing Spirits; the first incorpo∣reall, proper to Angels onely: the second, couered ouer with flesh, but not mortall, or dying there-with; that is, the soule or Spi∣rite of man, dwelling in his body: the third, carnall, and dying with the flesh; namelie, the spirite or life of beastes. The soule of man (also) beeing onceAugustine. made, shall surely endure for euer, eyther in the body, or out of the body: For, it should neuer beare the name, to bee made according to the Image of Gods own like∣nesse, if it might possibly be enclosed in the bonds of death. §. 4. The most precious & excellent creatureHermes. that God hath created here on earth, (saith Hermes) is man; & the most worthy thing in him, is his soule or spirit: vvhich ende∣uouring in this life to follow goodnes, shall after death be rewarded with eternal glory. For, this is to be beleeued, that the soulesSocrates. of good men, so soone as they are foorth of
the bodie, they passe speedily into a better life; but the soules of the wicked, goe from this world to a worse. If death were the dissoluing both of bo∣diePlato. and soule, then happy were the wicked, which beeing once ridde of theyr bodie, should also for euer after be ridde of theyr soule and wickednes: but forasmuch as it is euident, that the soule is immortall, there is no comfort left for the vngodly to trust in. For, the immortalitie of the soule, exclu∣deth all hope from the wicked, and esta∣blisheth the good in theyr goodnes. §. 5. By the iustice of God, (saith Plato) thePlato. soule must needes be immortall: and ther∣fore no man ought to liue carelesse or neg∣ligent thereof. For, though the body die, yet the souleSolon. dieth not; but by the stroke of death, it passeth foorth of the body, into another world, more swiftly thē any bird that flieth. Yea; the soules of all men (doubtlesse)Socrates. are immortall: but the soules of the godlie, are both immortall and diuine. Wherefore, if thy soule be good, theBasill. stroke of death cannot hurt thee: for thy spirit shall thereby liue blessedly in heauen.
§. 6. But for better proofe of this matter, then the speech of any Philosopher in the world can affoord, we finde it plainly affirmed in the Gospell of S. Luke, by the testimonieLuke, 16, 22, 23. &c. of Truth it selfe, that the soule of Lazarus, was no sooner out of his body▪ but it vvas immediatly carried vp by the Angels into Abrahams bosome. Contrariwise, the soule of Diues▪ after his death was speedily borne to hell torments. The first, to ioy & plea∣sure: the last, to paine & greefe. Betweene which two places also, there is such a great gulfe or swallowing pit sette, that there can∣not possibly be any passage from one of them to the other. Saint Iohn likewise witnesseth in the Re∣uelation, that whē the 5. seale of the bookeReue. 6. 9. of God was opened, he saw vnder the Al∣ter in heauen, the soules of them that were killed heere on earth, for the word of God, and for the testimonie of his truth. And, to shew that they liue there, he fur∣ther addeth in the next vese folowing, that they cryed vnto God, with a loude voyce,verse, 10, saying: Howe long Lorde, holy and true, tariest thou to iudge & auenge our blood, &c.
King Salomon also, in his booke of wis∣dome affirmeth, that the soules of the righ∣teousWised. 3. 1. 2, 3, 4. are in the hande of God, and no tor∣ment shall touch thē. Though in the sight of the vnwise (saith hee) they appeared to die, and their end was thought greeuous, and their departing from vs destruction; yet they rest in peace: and though they suffer paine before men, yet is theyr hope full of immortality. §. 7. Besides these former places of holy scrip∣ture, wee finde also diuers other proofes in the booke of God, concerning this poynt: as namely, the hopefull speech of Dauid; vvho when newes was brought him, that his base-borne child (for whom hee fasted, prayed, and wept) was dead, hee lamented no longer, but presently washed his handes and called for meate. And being demaun∣ded2, Sam, 12. 23. the reason thereof by his seruants: hee aunswered; I shall goe to him, but he shall not returne to mee. Also; when old Tobias was derided of his kinsfolkes and acquaintance, and scof∣finglyTobie, 2. demaunded by thē, where his hope was, for the which he had doone almes and buried the dead, (considering he was now,
euen after the finishing of a good vvorke, suddainly smitten blinde?) hee, nothing there-with dismayed, confidently rebuked them, saying; Say not so; for, wee are the children of holy men; and looke for the life, which God shall giue vnto them that neuer turne their beleefe from him. The same Tobias also at another time, to witnesse vnto the worlde vvhat confident hope hee alwaies had of the soules immor∣talitie, earnestly requested of the Almigh∣tie,Tobie, 3, 6, that his spirit might be taken from him, and that his body might be dissolued and become earth. The like may be read in the prayer of E∣lias, whē he desired to die, saying: ô Lord,1, Reg, 19, 4 I pray thee take my soule, for I am no bet∣ter then my Fathers. &c. §. 8. And to shew yet a little further, that it re∣steth in the power of God to take the soule from the body, and to giue it againe at his pleasure; vvee finde in the first Booke of Kings, that the fore-said Elias, found such1, Reg, 17, 22, 23. fauour in the sight of God, that vvhen the sonne of his hostesse was dead, he through his earnest prayer obtained that the childes soule was restored to him againe.
So did Elisha, in the same manner, ob∣taine2, Reg, 4, 32, 33. his peticion of the Lord, and reuiued the dead body of the Shunamites sonne. We reade also in the Gospell written by S. Mathew, that after our Sauiour had gi∣uen vp the Ghost, the Scpulchers of deadMath, 27, 52, 53. men, (through the miraculous working of the Almightie) opened themselues; and many bodies of the Saints which slept, a∣rose, and came foorth of the graues after his resurrection; and vvent into the holie Citty, and appeared vnto many. So that by these sayings and examples,Gene, 5, 24. 2, Reg, 2, 1 Num, 16, 32, 33, (with the taking vp of Henoch and Elias both body and soule into heauen, the swal∣lowing downe of Corath, Dathan, and A∣biram, quicke into hell,) and sundry other proofes in the Booke of God to this pur∣pose, we may sufficiently assure our selues, that the soule of Man is immortall: & that there is not onely a place of rest ordayned of God for the godly; but also, a lothsome pitte, or place of punishment, appointed by him for the wicked, after this life. The veritie whereof, is likewise further witnessed vnto vs by the wordes of S. Au∣gustine,Augustine. where he sayth; The soules of the godly, beeing separated from their bodies,
are in rest: and the soules of the vngodlie doe suffer punishment; vntill such time as the bodies of the righteous doe rise againe vnto life euerlasting; and the bodies of the vnrighteous vnto eternall death: which is also called the second death. ¶ Of the first Iudgement after death, called by Diuines particuler Iudgement: when the soule of euery man (after it is parted foorth of his body) shall presently receiue sentence from God, eyther of eternall ioy, or euer∣lasting payne. §. 1. IT is appointed vnto men, (saith the A∣postle)Heb, 9, 27, that they shal once die; and after that commeth the iudgement. For, wee must all appeare before the Iudgement-seate of Christ, that euery man2, Cor, 5, 10 may receiue the workes which are done in his body; according to that he hath done: whether it be good or bad. Also, at the very houre of death, the souleCyprian. must render vp a particuler account vnto God, concerning all her doings in this life: and then shall it be iudged, & knowe assu∣redly, what shall become of it for euer.
If it finde fauour in the sight of God, itBasill. shal presently enter into the rest and ioy of the righteous: if otherwise, it shall be con∣dēned by the Iudge to perpetual torments. Yea;] Of euery idle vvorde, that menMath. 12. 36 shall speake in this life, they shal giue an ac∣count at the day of iudgement. For, GOD will bring euery worke intoEccles. 12. 14. iudgement; with euery secret thing, whe∣ther it be good or euill. Hee vvill render vnto man according toIob, 34, 11. his worke: and cause euery one to finde according to his way. That is, to them which by continuaunceRom, 2, 7, 8, in well dooing, seeke glorie, and honor, & immortalitie, shall be eternall life: but vn∣to them that are contentious and disobey the truth, and obey vnrighteousnesse, shall be indignation and wrath. Tribulation and anguish [also] shall beRom, 2, 9, 10, vpon the soule of euery man that doth euil, of the Iewe first, and also of the Grecian▪ But to euery man that doth good, shall be glory, and honour, and peace. &c. §. 2. Againe, so soone as the soule of man, saithAugustine. S. Augustine, is parted frō the body, it pas∣seth presently to the tribunall seate of God,
vnder the custodie both of good and euill Angels: and after it hath there abidden the triall of a straite examination, it shall forth∣with receiue the sentence, either of eternall blessednes, or els, of endlesse vvoe and mi∣serie. Yea; euery one of vs shall giue accountsRom, 14, 12, of himselfe to God. And, euery man shall receiue his wages1, Cor, 3, 8. [or reward] according to his worke. But in most happy state, shall the soulesBeda. of all the godly bee, after theyr departure hence; vvho (through grace giuen them from GOD) haue earnestly in this life resi∣sted euill, and followed goodnes: for, they shall then enter into that place of perpetu∣all happines, which Christ their Captaine hath prepared for all the companie of the faithfull, in the kingdome of his Father. And, thus much likewise witnesseth the words of S. Iohn in the Reuelation, where hee sayth; * Blessed and holy is hee, thatReue. 20, 6 hath part in the first resurrection: for, on such the second death hath no power. Blessed [also] are the dead, which here∣afterReu, 14, 13 die in the Lord: euen so saith the Spi∣rite; for, they rest from theyr labours, and theyr workes follow them.
¶ Of the last Iudgement after death: com∣monly called the general iudgement, or Doomes day: When the body and soule of euerie Man departed out of this life, beeing (by the power of God) ioyned againe together, shall (with the rest of all mankind then liuing) receiue the finall sentence, either of eternall pleasure or paine. §. 1. AFter death (saith Esdras) shall the2, Esdras, 14. 35. day of Iudgement come, vvhen we shall liue againe; and then shall the names of the righteous be made ma∣nifest, and the workes of the vngodly shall be declared. And, many of them that sleepe in theDan, 12, 2. dust of the earth, shall awake; Some, to euerlasting life: and som, to shame and perpetuall contempt. §. 2. But, before the comming of this day, (saith Christ) there shall be great warres &Luke, 21, 10, 11. troubles in the worlde: For, Nation shall rise against Nation, and Realme against
Realme. There shall also be great Earth∣quakes in diuers places, and pestilence, and hunger, and fearefull things appearing frō heauen; and many other great signes and wonders. There shall be signes in the Sunne, andLuke, 21. 25, 26, in the Moone, and in the starres: and vpon the earth trouble among the Nations with perplexitie. The Sea and the waters shall roare, and mens harts shall fayle them for feare, and for looking after those thinges which shall come on the World. For, the powers of heauen shall be shaken. §. 3. After this, shall appeare the signe of theMath. 24, 30. sonne of man in heauen: and then shall all the kindreds of the earth mourne. Then [also] shal the wicked goe into theEsay, 2, 19, holes of the Rockes, and into the Caues of the earth, frō before the feare of the Lord, and from the glory of his Maiestie, vvhen he shall rise to destroy the earth. Then shall they beginne to say to theLuke, 23, 30 Mountaines, fall on vs; and to the Hils, co∣uer vs, & hide vs, from the presence of him that sitteth vpon the throne; and from theReue, 6, 16, 17, wrath of the Lambe: for, the great day of
his wrath is come, and who can stand? In those dayes, men shall seeke death, andReue, 9, 6. shall not finde it; and shall desire to die, & death shall flee from them. And they shall see the Sonne of manMath. 24. 30 come in the clowdes of heauē, with power and great glory. Who (beeing ordained ofActs. 10, 42, * God to be the Iudge both of the quicke and deade,) shall sende his Angels vvith aMat. 24, 31. great sound of a trumpet, and they shal ga∣ther together his Elect, from the 4. windes, and from the one end of heauen vnto the other. §. 4. Then shall Christ sitte vpon the throneMath, 25, 31 32, 33. of his glory: and before him shall be gathe∣red all Nations; and he shall seperate them one from another, as a sheepheard sepera∣teth the sheepe from the goates. And hee shall set the sheepe on his right hand, and the goates on the left. The shall the earth restore those that2, Esdr. 7, 3. haue slept in her, and so shall the dust, those that dwell therein in silence: and the secret places shall deliuer the soules that were cō∣mitted vnto them. And they shall come foorth that haueIohn, 5, 29. doone good, vnto the resurrection of life;
but they that haue done euill, vnto the re∣surrection of condemnation. For, Christ our righteous Iudge, vvillMath. 16. 27 then giue to euerie man according to his deedes. And reward euery one, accordingReue, 22, 12 as his worke shall be. Hee will then say to the righteous whomMath, 25. 34, 35, &c. hee hath placed on his right hand; Come yee blessed of my Father, inherite yee the kingdom prepared for you from the foun∣dations of the world. For, I was hungry, & ye gaue mee meate; I was thirstie, and yee gaue me drinke; I was a stranger, and yee lodged mee; I was naked, and yee clothed mee; I was sick, and yee visited me; I was in prison, and yee came vnto mee. Then shall the iust say, Lord, when haue we doone these things vnto thee? And the King shall answere; Verily, when you did them to the least of my bretheren, you did them to mee. Then will he say to the wicked, standingMath. 25, 41, 42, &c. on his left hand: Depart from me yee cur∣sed, into euerlasting fire, which is prepared for the deuill and his Angels. For, I vvas hungry, and ye fed mee not; I was thirstie, and ye gaue mee no drinke; I was a stran∣ger, and ye lodged mee not; I was naked,
and you clothed me not; I was sicke, & in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also aunswere, saying; When, ô Lord, haue wee seene thee hun∣gry, or thirstie, or a stranger, or naked, or sicke, or in prison, and haue not ministred vnto thee? And he shall aunswere; Truly, I tell you, inasmuch as yee haue not doone it to one of the least of these my bretheren, yee did it not to mee. And these men shall goe into euerlasting paine; and the righteous into life eternall. §. 5. Miseries (saith Esdras) shal then vanish a∣way;2, Esdr, 7▪ 33 34. and long suffering shall haue an end. Iustice onely shall cōtinue: the Truth shal remaine; and Faith shall be strong. The worke shall follow, and the rewardeverse, 35, shall be shewed: the good deedes shall be of force; and vnrighteousnes shal beare no more rule. For, the day of Iudgement, shall be the2, Esdr. 7, 43. end of this world, and the beginning of the immortalitie to come; wherein all corrup∣tion shall cease. Then shall no man bee able to saue him2, Esdr. 7. 45, that is destroyed: nor oppresse him that hath gotten the victory.
§. 6. VVe finde in the New Testament, that Saint Paule the Apostle, vvriting to the Corinthians, to prooue the resurrection of the dead, and the second cōming of Christ, vseth many arguments to expresse the same: and neere vnto the end of his chap∣ter he thus concludeth. * Behold, I shewe1, Cor, 15, 51, 52, 53, you a secret thing; vve shall not all sleepe, [or die,] but wee shall all be changed, in a moment, in the twinckling of an eye at the last trumpet: for, the trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised vp incorrupti∣ble, and we shall be changed. For this cor∣ruptible, must put on incorruption: And this mortall, must put on immortality. &c. According also to the former part of the Apostles speech in the afore-saide chapter, (concerning the comming of Christ to iudgement; with the resurrection of mens bodies, and the immortality of the soule,) speaketh holy Iob, in the 19. of his booke, with a confident and perfect hope thereof, saying: * I am sure that my Redeemer li∣ueth,Iob, 19, 25, 26, 27, and that he shall stand the last on the earth. And though after my skin, wormes destroy this bodie, yet shall I see GOD in my flesh: whom I my selfe shall see, and
mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me; though my raines are consumed with∣in mee. The aforesaide S. Paule likewise, com∣forting the Thessalonians, with the remē∣brance of the resurrection of the body, and last Iudgement, saith thus; * I vvould not1. Thes. 4, 13. 14. 15. 16, &c. Bretheren, haue you ignorant, concerning them that are a sleepe; that ye sorrow not, euen as other which haue no hope. For, if we beleeue that Iesus is deade, and is risen; euen so them which sleepe in Iesus, vvill God bring with him. For, this say we vnto you by the worde of the Lorde, that vvee which liue and are remaining at the com∣ming of the Lorde, shall not preuent them which sleepe. For, the Lord himselfe shall descend from heauen with a showte, and with the voyce of the Archangell: & with the trumpet of GOD: and the dead in Christ shall rise first. Then shall we which liue & remaine, be caught vp with them al∣so in the Clowdes, to meet the Lord in the ayre: and so shall wee euer be vvith the Lord. By the testimony of vvhich places, it plainely appeareth, that at the last iudge∣ment, there shall not onely bee a generall
raysing vp of all mens bodies, (which from the beginning of the vvorld haue already departed out of this life,) but also, a suddain changing of all mens bodies then liuing on the earth: which change, shal be vnto them in sted of death. And then shal the saints of God, presently after the finall sentence frō Christ our Iudge pronounced, enter both body & soule into endlesse pleasure, & the wicked both body and soule into eternall paine. ¶ of the vncertaine time of the last Indgement. §. 1. NOvv, for that the time of this day is vncertaine, & the houre of Christes comming vnknowne; our Sauiour himselfe, & his beloued Apostles, haue therefore vouchsafed to leaue behind them many forewarning speeches, as a very necessary meanes to make vs more wary & watchfull of the same. Affirming that sud∣dainly, * and in an houre that we think not,Math, 24. 44 will the sonne of man come. But of that day and howre, saith Christ,Math, 24, 36 knoweth no man: no, not the Angels of
heauen, but my Father onelie. But as the dayes of Noe were, so likewiseMath. 24, 37, 38, 39, shal the comming of the Sonne of man be. For, as in the dayes before the floode, they did eate & drinke, marry, and giue in mar∣riage, vntill the day that Noe entred into the Arke, and knewe nothing, vntill the flood came, and tooke thē all away; so shal also the cōming of the sonne of man be. Likewise also, as it was in the dayes ofLuke, 17, 28, 29, 30, Lot, they eate, they dranke, they bought, they solde, they planted, they built; but in the day that Lot went out of Sodome, it rained fire & brimstone from heauen, and destroyed them all. After these ensamples shal it be in the day when the sonne of man is reuealed. At that day, he that is vpon the house, &Luke, 17, 31 his stuffe in the house, let him not come downe to take it out: and hee that is in the fielde likewise, let him not turne backe to that he left behind. Then two shall be in the fieldes, the oneMath. 24, 40, 41, 42. shall be receiued, the other refused: two women shall be grinding at the Mill, the one shall be receiued, and the other shal be refused. Watch therfore, for yee know not what houre your Maister will come.
Whether at euen, or at midnight: at theMar, 13, 35, Cock-crowing, or in the dawning. Of this be sure, (saith Christ) that if theMath, 24. 43, 44. good-man of the house knew at what time the thiefe would come▪ hee woulde surelie watch▪ & not suffer his house to be digged through. Therfore be ye also readie: for in the houre that ye thinke not, will the sonne of man come. If thou wilt not watch (saith hee) I vvillReue, 3, 3, come on thee as a theefe, & thou shalt not know what houre I will come vpon thee. §. 2. These, and sundry other such like spee∣ches, are set down in the New-Testament, as admonishments to forewarne vs; & ca∣ueats, to make vs careful how we spend our time, least at that houre wee be found with the fiue foolish Virgins vnprouided. For, * the day of the Lord will come as a theefe2, Pet, 3, 10. in the night; in the which, the heauens shal passe away with a noyse, and the elements shal melt with heate & the earth, with the works that are therein, shal be burnt vp. Seeing then that all these thinges must be2, Pet. 3. 11. 21, 13, 14. dissolued, what manner of persons ought we to be in holy conuersation & godlines: looking for, and hasting to the comming
of the day of God; by vvhich the heauens beeing on fire, shall be dissolued, and the elements shall melt with heate? But vvee looke for newe heauens, and a new earth; according to his promise, wherein dwelleth righteousnesse. Wherfore, beloued, seeing that yee looke for such things, be diligent, that yee may bee founde of him in peace, without spot, and blamelesse. &c. And take heede to your selues; least atLuke, 21, 34 any time your harts be oppressed with sur∣fetting and drunkennesse, and cares of this life, and least that day come on you at vn∣wares. For, as a snare shall it come on all themverse, 35, 36 that dwell on the face of the vvhole earth. VVatch therefore, and pray continually; that ye may be counted woorthy to escape all those thinges that shall come to passe: and that ye may stand before the Sonne of Man. And those things that I say vnto you, IMar, 13, 37, say vnto all men: vvatch. For,] blessed is that seruaunt, whom hisMath, 24, 46 Maister when he commeth, shall finde so dooing.
¶ Of Christ: Why hee came into the world: and of the profit vvee haue by his Death, Re∣surrection, and Ascention. IOHN. 17. verse, 3. To know GOD, and Iesus Christ whom he hath sent, is life euerlasting. ¶ Of Christ. &c. §. 1. AT sundry times, and in diuers man∣ners,Heb, 1, 1, 2, (saith the Apostle) God spake in the old time to our Fathers by the Prophets: in these last dayes, hee hath spoken vnto vs by his Sonne, vvhom he hath made heire of all things, by whom also he made the worlds. Who beeing the brightnesse of the glo∣rie,verse, 3, 4. and the ingraued forme of his person, and bearing vp all thinges by his mightie word, hath by himselfe purged our sinnes; and sitteth at the right hande of the Ma∣iestie in the highest places: and is made so much more excellent then the Angels, in asmuch as hee hath obtained a more excel∣lent name then they.
For, vnto which of the Angels said he atHeb, 1, 5, any time: Thou art my sonne, this day be∣gate I thee? And againe: I will be his Fa∣ther, and he shall be my sonne. Or,] vnto which also of the Angels saidHeb, 1, 13. he at any time; Sit at my right hande, till I make thine enemies thy foote-stoole? §. 2. By this man, (namely Christ,) vvere allColos. 1. 16, 17. things created, vvhich are in heauen, and which are in earth: things visible, and in∣visible: whether they be Thrones or Do∣minions, or Principalities, or Powers: All things were created by him, and for him: and hee is before all things, and in him all things consist. Hee is the heade of the bodie of theverse, 18, 19, 20. Church; hee is the beginning and the first begotten of the dead; that in all things hee might haue the preheminence. For, it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulnes dwell: and by him, to re∣concile all things vnto himselfe; and to set at peace through the blood of his Crosse, both the things in earth, and the thinges in heauen. Wherefore, God hath also highly exal∣tedPhilip. 2, 9. 10, 11. him, & giuen him a Name aboue euery
name, that at the Name of Iesus euery knee should bow, both of things in heauen, and things in earth; and things vnder the earth. And, that euery tongue shoulde confesse, that Iesus Christ is the Lord, vnto the glo∣rie of God the Father. For, in him, dwelleth all the fulnesse ofColos. 2, 9. the God-head bodily. And in him are hidde all the treasures ofColos. 2. 3. vvisedome and knowledge. Vnto him is all power giuen, both heauen and in earth.Math. 28. 18 For, the Father loueth the Sonne, andIohn, 3, 35, hath giuen all things into his hand. The Father iudgeth no man, but hathIoh, 5, 22, 23 committed all iudgement vnto the Sonne, because that all men shoulde honour the Sonne, as they honour the Father. In his hand also, are the keyes both of hellReu, 1, 18. and of death. And, hee [likewise] hath the key of Da∣uid,Reue. 3. 7. which openeth, and no man shutteth: and shutteth, and no man openeth. §. 3. VVherefore, if any man be willing toIohn, 14, 6. come vnto God, our Sauiour Christ de∣clareth himselfe to be the Way, the Truth,
and the Light: and, that no man commeth vnto the Father, but by him. Hee is the doore; by him if any man en∣terIohn, 10, 9, in, he shall be saued: and shall goe in, & goe out, and finde pasture. He is the true light, which lighteth eueryIohn, 1, 9, man that commeth into the world. He is that preuailing seed of the woman,Gene, 3, 15. which vvas promised in Paradise by God the Father vnto Adam, that hee shoulde breake the head of the deuill. He is that spirituall Rock, of whō all our1, Cor. 10. 3. Fathers did eate and drinke. He is acknowledged and openly confes∣sedMark, 5, 7. by his greatest enemy, to be the Sonne of the most high God. Yea; hee is confirmed by a voyce fromMath, 3, 17 heauen, to be that beloued sonne, in whom God the Father is well pleased. Hee is that sonne whom Dauid vvillethPsalm. 2, 12, vs to kisse and embrace; least he be angry, and we perrish from the right way. Hee is the Lord of Lordes, and King ofReue, 17, 14 Kings: and they that are on his side, are called, and chosen, and faithfull. Hee is the Lambe of God, which takethIohn, 1, 29. away the sinnes of the world. Hee is that kinde & louing Samaritane,Luke. 10, 34
which healed the wounded man, that was found in the high-way halfe dead. He is that gentle and compassionate So∣ueraigne,Math, 28, 27 which freely forgaue his seruant the tenne thousand talents that hee owed vnto him. He is that cheefe corner stone, vvhichActs, 4, 11, the Iewes (counting themselues builders) refused. He is the Mediatour of the Newe-Te∣stament.Heb, 12. 24. He is the end of the Lawe for righteous∣nesse,Rom. 10. 4. vnto euery one that beleeueth. Hee is the onely Mediatour betweene1. Tim, 2. 5. God and man. He is [both] the power of God, and the1, Cor. 1. 24. wisedome of God. He is our wisdome, and righteousnesse,1, Cor. 1. 30 sanctification, and redemption. He is that Lord of life, whom God hathActs, 3. 15. raised from the dead. Hee * is our peace. And the * Prince ofEphe. 2. 14. Heb, 2. 10. our saluation. He is the Sheepheard and Bishop of our1, Pet. 2. 25. soules. He is the Vine, & we are the branches.Iohn, 15, 5, Heb, 6, 20. He is our high-priest for euer, after the order of Melchisedecke.
Hee is our Aduocate vnto God the Fa∣ther.1. Ioh, 2, 1, Hee is the reconciliation for our sinnes:1, Iohn, 2, 2, & not for ours onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole world. Finally; hee is the Authour and finisherHeb, 12, 2. of our fayth. For, without him, we can do nothing.Iohn. 15. 5. §. 4. If any man thirst, (saith Christ) let himIohn, 17, 37, come vnto mee and drinke. Hee that beleeueth in mee, as sayth theverse, 38, Scripture, out of his belly shall flowe riuers of water of life. I am the light of the world; hee that fol∣lowethIohn, 8, 12 mee, shall not walke in darknesse, but shall haue the light of life. I am the bread of life; hee that commethIohn. 6. 35, to me, shall not hunger: and he that belee∣ueth in me, shall neuer thirst. I am that liuing bread which came downIohn, 6, 51, from heauen; of whom whosoeuer eateth, hee shall liue for euer. I am the resurrection & the life; hee thatIohn, 11, 25, 26. beleeueth in me, though he were dead, yet shall hee liue: and whosoeuer liueth & be∣leeueth in mee, shall neuer die.
¶ Of Christes comming into the worlde: and the seuerall causes thereof. §. 1. WEe, when vvee were children, saith the Apostle) were in bon∣dageGala▪ 4, 3, 4, 5. vnder the ordinaunces of the world. But when the fulnes of time was come, GOD sent foorth his Sonne, made of a vvoman, & made bond vnto the law, to redeeme them which were bond vnto the law: that we [through elec∣tion] might receiue the inheritance that belongeth vnto the naturall sonnes. §. 2. Man liued in the worlde for a time (saith S. Augustine) without the Lawe written;Augustine. to teach him, that he was not a law to him∣selfe: and a certaine time vnder the Law, to make him finde by proofe, that he was not able to performe it. But afterwards, GOD (through his great loue and mercy) sent his onely Sonne Christ into the vvorld, both to fulfill the Lawe, and also, to offer grace vnto man; vvhich remained as it were vp∣pon a scaffold, where hee saw nothing but death, ready to deuoure him.
Christ came also at such time, as learning did most florish, & when the greatest Em∣pireAugustine. was in the cheefest pride: to the ende, that all worldly wisedome, should acknow∣ledge it selfe to be foolishnes, & all power weakenesse, before him. Yet came he not to bee serued, but toMar. 10, 45 serue: & to giue his owne life for the raun∣some of many. Hee came [likewise,] not to destroy theMath, 5, 17 Law or the Prophets; but to fulfil them. Neither came hee to destroy mens liues,Luke, 9, 5. but to saue them. For, God sent not his Son into the world,Iohn, 3, 17, that he should condemne the worlde; but that the world throgh him, might be saued. And this is a true saying, & by al meanes1, Tim, 1, 15 woorthy to be receiued, that Christ Iesus came into the vvorld to saue sinners. §. 3. It was a matter greatly standing with theIerome. iustice of God, (saith S. Ierome) that Christ should come into the vvorld, and become man for vs; because, that in the same nature whereby GOD was offended, in the same nature likewise shoulde satis-faction bee made: sinne was committed in mans na∣ture, and therefore it was necessarie that
Christ should come in mans nature, to ap∣pease the wrath of God for sinne. And forasmuch also, as by the right ofChrisostome. creation, euery man is bound in conscience to fulfill euen the very rigour and extremi∣tie of the mortall Law, but man beeing fal∣len from his first estate, was no way able to obserue it: therefore, it was requisite that Christ should come, & become man, that in mans nature hee might fulfill all righte∣ousnes which the Law doth exact. §. 4. Christ came into the world (saith Becon)Becon. both true God, & true man; God, of God his Father, from before the beginning of all time; and man of vs: borne of the kindred of Abraham & Dauid, according to Gods promise. Yea, true and naturall man, made of our fleshe, and of our blood; this alone excepted, that we receiued our nature with sinne, and in sin, & by naturall coniunction, but Christ receiued his humanitie, of his Mother Mary, the blessed Virgine, with∣out sinne, & without the company of any man; onely by the operation of the holie Ghost. For, by the salutation of an Angell, theGregory. Worde, entred the vvombe; and straight
the Worde in the wombe became flesh. And, the same Worde beeing made flesh,Iohn, 1, 14, dwelt among vs; and wee sawe the glorie thereof, as the glory of the onely begotten Sonne of the Father, full of grace and truth. §. 5. Furthermore, it greatly behooued (saithCaluine. Caluine) that the sonne of God, should be∣come for vs Emanuell: that is, God with vs: & that in this sort; that by naturall ioyning, his God-head and nature of man, might grow into one together; otherwise, neither could the neerenesse be neere enough, nor alliance strong enough for vs to hope by, that God dwelleth vvith vs: So great vvas the disagreement betweene our filthines, & the most pure cleanenes of God. And, although man had stoode vndefiled with∣out any spotte, yet vvas his estate too base, to attaine vnto GOD, without a Medi∣atour. Besides; it was no meane thing that theCaluine. Mediatour had to doe: for, it was so to re∣store vs into the fauour of God, as to make vs, of the children of men, the chyldren of God: of the heires of hell, the heires of the kingdome of heauen. And who could do
this, vnlesse the sonne of God, were made also the sonne of man: & so take ours vp∣pon him, to conceiue his into vs; and to make that ours by grace, which was his by nature? Therefore it was for the same cause verieCaluine. profitable, that hee which shoulde be our Mediatour and Redeemer, should be both very God, and very man. It was his office to swallow vp death; who could doe that, but Life it selfe? It was his office to ouer∣come sinne; who could do that, but Righ∣teousnes it selfe? It was his office to van∣quish the powers of the worlde and of the ayre: who could doe that, but a Power a∣boue both world and ayre? Now, in whose possession is life, or righ∣teousnes, or the Empire and power of hea∣uen,Caluine. but in Gods alone? Therfore the most mercifull God, in the person of his onelie begotten sonne, made himselfe our Medi∣atour and Redeemer, when his will vvas to haue redeemed. And forasmuch therfore, as neither being onely God, he could feele death, nor being onely man, he could ouer∣come death; hee coupled the nature of man, with the nature of GOD; that hee might yeelde the one subiect to death, to
satisfie for sinnes: and by the power of the other, hee might wrastle with Death, and get the victory for vs. § 6. Christ came from heauen (saith Grego∣rie)Gregory. into a vvomans wombe; from a vvo∣mans wombe into a Cratch or Manger; from the manger, to the Crosse; from the Crosse, to the graue; & from the graue he went to heauen againe. Yea; hee by his incarnation came downeAmbrose. from heauen to vs: that wee, beeing made partakers of his grace, might ascend vp in∣to heauen by him. And, for this purpose appeared the Son1, Iohn, 3, 8. of GOD, that he might loose the works of the deuill. Which are, Fulgentius. sinne; death; and hell. He came [also,] that we might haue life;Iohn, 10, 10 and that we might haue it in aboundance. Finally;] hee came into the vvorlde, toLuke, 19, 10 seeke and saue that which was lost. And, not to call the righteous, but sin∣nersMath, 9, 13. to repentance. §. 7. Moreouer,] vvee knowe, (saith S. Iohn)1, Iohn, 5, 20 that the sonne of God is come; & hath gi∣uen vs a mind to know him, which is true:
and vvee are in him that is true; that is, in his Sonne Iesus Christ: this same is verie God, and euerlasting life. Yea; hee is come a light into the world;Iohn, 12, 46 that who soeuer beleeueth in him, shoulde not abide in darknesse. Hee hath [also] appeared, that he might1, Iohn, 3, 5. take avvay our sinnes: and in him is no sinne. Euery spirite [therefore] which confes∣seth1, Ioh, 4, 2, 3 that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God. And, euery spirit that confesseth not, that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God. ¶ Of the Passion: Death: Buriall: Resur∣rection: and Ascention of our Sa∣uiour Christ. §. 1. AFter that S. Peter had fully aunswe∣red the demaund of his Maister; byMath, 16, 16 20. cōfessing him to be Christ, the sonne of the liuing God: our Sauiour pre∣sently charged him, and the rest of the dis∣ciples, that they shoulde [as then] tell no man that he was Iesus the Christ.
And, from that time forth, hee began toverse, 20. shewe and fore-tell them of his Passion; Death; and Resurrection; saying: * TheMark, 8, 30, 31, sonne of man must goe vnto Ierusalem, & suffer many things of the Elders, and of the High-priests, and Scribes, & be slaine, and rise againe the third day. Also, in the 20. of Mathew, the ninth ofLuke, 9, 44. Marke, and the eyghteene of Saint Luke, besides sundry other places, he ceaseth not to instruct and perfect them in this poynt: bidding them * marke his words diligent∣lie. For, it shall come to passe, saith he, that the Sonne of man shall be deliuered into the hands of men. &c. Likewise, being in the way going towardMat, 20, 17, 18, 19. Ierusalem, hee tooke the twelue Disciples apart, and began againe to tell them, what things should come vnto him: saying; Be∣hold,Marke, 10, 32, 33, 34, we goe vp to Ierusalem, & the sonne of man shall be deliuered vnto the High∣priests,Luke, 18, 31, 32, 33, and to the Scribes; and they shall condemne him to death; and shall deliuer him vnto the Gentiles. And they shall mocke him, and scourge him, and spet vp∣on him, and kill him: but the third day he shall rise againe. * For, as Ionas was threeMat. 12. 40. dayes and three nights in the Whales belly,
so shall the sonne of man be three dayes & three nights in the hart of the earth. And, as Moises lift vp the Serpent in theIoh, 3, 14, 15 wildernesse, so must the Sonne of man bee lift vp: that who-soeuer beleeueth in him, shoulde not perrish, but haue euerlasting life. §. 2. After all these seuerall fore-tellings of his Passion, Iesus entered into Ierusalem, andMarke, 11, 11, 15. vvent into the Temple, and began to cast out them that sold and bought therein, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money-chan∣gers, and the seates of them that solde Doues. Saying vnto them: Take these thingesIohn, 2, 16, hence: make not my fathers house, a house of merchandise. For, it is written; My house shall be cal∣led,Mat. 21. 13. the house of Prayer; but ye haue made it a denne of theeues. Also, hee taught daily in the Temple.Luke, 19. 47, And the High-priestes, & the Scribes, and the cheefe of the people, sought to destroy him. But they coulde not finde vvhat theyverse, 48, might doe vnto him: for all the people hanged vpon him when they heard him.
§. 3. Then one of the twelue, named IudasMath, 26, 14, 15, Iscariot, vvent vnto the cheefe Priestes, and said; VVhat will ye giue mee, and I vvill deliuer him vnto you? And, when they heard it, they were glad,Mar, 14, 11, and promised that they woulde giue himMath, 26, 15, 16. money: namely, thirtie peeces of Siluer. And from that time he sought opportuni∣tie to betray him. §. 4. Now, hee that betrayed Iesus, had giuenMath. 26, 47. 48. them a token, saying: VVhom-so-euer I shall kisse, that is hee, lay hold on him. And, forth-with hee came to Iesus, and said; GOD saue thee Maister, and kissed him. Then the Bande, and the Captaine, andIohn. 18. 12. 13, 14. the officers of the Iewes, tooke Iesus, and bounde him, & ledde him away, to Annas first; for he was father in lawe to Caiphas, which was the high Priest that same yeere. And Caiphas was he that gaue counsell to the Iewes, that it was expedient that one man should die for the people. §. 5. The cheefe Priestes [therefore] and theMat. 26. 59. 60. 61. Elders, and all the whole Counsell, sought
false witnesse against Iesus, to put him to death: but found none. And though ma∣ny false witnesses came, yet founde they none whose witnes agreed together. But at the last, came two false witnesses, saying:Mark, 14, 56 57, 58, 59, VVee heard this man say; I will destroy this Temple of God made with hands, and within three dayes I will builde another, made without hands. But theyr witnes yet agreed not together. Then the high Priest stood vp amongstMath, 26, 63 64, 65, 66. them, and sayde vnto Iesus; I charge thee by the liuing God, that thou tell vs, if thou be Christ the Sonne of God. And, when Iesus had told him the truth of that which he asked, hee beleeued him not, but presently rent his clothes, saying; Hee hath blasphemed, what haue wee any more neede of witnesses? Behold, now yeMark. 14, 61 62. 63, 64. haue heard his blasphemy. What think ye? And they all condemned him to be vvor∣thie of death. §. 6. Then spate they in his face, and buffet∣tedMath. 26. 67 Luke 22, 63 64, 65, him. And * the men that helde Jesus, mocked him, and strooke him. And when they had blindfolded him, they smote him on the face, saying; Prophecie vnto vs, (ô
Christ) who is hee that smote thee. And many other thinges blasphemously spake they against him. Besides; when the morning vvas come,Mat, 27, 1, all the cheefe Priestes & Elders of the peo∣ple, tooke counsel against Iesus, to put him to death. And they led him away bounde, and de∣liueredverse, 2. him vnto Pontius Pilate the Go∣uernour. And, they began to accuse him, saying:Luke, 23, 2, Wee haue founde this man peruerting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, saying; That hee is Christ, a King. &c. §. 7. Pilate, after hee had examined Iesus, andLuke, 23, 4, 7. 11. 15. coulde finde no fault in him, sent him to Herod. Herod, with his men of warre de∣spised and mocked him: and arrayed him in white, and sent him backe againe to Pi∣late. Pilate, seeing nothing woorthy of death was done vnto Iesus by Herod, assembled together the Iewes, & demaunded of thē,Math, 27, 22, 23, what * hee should doe with Iesus, vvhich was called Christ? Then aunswered they all at once, saying: Let him bee crucified.
And, when he asked them, saying: What euill hath hee doone? they cryed the more vehemently: Let him be crucified. So Pilate willing to content the Iewes,Mark, 15, 15 loosed vnto them Barrabas, a malefactour, whō they desired; and after hee had scour∣ged Iesus, deliuered him vnto the Souldi∣ours, that he might be crucified. §. 8. The souldiours of the Gouernour, (ha∣uingMath, 27, 27 28, 29, Christ in theyr custody) led him into the Common-hall, and presently gathe∣red about him the whole Bande; and they strypped him, and put vppon him a Scar∣let robe. Then platted they a Crowne of thornes, and put it vppon his heade, and a Reede in his right hande, and bowed theyr knees before him, & mocked him, saying: God saue thee, King of the Iewes. They also spate vpon him, & smote himverse, 30, 31, on the heade with the Reede. And, after they had mocked him, they tooke the robe from him, and put his owne rayment on him, and led him away to crucifie him. And, as they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, named Simon; him they com∣pelledverse, 32, to beare his Crosse.
And, they brought him to a place na∣medMar, 15, 22. Golgotha: which is by interpretation, the place of Dead-mens skuls. * There theyIohn, 19, 18. crucified him, and two other with him, on either side one, and Iesus in the midst. This was done about the sixt howre, andLuke, 23, 44 there was darknes ouer all the Lande vntill the ninth houre. The Sunne was darkned, and the vaileverse, 45, 46 of the Temple rent through the midst. And Iesus cryed with a loude voyce, and sayd; Father, into thine hands I commend my spirit. And when he thus had sayd, hee gaue vp the Ghost. §. 9. Thus suffered our Sauiour (according to his owne fore-telling) many wrongs, in∣iuries, & reproches of his enemies, for our sakes. And, in the end, after all his vvhyp∣pings, buffettings, mockings, and reui∣lings, hee was * deliuered to death [vponRom, 4. 25. the Crosse] for our sinnes. Yea; hee was deliuered to death, by theActs, 2, 23, determinate counsell, and foreknowledge of God. Otherwise, it had not been in the power of his enemies to depriue him of life. For,
no man could take his life from him: but he layd it downe of himselfe. For he, [be∣ingIohn, 10, 18. both God and man,] had power to lay downe his life; & power to take it again. Yet, forasmuch as he came downe from heauen, not to doe his owne will, but the * will of God which sent him; hee (there∣fore)Ioh, 6, 38, vvillinglie gaue * himselfe for our sinnes: that hee might deliuer vs from thisGala, 1, 4. present euill world, according to the will of God, euen our Father. And that, by his suffering; hee mightIerome. make an excellent and merritorious satis∣faction vnto his Father, for mans iniquity. For, to this end especially was the passionChrisostome. of our Sauiour Christ; that GOD might thereby bring to passe a worke, in which he might more fully manifest both his iustice and mercy, then hee did in the Creation: namely, the reconciliation betweene him∣selfe and man; through the suffering of his onely sonne for sinne. So that the Passion of Christ, being con∣sideredAugustine. as a bare passion, ministers no com∣fort vnto vs: but all our ioy standeth in this, that by fayth we apprehend it, as a full satis-faction, meanes, or agreement, made vnto God, for our iniquities.
And confesse withall, that as the princi∣pallAugustine. cause thereof, was the price of mans Redemption; so it was done by the decree and prouidence of God. §. 10. After our Sauiour had thus fully suffered for our offences; there came a rich man ofMath, 27, 57 58, 59, 60. Arimathea, named Ioseph, who had also himselfe beene Iesus disciple: hee went to Pilate, and requested the body of Iesus. And Pilate, (* after hee vnderstoode thatMar. 15, 45. Iesus was dead,) commaunded the body to be giuen him. So Ioseph tooke it, & wrap∣ped it in a cleane linnen cloth, and put it in his new Tombe, which he had hewne out in a Rocke, wherin (before that time) wasIoh, 19, 41, 42 * neuer any man layd. There then did he, and Nicodemus helping him, lay the bo∣die of Iesus. And when they had doone,Math. 27. 60 they rolled a great stone to the doore of the Sepulcher, and departed. At this time also, there were certaine wo∣men,Math, 27, 55, 56, which had followed Iesus from Ga∣lile, ministring vnto him, among vvhom was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mo∣ther of Iames and Ioses, and the mother of Zebedeus sonnes. These beheld the Sepul∣cher,Luke, 23. 55, 56. and sawe howe the body of Iesus was
layd. And they returned, and prepared o∣dours and sweet oyntments, but rested the Saboth day, according to the commaun∣dement. §. 11. On the morrow after the Saboth, bee∣ingLuke, 24, 1, 2, 3, the first day of the weeke, these fore∣said women came early in the morning vn∣to the Sepulcher, bringing with them the odours which they had prepared. And perceiuing the stone to bee rolled away frō the doore thereof, they went in, but found not the body of the Lord Iesus. And it came to passe, that vvhilst theyverse, 4. 5. 6, 7, 8. were amazed thereat, two men suddainlie stoode by them in shining vestures. And as they trembled and durst not looke vp, the men said vnto them: Why seek ye him that liueth, among the deade? Hee is not heere, but is risen. Remember howe hee spake vnto you while hee was yet in Gali∣lee, saying; The sonne of man must be de∣liuered into the hands of sinfull men, & be crucified; & the third day rise againe. And they remembred the vvordes ofverse, 9, 10. Christ, and returned from the Sepulcher; and tolde all these thinges vnto the eleuen, and to all the remnant. &c.
The same day [also,] Iesus himselfe,Mark, 16, 9, 10. 11, 12, (that hee might make manifest his Resur∣rection to such as loued him) appeared first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom hee had cast seauen deuils. And, at another time, after that, he appeared vnto two of his dis∣ciples, as they went into the Country. And they went and tolde these thinges vnto the Apostles, and the rest of his disciples: but they beleeued it not. After this, hee appeared also vnto theMark. 16. 14 eleuen, as they sate together; and reproued them for their vnbeleefe, and hardnesse of hart: because they beleeued not thē which had seene him, being risen vp againe. And further, to confirme them in an vn∣doubted beleefe of his most certaine Re∣surrection, and to assure them by plaine proofes, that he was truly their Lorde and maister Christ which appeared vnto them, and no deceitfull or deluding Spirit, (asLuke, 24, 37 38, 39. 40. they at the first sight supposed him to be,) he first shewed vnto them his hands & his feete, and then commaunded them to han∣dle and feele his body, and to beholde his flesh and bones. * Afterwardes, he askedverse, 41. 42, 43, &c. them for meat, & did eate the same in their presence. Hee also opened their vnder∣standing,
and expounded the Scriptures vnto them, saying: Thus it is written: and thus it behoued Christ to suffer, and to rise againe frō the dead the third day: and that repentance & remission of sinnes, should be preached in his Name among all Nati∣ons; beginning at Ierusalem. &c. After∣ward, he led them * forth into Bethania, &Luke, 24, 50 lift vp his hands & blessed them. And when hee had sundry times presen∣ted himselfe aliue vnto them, (after that he had suffered,) and sufficiently prooued his resurrection * by many infallible tokens;Acts, 1, 3, 4. 5. (beeing seene of them by the space of for∣tie dayes, & speaking of those things which appertaine to the kingdome of God,) hee then gathered them together, and com∣maunded them, that they shoulde not de∣part frō Ierusalem; but waite for the pro∣mise of the Father: which (said he) ye haue hearde of mee. Namely, the comming of * the holy Ghost. &c.Iohn, 14, 26 §. 12. And when Iesus had spoken these things vnto his Apostles, (to the intent they might as well be eye-witnesses of his Ascention, as records to the worlde of his Resurrecti∣on,) while * they beheld, he was taken vp:Acts. 1. 9.
for a clowde tooke him out of their sight. And for further suretie hereof, then the bare sight of their eyes onely, (though that alone, were of it selfe, aboue all other most sufficient,) they heard with theyr eares, the very same thing which they saw with theyr eyes, further affirmed vnto them by tvvo heauenly witnesses: for, while they looked stedfastly after him, towards heauen as hee went, * behold, two men stoode by thē inActs, 1, 10. 11. white apparrell, which also said; Yee men of Galilee, why stand yee gazing into hea∣uen? This Iesus, which is taken vp from you into heauen, shall so come, as yee haue seene him goe into heauen. Thus much, onely to prooue, according to the Scriptures, the Passion, Death, Bu∣riall, Resurrection, and Ascention of our Sauiour Christ. VVhom * the HeauenActs, 3, 21. must containe, vntil the time that all things be restored, vvhich GOD hath spoken by the mouth of all his holie Prophets, since the vvorld began.
¶ Of the seuerall benefites which wee haue, by the Death, Resurrection, and Ascen∣tion of our Sauiour Christ. §. 1. AS by diuers places in the Booke of GOD, we finde it manifestly affir∣med, that there is only but one God, which alone, by his owne almightie power, hath made Heauen, and Earth, the Sea, & all that in them is: So from the selfe same sacred Scriptures it may plainlie bee proued, by the speech of the Apostle, that there is [onely] but one Mediatour be∣tweene God, and man; namely, the man1, Tim. 2. 5. 6. * Christ Iesus: who gaue himselfe a raun∣some for all men, to be a testimonie in due time. Hee [alone] died for our sinnes, accor∣ding1, Cor. 15, 3, 4. to the Scriptures; and he was buried, and rose againe the third day, according to the Scriptures. Yea; hee died for all: that they vvhich2, Cor, 5, 15, liue, should not henceforth liue vnto them∣selues; but vnto him which died for them, and rose againe.
§. 2. Christ, that he might kill death, (saith S.Augustine. Augustine,) was clothed with death: for, death coulde not die, but in life: euen as that which is sower & bitter, dieth not, but in that which is pleasant and sweet. And, as Elizeus made the yron to swim,Cyrill. which naturally sinketh: so Christ by his death, brought vs backe from the gates of hell, which deseruedly we should haue en∣tered. Hee also, by his owne death, hath de∣stroyedHeb. 2, 14, 15. him that had the power of death: that is to say, the deuil: and hath deliuered all them, which for feare of death, remai∣ned all their life time subdued vnto bon∣dage. Yea, he by his comming, hath abolished2, Tim, 1, 10 or put away death: and brought life and immortalitie vnto light, through the Go∣spell. §. 3. O Death, where is thy sting? (saith the1, Cor, 15, 55, 56, 57, Apostle,) ô graue, vvhere is thy victorie? the sting of Death, is sinne; & the strength of sinne is the Lawe: but thankes be vnto God, which hath giuen vs victory through our Lord Iesus Christ.
For, hee [onely] deliuereth vs from the1, Thes. 1, 10. wrath of God to come. And to him also giue all the ProphetsActs, 10, 43. witnesse; that through his Name, all that beleeue in him, should receiue the forgiue∣nesse of theyr sinnes. §. 4. VVee were not redeemed (as S. Peter1, Pet, 1, 18, 19, 20. affirmeth) with corruptible things, as Sil∣uer and Gold, from our vaine conuersati∣on, which we receiued by the traditions of the Fathers: but with the precious bloode of Christ, as a Lambe vndefiled and with∣out spot; which was ordained before the foundation of the world, but was declared in the last times. &c. VVho his owne selfe, bare our sinnes in1, Pet, 2, 24, his bodie on the tree: that we being deliue∣red from sinne, shoulde liue in righteous∣nesse: by whose stripes we were healed. For, hee hath taken on him our infirmi∣ties,Esay, 53, 4. and borne our paines. He was wounded for our transgressions,Esay, 53, 5, hee was broken for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace was vpon him; and with his stripes we are made whole. All wee like sheepe, haue gone astray:verse, 6, we haue turned euery one to his own way,
and the Lord hath layde vpon him, the ini∣quitie of vs all. Yea; God hath made him which knewe2. Cor. 5, 21. no sinne, to be sinne for vs: that we should be made the righteousnesse of GOD in him. And, those things which GOD beforeActs, 3, 18, had shewed by the mouth of all his Pro∣phets, that Christ shoulde suffer, the same hath hee fulfilled. Yet was his death voluntary, and not ofAugustine. constraint. §. 5. Mankind laboureth in this world, (saithBernard. S. Bernard) of a three-folde disease: his birth; his life; his death. The first, vn∣cleane; the second, sinfull; the third, dan∣gerous: but Christ by his cōming, brought vnto vs three remedies: Hee vvas borne; hee liued; he died. His birth, refined ours, his life, instructed ours; his death, ouer∣came ours. And, as a strong corrasiue layd to a sore,Ierome. eateth away all the rotten and dead fleshe: so Christes death, beeing applyed to the hart of a penitent sinner by fayth, weakens & consumes that corruption of sin, which
cleaueth so fast vnto our natures; & dwel∣leth within vs. §. 6. It was very needfull (saith S. Augustine)Augustine. that Christ the sonne of God, should both become man, & die for vs; for two causes. First, to satisfie Gods iustice. Secondly, that hee might fulfill the truth of Gods VVord, vvhich had saide; That man ea∣ting the forbidden fruite, shoulde die the death. For surely, if the sonne of God, had notBeza. come into the worlde in our nature, (sinne onely excepted) and died vpon the Crosse, to appease the wrath of God for mans of∣fences; wee should yet remaine subiect to eternall death and damnation. But he hath loued vs; & hath giuen him∣selfeEphe, 5. 2, for vs: to be an offering, & a sacrifice, of a sweet smelling sauour vnto God. Yea; hee hath loued vs, and washed vsReue. 1, 5. from our sinnes in his owne blood. Hee [also] hath redeemed vs from theGala, 3, 13. curse of the Law, whē he was made a curse for vs. And, hee [likewise] beeing rich; for our2. Cor, 8. 9. sakes became poore: that wee through his pouertie, might be made rich.
§. 7. Christ, (saith S. Peter) hath once suffe∣red1, Pet, 3, 18. for sinnes; the iust for the vniust; that he might bring vs to God: and was put to death, cōcerning the flesh; but was quick∣ned in the Spirit. Yea, euen when Christ suffered deathEpiphanius. in his flesh vpon the Crosse, the God-head and manhood vvere [still] together; but his Godhead did not suffer: that we might be iustified not onely in his flesh, but also in his Diuinitie: and that we might be sa∣ued, both in his God-heade and manhood together. For, we could neuer haue beene deliue∣redAugustine. by that one onely Mediatour between God, and men, the man Christ Iesus, vn∣lesse he had beene also God. The benefites which we dily receiue byAmbrose. his death, are foure. The first is, the change of our naturall death. The second is, in that he hath quite taken away the second death from those that are in him. The third is, that his death is a meanes to satisfie his last will and Testament. The fourth is, that it doth serue to abolish the originall corrup∣tion of our sinfull harts.
The meanes also of our saluation by him,Augustine. are two: his Merrite; & his Efficacie. The first is, in that by his obedience to the Law, and by his death, he made full satis-faction vnto his Father for all our sinnes; freed vs from death; and reconciled vs vnto God. The second is, in that he gaue his Spirit to mortifie the corruption of our natures; that we thereby may daily die vnto sin, and liue vnto righteousnes: & haue true com∣fort in terrors of conscience, and in the pangs of death. Beleeuing assuredly, that what-so-euerCaluine. Christ hath suffered, hee hath suffered for vs; and that all his righteousnes, through fayth is made our righteousnesse. For, hee himselfe alone, hath fully discharged by his death, the debt which all vvee owed: and hath made vs by his obedience, the sonnes of God, & fellow heires with him, of euer∣lasting glory. For, hee hath put out the hand-vvritingColos. 2, 14, 15. that was against vs, contained in the Lawe written, which was contrary to vs; he euen tooke it out of the way, & fastned it vpō the crosse: & hath spoiled the Principalities & Powers; & hath made a shew of thē open∣ly, triumphing ouer thē in the same crosse.
§. 8. The Lawe, (saith S. Iohn) was giuen byIohn, 1. 17. Moises; but Grace and Truth came by Ie∣sus Christ. For, God sending his owne sonne, in theRom, 8, 3, similitude of sinful flesh, and for sin; con∣demned sinne in the flesh; that the righte∣ousnesse of the Lawe, might be fulfilled in vs, which walke not after the flesh, but af∣ter the spirit. And wee, through the spirit, waite forGala, 5, 5, the hope of righteousnes through faith. Be it knowne vnto you therefore, menActs, 13, 38, 39, & brethren, that through this man (Christ) is preached vnto vs, the forgiuenesse of sinnes: & from all things, from which we could not be iustified by the Law of Moi∣ses; by him, euery one that beleeueth, is iu∣stified. For, the Lawe made nothing perfit: butHeb, 7, 19. the bringing in of a better hope made per∣fect, whereby we draw neere vnto God. And, albeit that we in time past, (beeingEphe. 2. 11. 12. 13. Gentiles, and vncircumcised people in the flesh,) were indeede without Christ; and were aliants from the common-wealth of Israell; and strangers from the couenaunts of promise; and had no hope, and were
without God in the world: yet nowe, by the meanes of Christ Iesus, we which once were farre off, are made neere by the blood of Christ. For hee, being our peace, hath made ofEphe, 2. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. both one; and hath broken down the stop of the particion Wall, [that was betweene the Iewes and vs,] in abrogating through his flesh, the hatred; namely, the Lawe of Commaundements, which standeth in or∣dinances: for, to make of twaine one nevv man in himselfe, so making peace: And that he might reconcile both vnto God in one body, thorow his Crosse, and sley ha∣tred thereby, he came & preached peace; both to vs vvhich were a farre off, and to them also that were neere. For, through him, vvee both haue an entrance vnto the Father by one spirit. And GOD, vvhich is rich in mercie, through his great loue wherewith he louedEphe▪ 2, , 5, 6, 7. vs, euen whē we were dead by sinnes, hath quickned vs, [both Iewes and Gentiles] together in Christ; by whose grace we are saued: and hath raised vs vp together, and made vs sitte together in the heauenly pla∣ces in Christ Iesus. That he might shew in the ages to come, the exceeding riches of
his grace, through his kindnes towards vs in Christ Iesus. Not by the vvorkes of righteousnesseTitus, 3, 5, 6, 7. which we had doone, but according to his mercie hee saued vs, by the washing of the newe birth, and the renewing of the holie Ghost; which he shed on vs aboundantlie through Iesus Christ our Sauiour that we beeing iustified by his grace, shoulde bee made heires, according to the hope of eter∣nall life. For, God so loued the vvorlde, that heeIoh, 3, 16. hath giuen his onely begotten Sonne, that whosoeuer beleeueth in him, shoulde not perrish, but haue euerlasting life. And, heerein was the loue of God made1. Ioh, 4, 9. manifest amongst vs; in that hee sent his onely begotten sonne into the world, that we might liue through him. Yea; heerein is loue; not that wee loued1, Ioh. 4. 10. GOD, but that he loued vs; and sent his Son to be a reconcilation for our sinnes. For Christ, vvhen we vvere yet of noRom 5, 6, strength, at his time died for the vngodly. And hee, beeing very God, equall vvithPhilip. 2. 6, 7, 8. the Father in power and glory, made him∣selfe (notwithstanding) of no reputation; taking on him the forme of a seruaunt, and
was made like vnto men; and was found in shape as a man. Hee humbled himselfe, & became obedient vnto the death, euen the death of the Crosse. That hee might heeby deliuer vs, from the wrath of God, and from the danger ofBecon. eternall damnation; whereunto (through our Father Adams transgression) vvee all remained subiect. Likevvise then, as by the sinne of one,Rom, 5, 18. (namely Adam) there sprang vp euill on all men to condemnation: euen so, by the righteousnesse of one, (namely Christ) pringeth good vpon all men, to the righ∣teousnes of life. For, as by one mans disobedience, manyverse, 19, were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous. §. 1. CHrist, (saith the Apostle) is risen from1, Cor. 15. 20. the dead; & was made the first fruites of them that slept▪ For, since by man came death▪ by manverse. 21, 22, came also the resurrection of the dead▪ and  in Adam, all die; euen so in Christ, shall  be made aliue.
Yea; Christ himselfe, and no other for him, did by his owne power, raise himselfeAugustine. to life. Which proueth, that hee was not onely man, but also true God. VVherefore, if he were able to giue lyfeIerome. vnto himselfe, beeing deade, and buried; then much more now, beeing aliue, and in heauen glorified, hee is able by his owne power to raise vp all those that be his mem∣bers from death. For, his Resurrection▪ euen vnto the deadBernard. is life; to the Saints glory; and to sinners mercie. And, like as when a man is cast into theChrisostome. Sea, hauing all his body vnder the vvater, and that there is nothing to be looked for but present death; yet if hee carry his head aboue the water, thee is good hope of his recouerie: so Christ himselfe, though hee were dead and buried in the graue; is risen againe; as a sure pledge, that all the iust shal likewise rise againe. For, hee is the head vnto his Church; and therefore all his members must needes follow him in they time. §. 2. The resurrection of our Sauiour Christ▪Augustine. (saith S. Augustine) vvs long since pre∣gured
in our first Father Ada: For, as he rising from his sleepe, did know Eue to e flesh of his flesh; so Christ, rising from is death; by the wound of his side, acknovv∣ledged his Church. And, his resurrection is sufficiently uai∣lableAugustine. for all them that beleeue in him: for, by the same power, whereby he raised him∣selfe, he raiseth all his members: and there∣fore he is called a quickning Spirit. Besides, it was most needfull that ChristAmbrose. our Sauiour shoulde rise againe after his death, for these three causes following. First, that he might thereby shewe to all the people of God, that he had fully ouer∣come death. Secondly, Christ vvhich died vvas the sonne of GOD, therefore the Authour of life it selfe: and for this cause, it was ney∣ther meete nor possible, for him to be hol∣den of death, but needes he must rise from death. Thirdly, Christ his Priest-hood consi∣steth of two parts: one, to make satisfacti∣on for sinne, which he perted by his one onely sacrifice vpon the Crosse; the other, to apply [through the secrete working of his holy Spirite] the vertue of this sacrifice,
to euery one that beleeueth in him: vvhich could not be, vnlesse hee had risen againe from the dead. §. 1. CHrist our Sauiour, hauing once offe∣red himselfe a sufficient sacrifice vnto his Father for our sinnes, sitteth, (as the A∣postle saith) for * euer at the right hand ofHeb, 10, 12, 13. God; and from hence-forth tarrieth, vntill his enemies be made his footestoole. For, vvith one offering, hath hee madeverse, 14, perfit for euer, them that are sanctified. Yea, be is now at the right hand of God;1, Pet, 3, 22, gone into heauen; and to him, the Angels, powers, and might are subdued. Also; when hee ascended vp on hi, heeEphe, 4, 8, ledde captiuitie captiue: & gaue gifts vnto men. Hee gaue some to be Apostles; some toEphe, 4, 11, 12, 13. be Prophets; some to be Eangelists; and some to be Pastours, and Teachers; for the gathering together of the Saints; for the worke of the Ministerie; and for the edi∣fication of the body of Christ: till vvee all meete together in the vnitie of fayth, and knowledge of the sonne of GOD, vnto a perfit man.
§. 2. Christ, (saith S. Ierome) is ascended intoIerome. heauen, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father; the same nature of flesh, wherein he was borne, & suffered, and rose againe, remaining still. For, the substance of his humaine nature, vvas not done avvay, but glorified. Wherefore, vvee must beleeue, that al∣thoughCyrill. Christ be absent from vs as con∣cerning his body; yet by his diuine power he gouerneth vs and all things; and is euer∣more present with all the faithfull, (accor∣ding as himselfe hath promised) euen * vn∣tillMath. 28. 20 the end of the world. For, like as when he was conuersant hereCyrill. on earth, as man, yet then he filled heauen; and did not leaue the company of Angels; euen so, beeing nowe in heauen with his flesh, yet he filleth the earth, and dwelleth in all them that loue him. So that he is with vs, & not with vs; forVirgilius. those whom he left, and went from, as con∣cerning his humanitie, those he left not, nor forsooke them not▪ as touching his diuini∣tie. For, as touching the forme of a ser∣uaunt, (which hee tooke away from vs in∣to heauen) he is absent from vs: but by the
forme of God, (which goeth not from vs) he is alwayes present with vs in earth. And neuerthelesse, both present, and absent, he is all one Christ. §. 3. Christ, by his ascention, (saith S. Augu∣stine)Augustine. hath, like a noble Captaine, taken sinne and athan prisoners, and hath pini∣oned thē fast; so that all the power which they heeretofore had, is nowe in Christes hand. And this benefite likewise comes vntoAugustine. vs by his ascention; that he is ascended not onely to rest personally in heauen himselfe, but also to prepare a place of endlesse feli∣citie, for as many as shall beleeue in him. And, that hee might the better by his as∣cention,Ambrose. take away al excuses frō them that will not seeke his king dome, hee hath see markes and boundes in the way, and hath placed guides in it: namely, his Ministers; to shew all passengers, a straight and ready course vnto the kingdome of God. Nay more; euen with his owne bloodeIerome. hee hath vouchsafed to trayne the way for vs to the kingdome of heauen; and hath there made a perpetuall purchase for vs:
requiring nothing of vs, but that we would come to possesse the place, which he hath already payd for. §. 4. VVee reade, (saith S. Bernard) that noBernard. man ascendeth vp to heauen, but hee that came downe from heauen. What shall we doe then? shall we despaire? Nay rather by this, saith hee, our hope is made stronger: for although Christ onely ascend, yet rest we fully assured, that euery part of him go∣eth with him; for, a bone of him shall not be broken; and the heade in Gods king∣dom, is not found without the members. Thou therefore which fearest death, re∣memberIerome. that Christ is gone into heauen, to prepare a place for thy bodie vvhere it must be glorified, and liue for euer, vvith the blessed▪ Trinitie, & all the holy Saints, and beautifull Angels: though for a while it lie dead, & ot in the earth. For, as sure as Christ our Captaine is as∣cendedBeza. into heauen in mans nature; so cer∣tainly shall all we that are his members, by his almightie power, be likewise receiued into heauen, in the same nature wherein he is ascended.
§. 5. What shall wee then say to these things?Rom. 8, 31, 32. If GOD be on our side, vvho can be a∣gainst vs? Who spared not his own sonne, but gaue him for vs all to death, how shall he not with him, giue vs all things also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge ofverse, 33. 34, Gods chosen? It is GOD that iustifieth, who shall condemne? It is Christ vvhich is dead; yea, or rather vvhich is risen againe: who is also at the right hand of God, and maketh request for vs. Sathan and his Angels are fallen, andAugustine. haue no Sauiour; but Man, falling, had (through the great mercy of God) a Me∣diatour and Sauiour to restore him; name∣ly; Iesus Christ. VVho, as he stoode in our roome vponAmbrose. the Crosse, and made satisfaction vnto his Father for our sinnes; so nowe in heauen, hee appeares as a publique person in our stead, representing all the Elect that be∣leeue in him. Yea; the selfe same Christ, vvhich dyedAugustine. for vs heere vpon the earth; maketh inter∣cession vnto his Father for vs, now in hea∣uen.
And, whatsoeuer his request was in ourAmbrose. behalfe heere on earth, the same for sub∣stance it continues still in heauen. §. 6. Before the fall of Adam, saith S. Ierome,Ierme. man could speak to God, face to face: but now Christ is his Intercessour. And thys worke of intercession, is the sole worke of Christ, God and man: not belonging to a∣ny other creature besides, either in heauen or earth. The worke of Christes Passion, seruethChrisostome. as a satisfaction vnto Gods iustice for our offences; and is as it were the tempering of the plaister, by which wee may be healed: but Intercession goeth further; for it ap∣plieth the same satis-faction of Christ to vs, and layeth the very salue to the sore of eue∣rie penitent sinner. Besides; the vvorke of Christes Inter∣cessionChrisostome. or Mediation, serueth not onely to preserue all repentant sinners in the estate of grace, (that beeing once sanctified and iustified, they may so continue to the end,) but it also maketh our workes acceptable in the sight of GOD; and causeth him to account them righteous, through our faith in Christ.
§. 7. Christ our Sauiour, (beeing both ourHeb, 9, 24, high Priest and Mediatour, as the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrewes calleth him) is not entred into the holy places that are made with hands; which are similitudes of the true Sanctuary: but is entred into hea∣uen it selfe, to appeare nowe in the sight of GOD for vs. Not that hee should offer himselfe often,verse, 25, 26. as the High-priest (among the Iewes) en∣tred into the Holy place euery yeere vvith other blood, (for then must he haue often suffered since the foundation of the world) but nowe, in the end of the world, hath he appeared once, to put away sinne, by the sacrifice of himselfe. And, as it is appointed vnto men, thatverse, 27, 28. they shall once die, and after that cōmeth the iudgement; so Christ was once offe∣red, to take away the sinnes of many: and vnto them that looke for him, shall hee ap∣peare the second time without sinne vnto saluation. Againe; among the Ievves many vvereHebr. 7, 23. made Priestes, because they were not suffe∣red to endure by reason of death; but this man [Christ,] because hee endureth euer,
hath an euerlasting priest-hood. VVhere∣fore,verse, 24. 25, he is able also, perfectly to saue them that come vnto God by him, seeing he euer liueth to make intercession for them. For, such an High-priest it became vs toverse, 26. 27. haue, which is holie, harmelesse, vndefiled, separate frō sinners, and made higher then the heauens: which needed not daily, as those High-priestes, to offer vp sacrifice, first for his owne sinnes, and then for the peoples; for that did he once, when he of∣fered vp himselfe. §. 8. The same Christ [likewise,] being comeHebr, 9, 11. 12. an High-priest of good things to come, by a greater and a more perfit Tabernacle, not made with hands: that is to say, not of this building; neyther by the blood of Goates and Calues, but by his owne blood, entred he in once into the holy place, & obtained eternall redemption for vs. For, if the blood of Bulles & of Goates,verse. 13. 14. and the Ashes of an Heifer, sprinckling them that are vncleane, sanctifieth as tou∣ching the purifying of the flesh; hovve much more shal the blood of Christ, which through the eternall Spirit offered himselfe without spot to God, purge our cōscience
from dead works to serue the liuing God? And for this cause is he the Mediatou ofverse, 15. the newe Testament, that thorowe death, which was for the redemption of the trans∣gressions that vvere in the former Testa∣ment, they which were called, might re∣ceiue the promise of eternall inheritance. For, where as is a Testament, there mustverse, 16, 17, also be the death of him that made the Te∣stament. For, the Testament is confirmed when men are dead; and is yet of no force, so long as he that made the same remaineth aliue. &c. §. 9. Doubtlesse, (saith S. Paule) one wil scarseRom, 5, 7, die for a righteous man; but yet for a good man, it may be that one dare die. But God setteth out his loue towards vs,verse, 8, 9, seeing that vvhile vvee vvere yet sinners, Christ ded for vs. Much more then bee∣ing now iustified by his blood, we shall be saued from wrath through him. For, if when we were enemies, wee wereverse, 10, reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more beeing reconciled, we shall be saued by his life. And, not onely so, but vvee also reioyceverse, 11. in GOD, through our Lord Iesus Christ,
by vvhom vvee haue novve receiued the attonement. For, God hath not appoynted vs vnto1, Thes. 5, 9, 10. vvrath, but to obtaine saluation by the meanes of our Lorde Iesus Christ, vvhich died for vs; that vvhether wee vvake or sleepe, we should liue together with him. Wherefore,] if any man sinne, wee haue1, Ioh. 2, 1, 2. an Aduocate with the Father, Iesus Christ the iust: hee is the reconciliation for our sinnes: and not for ours onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole world. By him, vvee haue redemption throughEphe, 1, 7, 8, his blood, euen the forgiuenesse of sinnes, according to his rich grace: vvhereby hee hath beene abundant toward vs in all wise∣dome and vnderstanding. By him, we are made the sonnes of God,Iohn, 1, 12. if wee beleeue in his Name. And of his fulnes haue all wee receiued:verse, 16, euen grace for grace. By his blood [also] wee may be bold toHeb, 10. 19, 20. enter into the Holy place, by the newe and liuing way which he hath prepared for vs, through the vaile; that is, his flesh. For, we are made partakers of Christ, ifHeb, 3, 14, we keepe sure vnto the end, the beginning where-with we are vpholden.
And, we are iustified freely, by the graceRom. 3, 24. 25. of God, through the redemption that is in Christ Iesus; whom God hath set forth to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood. For, the blood of Iesus Christ the sonne1. Iohn, 1. 7. of God, clenseth vs from all sinne. And, without sheading of blood, is noHeb, 9, 22. remission. §. 10. Seeing then that we haue a great High∣priest,Heb, 4, 14, vvhich is entred into Heauen, euen Iesus the Sonne of GOD, let vs hold fast our profession. For, wee haue not an High-priest whichverse, 15. cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all thinges tempted, like as we are: yet without sinne. Which in the dayes of his flesh, did offerHeb, 5, 7, vp prayers and supplications, with strong crying & teares, vnto him that was able to saue him from death: and was also heard in that which he feared. And though he were the Sonne, yet lear∣nedverse, 8. 9. hee obedience by the things vvhich he suffered. And being consecrate, [or per∣fectly holy,] was made the Authour of eternall saluation to all thē that obey him.
And is called of GOD an High-priestHeb, 5, 10, [Heb, 7, 21 for euer,] after the order of Melchi∣sedeck. For, it became him, for whom are allHebr, 2, 10. things, and by whom are all things, seeing that he brought many children vnto glory, that he should cōsecrate the Prince of theyr saluation through afflictions. Yea; in all things it behooued him, to beHeb, 2, 17. made like vnto his brethren, that he might be mercifull: and a faithfull High-priest in things concerning God, that hee might make reconciliation for the sinnes of the people. For, in that he suffered, and wasverse, 18. tempted; hee is able also to succour them that are tempted. §. 11. These things are written, that yee mightIohn, 20, 31 beleeue, that Iesus is the Christ, the sonne of God; and that in beleeuing, yee might haue life through his Name. For, other foundation can no man la,1, Cor, 3, 11, then that vvhich is layde, vvhich is; Iesus Christ. The Mark. 5. 7. Son of the most high God. Who gaue himselfe for vs; that e mightTitus, 2, 14, redeeme vs from all iniquitie; and purge vs to be a peculier people vnto him-selfe: zealous of good workes.
Neither is there saluation in any other:Acts, 4, 12. for, among men, there is giuen none other Name vnder heauen, whereby we must be saued. Let vs therefore by him, offer the sacri∣ficeHeb. 13, 15, of prayse alwayes vnto GOD; that is to say; the fruite of those lippes which con∣fesse his Name. For, he [onely] is our mouth, vvherebyAmbrose. we speake vnto the Father: he is our eyes, whereby we see the Father: he is our right hand, whereby we offer our selues vnto the Father. And, vvithout his intercession, neyther wee, nor any of the Saints, haue ought to doe with GOD. But hee, euermore prayeth for vs; pray∣ethBeda. in vs; & is prayed of vs. Hee prayeth for vs, as our Aduocate and euerlasting Priest: Hee prayeth in vs, as our head: and hee is prayed of vs, as our God. For, he is the Mediator between God &Cyrill. man, not onely because he hath reconciled man vnto God; but also, because hee is na∣turally and substantially, both God & man in one person. Yet doth it not folow, that he maketh in∣tercessionTheod. Beza. to himselfe; seeing that the Fa∣ther is one, & the Son is another, in seuerall
persons throughly distinct, albeit, that the Father & the son be both one thing, & one God, if the essence of them be considered without their persons. For, like as in Christ incarnate, there be seuerall things, & not se∣uerall persons; so in the God-head, there be seueral persons, but not seuerall things. §. 12. In him likewise, and through him, vveeAmbrose. haue all things. For, if wee desire to be cu∣red of our wounds, hee is our Phisition: If we be greeued with our sinnes, hee is our righteousnes: If we lacke helpe, hee is our strength: If we feare death, he is our life: If we be in darknes, he is our light: If we will goe to heauen, he is our way. Yea, the whole sum of our saluation, & allCluine. the parts therof, are cōprehended in Christ. If we seeke for saluation, wee are taught by the very Name of Iesus, that it is in him; If we seek for any other gifts of the Spirit, they are to be found in his annoynting; If we seeke for strength, it is in his dominion; If we seek for cleanenes, it is in his concep∣tion; If we seeke for tender kindnesse, it sheweth it selfe in his birth, whereby he was made in all thinges like vnto vs, that hee might learne to sorow with vs; If we seeke
for redemption, it is in his passion; If wee seek for absolution, it is in his cōdemnation; If we seek for release of the curse, it is in his crosse; If we seek for satisfaction, it is in his sacrifice; If we seek for clensing, it is in his blood; If we seek for reconciliation, it is in his going downe into hell; If we seeke for mortification of the flesh, it is in his buriall; If we seeke for newnes of life, it is in his re∣surrection; If we seeke for immortality, it is in the same; If we seek for the inheritance of the kingdome of heauen, it is in his en∣trance into heauen; If we seek for defence, for assurednes, or, for plenty & store of all good things, it is in his kingdom. Finally; sith the treasures of all sorts ofCaluine. good things are onely in him; let vs drawe thence, & from no where els, euen till vve be full withall. For, they which beeing not content with him alone, are carried hether & thether, into diuers hopes; although they haue principall regard vnto him, yet euen in this they are out of the right vvay, that they turne any part of theyr knovvledge; [or comfort,] to any other-where.
¶ Of Fayth: Feare: and Loue: beeing three speciall Ʋertues, necessarily belonging to euery true Christian. HEBREVVES. 11. verse. 6. VVithout Fayth, it is vnpossible to please GOD; for he that is in comming towards God, must be∣leeue that there is a God: and that he is a rewar∣der of them that seeke him. ¶ Of Fayth. §. 1. FAyth, (as S. Paule the Apostle affir∣meth)Hebr. 11. 1. is the ground of things vvhich are hoped for; and the euidence of things which are not seene. It is also a confident perswasion, of al∣mightyVrsinus. Gods euerlasting loue and mercie towards vs; in, and by the meanes of Christ Iesus: grounded wholely on the promises of our heauenly Father in his holy Word; vvrought in our harts by hearing the Go∣spell preached; and witnessed in vs by the testimony of the holy Ghost. By vvhich, we certainly assure our selues in soule and conscience, that all our sinnes, are as freelie
forgiuen vs for Christes sake, as if we neuer had committed any; and all his righteous∣nesse and obedience, as perfectly imputed vnto vs, as if wee had performed the same in our owne persons. This fayth, is the gift of God; and brea∣thedAugustine. onely by his Spirit, into the harts of all those that be his chyldren. §. 2. Through fayth, we vnderstand that theHebr. 11. 3. World was ordained by the word of God; so that the things which wee see, are not made of things which did appeare. For, God in the beginning, by the onelyLactantius. power of his Word, made all things of no∣thing: and he likewise, by the power of his Worde alone, is able to destroy all thinges againe, when it pleaseth him. §. 3. From fayth, if it be perfect and liuelie,Euagoras. vve come to feare; from feare, to flying of sinne; and by flying of sinne, vvee attaine vnto a patient minde to suffer tribulation: by the which we obtaine sure hope & trust in GOD; through the which hope, our soules sitte safe in a sure chayre of a certaine expectation of that glory, which is layd vp in store for vs in the kingdom of heauen.
For, 2, Cor, 5, 7 we walke by fayth, and not by sight. And, by it, our fore-fathers were well re∣portedHeb. 11. 2, of. §. 4. By fayth, Abraham when he was called,Heb, 11, 8. obeyed God, to goe out into a place, which hee should afterward receiue for inheri∣tance; and he went out of his owne coun∣trey, not knowing whether he went. Through fayth also, Sara the wife of A∣braham,Heb, 11, 11. receiued strength to conceiue seede, and was deliuered of a childe when she was past age: because shee iudged him faithfull which had promised. By fayth, Moises when hee was come toHeb. 11, 24. 25. age, refused to be called the sonne of Pha∣raos Daughter; and chose rather to suffer aduersitie with the people of God, then to enioy the pleasures of sinnes for a season. Esteeming the rebuke of Christ greaterverse, 26. riches then the treasures of Egipt: for hee had respect vnto the recompence of the re∣ward. By fayth, the woman of Cananee, (afterMath. 15▪ 22 23. 24. &c. three repulses giuen her, from our Sauiour Christ himselfe,) receiued helpe for her daughter, which was misterably vexed with an vncleane spirit.
By fayth, Saint Peter confessed his LordMath, 16▪ 16 and Maister Iesus, to be Christ, the sonne of the liuing God. And, who-soeuer else, (hauing in himMath, 16, 18 the Spirit of God) shall confidently make such like confession of his fayth when he is demaunded, as S. Peter made, our Sauiour giueth him this assurance, that the gates of hell shall not be able to preuaile against it. Wherfore, if thou shalt confesse with thyRom, 10, 9, mouth the Lord Iesus, and shalt beleeue in thy hart, that God raised him vp from the dead, thou shalt be saued. For, with the hart, man beleeueth vntoverse, 10. righteousnes; and with the mouth, man confesseth vnto saluation. §. 5. VVho is it that ouercōmeth the world,1, Iohn, 5, 5 (saith S. Iohn) but he which beleeueth that Iesus is the sonne of God? For, whosoeuer confesseth, that Iesus is1, Ioh, 4, 15, the sonne of GOD, he dwelleth in God, and God in him. Yea; who-soeuer beleeueth that Iesus is1, Ioh, 5, 1, the Christ, is borne of God. And, all that is borne of God, ouercom∣meth1, Iohn, 5, 4, the vvorld: & the victory that ouer∣commeth the world, is our fayth.
And, * the ende of our fayth, is the sal∣uation1. Pt, 1▪ 9, of our soules. §. 6. Verily, verily, (saith Christ) he that be∣leeuethIohn, 6, 46 in mee, hath euerlasting life. And, this is the vvill of him that sentIohn, 6. 42, mee; that euery man which seeth the Son, and beleeueth in him, should haue euerla∣sting life: and I will raise him vp at the last day. Nowe, although euery man cannot withIohn, 20, 29 his bodily eyes, (as S. Thomas did) first see Christ, and afterward beleeue: yet are all men, (euen by the mouth of Truth) pro∣nounced blessed, which haue not so seene him, and yet haue beleeued. §. 7. VVee read in S. Iohn, that when Mar∣thaIohn, 11, 39, 40. seemed doubtful, that Christ could not call againe her brother Lazarus to life, be∣cause he had beene foure dayes dead, and buried in his graue: our sauiour thus gent∣ly reproued her, saying; Saide I not vnto thee, that if thou diddest beleeue, thou shouldest see the glorie of God? Also; vvhen certaine friendes of Iairus came vnto him, willing him to forbeare toMark, 5, 35, 36, trouble Christ any further for the health of
his daughter, seeing shee was already dead▪ Our Sauiour (notwithstanding) thus com∣forted the discomforted father, saying: Be not afrayd; onely beleeue. For, if thou canst beleeue, all things areMark, 9, 23. possible to him that beleeueth. Expressing vnto vs by these speeches, both the great power of God, & wonder∣full force of fayth. §. 8. VVee reade furthermore, in the Acts of the Apostles, that vvhen Paule and SilasActs, 16, 22, 23, 24, 25, were whypped & imprisoned at Philippi, (a cheefe Citty in Macidonia,) for theyr testimony of Iesus; at midnight they pray∣ed, and sung Psalmes vnto God: and sud∣dainely, there was a great Earth-quake, so that the whole foundation of the prison was shaken; and by and by all the doores opened, and euery mans bands vvere loo∣sed. Then the Keeper of the prison vvakedverse, 27, 28. out of his sleepe; and when he saw the pri∣son▪ doores open, hee drewe out his sword, and would haue killed himselfe; suppo∣sing that the prisoners had beene fled. But Paule cryed out with a loude voyce vnto
him, saying; Doe thy selfe no harme: for vvee are all heere. Then called he for a light, & leaped in,verse, 29, 30. and came trembling, & fell downe before Paule & Silas, and brought them out, and said: Sirs; what must I do to be saued? To which demaunde of his, they madeverse, 31, no other aunswere but onely this: Beleeue in the Lord Iesus Christ; and thou shalt be saued, and thine houshold. Our Sauiour Christ, beeing likewise de∣maunded by certaine Iewes which heard him teach, what they might doe to workeIohn, 6, 28 29. the workes of God? [or, the works which might be acceptable vnto God?] This is the worke of God, (quoth he) that yee be∣leeue in him whom hee hath sent. For, except yee beleeue that I am hee▪Iohn, 8, 24, [namely, the Christ, the Sonne of GOD, which according to the saying of the scrip∣ture, shoulde come into the vvorld to re∣deeme both you, and all man-kinde from death and hell,] you shall die in your sinnes. Search [therefore] the Scriptures; for inIohn, 5, 39, them yee thinke to haue euerlasting life: and they are they which testifie of mee. Also; while ye haue light, beleeue in theIohn, 12, 36
light; that yee may bee the children of the light. §. 9. The Father loueth the Son, saith Christ,Iohn, 3, 35, 36. & hath giuen all things into his hand. Hee that beleeueth in the Sonne, hath euerla∣sting life: & hee that obeyeth not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abi∣deth on him. Hee that beleeueth in the Sonne, shallIohn, 3, 18. not be condemned; but hee that beleeueth not, is condemned already; because he be∣leeueth not in the Name of the onelie be∣gotten Sonne of God. §. 10. He that beleeueth in the Sonne of God,1, Iohn. 5. 10 hath the witnes [of God] in himselfe: hee that beleeueth not God, hath made him a lyer; because hee beleeued not the record, that God witnessed of his Sonne. And, this is the record; that God hathverse, 11, 12 giuen vnto vs euerlasting life: and this life is in his Sonne. Hee that hath the Sonne, hath life: and hee that hath not the Sonne of God, hath not life. These thinges haue I written vnto you,1, Iohn, 5. 1 that beleeue in the Name of the Sonne of GOD; that yee may know that yee haue
euerlasting life: and that ye may beleeue in the Name of the Sonne of God. For, hee that shall beleeue, and be bapti∣zed,Mar. 16. 16. shall be saued: but he that will not be∣leeue, shall be damned. §. 11. S. Paule, going about in his Epistle to the Galathians, to prooue our iustification to come onely by the grace and mercie of God, through fayth in Iesus Christ, & not by the works of the Law; beginneth thus. VVee * which are Iewes by nature, andGala. 2. 15. 16. not sinners of the Gentiles, knowe, that a man is not iustified▪ by the vvorkes of the Law, but by the faith of Iesus Christ. Euen wee, I say, haue beleeued in Iesus Christ, that wee might be iustified by the fayth of Christ, and not by the works of the Lawe; because that by the works of the Lawe, no flesh shall be iustified. But, wee beleeue to be saued▪ throughActs, 15. 11. the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ. For, as many as are of the workes of theGala. 3. 10. Law▪ are vnder the curse. For, it is written: Cused is euery man that continueth not in all things, which are written in the booke of the Law, to doe them.
And, that no man is iustified by the laweGala, 3, 11. in the sight of God, it is euident: for the iust shall liue by fayth. I, through the Law (saith he) am dead toGala, 2, 19. 20. the Law: and that I might liue vnto God, I am crucified with Christ. Neuerthelesse, I liue; yet not I now, but Christ liueth in mee: and in that, that I nowe liue in the flesh, I liue by the faith in the Son of God; vvho hath loued mee, and giuen himselfe for mee. I do not abrogate the grace of God; forverse, 21. if righteousnes be by the lawe, then Christ died without a cause. But nowe is the righteousnes of GODRom, 3, 21, 22, made manifest without the Lawe, hauing witnes of the Law, & of the Prophets. To wit, the righteousnes of God, by the fayth of Iesus Christ, vnto all, and vpon all that beleeue. For, by grace we are saued through faith,Ephe, 2, 8, 9, and that not of our selues; it is the gift of God. Not of works, least any man should boast himselfe. §. 12. If Abraham (saith the same Apostle)Rom, 4, 2, 3. were iustified by works, he hath wherin to reioyce, but not with God. For, what saith
the Scripture? Abraham beleeued God, & it was counted to him for righteoushes. Now, to him that worketh, the wages isverse, 4, 5, not counted by fauour, but by debt: but to him that worketh not, but beleeueth in him that iustifieth the vngodly, his fayth is counted for righteousnes. (For, Gregory. onely beleeuing, is righteousnes.) Besides; it is not vvritten for AbrahamRom, 4, 23, 24, 25. onely, that it was imputed to him for righ∣teousnes, but also for vs, to whom it shall be imputed for righteousnesse; which be∣leeue in him that raised vp Iesus our Lord from the dead: who was deliuered to death for our sinnes; and is risen againe for our iustification. Knowe yee therefore, that they vvhichGala, 3, 7, are of fayth, the same are the chyldren of Abraham. For▪ the Scripture fore-seeing, that Godverse, 8, 9. would iustifie the Gentiles through fayth, preached before the Gospell vnto Abra∣ham; saying: In thee shall all the Gentiles be blessed. So then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithfull Abraham. For▪ the promise that hee should be theRom, 4, 13▪ heire of the world, was not giuen to Abra∣ham, or to his seede, through the Law, but
through the righteousnes of fayth▪ For, ifverse, 14, they which are of the Law be heires, faith is made voyde; and the promise is made of none effect. For, the Law causeth wrath; but vvhereverse, 15. no Law is, there is no transgression. (By the lawe [also] commeth the know∣ledgeRom, 3, 20. of sinne. Nay, I knew not sinne, but by the lavve;Rom. 7, 7. for, I had not knowne lust, except the law had said; Thou shalt not lust.) Therefore is the promise by faith, that itRom. 4, 16. might come by grace, and the promise might bee sure vnto all the seede: not to that onely which is of the lawe; but also to that which is of the faith of Abraham: who is the father of vs all. §. 13. Doe wee then make the lawe of none ef∣fectRom, 3, 31 through fayth? God forbid: yea, vvee rather establish the law. For, the doctrine of faith, is the orna∣mentCaluine. of the lawe; and by it wee embrace Christ: who, by his death hath fully satis∣fied the lawe. So that the law, which could not bring vs to saluation, by reason of our owne corruption; is nowe made effectuall to vs, by the meanes of Christ Iesus.
I the lawe then against the promise ofGala, 3, 21, 22. God? God forbid. For, if there had been a lawe giuen▪ which coulde haue giuen life: surely righteousnes shoulde haue beene by the law. But the Scripture hath concluded all vnder sin, that the promise by the faith of Iesus Christ, shoulde be giuen to them that beleeue. But before faith came, we were kept vn∣derverse▪ 23. the law, & shut vp vnto the faith, which should afterward be reuealed. Wherefore, the lawe was our Schoole∣maisterverse, 24, to bring vs to Christ, that vvee might be made righteous by fayth. But af∣ter that fayth is come, we are no longer vn∣der a Schoole-maister: for, wee are all the sonnes of God, by faith in Iesus Christ. Not that the doctrine, or any commaun∣dementCaluine. of God in the law concerning ver∣tuous life is abolished: but that all Iewish Ceremonies are nowe ceast: and the curse or condemnation of the lawe▪ which vvas due vnto vs for our sinnes; is cleane taken avvay▪ through fayth in our Redeemer▪ Christ Iesus. Who came into the world, (as hath alrea∣dyMath, 5, 17. been shewed) not to destroy the law, or the prophets, but that he might fulfil them.
VVee conclude therefore, that a man is▪Rom, 3. 28. istisd by faith, vvithout the vvorkes of the Lawe. And▪ beeing iustified by faith, wee haueRom, 5, 1, 2, peace with God, through our Lord Iesus Christ by whom also  vvee haue acesse through fayth vnto this grace; wherei we stan, and reioyce vnder the hope of the▪ glory of God. Neythe doe weso onely; but also vveeRom, 5, 3,  4. 5. reioyce in tribulations; knowing tha tri∣bulatio bringeth forth patience; and pa∣tience experience; and experience hope; and hope maketh not ashamed: because the loue of GOD  abroade in our harts by the holy Ghost, which is giuen n∣to vs. Thus much for fith onely. §. 14. NOwe; as we finde true fayth in Iesus Christ, to be the chiefe & onely means of our iustification; so may vvee likewise certainly assure our selues▪ that it is also the very vvell-spring or Fountaine▪  whence ale all good works oe flow. For surely, it is as much impossible for true ayth to be
without good workes, as it is for a man to speake, without a toge; to see, wanting eyes; or to liue, lacking a hart. A example further to confirme vs in the vndoubtd truth eereof, may be read in the story of Zacches; who had no soo∣ner ciued Christinto his house, (and much mre into his art by fayth▪) but pre∣sently hee brake forth into these spches; saying  Behold▪ Lord, the halfe of yLuke, 19, 8, good giue vnto the pore: and if I haue taken from any man, by false or vnlawfull meanes,  restore him foure fold. Againe; vvhat  it my Brheren,Iam, 2, 14. 15, 16, 17, (saith  Iames) though  say ee hath fayth▪ when ee hath no works▪ Ca that fayth saue him? For, if a brother or a sister be naked▪ and dstitu of daily fde, and one of you say vnto thē; Depart in peace; God send you warmnes and foode: Not∣withstanding, you giue them not those things which are needfull to the body▪ what helpeh ▪ Euen so the ayth, if it haue no work i dead in itselfe. But some man might say; Thou hast theIames, 2, 18 aith, and I haue workes: Shewe mee thy faith out of thy workes, and I will shewe thee my faith by my workes.
Thou beleeuest that there is one God;verse, 19. thou doost well; the deuils also beleeue it, and tremble. But wilt thou vnderstand (ô thou vayneverse, 20, 21 22, man) that faith vvithout workes is dead? VVas not Abraham our Father iustified through workes, when he offered Isaac his sonne vpon the Altar? Seest thou not, that the fayth wrought vvith his workes? and through the works was the faith made per∣fect. And▪ the Scripture was fulfilled, whichverse, 23, saith: Abraham beleeued God, and it was imputed vnto him for righteousnes: & he was called the friend of God. Yee see then, how that of workes a manverse, 24, is iustified; and not of faith onely. For, as the body vvithout the Spirit isverse, 26. dead; euen so the fayth without workes is dead. §. 15. Wee must not yet heere thinke, that theAugustine. sayings of the two Apostles, S. Paule and S. Iames, are contrary one to the other; where as Paule saith; A man is iustified without workes. And Iames saith; Fayth without workes is vaie. For, Paule spea∣keth of the workes that goe before fayth,
and Iames speaketh of the vvorkes vvhich follovve after fayth. Our Religion likewise, doth not discerneAugustine. the righteous from the vnrighteous, by the lawe of workes, but by the lawe of faith; vvithout the which, euen those works that seeme good, are turned into sinnes. For, vvhatsoeuer is not of fayth, is sinne.Rom, 14, 23 And, where faith is not, good vvorkes isAugustine. not. The intent [indeede] maketh a good worke; but fayth directeth that intent. Besides; good workes make no man to be accounted iust, or righteous in the sight of God: but a man being once iustified by faith; doth good workes through loue. Also,] in Iesus Christ, neither Circum∣cisionGala, 5, 6. auaileth any thing; neither vncir∣cumcision: but fayth, which worketh by loue. For, like as the goodnesse of a Tree, isLuther. alwayes knowne by the good fruite which it bringeth foorth: euen so the fayth of a godly man, is euermore declared vnto the world; by his religious obedience towards the law of GOD; and his workes of cha∣ritie towards his neighbour. VVee are iustified [therfore] by thatBeza. liuely fayth, which doth apprehend all the
mercifull promises of God▪ made towards vs in Iesus Christ. VVhich fayth, neyther sleepeth nor isBeza. idle; but alwayes awaketh: and is conti∣nually busied, about the performing of some good worke. Resting fully perswaded, that goodBernard. vvorkes are the vvay to the kingdome of heauen; though they be not the cause of raigning there. ¶ Of Feare. §. 1. FEare, (as Pacuuius saith,) is a diuinePacuuius, affection or passion of the minde▪ by a feeling regard conducting vertue to all the actions of the soule. It grow∣eth from an vndoubted beleefe in GOD, and maketh a man carefull to lead his lyfe pleasing, in the sight of his Creator. But before I enter any further into the discourse of this Vertue, I am to enforme the Reader, that there are two sorts of Feare: The one, Seuile, or slauish: the other, Fliall, or chyld-like.
The Seruile, or slauish feare; is that which euery bond-man beareth to his bo∣dilie Maister; or wicked offenders, to wise Iudges. This feare, is also a defect of the minde, and a harmefull hinderance to all vertuous resolutions: killing courage by cowardise, and pietie through distrust∣ment. It many times causeth the tongue to controle the hart, and maketh the mouth to marre the meaning of the minde. It tea∣cheth men to talke according to the time; and enforceth faint-harted subiects, to sooth the sinnes of their Soueraigne. Like vnto those people of whom Plu∣tarchPlutarch. speaketh: Whose hearts, (saith hee) harbour hatred, against an vngodly Ty∣rant, for his bad gouernement, & yet not∣withstanding, with the labour of their lyps, they neuer cease, fearefully to flatter him in his folly; to the end hee should not hurt them. But the Filiall, or Chyld-like Feare, (vvhereof I onely meane in this place to speak) is a diuine chastiser of euill in it selfe, hauing in it such force, that it causeth con∣cupiscence to flie; and maketh a man to abstaine from all sinne and wickednes. It dependeth not on hate, but on loue; not
resembling the feare of seruaunts, but the feare of sonnes: not like the trembling and despayring feare of * Saule, when sathan in1, Sam, 28, 19, 20 the forme of Samuell, fore-told him how little awhile he had to liue. But rather, like the reuerent and religious feare of Dauid, * when hee kept Abisha his Captaine frō1, Sam, 26. 9 killing the Lords annoynted. This  feare; as wee finde in diuers places of the holy Scripture; hath alwaies been a guide vnto the godly to direct their dooings: and a Tutor to teach them, the perfect pathway to eternall felicitie. §. 2. Plato the Prince of Phylosophers, affir∣meth;Plato. that this excellent feare, was so ex∣cellently excelling in the harts of the Hea∣then, that in Sparta, they built a Temple to true Feare: in which, they daily vsed to burne thev first sacrifice. And, so much likewise affirmeth Socrates▪ who was Pla∣tosSocrates. Schoole-maister. But King Salomon the sonne of Dauid, beeing farre wiser in knowledge then ey∣ther Socrates or Plato; giueth in his Pro∣uerbs many prayses of this vertue: Telling vs plainly; that, * the feare of the Lord,Prou, 9. 10,
(which is a dutifull reuerence and avve of the Almighty, firmely fixed in the harts of all the godly,) is, Initium sapiee: the very beginning of vvisedome. That, in it is an assured strength.Prou. 14. 26 Prou, 10, 27 Prou, 14, 27, That, it increaseth our dayes. That, it is as a Well-spring of wisedome, to auoyde the snares of death. That, it leadeth to life; and that hee thatProu. 19. 23 is filled there-with, shall prosper, and shall not be visited with euill. §. 3. Iesus likewise, the sonne of Sirach, who well deserueth the name of a second Salo∣mon for his great wisedome; telleth vs, in the beginning of his Booke: That, the feare of the Lord, is worship; & tryumph;Eccl{us}, 1, 11. gladnesse; and a ioyfull crow That, it is an holy knowledge.Eccl{us}. 1. 16. That, it is both wisedome & discipline.Eccl{us}. 1, 32. Eccl{us}, 25, 13 That, it is the beginning of the loue of GOD. That, it passeth all things in clearenes.Eccl{us}. 25, 11 That, it maketh a merry hart, & giuethEccl{us}, 1, 12. gladnesse, ioy, and long life. That, it expelleth, sinne, and driueth a∣wayEccl{us}, 1, 26. anger.
That, it is the Crowne of vvisedome; &Eccl{us}, 1. 22 giueth pleace and perfect health. That, it is the roote of vvisedome; andEccl{us}. 1. 24. the branches thereof are long life. That, it is a pleasant garden of blessing:Eccl{us}. 40. 27 & that there is nothing so beautifull as it is. Neither is there any thing sweeter thenBasill. the same. §. 4. Besides; Sirach doth not onely giue cō∣mendations of this vertue it selfe, but also vttereth sundry speeches in prayse of the man that is enriched there-with: and con∣sequently declareth, how much mindfull it maketh them that haue it, prouident to please God in all theyr proceedings; say∣ing:Eccl{us}. 10. 25 The great man; the Iudge; and the man of authoritie; are all of them honou∣rable: yet is there none of them greater then he that feareth the Lord. Hee that hath small vnderstanding, andEccl{us}. 19. 23 feareth God, is better then hee that hath much wisedome, and transgresseth the law of his Maker. Oh howe great is the man that findethEccl{us}. 25. 10 wisedome & knowledge: yet is there none aboue him that feareth the Lord.
§. 5. They that feare the Lord, (saith he) willEccl{us}. 2. 18, prepare their harts, & humble their soules in his sight. They will [also] seeke out the thingesEccl{us}. 2. 1. that are pleasant vnto him. They will keepe his commaundements.Eccl{us}. 2. 19. Eccl{us}. 32. 15 And receiue his doctrine. They will honour theyr Parents, & doeEccl{us}. 3. 8, seruice vnto them▪ Yea; they that feare the Lord▪ will be di∣ligentEcclus. 15. 1. Eccl{us}. 2. 16 to do good; and will not disobey his VVorde. And, such as feruently loue the Lord, wil euer be careful to keep his wayes. For, as by the feare of God, our harts areVincentius. first framed to the obedience of his holy will: so through the loue of God▪ vvee are afterwards enforced to goe forward, daily more and more, with ioy and delight in his seruice. Yet, Augustine. ee that loueth GOD best, alwayes feareth him most. §. 6. VVith this holy, religious, and louingGene, 39, 10 11. 12. feare of the Lorde, was the hart of Ioseph the sonne of Iacob fully stored when bee∣ing seruaunt with Potipha in Egipt, hee fledde from the company and vnlawfull li∣king of his maisters wfe.
This true and reuerent feare also of the Almightie, kept the three young menDan. 3. 18. mentioned in Daniell; from falling downe before the false God, vvhich Nabuchad∣nezzar the great King of Babell had sette vp. It likewise caused Daniell himselfe to doDan, 6, 10. contrary to the Decree of Darius. And made the * faire and constant wife of Io∣akim,Dan, 13. to withstand the wit-wanting Re∣thorick of the two Isralite Rulers. Also; whosoeuer else he be, that truelieGueuara. feareth God as he ought, shall vndoubted∣lie finde the same such a stay vnto him in the time of temptation, that he shall there∣by be kept safe from falling in those dan∣gers which lead men into destruction. For, the feare of God, doth not onelieBoetius. withdraw the hand, the eye, & other mem∣bers of the body, from committing euill: but it also helpeth to clense the minde, and to keep the consent thereof from yeelding to euill. Very well therefore saith Saint Bernard;Bernard. That there is nothing of greater force and efficacie, to keepe vs in the grace▪ & fauour of God▪ then to liue cōtinually in his feare: and to eschew by all meanes that may bee,
the performance of our proude and pre∣sumptious thoughts. But if the feare of GOD be once goneBernarde. from a man, then there remaineth in him, nothing else but lewdnes of life, extreame rashnes, forgetfulnes of vertue, & a harm∣full running head-long into all kindes of sinne and wickednes. §. 7. It is written of Iob, that hee was an vp∣right and iust man; one that feared God,Iob, 1, 1, and shewed euill. VVhereby I vnder∣stand, that the true feare of God, kept him vpright in life: and his abstaining frō euill, caused him to be counted iust. And, to shew further, that Iob ledde his whole life in the feare of God, it is as a spe∣ciall testimony, plainly expressed vnto vs by his owne speech, where (in effect) hee thus speaketh, saying: * I am afrayd of allIob, 9, 28, my dooings (ô Lorde) knowing that thou wilt not iudge mee innocent; or, without sinne in thy sight. The Prophet Dauid likewise, although himselfe be many times praysed in the sa∣cred Scriptures, for his religious holinesse, and vprightnes of life: yet to make known vnto all men, how much he was acquainted
with the true feare of GOD, hee spareth not to reueale the same in the hundred and nineteene Psalme; where hee saith: * MyPsalm, 119 120. flesh trembleth for feare of thee (ô Lord,) and I am afrayd of thy iudgements. VVee finde furthermore, that S. Paule the Apostle, was commended by the Lord himselfe, to be an elect and chosen vessellActs, 9, 15, vnto him, to beare his Name before the Gentiles, and Kings of the Earth. Yet notwithstanding, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, by his owne words it is witnessed, how greatly hee feared God in all his actions; as namely, in the 9. chapter, where hee saith: * I doe beate downe my1, Cor. 9. 27 bodie, and bring it into subiection: least by any meanes it should come to passe, that after I haue preached to others, I my selfe should be reproued. §. 8. Thus see wee, both by seuerall sentences and examples, that the Saints of God; yea, such men as vvere most high in Gods fa∣uour, haue alwaies beene carefull to serue their Creator with feare and reuerence. And, without true feare and reuerence,Augustine. no man liuing can be righteous in the sight of God.
Boldly hereby, may we then with Sirach,Eccl{us}, 18, 26 count him a vvise man, that feareth God in all his actions. And rightly with Salomon, pronounceProu. 28. 14 him blessed, that standeth alwaies in dread to doe that which may offend his Maker. But hee that hardneth his owne hart, shall fall into euill. Happy [therefore] is the man, vnto whōEccl{us}. 25. 12. it is graunted to haue the feare of God. And, blessed is the soule of him that fea∣rethEccl{us}. 34. 15 the Lord. Yea;] blessed is euery one that fearethPsal. 128. 1. the Lord, and walketh in his wayes. It shal goe wel with such men at the last,Eccl{us}. 1, 13. and they shall finde fauour in the day of their death. For, who so feareth the Lord, hee shallEccl{us}, 1, 18, prosper; and at the end of his life hee shall be blessed. Yea; the spirits [or soules] of such men,Eccl{us}. 34, 13 shall surely liue: for, their hope is in the Lord their God, that can helpe them.
¶ Of Loue. §. 1. LOue, (as Plotinus saith) is a diuinePlotinus. passion of the soule or Spirit: inspi¦ring it with a celestiall desire of hea¦uenly things; and inflaming the har to God-ward, through the hope vvhich i conceiueth of euerlasting felicitie. But like as I haue saide before of Feare that there are two sorts thereof: so doe I heere certifie vnto euery one that readeth▪ that diuers worldly men, haue out of this holie roote of Loue, deriued tvvo seuerall Trees. Namely, this diuine Loue, whole∣lie dedicated to Pietie: and an immodest affection, extending it selfe to base Concu∣piscence; vvhich they entitle by the name of Loue also. This vile Loue, or rather Concupi∣scence, is, (as Aristotle saith) the vvorstAristotle. worke of a mans Malus Genius. It distur∣beth the passions of the hart, and maketh the sences mad. It is the roote of violence; furie; murders; and execrations: and the sole confounder of all the holy actions of the soule.
Full fraught with this filthy lust-loue, was the heart of wicked Amnon; vvhen2. Sam. 13. through his deceitfull policie, he obtained meanes to abuse by violence, the body of his sister Thamar. But the other Loue, sirnamed Charitie; which is true; perfect; diuine; and onelie sacred: * is the very originall, and cheefeGregory. ground of all godly actions. It is the way of man to God, & the vvayAugustine. of God to man. It is heauens Embassadour to the soule;Rauisius. and the whole scope or fulfilling, of all Gods commaundements. §. 2. This Loue, (as the Apostle saith) suffe∣reth1, Cor, 13, 4. 5, 6, 7. long: It is bountifull: It enuieth not: It doth not boast it selfe: It is not puffed vp: It disdaineth not: It seeketh not that which is her owne: It is not prouoked to anger: It thinketh not euill: It reioyceth not in iniquitie, but reioyceth in the truth: It suffereth all thinges: It beleeueth all things: It hopeth all things: It endureth all things. This loue, teacheth vs true vvisedome;Plato. namely, to loue the soule more then the bo∣dy, & not the body etter then the soule.
This loue, beeing both diuine and cha∣ritable; mooueth a man (according to theDeut, 6, 5, commaundement of God in the Law,) to loue his Maker aboue all things: and hisLeuit, 19. 18 neighbour as deerely as hee loueth him∣selfe. This loue, beeing a good and graciousPlotinus. affect of the soule; so worketh in the harts of the godly, that they haue no fancie to esteeme, value, or ponder any thing in the wide world, beside, or before the care and studie, how to please God. For, the greatest argument of godly loue,Pacuuius. is to loue that which God willeth: and to forbeare to doe that which he hath forbid∣den. §. 3. This loue, resembleth fire; which natu∣rallyErasmus. inflameth all things that it toucheth. This loue, teacheth vs, (according to the commaundement of our Sauiour Christ,)Math, 5, 44. to loue our enemies; to blesse them that curse vs; to do good to them that hate vs; and to pray for them that hurt vs, and per∣secute vs. Yea; this loue, couereth all trespasses.Prou, 10, 12 It is strong as death. Much water cannotCant, 8, 6. 7, quench it: neither can the floods drown it.
This loue, maketh men to forsake sinne,Chrisostome. and embrace vertue. This loue, increaseth fayth; begettethAugustine. hope; and maketh vs at peace with God. This loue, in aduersity is patient; in pro∣speritieBernard. temperate; in passions strong; in good workes quicke; in temptations con∣fident; in hospitality bountifull. This loue, is neuer idle; but alwayes la∣bouringAmbrose. to serue him whom it loueth. §. 4. This loue, (as Pacuuius saith) cannotPacuuius. stand with any worldly care or studie, for the things of this life; neither abideth it the coupling with any other loue. It beareth no partiall affection to kindred. It know∣eth no difference betweene poore & rich. It knoweth not what meaneth mine and thine: Neither can it deuide a foe from a friende. For, hee that truely and perfectlie loueth GOD, loueth him alone; nothing besides him, nor with him; but all thinges indifferently, in him, and for him. By which speech it appeareth, that the * right measure where-with vvee ought toBernard. loue God; is to loue him entirelie, without either end or measure.
Not in part; but in whole: (as hee him∣selfe in his holy VVorde hath willed vs,)Leuit, 6. 5. Luke, 10, 27 namely; vvith all our heart; vvith all our soule; with all our minde; & with all our strength. VVhich speech of GOD, beeing by Maister Becon in a certaine Sermon of hisBecon. expounded, hee enterpreteth the same in this manner; saying: To loue God with all our hart; is to preferre the loue of him, both aboue, & before all things else what∣soeuer. To loue God with all our soule; is to loue him discreetly. To loue God with all our minde; is continually to meditate vpon his commaundements. And, to loue him with all our strength; is manfullie to suffer all kinds of aduersities, with willing∣nesse & patience, for the testimonie of his truth. §. 5. VVith this sacred and religious loue of man to his Maker, was the hart of holie Dauid greatly enflamed, as may for exam∣ple be seen in sundry places of his psalmes; where, in zealous affection to the Lorde and his Lavv, he first of all saith: * OnePsalm, 27. 4, thing haue I desired of the Lorde, the which I will still require; euen that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the daies of my life; to beholde the beauty of the Lord, and to visite his holy Temple. I haue loued, ô Lord, (saith hee) the ha∣bitationPsalm, 26. 8, of thine house; & the place where thine honour dwelleth. The zeale of thine house (ô Lord) hathPsalm, 69, 6. eaten mee vp. One day in thy Courts, is better then aPsal, 84, 10. thousand other-where. I had rather be a Doore-keeper in the house of my GOD, then to dwell in the Tents of the vngodly. As the Hart brayeth for the Riuers ofPsal, 42, 1, 2, water, so panteth my soule after thee (ô Lord.) My soule thirsteth for God, euen for the liuing God. When shall I come & appeare before the presence of God? I will loue thee deerely (ô Lorde) myPsal, 18. 1. strength. VVhom haue I (ô Lord) in heauen butPsal, 73, 25. thee? and there is none vpon earth, that I desire, in comparison of thee. I haue longed (ô Lord) for thy saluati∣on:Ps. 119. 174. and thy law is my delight. Oh how I loue thy law! It is my medita∣tionPsal, 119. 97 continually. Oh teach mee thy statutes (ô Lorde,)Psalm, 119. 26, 27. make mee to vnderstand the vvay of thy
commaundements; and I will meditate in thy wondrous workes. Teach mee (ô Lord) the way of thy sta∣tutes;Psal, 119, 33 34, & I will keepe it vnto the end. Giue mee vnderstanding, and I will keepe thy Law: yea, I will keepe it with my vvhole hart. Direct me in the path of thy commaun∣dements;verse, 35, for therein is my delight. Behold, I desire thy commaundements;verse, 40, quicken me in thy righteousnes. And,] incline my hart vnto thy testimo∣nies.verse, 36, Deale with thy seruaunt (ô Lord) accor∣dingPs, 119, 124. 125. to thy mercie, and teach mee thy sta∣tutes. I, ô Lord, am thy seruaunt, graunt mee therefore vnderstanding, that I may know thy testimonies. Looke vpon mee, and be mercifull vntoPsalm, 119, 132. mee, as thou vsest to doe vnto those that loue thy Name. Direct my steps in thy Worde, and letverse, 133. none iniquitie haue dominion ouer me. Teach mee to doe thy will; for thou artPsal, 143. 10 my God. Let thy good Spirit lead me vn∣to the Land of righteousnesse. By these, and manie moe such like say∣ings in the Booke of Psalmes, dooth thys
princely Prophet make manifest, (as I said before) with vvhat earnest zeale & feruent affection, hee alwayes loued the Lord and his Law. The true and perfect loue also of man to his Maker, was (as it seemeth) deeply roo∣ted in the hart of old Eleazer, when he re∣fused all the friendship & worldly fauours,2, Mac, 6, 28 that were offered vnto him by the seruants of Antiochus; and chose rather to suffer death by torments, then to saue his life by breaking the rules of his Religion. With the like loue and constancie, did the seauen brethren and their mother, en∣dure2, Mac. 7. death by tortures, vnder that wicked Tyrant Antiochus; and left behinde them a woorthy remembrance of their feruent affection to the Lawe of the Lorde their God. VVe reade also in the Newe-testament, that Saint Stephen the first Martir afterActs, 7, 59. Christ, through his religious loue to his Lord and Maister, willingly suffered him∣selfe to be stoned to death: commending his spirit into the hands of his Creator. And such like diuine and holy loue to Christ our Captaine, ought euery Chri∣stian professor to harbour in his heart, else
may it greatly be doubted, that hee shall shoote short of life euerlasting. §. 6. But, as I said in the beginning, this loue is both diuine and charitable. First, mouing man to loue the Lord and his lawe, for the sundry blessings and benefits, which God both already hath, and daily doth bestowe vppon him through Christ. Secondlie, to loue his neighbour, or brother, as himselfe; because GOD in his holy Worde hath so commaunded him: and for that hee is the very forme of his own Image or likenes. With which kinde of charitable loue of man to man, or man to his neighbour, was the heart of the Samaritane softned: vvhoLuke, 10. 33 34, 35. finding a stranger in the high-vvay halfe dead, first bound vp the wounds of his bo∣dy, & then setting him vpon his own beast, brought him to an Inne, and made proui∣sion for him; commaunding the Host of the house to take care of him: and looke (quoth he) what-soeuer the charges of this man commeth vnto, more then the two pence which I now giue thee; at my next comming hether, I will pay thee all. But, with more then charitable loue of man to his neighbour, was the hart of holy
Moises moued, when through his great af∣fection hee prayed vnto the Lord, to par∣don the foolish and Idolatrous sinne of his people. Yea, such was his feruent affection & more thē charitable loue towards them, that he desired of GOD in his prayer, toExod, 32, 32 graunt, that theyr foule offence might be forgiuen; or else his owne name to be rased out of the Booke of life. And, vvith more also then charitable loue of man to his neighbour, was the A∣postle Saint Paule acquainted, when verie zeale for Gods glory, and loue to his owne Nation, enforced him to say: * I vvouldRom, 9, 3. wish my selfe to be separated from Christ, [or to loose mine owne saluation] for my Bretheren; that are my kinsmen according to the flesh. I terme these two last ensamples more then charitable loue, because it made these men ready to refuse their ovvne soules health, rather then their Brethren should be vnpardoned; and cast from their Crea∣tor for their offences. §. 7. By which few examples onely, wee may sufficiently perceiue the forcible effect of true and perfect loue; and iustly may wee
confesse with the afore-named Apostle, That * although we speak with the tungs1, Cor, 13, 1, 2, 3. of men and Angels, and haue not loue, we are but as sounding Brasse, or a tinckling Cymball. And though wee had the gift of prophecie, and knewe all secrets, and all knowledge: yea, if we had all fayth, so that we could remoue mountaines, and had not loue, we were nothing. And though vvee feede the poore with all our goods, & giue our bodies to be burned, & haue not loue, it profiteth vs nothing. For, God hath chosen vs in Christ Ie∣sus,Ephe, 1, 4, before the foundation of the World, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in loue. And this commaundement haue we of1, Ioh, 4, 21. him; that he which loueth GOD, should loue his brother also. For, as a King is honoured in his Image,Bernard. so God in man, is either loued or hated: hee cannot hate man, who loueth GOD, neither can hee loue GOD, who hateth man. Also; like as the body without the souleFulgoti. enioyeth no life; so all other vertues with∣out godlie loue, are but colde and fruit∣lesse.
§. 8. If wee loue one another, (saith S. Iohn,)1, Ioh, 4, 12, God dwelleth in vs, and his loue is perfect in vs. Also,] hee that loueth his Brother, abi∣deth1, Ioh, 2, 10, in the light, & there is none occasion of euill in him. But he that hateth his brother, is in dark∣nesse,verse, 11. and walketh in darknesse; & know∣eth not vvhether hee goeth; because that darknesse hath blinded his eyes. §. 9. Loue, (saith the Apostle) doth no euillRom, 13, 10 to his neighbour: therefore is loue the ful∣filling of the lawe. For, all the law is fulfilled in one vvord,Gala. 5, 14. which is this: Thou shalt loue thy neigh∣bour as thy selfe. Wherefore,] If any man say, I loue1, Ioh, 4, 20. God, and hate his brother, he is a lyer; for howe can hee that loueth not his brother whom he hath seene, loue God, whom he neuer saw? Moreouer; Whosoeuer he be, that hath this worlds good, & seeth his brother haue1, Iohn. 3, 17 neede, and shutteth vp his compassion from him: howe dwelleth the loue of God in him?
For, by the true and perfect loue whichErasmus. we beare vnto God, we rightly vnderstand what our dutie is towards our neighbour. And, this is the cōmaundement of God,1, Ioh, 3, 11. which we haue heard from the beginning: That we should loue one another. * EuenEphe, 5, 2. as Christ himselfe hath loued vs. §. 10. Beloued, let vs [therefore] loue one an∣other:1. Ioh, 4, 7, 8, for, loue commeth of God, & eue∣rie one that loueth, is borne of God, and knoweth God. He that loueth not, know∣eth not God; for God is loue. Let vs not loue in vvorde; neither in1. Ioh. 3. 18. tongue onely; but in deede and in truth. That we may walke worthy of the voca∣tionEphe, 1, 1, 2. 3. where-vnto wee are called: vvith all humblenes of minde, & meekenesse: with long suffering, supporting one another through loue; endeuouring to keepe the vnitie of the Spirit, in the bond of peace.
¶ What the will and desire of Almighty God is concerning men: and how louingly he admo∣nisheth euery one to come to repentance: pro∣mising mercy & forgiuenes to all those that amend. 2. ESDRAS. 7. verse. 20. 21. Many perrish in this life, because they despise the Law of God that is appointed. For, God hath di∣ligently admonished such as came, so oft as they came, what they should doe to haue life; and what they should obserue to auoyd punishment. ¶ What the will of God is. &c. §. 1. THis is the will of God, (as saith the Apostle) euen our sanctification:1. Thes. 4. 3. 4. 5. 6. that we should abstaine from forni∣cation: that euery one of vs should knowe howe to possesse his vessell in holi∣nesse and honour: and not in the lust of concupiscence, as doe the Heathen which know not God: that no man oppresse or defraude his brother, in any matter; for the Lord is the auenger of all such things.
He therefore that despiseth these things,1, Thes, 4, 8. despiseth not man but God, who hath gi∣uen vnto vs his holy Spirit. And, whose will is, that all men should1, Tim, 2, 4, be saued, and come vnto the knowledge of the truth. For, it is not the will of God that one ofMath, 18, 14 the least should be lost. §. 2. Deerely beloued, (saith S. Peter) be not2, Pet, 3, 8, 9, ignorant of this one thing; that one day is with the Lord, as a thousand yeeres, and a thousand yeeres as one day. The Lord is not slack concerning the promise [of his comming,] (as some men count slacknes,) but is patient toward vs; & would haue no man to perrish; but would haue all men to come to repentance. For, GOD would not that man should2, Esdr. 8, 59, perrish. But, vnto them that will repent, hee gi∣uethEccl{us}, 17, 22 them grace to returne; and exhorteth such as faile vvith patience: and sendeth them the portion of the veritie. Amend your liues therefore, and turne,Acts, 3, 19. that your sinnes may be put away, when the time of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.
And, as it came into your minde, to goeBaruc, 4, 28. astray from your God, so endeuour your selues tenne times more, to turne againe, & to seeke him. For, he that is Lord ouer all, is rich vntoRom. 10, 12 all that call vpon him. §. 3. Make no tarrying to turne vnto theEcclus, 5. 7. Lord: neither put it off from day to day: for, suddainly shall the wrath of the Lord breake forth, and in thy securitie thou shalt be destroyed: & thou shalt perrish in time of vengeance. VVherefore, as the holy Ghost sayth:Hebr, 3, 7, 8, To day, if yee shall heare his voyce, harden not your harts. Yea;] this day, if yee heare his voyce,Heb, 4, 7, harden not your harts. For, it is a fearefull thing, to fall into theHeb, 10, 31, hands of the liuing God. §. 4. VVee finde in the eyghteene of Eze∣chiell, and the 23. verse, that the Almigh∣tie, by the mouth of the same Prophet, ex∣horting the Children of Israell to repen∣tance, first maketh this demaund of them;Ezec, 18, 23 saying: * Haue I any desire that the wic∣ked
should die? or shall hee not liue if hee returne from his wayes? Then followeth in the 27. and 28. ver∣ses,Ezec, 18, 27 28, 31, 32, sundry promises of Gods loue & mer∣cie, vnto him that truly repenteth, and for∣saketh his sinnes. And, in the 31. & 32. verses of the same chapter, he thus concludeth all his former speech held with them to that purpose, say∣ing: Cast away from you all your trans∣gressions, whereby you haue transgressed: and make you a newe heart, and a nevve Spirite; for vvhy vvill yee die, ô house of Israell? For, I desire not the death of him that dieth: cause therefore one another to re∣turne, and liue. §. 5. We finde likewise in the prophecie of E∣say, that the Lord, beeing there desirous to withdraw that wicked & obstinate people of Israell, from their greeuous offences, (in which too long they had wilfully con∣tinued;) beginneth also first with a gentle admonishment, saying: * VVashe you:Esay, 1, 16, 17, make you cleane; take away the euill of your workes from before mine eyes: cease to do euill; learne to doe well; seeke iudge∣ment;
relieue the oppressed; iudge the fa∣therlesse; and defend the widdow. And, hauing thus fore-told them vvhat they ought to doe, hee then presently ad∣deth: * Come nowe, and let vs reason to∣gether;Esay, 1, 18, though your sinnes were as Crim∣son, they shall be made white as snowe: though they were redde, like Skarlet, they shall be as vvooll. Declaring heereby vnto vs, howe readie he is to receiue them that truly repent; and how prone to put all their former offences, cleane out of his remembrance. As may further appeare againe, euen by the witnesse of his owne wordes in the 18. chapter of the afore-named Ezechiell; vvhere hee saith: * If the wicked will re∣turneEzec, 18, 21. from all his sinnes that he hath com∣mitted, & keepe all my statutes, & do that which is lawfull and right; hee shall surely liue, and shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath com∣mitted,verse, 22. they shall not be mentioned vnto him: but in his righteousnes that hee hath done, he shall liue. Moreouer; VVhen the wicked (saithEzec, 18. 27 hee) turneth away from his wickednes that he hath committed, and doth that which is
lavvfull and right, hee shall saue his soule aliue. Because hee considereth, and turneth a∣wayverse, 28, from all his transgressions that he hath committed, hee shall surely liue, and shall not die. Againe; vvhen I, saith the most Merci∣full,Ezech. 33, 14, 15, shall say vnto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die: if hee turne from his sinnes, and doe that which is lawfull and right; to wit: If hee restore the pledge, and giue againe that hee had taken away by robberie, and walke in the statutes of life, without com∣mitting iniquitie, then shall hee surely liue, and not die. None of the sinnes that hee hath com∣mitted,verse, 16, shall be mentioned vnto him, [or any more thought vpon,] for, insomuch as he doth nowe the thing that is lawfull and right, hee shall surely liue. §. 6. These places of Scripture onely, if no moe such could be found, might serue suf∣ficiently to proue▪ that God delights not in a sinners death. Yet notwithstanding, for our greater comfort, and as it were more certaine assurance, the Lord, besides his promise, hath vouchsafed to giue his oath
to this effect. And because he knewe none, eyther in heauen or earth, greater to sweare by, hee hath therefore sworne vnto vs by himselfe, saying: * As truly as I liue, I haueEzec. 33, 11. no pleasure in the death of the vvicked: but rather, that the wicked shoulde turne from his euill way and liue. And, to make yet a little more manifest how greatly he desireth our good; he spa∣reth not by sundry other speeches, both in the old and New-Testament, to expresse his kindnes and compassion towards vs, in this poynt. As namely, in the fift Booke of Moises, vvhere hee saith: * Oh that thereDeut, 5, 29. were such a hart in my people, as to feare mee, and to keepe all my cōmaundements alway: that it might goe vvell vvith them, and with their children for euer. Behold, (saith he) I stand at the doore &Reue, 3, 20, knock: if any man heare my voyce, and open the doore, I will come in vnto him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Also; by the voyce of his Gospell, hee daily more nowe then euer heretofore, ma∣nifesteth his euerlasting loue towardes vs: in that he therby vouchsafeth cōtinually to call vs; saying: * Come vnto mee, all yetMath. 11. 28 that are weary & laden, and I wil ease ou▪
Take my yoake on you, & learne of me,verse, 29, 30 that am meeke and lowly in hart; and yee shall finde rest vnto your soules. For, my yoake is easie, and my burden light. § 7. Clense [therefore] your hands, yee sin∣ners;Iames. 4. 8, and purge your harts yee vvauering minded. Circumcise the fore-skin of your hearts,Deut. 10, 16 and harden your necks no more. Returne vnto the ord; and he will re∣turneMala, 3, 7, vnto you. Cease from your sinnes, and forget your2, Esdr. 16. 59, iniquities, and medle no more from hence∣forth with them: so shall God leade you foorth, and deliuer you from all troubles. Yea, let the wicked forsake his wayes, &Esay, 55, 7, the vnrighteous his ovvne imaginations; and returne vnto the Lord, and hee vvill haue mercy vpon him: and to our GOD, for, hee is very ready to forgiue. §. 8. Returne then vnto the Lord, and forsakeEccl{us}, 17, 23 thy sinnes: make thy prayer before his face, and take away the offence. Turne againe vnto the most High: forverse, 24, hee will bring thee from darknes to whol∣some
light: forsake thine vnrighteousnes, and hate greatly all abhomination. Learne to know the righteousnesse andverse, 25, iudgements of God; stand in the portion that is sette forth for thee, and in the prayer of the most high GOD: and goe in the portion of the holie world, with such as be liuing and confesse God. Also; if thou be withered and worne a∣wayChrisostome. of sin, renew thy selfe againe, through hartie sorrow, and true repentance. For godly sorrowe, causeth repentance2, Cor, 7, 10, vnto saluation; not to be repented of: but worldly sorrow causeth death. And, the best remedy if thou hast offen∣ded,Hermes. is true repentance, and amendement of life. §. 9. But to the ende we may some-what the better vnderstand what true repentance is, I will heere rehearse some fewe places col∣lected frō diuers of the diuine Doctors of the Church: and first of all, from S. Au∣gustine, vvhere, speaking to this purpose, hee saith: * True repentance, is greatly toAugustine. deplore sinnes past, and fully to resolue in minde & hart, neuer to commit any heere∣after.
It consisteth of three parts: namelie, Contrition of hart; Confession of mouth; and Satisfaction of deede. For, vvee haue (saith hee) offended God three manner of wayes; by the delight of thought: by the lapse of tongue: & by the pride of works: And these three are to be cured by three contrary remedies. Delight of thought, by the inward sorrow & contrition of the hart. The lapse of tongue, by the confession of the mouth. And the pride of works, by our vpright liuing, and vncorrupted satis-fac∣tion. Contrition, is a hartie sorrowe & inwardBernarde. greefe, taken for the sinnes which we haue already committed: with a full inten: and purpose of confession and satisfaction; & heereafter not to commit any more. For otherwise, thy repentance is no trueAugustine. repentance, but rather seemeth to be fai∣ned; if thou pollute thy selfe againe vvith thy former offences: & thy penitent teares are to small purpose, if thou multiply thine iniquities. For, true repentance is to cease from sinne. Wee ought also, in the true contrition ofCassianus. hart, to be sorowfull for these three things; First, for the sinnes wee haue committed:
Secondly, for the good wee haue omitted: Thirdly, for the time we haue lost. And this kinde of contrition, is more a∣uailableAugustine. in the sight of God, then to goe on pilgrimage throughout the world. §. 10. Confession, which hath the second placeAugustine. in true repentance, is the health of the soule; an expeller of vices; a restorer of vertue; an impugner of wicked spirits: & an impediment of the deuill. By it, the lurking disease of the soule isIsidore. opened, to the praise of God: & through it, we obtaine hope of pardon for all our offences past. Besides; vvhen the confession of theAmbrose. hart, proceedeth forth of the mouth, then the vengeance of GOD ceaseth to pursue the penitent person. And, hee likewise that accuseth himselfeAugustine. of his sinnes, preuenteth thereby the deuill of his purpose; so that hee cannot accuse him at the day of iudgement: if in confes∣sing his sinnes vnto God, he blot those of∣fences out by repentance, which hee hath cōmitted: and cease to renew those sinnes againe, which he now is sorry for.
For, those sinnes shall neuer be condem∣nedLeo. in iudgement, which were purged be∣fore, with confession & true repentance. Neither is Iesus Christ any longer theyrCassiodoru. Iudge, but their Aduocate, vvho accuse themselues by their owne confession. So that confession, ioyned with true con∣trition,Augustine. openeth the gates of heauen, and stoppeth the mouth of hell. §. 11. Satisfaction, beeing the third & last partAugustine. of repentance, is; cheefely to cutte off the causes of such sinnes, as in former time we haue loued; & not to cherrish henceforth by suggestions, any entrance into them. For, wee doe not truly satis-fie, althoughGregory. wee cease from iniquitie; vnlesse wee per∣secute by opposite bewailings, the euils which heere-to-fore wee haue most affec∣ted; & endeuour with all our might, dai∣ly to with-stand all such kind of pleasures, as prouoke men to sin and wickednes. Wee ought also to vnderstand, that inPhil. Mel. the worke of true repentance, satis-faction is to be made three seuerall waies. First, vn∣to God: to wit, when through faith and confidence, wee humbly present our selues
in prayer before him, and earnestly intreate his maiestie, that he will vouchsafe, to ac∣cept the passion and death of his Sonne Christ, as a perfect, full, and sufficient sa∣tisfaction, for all the sinnes which we haue committed. Secondly, satis-faction is to be made vn∣to the Church, after Excommunication, for such offences as we haue done: testify∣ing thereby, both in the sight of God and man, our humble submission and vnfained repentance. Thirdly, satisfaction ought to be made vnto our neighbour or brother, if we haue any way wronged him, either in vvord or deede: namely thus; hee must be recom∣pensed by confessing the fault vnto him: and restitution must likewise be made, ac∣cording to the damage we haue done him: otherwise, our repentance is greatly to bee suspected of hipocrisie, if (beeing able) we make not recompence by restitution. Againe; in making satis-faction, the re∣conciliation,Chrisostome. ought to be equall to the pre∣cedent offence; and thou oughtest to bee as ready to lament, as thou wast to offend. And, as thine intent was before to offend, such also ought now thy deuotion to be in
repenting: For, according to the greatnes of thy sinnes, ought the greatnesse of thy greefe & sorrowe to be: and as thy delight and loue was before, to those things which were euill; so ought now thy hatred & lo∣thing to be against those things vvhich are euill. §. 12. Vnderstanding novve by these fevve former speeches vvhat true repentance is; * Let vs, (according to the counsell whichLament. 3. 40, 41. the Prophet Ieremie giueth,) search & try our wayes, and turne againe vnto the Lord. Let vs lift vp our harts with our hands vn∣to God in the heauens. Yea, let vs, (as Erasmus willeth,) returneErasmus. againe vnto the Lord our God, with hartie sorrow, and true repentance; humbly con∣fessing before him, the faultes which vvee haue committed; and earnestly desiring of him, that hee vvill alvvaies heereafter, so strengthen vs with his grace, that wee may daily more & more, dutifully becom obe∣dient to his holy will, & euer study to please him, our whole life time following. For, if we acknowledge our sinnes, God1, Ioh, 1, 9. is faithfull and iust, to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to clense vs from all vnrighteousnes.
Hee that hideth his sinnes, shall not pro∣sper;Prou, 28. 13 but hee that confesseth, & forsaketh them, shall haue mercie. Wherfore, if the testimony of thine ownPacuuius. conscience, doe at any time accuse, vexe, or trouble thee, for any euill conceiued or done; confesse thy fault speedily, deferre not the time; dally not with God; but bee earnestly repentant; trust in his mercy, and seeke not to hide thine iniquity from him: so will he haue compassion on thee, & not impute sinne vnto thee. Besides; when thou truly repentest, and askest pardon of God for thine offences:Botius. then cannot thy sinnes disquiet thee, nor haue any power to hurt thee. But vvhen thou art vnrepentant, and ceaest to call for mercie, then thy sinnes rage ouer thee, and cry dailie vnto God for vengeance against thee. Also; the sinne that is not foorth-withGregory. clensed, and purged by repentance, doth speedily draw on another with his weight. Sleepe not therefore without repentancePlato. for thy sinnes done and past. §. 13. It behooueth a man so to liue (saith Ba∣sill,)Basill. that hee looke for death euery howre:
and to be alwaies in a readines for the com∣ming of death. For, as God findeth thee to bee when heGueuara. calleth thee, so will he iudge thee. And, as the tree falleth, so shall it be ta∣kenEccles, 11, 3. vp. Trouble not thy selfe then with takingScrates. thought how thou maist liue long, but ra∣ther be careful to liue well: and forasmuch as thou ar vncertaine in what place Death abideth fo thee▪ be thou ready prepared in eac plac to mte him. Let not thy ea be layde downe to rest,Isidore. before thou hast considered how thou hast bestowed the day past: If thou hast vvell done, giue thanks to God; if otherwise, re∣pent, and aske him forgiuenesse. Also; if thou intend to doe well, deferrePlato. it not till to morow; for thou knowest not what may chaunce vnto thee this night. Neuer trust too much to time; for it sud∣dainlieHermes. deceiueth them that trust thereto. Thinke not, that another time vvill beRauisius. soone enough for thee to repent, if thou now feele thy conscience touched with the remembrance of thy sinne. For although we finde, that God in ma∣nyGregory. places of his holy Word, hath promised
pardon to the penitent; yet we no where read, that euer hee promised to morrowe vnto a sinner. §. 14. Certainly, (saith Aurelius,) those menMar. Aurel. doe liue very euill, that are alwaies begin∣ning to liue well: forasmuch as theyr often beginnings, doe make theyr liues still more and more vnperfect. Well therefore saith Zenophon, that toZenophon. see, is a small matter; but to fore-see, is a token of good wit. And the difference betweene a wise manDigenes. and a foole is this: the one is prouident to preuent an euill before it come; the other wisheth for remedy, when it is too late. As may for example more plainelie be perceiued, by reading the different doings of these two men following. Baltazar the king of Babel, (as Daniell affirmeth,) euen in the time of his banquetting amongst hisDan. 5. 5. 6. thousand Princes, perfectly discerned the hande of a man, writing vppon the plaister of his wall, and was greatly (for the time) terrified thereby; insomuch, that the verie ioynts of his loynes were loosed, his coun∣tenaunce changed, his thoughts troubled, and his knees smote one against the other
for feare of Gods iudgements. Yea, by Da∣niels diuine interpretation, hee also vnder∣stoodverse, 25. the misticall meaning of those words which were written; the summe vvhereof, cōtained no lesse (for his offences) then the speedy subuersion of his whole kingdom, and his owne vtter ouerthrovve for euer. Yet seeing, and knowing all this, but wan∣ting grace to fore-see, & preuent the dan∣ger by true repentance, hee perrished theverse, 30. same night, according to the saying of the Prophet. Contrariwise; by Samuell it is affirmed: that king Dauid did not only see the foule∣nesse of his offence, wherein too long hee had (in a manner) sencelesly liued, so soone as the shril-sounding voyce of Nathan, had once (by denouncing Gods anger) tho∣rowly2, Sam. 12. chap. awaked him out of his deadly slum∣ber: but also presently fore-saw, by belee∣uing the speech of the Prophet, & speedi∣lie preuented, by his vnfained repentance and amendement, the heauy wrath of the Almighty; which otherwise was likely for his iniquitie, to fall vpon him. Marke therefore, what counsell Sirach giueth to this purpose, and endeuour dili∣gently to follow the same, where he sayth:
My * sonne, hast thou sinned? doe so noEccl{us}. 21. 1. 2 more; but pray for thy former sinnes that they may be forgiuen thee. Flee frō sin, as from a Serpent; for if thou commest too neere it, it will bite thee: the teeth thereof, are as the teeth of a Lyon, to sley the soules of men. Make much [also] of time; and eschewEcclus, 4, 20 the thing that is euill. Remember that death tarrieth not, andEccl{us}, 14, 12 that the couenaunt of the graue is not shewed vnto thee. Defraude not thy selfe of the good day;Eccl{us}, 14, 14 neither let the portion of good desires o∣uer-passe thee. Giue and take, and sanctifie thy soule:verse, 16. vvork thou righteousnes before thy death, for in the hell there is no meate to finde. Neither is there any more place or timeCyprian. of repentance left for any man, after hee is once departed out of this vvorlde: life is heere either lost or wonne: euerlasting sal∣uation is onely heere prouided for, by the due worshipping of God, and the fruites of fayth. And no man is letted, eyther by sinnesCyprian. or by yeeres, to come to the obtaining of saluation: for, as long as the soule is yet
abyding in the body, no repentance is in vaine. And, what-soeuer is truly doone, is neuer too late done. Yet thus much alwaies vnderstand, thatOsorius. thy repentance is then most acceptable to God, when thou doost offer the same in the prime of thy youth, and in the time of thy perfect health: For, such as neuer cease to sin, till sin (through age & feeblenes) be∣gin to forsake them; it may greatly be fea∣red, that they in the meane while, daily drinke vp the dreggs of Gods wrath. §. 15. Furthermore; although there be indeed,Augustine. * many in the vvorld, which are not asha∣med to sinne, but are ashamed to repent; yet if thou looke for fauour in Heauen, thou must both confesse and forsake thy sinnes heere on earth. For, hee that heere in this life, receiuethAmbrose. not remission of his sinnes: shall haue no part with the godly, in the felicity to come. Followe therefore, for thine owne good, the example of King Dauid; and with the like humility of heart, be ready to say vnto God, as he said: * Lord haue mercy vponPsalm, 41, 4, me; and heale my soule, for I haue sinned against thee.
Or, as Manasses King of Iuda, in his pe∣nitent2, Chro, 36. prayer, said: * I haue sinned, ô Lord, I haue sinned, aboue the number of the sand of the Sea. My transgressions are mul∣tiplied, my offences: are exceeding manie: and I am not vvoorthy to behold and see the height of the heauens, by reason of the multitude of mine iniquities. For, I haue prouoked thy wrath, and done euill before thee. I did not thy will, neyther kept I thy commaundements. Nowe therefore I bowe the knee of my hart, beseeching thee of grace. I haue sin∣ned, (ô Lord) I haue sinned: & I acknow∣ledge my transgressions: but I humbly be∣seech thee to forgiue mee. O Lord for∣giue mee, and destroy mee not vvith my transgressions. Be not angry with mee for euer, by reseruing euill for mee: neither condemne me into the lower parts of the earth. For, thou art the God, euen the God of them that repent: and in mee thou vvilt shew all thy goodnes: for, thou (ô Lord) vvilt saue mee, that am vnvvoorthy; ac∣cording to thy great mercie: therefore I will praise thee for euer, all the dayes of my life. &c.
Or, as the prodigall sonne spoken of by Christ, in the gospell did: remember thine owne estate in time: liue no longer like a slaue to sinne, and a stranger from the fel∣lowship of the faithfull; but rather returne home, & say vnto God thy Father, as hee said to his: * I haue sinned, ô Father, a∣gainst heauen, and before thee; and am noLuke, 15, 16 more worthy to be called thy sonne: make me as one of thy hired seruaunts. And thou shalt surely finde, if thou make an vnfained conuersion, that the Lord thy God will be ready to receiue thee. For, there * is more ioy among the Angels inLuke, 15, 7. Heauen, for one sinner that conuerteth; then for ninetie and nine iust men, vvhich neede none amendement of life. Yea; at the true repentance and conuer∣sionBernard. of sinners, the Father reioyceth; the Sonne reioyceth; and the holy Ghost re∣ioyceth. The first, figured in the prodigall Sonne. The second, in the lost sheep. The third, because they are the temple & cho∣sen vessels of the holy Ghost, euen all the Angels in heauen doe reioyce. §. 16. O how good a thing is it then, (as SirachEccl{us}. 20. 4. saith,) so soone as thou art reprooued, to
manifest thy repentance! for thereby shalt thou escape wilfull sinne. Who so hateth to be reformed, is in theEcclus, 21, 6. way of sinners: but hee that feareth the Lord, conuerteth in hrt. Seeke the Lord [therefore] vvhile heeEsay, 55, 6, may be founde: call vpon him while he is neere. For, hee vvill be founde of them thatWisd. 1. 2. tempt him not; and appeareth vnto such as proue not vnfaithfull vnto him. Get thee righteousnes before thou comeEccl{us}. 18. 18 to iudgement. Learne before thou speake, and vse phisicke or euer thou be sicke. Examine thy selfe, before thou bee iud∣ged;verse, 19. and in the day of the visitation thou shalt finde mercy. Humble thy selfe, before thou be sicke:verse. 20. and whilst thou maist yet sinne, shewe thy conuersion. Let nothing let thee to pray alwayes vn∣toverse, 21. God: and deferre not vnto death to be reformed: for the reward of GOD endu∣reth for euer. And, in what place or state soeuer a manGregory. shall be founde, when he departeth out of this life, in the same state and degree, the last day of the worlde shall finde him.
For, such as euery man shall be in the dayAugustine. of his death; [concerning eyther his ver∣tue or vice,] euen such shall hee appeare againe before God, in the day of generall iudgement. And, except wee be conuerted, & be∣comeMath, 18, 3, as little children, wee shall not enter into the kingdome of heauen. Not chyldren in vnderstanding, but as1. Cor. 14, 15. concerning maliciousnesse, [or any other euill,] we must be children: and, in vnder∣standing of a ripe ag.
¶ What manner of seruice is required of vs during this life: both towards God and our neighbour. ECCLVS. 15. verse, 17. Before man is life and death; good and euill; what him liketh, shall be giuen him. ¶ What seruice God requireth. &c. §. 1. WHen Christ our Sauiour vvas demaunded by a certaine Ru∣lerMath, 19, 16, 17, Luke, 18, 18 this question; Good Mai∣ster, vvhat good thing shall I doe▪ that I may haue eternall life? He pre∣sently returned him this aunswer; saying: Why callest thou mee good? there is none good, but one; euen God: but if thou wilt enter into life, keepe the commaunde∣dements. And, beeing likewise asked at an other time by a tempting Pharisee, vvhich was the greatest, or cheefest commaundementMath. 22, 36 37, &c. in the lawe of God? Hee forth-with made this reply vnto the partie; saying: Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God, with all thine hart; with all thy soule; and with all thy
minde. This is the first, and the greatest commaundement. And the second is like vnto this: Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. On these two commaunde∣ments, hangeth the whole Lawe and the Prophets. Also; being in talke with his owne Di∣sciples, a little before the time of his suffe∣ring; amongst many other things which he then taught, hee gaue this short lesson fol∣lowing, as a speciall rule for them to direct their life by, saying: * If yee loue me, keepIohn, 14, 15 my commaundements. And, as in the 15. of S. Iohns Gospell,Iohn, 15, 14 our Sauiour Christ counteth all those men to be his friendes, which doe whatsoeuer hee hath commaunded them. So in the second of S. Iohns Epistle, the1, Ioh, 2, 4. holy Ghost reckoneth euery one to bee a lyer, which saith, hee knoweth God, and keepeth not his commaundements. Take heede therefore, that ye doe as theDeut, 5, 32. Lord your God hath commaunded you: turne not aside to the right hande, nor to the left. But vvalke in all the vvayes vvhich theverse. 33. Lord your God hath commaunded you: that yee may liue, and  that it may goe
well with you; and that your dayes may be prolonged in the Land which ye possesse. §. 2. Let not the Booke of the Law, (as saithIosua, 1, 8, the Lord vnto Iosua) depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day & night: that thou maist obserue & doe, according to all that is written therein; for, then shalt thou make thy way prosperous; and then shalt thou haue good successe. Yea; let thy minde, be vppon the ordi∣nauncesEccl{us}. 6, 38 of the Almighty, & be thou con∣tinually occupied in his cōmaundements: so shall he stablish thy heart, and giue thee wisedome at thine owne desire. For, the knowledge of the commaunde∣mentsEccl{us}, 19, 19 of God, is the doctrine of life: and they that obey him, shall receiue the fruite of immortalitie. §. 3. Delight thy selfe [then] in the Lord [thyPsalm, 37, 4, God,] & the shall giue thee thy harts desire. Commit thy workes vnto him, and thyProu, 16, 3, thoughts shall be directed. Loue the Lord all thy life long, and callEccl{us}, 13, 15 vpon him for thy saluation. Beleeue in him, and hee will helpe thee;Ecclus, 2, 6, order thy way , & trust in him: hold
fast his feare; and growe old therein. Trust in him with all thine hart, & leaneProu. 3. 5, 6, 7. not vnto thine owne wisedome. In all thy wayes acknowledge him, and hee shall di∣rect thy steps. Be not wise in thine ovvne eyes, but feare the Lord, and depart from euill▪ So health shall be vnto thy nauell, andverse, 8, marrow vnto thy bones. §. 4. The Lorde (saith Msah) hath shovvedMica. 6, 8, thee, ô man, what is good; and vvhat hee requireth of thee: namely, to doe iustice; to loue mercy; and to humble thy selfe to walke with thy God. And now, ô Israell, (saith Moises) whatDeut, 10, 12 is it that the Lord thy GOD requireth of thee; but to feare the Lord thy God; to walke in all his waies; and to loue him, and serue him, with all thine hart, and with all thy soule. For, this commaundement which I cō∣maundDeut, 30, 11 thee this day, is not hid from thee; neither is it farre off. It is not in heauen, that thou shouldestverse, 12, 13, say; Who shall goe vp for vs to heauen, & bring it vs, and cause vs to heare it that wee may doe it? Neither is it beyond the Sea;
that thou shouldest say; Who shall goe o∣uer the Sea for vs, and bring it vs, & cause vs to heare it, that we may doe it? But the Word is very neere vnto thee:verse, 14, euen in thy mouth, and in thy hart, for to doe it. And this (saith the Apostle) is the wordRom, 10, 8, of faith which vvee preach. §. 5. If any man (saith Saint Peter) long after1, Pet, 3. 10. 11. life, and to see good daies; let him refraine his tongue from euill, and his lips that they speake not guile. Let him eschew euill, and doe good: let him seeke peace, and follow after it. Let euery man be swift to heare; sloweIam, 1, 19, to speake; and slow to wrath. (For, he that hath knowledge, sparethProu. 17, 27 his speech. And, hee that sinneth not in vvord, is aIames. 3, 2. perfect man; and able to bridle his vvhole bodie.) Bee swift to heare good things; and letEcclus, 5, 12 thy life be pure; and giue a patient aun∣swere. If thou hast vnderstanding, aunswer thyverse, 13. neighbour: if not, lay thy hand vppon thy
mouth; least thou be trapped in an vndis∣creet word, and so be blamed. Apply thine heart to instruction: andProu, 23, 12. thine eares vnto the words of knowledge. Be humble to heare the word of God,Ecclus, 5, 11 that thou maist vnderstand it: and make a true aunswere with wisedome. For; to lacke knowledge, is a very euillOrosius. thing: to thinke scorne to learne, is worse: but, to with-stand and repugne the truth, against men of knowledge teaching the same, is the worst thing that may be, and furthest from all grace. Wherefore; if thou desire to be good,Pet. Lomb. endeuour thy selfe to learne to know, and to follow the truth: for he that is ignorant therein, and will not learne, can neuer be good. Endeuour thy selfe diligently, euen inSiluius. thy youth, to learne wisedome and know∣ledge, though for the time present it seeme painfull vnto thee: for, it is lesse paine for a man to learne in youth, then in age to be vnskilfull. §. 6. Sanctifie the Lorde God in your harts,1, Pet, 3, 15. 16. (saith the Apostle,) and be ready alwayes to giue an aunswere to euery man that as∣keth
you a reason of the hope that is in you: and that with meekenes & reuerence, hauing a good conscience; that when they speake euill of you, as of euill dooers, they may be ashamed, which blame your good conuersation in Christ. Yea,] let the vvord of Christ dwell inColos, 3. 16. you plenteously, in all wisedome; teach∣ing and admonishing your owne selues, in Psalmes, and Hymnes, & spirituall songs: singing with a grace in your harts vnto the Lord. And, whatsoeuer yee shall doe in vvord,verse, 17. or in deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Iesus; giuing thanks to God, euen the Fa∣ther, by him. For, God is a Spirit, and they that wor∣shipIohn, 4. 24, him, must worship him in spirit and truth. He is likewise, a God of wonderfull greatTertullian. power, might, and majestie: and therefore we ought, alwaies to serue him truely, with feare and reuerence. §. 7. I beseech you brethren, by the merciesRom, 12. 1. 2. of God, (saith S. Paule) that yee giue vp your bodies a liuing sacrifice, holy, accep∣table to GOD; which is your reasonable
seruing of God. And fashion not your selues like vnto this world; but be ye chan∣ged by the renewing of your minde, that yee may proue vvhat is the good vvill of God, and acceptable, and perfect. Lay apart all filthines, and superfluitieIames, 1, 21. 22. of maliciousnes, and receiue with meeke∣nesse the vvorde vvhich is grafted in you, which is able to saue your soules. And bee yee dooers of the vvord, and not hearers onely, deceiuing your selues. For, if any man heare the word, & doeverse, 23, 24, it not, he is like vnto a man that beholdeth his naturall face in a glasse. For, when hee hath considered himselfe, he goeth his way, and forgetteth immediatly what manner of one hee was. But who so looketh in the perfect Laweverse, 2. of libertie, and continueth therein: he not beeing a forgetfull hearer, but a dooer of the worke, shall be blessed in his deede. For, the hearers of the Law, are not righ∣teousRom, 2. 13, before God: but the dooers of the lawe shall be iustified. And, not euery one that saith vnto Christ,Math, 7, 21. Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdome of heauen: but hee that doth the will of God, which is in heauen.
Take heede therefore, that yee vvalkeEphe, 5. 15. 16, circumspectly; not as fooles, but as wise, redeeming the time, for the dayes are euill. That is, that ye cast off, concerning theEphe, 4, 22, 23, 24, conuersation in time past, the olde man, which is corrupt through deceiueable lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind. And put on the newe man, which after God is created, in righteousnes & true ho∣linesse. For, the grace of GOD, that bringethTitus, 2. 11. 12. saluation to all men, hath appeared: and teacheth vs, that we should denie vngodli∣nes, and worldly lusts; and that we should liue soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world. Looking for the blessed hope, and ap∣pearing of the glory of the mightie God,verse. 13. 14. and of our sauiour Iesus Christ: who gaue himselfe for vs, that hee might redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to be a pe∣culier people vnto himselfe, zealous of good workes. §. 8. Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered, Pet. 4, 1. for vs in the flesh, arme your selues likewise vvith the same minde; which is, that hee vvhich hath suffered in the fleshe, hath
ceased from sinne: that hee hence-foorth should liue, (as much time as remaineth inverse, 2. 3, the flesh) not after the lusts of men; but af∣ter the will of God. For, it is sufficient for vs, that wee haue spent the time past of the life, after the lust of the Gentiles, walking in wantonnes, & lusts, in excesse of wines, in excesse of eatings, in excesse of drink∣ings: and in abhominable Idolatries. Therefore, if any man be in Christ, let2. Cor. 5. 17. him be a newe creature. For, they that are Christes, haue crucifiedGala, 5, 24, the flesh, with the affections & the lusts. §. 9. The night (saith the Apostle) is past, &Rom, 13, 12 13. 14, the day is at hand: let vs therefore cast a∣way the works of darknes, & let vs put on the Armour of light: so that we walke ho∣nestly, as in the day; not in gluttony, and drunkennes, neither in chambering and wantonnesse, nor in strife & enuying. But put yee on the Lord Iesus Christ, & take no thought for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. * For, if yee liue after the flesh, yeRom, 8, 13, shal die, but if yee mortifie the deedes of the body by the Spirit, ye shall liue. VValke then I say in the Spirit, and yeeGala. 5. 16, 17, shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh: for,
the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are con∣trary one to another, so that ye cannot doe the same things that ye would. Striue therefore to enter into heauen atLuke, 13, 24 the straite gate: for many will seeke to en∣ter in, and shall not be able. §. 10. If yee be risen with Christ, seeke thoseColo, 3, 1, 2, things which are aboue; vvhere Christ sit∣teth at the right hande of God. Set your affections on thinges which are in heauen, and not on things which are on the earth. Gird vp the loynes of your minde, be so∣ber, and trust perfectly on the grace that is1, Pet, 1, 13. 14, 15, 16. brought vnto you by the reuelation of Ie∣sus Christ, as obedient children: not fashi∣oning your selues vnto the former lusts of your ignoraunce: but as hee vvhich hath called you is holy; so be ye holy in all man∣ner of conuersation: because it is written; Be yee holy, for I am holy. Let no corrupt communication proceedEphe. 4. 29. out of your mouthes, but that vvhich is good, to the vse of edifying, that it may mi∣nister grace vnto the hearers. For, euill speakings corrupt good man∣ners.1, Cor, 15, 33.
And those thinges are alwaies vnhonestIraeneus. to be spoken of, vvhich are filthy to bee done. Onely let your conuersation be as it be∣commethPhilip. 1. 27, the Gospell of Christ. That ye may walke worthy of the Lord,Colos. 1, 10, and please him in all things: beeing fruite∣full in all good works, and increasing in the knowledge of God; Who hath saued vs, and called vs with2. Tim, 1, 9. 10, an holy calling; not according to our workes, but according to his owne pur∣pose and grace, which was giuen to vs through Christ Iesus before the vvorlde was; but is now made manifest, by the ap∣pearing of our Sauiour Iesus Christ: who hath [as I haue already declared,] aboli∣shed death, and hath brought life and im∣mortalitie vnto light, through the Gospell▪ §. 11. Deerely beloued, (saith S. Peter) I be∣seech1, Pet, 2, 11, you, as strangers and pilgrimes, ab∣staine frō fleshly lusts, which fight against the soule. And haue your conuersation honest a∣mongverse, 12. the Gentiles, that they which speake euill of you, as of euill dooers, may by your
good workes which they shall see, glorifie God in the day of visitation. Yea; let your light so shine before men,Math. 5, 16. that they may see your good workes, and glorifie your Father which is in heauen. §. 12. Be sober [also] and watch: for your ad∣uersary1, Pet. 5, 8, 9. the deuill walketh about like a roa∣ring Lyon, seeking vvhom hee may de∣uoure: whom resist stedfast in the faith. Ioyne moreouer vertue with your faith;2, Pet, 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, and with vertue, knowledge; and vvith knowledge, temperance; and vvith tem∣perance, patience; and with patience, god∣linesse; and with godlines, brotherly kind∣nes; & with brotherly kindnes, loue. For, if these things be among you, and abound, they will make you that yee neither shall be idle, nor vnfruitfull in the knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ. §. 13. Be yee therefore followers of God, asEphe. 5, 1. 2. deere children, and walke in loue, euen as Christ hath loued vs, and hath giuen him∣selfe for vs, to be an offering and a sacrifice of a sweete smelling sauour vnto God.
But fornication, and all vncleanenes, orverse, 3, 4, couetousnes, let it not bee once named ¦mong you, as it becommeth Saints; ney∣ther filthines, neither foolish talking, ney∣ther iesting, which are things not comelie; but rather giuing of thanks. For, this yee know; that no whoremon∣ger,verse, 5. neither vncleane person, nor coue∣tous person, which is an Idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdome of Christ, and of God. Wherefore, be yee not vnwise; but vn∣derstandEphe, 5, 17, what the will of the Lord is. And be not drunke with wine, whereinEphe. 5, 18, 19, 20, 21, is excesse, but be fulfilled with the Spirit: Speaking vnto your selues in Psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songs; singing and making melodie to the Lord in your harts. Giuing thanks alwayes for all things vnto God euen the Father, in the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ: and submitting your selues one to another in the feare of God. §. 14. Flee fornication: euery sinne that a man1, Cor, 6, 18. doth, is without the body; but he that cō∣mitteth fornication, sinneth against his own bodie.
And, who will count him iust, that sin∣nthEccl{us}. 10, 30, against himselfe; or honour him, that dishonoureth his owne soule? Know ye not, that your body is the tem∣ple1, Cor, 19. 20, of the holy Ghost, which is in you, whō yee haue of God? & ye are not your own; for ye are bought for a price: glorifie God therefore in your body, and in your spirit: for they are Gods. Know yee not [likewise] that to whom∣soeuerRom, 6, 16, you giue your selues as seruaunts to obey, his seruaunts yee are to whom yee o∣bey: whether it be of sinne vnto death, or of obedience vnto righteousnes? Know you not [also] that all wee whichRom. 6., 4. haue been baptized into Iesus Christ, haue been baptized into his death? We are bu∣ried then vvith him by Baptizme into his death, that like as Christ was raised vp frō the dead, by the glory of the Father, so we also should walke in newnes of life. (For, all that are baptized into Christ,Gala, 3, 27. haue put on Christ.) And if we be grafted with him, to the si∣militudeRom. 6. 5. 6, 7, of his death, euen so shall we be to the similitude of his resurrection: knovv∣ing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sinne might be de∣stroyed,
and hence-foorth wee should not serue sinne. For, hee that is dead, is freed from sinne. Wherefore, if wee be dead with Christ,Rom, 6, 8, 9. 10. 11. wee beleeue that wee shall liue also vvith him: for in that hee died, hee died once to sinne: but in that hee liueth, hee liueth to God. Likewise thinke yee also, that ye are dead to sinne, but are aliue to God, in Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. Let not sinne raigne therefore in yourverse, 12, 13, mortall body, that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof: Neither giue yee your mem∣bers as weapons of vnrighteousnesse vnto sinne; but giue your selues vnto God, as they that are aliue from the dead: & giue your members as weapons of righteousnes vnto him. For the wages [or reward] of sinne, isRom, 6. 23. death: but the gift of God is eternall life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Mortifie therefore your members whichColo, 3, 5, 6, are on the earth: [namely,] fornication; vncleanenes; the inordinate affection; euil concupiscence; and couetousnes, which is idolatry. For the which thinges sake, the vvrath of God commeth on the chyldren of disobedience.
§. 15. Furthermore;] These are the thingesZach, 8, 16, 17. that yee shall doe. Speake yee euery man the truth vnto his Neighbour; execute iudgement truly, and vprightly in your gates; and let none of you imagine euill in his heart against his Neighbour; Neither loue any false oath: for, all these are the thinges that I hate, saith the Lord. See that none recompence euill for euill1, Thes, 5, 15 vnto any man: but euer follow that which is good, both toward your selues, and to∣ward all men. If it be possible, as much as in you is,Rom, 12, 18 haue peace with all men. And, let loue be without dissimulation.Rom, 12, 9 Abhorring that which is euill: and clea∣uing vnto that which is good. Also;] seeing your soules are purified in obeying the truth through the Spirit, to1. Pet, 1, 22. 23. loue brotherly without faining, loue one another with a pure hart feruently: beeing borne a newe, not of mortall seede, but of immortall, by the word of God, who li∣ueth and endureth for euer. Let all bitternes, and anger, and wrath, crying, & euill speaking be put away fromEphe, 4, 31, 32, you, with all maliciousnesse. And be yee
curteous one to another, and tender harted, freely forgiuing one another, euen as God for Christes sake freely forgaue you. Be all of one minde; one suffer with an∣other;1. Pet. 3, 8, 9 loue as brethren; bee pittifull; bee curteous; not rendering euill for euill, nei∣ther rebuke for rebuke: but contrariwise blesse, knowing that yee are there-vnto cal∣led, that yee should be heyres of blessing. Blesse them which persecute you: blesseRom, 12. 14 15. 16. I say, & curse not: reioyce with them that reioyce, and weepe with them that weepe: Be of like affection one towards another: be not hie minded, but make your selues equall to them of the lower sort: Be not wise in your owne eyes. But rather pray vnto the most High, thatEccl{us}. 37, 15 hee will direct thy way in truth. §. 16. Yee haue heard, that it hath been said:Math, 5, 43, 44, 45, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour, and hate thine enemie. But I (saith Christ) say vnto you, loue your enemies; blesse them that curse you; do good to them that hate you; and pray for them that hurt you; and per∣secute you: that yee may be the chyldren of your Father which is in heauen: For, he
maketh his sunne to arise on the euill, and on the good: and sendeth downe raine on the iust and vniust. For, if yee loue them which loue you,verse, 46. 47, what reward shall yee haue? doe not the vngodly euen the same? And, if you beLuke, 6, 32, friendly to your Brethren onely, what sin∣guler thing doe yee? Doe not euen the vngodly likewise? Yee shall therefore be perfect, as yourMath. 5. 48, Father which is in heauen is perfect. §. 17. Auenge not your selues, but giue placeRom, 12. 19 vnto wrath: for, it is written; Vengeance is mine; I will repay saith the Lord. Therefore, if thine enemie hunger, feedeverse, 20, him: if he thirst, giue him drink: for, in so doing, thou shalt heape coales of fire vp∣pon his head. Contrariwise,] hee that seeketh venge∣ance,Eccl{us}. 28. 1, shall finde vengeance of the Lord: and he will surely keepe his sinnes. Should a man beare hatred against man,Eccl{us}, 28. 3, and yet desire forgiuenes of the Lord? Hee will shew no mercy to a man that isverse, 4. like himselfe; and will hee aske forgiuenes of his owne sinnes?
If he which is but flesh, nourish hatred, and aske pardon of God, who will intreatEccl{us}, 28, 5. for hys sinnes? Remember [therefore] the end, and letverse, 6, enmitie passe: imagine not death and de∣struction to another through anger, but perseuer in the commaundements. And forgiue thy neighbour the hurt thatEccl{us}. 28. 2, hee hath done thee; so shall thy sinnes be forgiuen thee also, when thou prayest. §. 18. If thy Brother trespasse against thee, re∣bukeLuk, 17, 3, 4 him; and if hee repent, forgiue him. And though hee sinne against thee seauen times in a day, and seauen times in a day turne againe vnto thee, saying; It repen∣teth mee, thou shalt forgiue him. For, if you doe forgiue men their trespas∣ses,Math, 6, 14, 15, your heauenly Father will also forgiue you your trespasses: but if you do not for∣giue others, God will not forgiue you. Be alwaies therefore, as ready to forgiueIunius. thy brother vvhen hee repenteth; as thou thy selfe art willing to be pardoned of God when thou prayest. And be not ouercome of euill, but ouer∣comeRom, 12, 21 euill with goodnes.
§. 19. Nowe the end of all things (saith the A∣postle)1. Pet, 4, 7, 8, is at hand; be yee therefore sober, and watching in prayer. But aboue all things haue feruent loue among you; for loue couereth the multitude of sinnes. Be yee [likewise] harberous one to an∣otherverse, 9, 10, vvithout grudging. And let euery man, as hee hath receiued the gift, mini∣ster the same one to another, as good di∣sposers of the manifold grace of God. If any man speake, let him talke as the wordes of God. If any man minister, let1, Pet, 4, 11, him do it as of the abilitie vvhich God mi∣nistreth; that GOD in all thinges may be glorified through Iesus Christ. §. 20. Cast away prophane and olde wiues fa∣bles,1. Tim, 4, 7, 8. and exercise thy selfe vnto godlines: For, bodilie exercise profiteth little: but godlines is profitable vnto all things, which hath the promise of the life present, and of that, that is to come. Flee also from the lusts of youth: & fol∣low2. Tim, 2. 22 after righteousnesse, faith, loue, and peace; vvith them that call on the Lord with a pure hart.
For, the end of the commaundement, is loue out of a pure hart; and of a good con∣science;1. Tim, 1. 5. and of faith vnfained. §. 21. Be nothing carefull, but in all things letPhil. 4. 6. 7, your requests be shewed vnto GOD in prayer and supplication, with giuing of thanks. And the peace of God which pas∣seth all vnderstanding, shall preserue your harts and mindes in Christ Iesus. Bee [also] at peace among your selues;1. Thes, 5, 13. 14, admonish them that are vnrulie; comfort the feeble minded; beare with the meeke; be patient toward all men. Reioyce euermore; pray continually; in1. Thes, 5. 16, 17, 18. all things giue thanks: for this is the will of God in Christ Iesus toward you. Quench not the Spirit; despise not pro∣phesying:1. The. 5. 19 20, 21, 22, try all thinges, and keepe that which is good. Abstaine from all appea∣rance of euil. Let your conuersation be without coue∣tousnes,Hebr, 13, 5, and be content with those things that ye haue. Remember them that are in bonds, asHeb. 13, 3. though yee were bounde with them: and them that are in affliction, as if yee were al∣so afflicted in the body.
Bee [alwaies] affectioned to loue oneRom, 12, 10 another with brotherlie loue. Reioyce in hope: be patient in trouble:Rom, 12. 12, 13. and continue in prayer. Distributing vnto the necessitie of the Saints, and giuing your selues to hospitalitie. Also;] vvhatsoeuer thinges are true,Philip, 4, 8, vvhatsoeuer things are honest, what soeuer things are iust, whatsoeuer things are pure, whatsoeuer things pertaine to loue, what∣soeuer thinges are of good report; if there be any vertue, or if there be any praise, thinke on these things, which ye haue both learned, and receiued, and heard. Those things [also] doe, & the God ofverse. 9. peace shall be with you. §. 22. Finally, my bretheren, be strong in theEphe. 6. 10. 11, 12. Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole Armour of God, that ye may be able to stand against the assaults of the deuill. For, wee wrestle not against fleshe and blood; but against principalities; a∣gainst powers; against vvorldly gouer∣nours; the princes of the darknesse of this world; and against spirituall wickednesses, which are in the hie places.
For this cause take vnto you the vvholeEphe. 6, 13. Armour of God, that yee may be able to resist in the euill day: and hauing finished all things, stand fast. Stande therefore, and your loynes gir∣dedEphe, 6, 14, 15. about with the truth, & hauing on the brest-plate of righteousnes, and your feete shod with the preparation of the Gospell of peace. Aboue all, take the shielde of faith,verse. 16. 17, vvhere-with yee may quench all the fierie darts of the vvicked: and take the helmet of saluation and the svvorde of the Spirit, which is the word of God. And pray alvvaies, with all manner ofverse, 18. prayer and supplication in the Spirit: and watch there-vnto, vvith all perseuerance, and supplication for all Saints. Let euery one also that calleth on the2, Tim, 2, 19 Name of Christ, depart from iniquitie. And what-soeuer yee would that menMath, 7, 12, should do vnto you, euen so doe yee vnto them: for this is the Law & the Prophets.
¶ Of Prayer and thankes∣giuing. §. 1. ASke, (saith Christ) and it shall be giuenMath, 7, 7, you; seeke, and ye shall finde; knock, and it shall be opened vnto you. For, whosoeuer asketh, receiueth: andverse, 8, hee that seeketh, findeth: & vnto him that knocketh, it shall be opened. But let him that asketh, aske in fayth, andIames, 1, 6, 7 wauer not; for hee that wauereth, is like a waue of the Sea, tost of the winde, & car∣ried away: neither let that man thinke that hee shall receiue any thing of the Lord. Therefore, I say vnto you, whatsoeuerMark, 11, 24 yee desire when yee pray, beleeue that yee shall haue it, and it shall be doone vnto you. Prouided alwaies, that thou neuer askeBeza. in prayer, any such thing as seemeth good onely in thine ovvne conceite or fantasie: but that thy peticion be euermore aunswe∣rable to the word of God; & wholie limit∣ted within the pleasure of his holy will. For, this is the assurance that we haue in1. Iohn, 5, 14, 15, God, that if wee aske any thing according
to his will, hee heareth vs: and if we know that hee heareth vs, what-soeuer wee aske, wee know that wee haue the peticions that we haue desired of him. §. 2. Before thou prayest (saith Sirach) pre∣pareEccl{us}. 18. 22 thy selfe therevnto; least thou bee as one that tempteth the Lord. For, prayer is like a shippe in the Sea,Plotinus. which if it be good, saueth all that is there∣in; but if it be naught, it suffereth them to perrish. First therefore, ere thou beginnest toPlotinus. pray vnto GOD, examine thy selfe what thou intendest to aske; & cast away from thee (with a repentant hart) all thy former iniquities: then call vpon him with a lowly and humble spirit; and hee will assuredlie heare thee; releeue thy necessity; quiet thy conscience; and most ioyfully comfort thee. §. 3. And, when thou prayest, be not as theMath, 6, 5. hypocrites; for they loue to stand & pray in the Sinagogues, & in the corners of the streetes, because they woulde be seene of men. Verily, I say vnto you, they haue theyr reward.
But when thou prayest, enter into thyMath, 6, 6, chamber, and vvhen thou hast shutte thy doore, pray vnto thy Father which is in se∣cret, and thy Father which is in secret, shall reward thee openly. Also, when yee pray, vse no vaine repe∣titionsverse, 7. 8, like the Heathen; for they think to be heard for their much babling. Be ye not like them therefore: for your father know∣eth whereof ye haue need before you aske him. §. 4. Furthermore, vvhen thou enterest in to pray, let thy prayer be to this end especi∣ally,Pacuuius. that God, as he is mercifull, so he will for his promise sake, grant vnto thee those things which thou desirest, if it stand with his blessed will: otherwise, so farre foorth onely to graunt thy peticion, as it may tend to his glory, & thine owne good. Desire him likewise, that as hee is good to all that call vpon him, so he will be mer∣cifullBcon. vnto thee, in forgiuing all thy offen∣ces past: & daily more & more purifie thy hart, through the powerfull working of his holie Spirit, that thereby thou mayst be made both apt and able to vnderstand his truth; & dutifully to appeare obedient in
the performing of his heauenly will, by ex∣pressing the fruites of faith in thy life and conuersation. Yea; forget not to pray often vnto GodEugenius. for the clensing of the impuritie of thine heart, and carefully endeuour to restraine, that the corruption thereof breake not out, either to the hurt of thy selfe, or to the harme of any other. Moreouer; thou oughtest in thy prayer,Hemingius. not onelie to make peticion vnto God for thy selfe; but also for the happy estate and prosperitie of thy Prince; and for all others that by him are placed in authoritie: for, of them dependeth the peace and tranqui∣litie of the weale publique. And of this matter dooth the Apostle S. Paule himselfe admonish vs, vvhere hee saith: * I exhort therefore, that first of all,1, Tim, 2, 1, 2. supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giuing of thanks be made for all men: for Kings, & for all that are in authoritie; that wee [vnder them] may leade a quiet and a peaceable life, in all godlines & honestie. §. 5. Acknowledge your faultes one to ano∣ther,Iames. 5. 16, and pray one for another, (saith Saint Iames) that yee may be healed: For, the
prayer of a righteous man auaileth much, if it be feruent. Elias was a man subiect to the like passi∣onsIames, 5, 17, as we are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not raine, and it rained not on the earth for three yeeres & sixe months. Afterward, hee prayed againe; and theIames, 5, 18, heauen gaue raine, and the earth brought forth her fruite. The prayer also of Moises, so mightilie preuailed in the presence of his Maker, that it seemed (as it were) to stay the very power of God, from powring downe his vvrath vpon the people: and caused him to say: * Let mee alone Moises, that my vvrathExod, 32, 10 may waxe hote against this Nation to de∣stroy them. As if hee should haue said to Moises, as he said to Lot; * Get thee hence, for I canGen, 19, 22, doe nothing till thou be gone. Wee reade likewise, that after Hezekiah had receiued a speciall commaundementEsay, 38, 1, 2, 3, &c. from God, to set the affaires of his house in good order, & to prepare himselfe to die: hee (beeing vnwilling so soone to forsake his life,) feruently prayed to the Giuer of time, & obtained so much fauour through his earnest petition, that his raigne vvas
afterward more enlarged, by the length of fifteene yeeres. §. 6. Let no man (saith Saint Bernard) be vn∣mindfulBernarde. to pray often vnto God, for pray∣er is a vertue that greatly preuaileth against temptation; against all assaults of infernall spirits; against the false delights of this lin∣gering life; and against the motions of our owne flesh. And, like as by reuerent fasting andErasmus. abstinence, the bodily passions of man are to be cured: so by feruent prayer and sup∣plication vnto God, the pestilent infecti∣ons of the minde are to be healed. Pray therefore, as the Apostle counsel∣leth,1, Thes. 5. 17 continually. And vvatch in the same, with thankes∣giuing.Colos. 4, 2, Yea; watch and pray, that yee enter notMark. 14. 38 into temptation. And, what-soeuer yee aske in prayer, ifMath, 21. 22 yee beleeue, yee shall receiue it. §. 7. VVhether yee eate or drinke, or vvhat∣soeuer1, Cor, 10▪ 31, yee doe, saith the Apostle, let all be done to the glory of God.
Giuing thankes alwaies vnto him thatEccl{us}. 32, 14 hath made thee, and replenished thee with his goods. For, vvee ought euermore to be as for∣wardPet. Mart. in giuing thankes to God, for the se∣uerall blessings which vvee haue already re∣ceiued; as vvee are vvilling vvhen vvee pray, to obtaine from him those graces which are most needfull for vs. Yea; wee ought to preuent the Sunne∣risingWisd. 16. 28 to giue thankes vnto God: & to sa∣lute him [vvith prayses] before the day spring. At thy downe lying therefore, and at thy vprising; at thy sporting, eating, and ban∣quetting,Tertullian. be mindfull of thy Maker: be thankfull vnto him for his benefits, and re∣member his manifold mercies▪ Be thankefull vnto him for thy creation,Becon. redemption, vocation, and sanctification. Be likewise thankfull vnto him for theEuagoras. sundrie helpes and succours, which many times he hath graciously extended towards thee: and also for the daily sustenaunce, which he prouidently prouideth for thee. For, the hope of the vnthankfull, shallWisd. 16. 29 melt as the winter yee; and flowe away as the vnprofitable waters.
But he that offereth praise, shall glorifiePsalm, 50. 23 mee, saith the Lorde; and to him that dis∣poseth his way aright, will I shewe the sal∣uation of God. ¶ Of Fasting and Almes-deedes. §. 1. THat which goeth into the mouth, (saithMath, 15, 11 Christ) defileth not the man, but that vvhich commeth out of the mouth, that defileth the man. Perceiue yee not, that vvhat-soeuer en∣terethMath. 15. 17 into the mouth, goeth into the bellie, and is afterward cast out into the draught? But those thinges vvhich proceede out ofverse, 18, the mouth, come from the hart, and they defile the man. For, out of the hart, come euil thoughts,verse, 19. murders, adulteries, fornications, theftes, false testimonies, slaunders. These are the thinges, vvhich defile averse. 20. man: but to eate with vnwashen handes▪ defileth not a man. §. 2. Wherefore, if at any time thou feele thyLuther. conscience inwardly greeued vvith the re∣membrance
of thy sinnes past, and art tru∣ly willing in hart to fast for thy former of∣fences; endeuour then diligently to purge thy soule from filth, by abstaining frō euill, for, God is better pleased there-with, then by thy abstaining from meates. If thou wilt fast, fast after the commaun∣dementOrigen. of Christ in the Gospell, and keep in thy fasting the rules of the Gospell. Fast from all sinne, abstaine from the meate of hatred and malice; take no delight in vaine pleasures; be not enflamed with the vvine of excesse: fast from euill actions; for beare euill thoughts; touch not the stolne bread of wrong and peruerse doctrine; lust not after the deceitfull foode of Philosophy, which may leade thee away from the truth of Gods word. This kind of fasting plea∣seth God: and this kinde of fasting is al∣lowed of him. §. 3. The honour of fasting, is not the absti∣nenceChrisostome. from meates, but the flying from sinne. For, what auaileth it, if wee abstaine frōBcon. the lawfull vse of meates needfull, and by backe-byting and slaundering, eate & de∣uoure our brothers flesh?
The most healthfull kinde of fasting, isAmbrose. to keepe our bodies from excesse & surfet∣ting; and our soules from sinne & vice. And, then are our fastings acceptable toAugustine. God, when they that fast through neede and necessity, are charitably refreshed of vs. For, it is not such a kinde of fasting as hypocrites vse, which pleaseth the Lorde;Esay, 58, 5, 6. namely, that a man should afflict his soule for a day, and bowe downe his head like a Bulrush, and lie vpon the ground in sack∣cloth and ashes: but rather this is the fa∣sting which pleaseth the Lord; to wit, that thou loose him out of bondage that is in thy danger: that thou breake the oath of wicked bargaines: that thou let the op∣pressed goe free, and take from them all manner of burdens. To deale thy bread to the hungry, andverse. 7. to bring the poore that vvander home to thy house: when thou seest the naked, that thou couer him, & hide not thy selfe from thine owne flesh. Then shall thy light breake forth as theverse, 8. morning, and thy health shall grow spee∣dily: thy righteousnesse shall goe before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall em∣brace thee.
Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall aunswer: thou shalt cry, and hee shall say;verse, 9, Heere I am: If thou take away from the mids of thee the yoake: the putting foorth of the finger, & wicked speaking. If thou powre out thy soule to the hun∣gry,verse, 10, 11, and refresh the troubled soule: then shall thy light spring out in the darknesse, and thy darknes shall be as the noone day. And the Lord shall guide thee cōtinually, and satisfie thy soule in drought, and make fatte thy bones: & thou shalt be like a wa∣tred garden, and like a spring of vvater, whose waters faile not. §. 4. Seeke therefore, to restraine and bridleFulgentius. thine owne flesh, by moderate fasting and abstinence; endeuour diligently to doe good, by exercising the vvorkes of mercy towards the poore: and pray alwaies ear∣nestly vnto God for his grace, that thou maist be made willing to doe his will. Likewise, know this; that vvee ought aBernard. great deale rather to fast from sinnes & vi∣ces, then from meates. Let therfore thine eyes fast: let thine eares fast: let thy tnge fast: let thy handes fast: and let also thy soule fast.
Let thine eyes fast, from all vaine and wanton lookes; let thine eares fast, fromBernard. filthy and naughtie tales and rumours; let thy tongue fast, from backbyting, slaun∣dering, & murmuring, and from vnpro∣fitable, vaine, & filthy words; let thy hands fast, from vaine signes, and from vvorkes what-soeuer are not▪ commaunded: but much more warily let thy soule and minde fast, from fond imaginations, and from thine owne vngodly desires. For, urelie, without wee fast after this manner, our fa∣sting is no true fast. Also; vvhen yee fast, looke not sowre, asMath. 6. 16. hypocrites doe; for they disfigure theyr fa∣ces, that they might seem vnto men to fast. Verily I say vnto you that they haue theyr reward. But when thou fastest, annoynt thineverse. 17, 18. head, and wash thy face; that thou seeme not vnto men to fast, but vnto thy Father vvhich is in secret: and thy Father vvhich seeth in secret, will reward thee openly. §. 5. To doe good, and to distribute, (saithHebr. 13, 16 the Apostle) forget not: for, vvith such sacrifices God is pleased▪
While we haue therefore time, let vs doeGala, 6, 10. good vnto all men: but specially vnto them that are of the houshold of fayth. Doe good vnto the righteous, and thouEcclus, 12, 2, shalt finde great reward: though not of him, yet of the most High. Helpe thy neighbour according to thyEccl{us}, 29. 22 power; and beware that thou thy selfe fall not. Giue almes according to thy substance;Tob, 4. 8. and though thou haue but a little, be not afraide to giue a little almes. For, if there be first a willing minde, it is2. Cor. 8, 12, accepted according to that a man hath, & not according to that he hath not. This yet remember; that he which sow∣eth2, Cor. 9. 6, 7 sparingly, shall eape also sparingly: & hee that soweth liberally, shall reape also li∣berally. As euery man wisheth in his hart, so let him giue, not grudgingly, or of ne∣cessitie: for, God loueth a cheerfull giuer. §. 6. Because (saith the Lord) there shall beeDeut, 15, 11 euer some poore in the Land, therefore, I commaund thee, saying: Thou shalt open thy hand vnto thy brother; vnto thy nee∣die; and vnto thy poore in the land.
Bestow thy treasure [then] according toEcclus. 29. 11, 12. the cōmaundement of th most High, and it shall bring thee more profite then golde. Lay vp thine almes in thy secret chambers, & it shall keepe thee from all afflictions. Lay not vp treasures for your selues vp∣onMath, 6, 19, 20, 21, earth, where the moth and canker cor∣rupt, and where theeues digge through & steale: but lay vp treasures for your selues in heauen: vvhere neither the moth nor canker corrupteth; & where theeues ney∣ther digge through, nor steale. For, where your treasure is, there wil your harts be also. §. 7. If thou wilt be a good Merchant, or aAugustine. gainefull Vsurer, giue that which thou canst not keepe, that thou maist receiue that which thou canst not loose. Giue a lit∣tle, that thou maist receiue a hundred fold: giue a temporall & fading possession, that thou maist receiue an euerlasting inheri∣tance. And vvhat-soeuer thou giuest, giue itAugustine. freelie, for hee neuer giues in vaine, that giues in zeale. Neither doe I remember, that euer IIerome. read of any one that dyed an euill death, vvho willingly exercised the vvorkes of
mercie. For, they haue the prayers of ma∣nie; and it is vnossible but that their pray∣ers should be heard. §. 8. Giue vnto the most High, according asEccl{us}. 35, 10 hee hath enriched thee: & looke what thy hand is able, giue with a cheerefull eye. For, the Lord recompenseth, & wil giueverse, 11. thee seuen times as much. Stretch out thine hande vnto the pooreEcclus, 7, 32 and needy, that thy blessing and reconcili∣ation may be accomplished. Be as a father vnto the fatherlesse, and asEcclus, 4, 10 an husbande vnto their mother: so shalt thou be as the sonne of the most High, and hee shall loue thee more then thy mother dooth. §. 9. Charge them that are rich in the vvorld, (saith Paule vnto Timothie,) that they bee1. Tim. 6. 17 18. 19. not high minded, and that they trust not in vncertaine riches; but in the liuing God, which giueth vs aboundantly all things to enioy. That they doe good, and be rich in good workes, and be ready to distribute & communicate: laying vp in store for them∣selues a good foūdation against the time to come, that they may obtaine eternall life.
For, hee that giueth almes, layeth vp forTob, 4. 9. himselfe a good store against the day of ne∣cessity. Because the almes of a man, is as a thingEccl{us}, 17, 20 sealed vp before God, and he keepeth the good deedes of men, as the apple of the eye; and giueth repentance to their sonnes and daughters. At the last [also] shall he arise & rewardverse, 21. them, and shall repay theyr rewards vpon theyr heads. Giue almes therefore, of those thingesLuke, 11, 41 which thou hast. Giue of thy bread to the hungry; giueTob, 4, 16. of thy garments to the needy and naked; and of all thine abundance giue almes: and let not thine eye be enuious when thou gi∣uest thine almes. For, nothing doth so much commend aAmbrose. Christian, as commiseration and charitie. §. 10. Let it not at any time grieue thee to doePlotinus. good vnto the poore and needy; but ra∣ther couet to be liberall in thy gifts, to such as want, and are distressed: for, the almes∣deedes of the liberall, doe more profit the giuer, then benefite the receiuer.
Haue alwaies compassion on the poore,Caluine. the blinde, & the lame: and endeuour by good counsell to comfort him that is afflic∣ted in conscience. Forget not often to visite the sicke; toGueuara. relieue them that are in bonds; to succour poore Orphanes; and to defend the cause of the widdow and oppressed. For, pure Religion and vndefiled beforeIames, 1, 17. God, euen the Father, is this; to visite the fatherlesse and widdowes in their aduersi∣tie, & to keepe our selues vnspotted of the world. Also; like as all things else that are bred vpon the earth, are all created and ordainedCicero. for the vse & commoditie of man: so man for the benefit of man, is begotten & borne into the world, to the end they should con∣tinually doe good, by helping one ano∣ther. And, they vvhich exercise almes & righ∣teousnesse,Tob, 12, 9, shall be filled with life. But euery one that sinneth, is an enemieTob, 12, 10 to his owne soule. §. 11. Almes, (saith Tobie,) is a good gift be∣foreTob, 4, 11, the most High, to all them vvhich vse it.
And, it is better to giue Almes, then toTob. 12. 8. lay vp gold. Say not vnto thy neighbour, Goe andProu, 3, 28, come againe, and to morrow I will giue thee, if thou now haue it. For, he that giueth vnto the poore, shallProu. 28. 27. not lack: but hee that hideth his eyes, shall haue many curses. Giue almes therefore, of thy substance:Tob, 4, 7, and when thou giuest thine almes, let not thine eye bee enuious, neither turne thy face from any poore body, least that God turne his face from thee. Giue part of that which thou possessest,Iraeneus. though thy gift amount to no more in va∣lue then the poore vviddowes two mites. Giue also at the first asking: for the giftSocrates. is not worth thankes, vvhich is often cra∣ued. Besides; the gift which is grudgingliePlato. giuen, may well be called a stonie loafe: which although it be hard, yet it is needfull to be receiued of him that is hungry. §. 12. Hee that hath mercie vpon the poore,Prou, 19, 17. lendeth vnto the Lorde; and the Lorde vvill recompence him that which hee hath giuen.
For, GOD so greatly loueth the poore,Ierome. that what-soeuer good deede is done vnto any of them for the loue of him; he taketh it as it were doone vnto himselfe. And, hee shall vndoubtedly finde manyLeo. great blessings at Gods hand, who letteth not the poore and needy depart from him, without comfort. §. 13. But; vvhen thou mindest to distribute, or giue any thing vnto the poore; thouRom, 12, 8, must euer-more obserue this rule therein: namelie, to doe the same, (as the Apostle counselleth) with simplicitie. Not causing a trumpet to be blowne be∣foreMath, 6, 2, 3, 4. thee when thou giuest thine almes, as the hypocrites doe in the Sinagogues, and in the streets, to the end they may be seene and praysed of men. For, verily I say vnto you, that they haue their reward. VVherefore, vvhen thou giuest thine almes, let not thy left hand know what thy right hande doth: that thine almes may be in secret, & thy Father which seeth in secret, will reward thee openly. §. 14. Likewise, regard vvell, that the AlmesIsidorus. which thou art willing to bestowe on the
poore, be taken from some part or portion of thine owne true-gotten goods: for, o∣ther-wise in giuing, thou shalt highly pro∣uoke GOD to anger; and sooner bring downe a curse, then a blessing vpon thee. For, the offering of the righteous, ma∣kethEccl{us}, 35, 6, the Altar fat, and the smell thereof is sweete before the Lord. But he that giueth an offering of vnrigh∣teousEccl{us}, 34, 18 goods, offereth a mocking sacrifice, and the gifts of the vngodly please not God. The sacrifice of the righteous, is accep∣table;Eccl{us}, 35, 7. and the remembrance thereof shall neuer be forgotten. But the most High doth not allowe theEccl{us}, 34, 20 offerings of the wicked, neither is hee pa∣cified for sinne through the multitude of their sacrifice. For, the sacrifice of the wicked, is an ab∣hominationProu, 15, 8, vnto the Lord. And, he that bringeth an offering of theEccl{us}. 34. 21 goods of the poore, doth as one that sacri∣ficeth the sonne before the fathers eyes. VVhich, as in reason euery man may well perswade himselfe, that the father of such a child, would neuer willingly be con∣tent, eyther to see or suffer: so by the testi∣mony
of these few former places, may wee certainely assure our selues, that God vvill much more vnlikely be pleased, with the gifts of ill-gotten goods. ¶ Of Humilitie and Obedience. §. 1. THe greater thou art (saith Sirach,) theEccl{us}. 3, 19. more humble thy selfe in all things; so shalt thou find fauour before the Lord. For, thus saith hee that is hie and excel∣lent; he that inhabiteth the eternitie, whoseEsay, 57, 15. Name is the Holie one; I dwell in the hie and holie place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit: to reuiue the spirit of the humble, & to giue life to them that are of a contrite hart. §. 2. There be (as Orosius saith) three degreesOrosius. of humilitie; the first is of repentance; the the second is, in hungering & thirsting af∣ter righteousnesse; the third, consisteth in extending the workes of mercie, to such as haue neede of comfort. And, the chiefest poynt of all mans trueIust. Mar. humilitie, consisteth in this, to subiect and
frame his vvill, according to the will of God, in all things what-soeuer. For, them that be meeke, wil God guidePsalm, 25, 9. in iudgement; and teach the humble his way. §. 3. It is nothing prayse-worthy for a man toClem. Alex. be humble in aduersitie, because necessitie then compelleth him: but in the midst of prosperitie to beare an humble minde, de∣serueth great commendation. VVherefore, if thou desire to ascendeBernard. where God the Father sitteth, thou must put on the true humilitie, which Christ his Sonne teacheth. For, euery one that exalteth himselfe,Luke, 18, 14 shall be brought lowe; but hee that hum∣bleth himselfe, shall be exalted. §. 4. Pride and humilitie be two contraries:Cicero. the one is both of GOD and man greatly disliked; the other is of God and man very much beloued. And, as the one directeth the way to hell,Mar. Bucer. so the other teacheth the way to heauen. If thou arrogantly lift vp thy selfe vntoAugustine. God, hee will flee further off from thee; but if thou humble thy selfe vnfainedly be∣fore
him, he will then draw neere, & come downe vnto thee. §. 5. Let nothing (saith the Apostle) be donePhilip, 2, 3. through contention, or vaine glory, but in meekenesse of minde, let euery man esteeme other better then himselfe. For, like as lowlines of hart, and meeke∣nesEpiphani. of minde, maketh a man highly in fa∣uour with God; so strife, vaine-glory, and contention, procureth hatred and disdaine amongst men. And, like as pride sleyeth loue, prouo∣keth disdaine, kindleth malice, confoun∣dethPacuuius. iustice, and subuereth Weales pub∣lique; euen so meekenes, gentlenes, or hu∣militie, doe stirre vp affection, augment beneuolence, intend charitie, support good equitie, and preserue in peace & concorde, both Countries and Common-weales. §. 6. It is better (saith Salomon,) to bee of anProu, 16. 19 humble minde with the lowlie, then to de∣uide the spoyles with the proude. Now therefore, as the elect of God, ho∣lie,Colos. 3. 12. 13. & beloued, put on tender mercy, kind∣nesse, humblenes of minde, meekenesse, long suffering; forbearing one another, &
forgiuing one another, if any man haue a quarrell to another, euen as Christ forgaue you, euen so doe yee. And, aboue all these things put on loue,Colos, 3, 14. which is the bond of perfectnes. And, let the peace of God rule in yourverse, 15. harts, to the which ye are called in one bo∣die; and be yee thankfull. Likewise ye yonger, submit your selues1, Pet, 5, 5. vnto the elders, & submit your selues eue∣ry man one to another; decke your selues inwardly in lowlines of minde: for GOD resisteth the proude, and giueth grace to the humble. Humble your selues therefore, vnder the1, Pet, 5, 6, mightie hand of God, that hee may exalt you in due time. Cast down your selues before the Lord,Iames, 4, 10, and hee will lift you vp. §. 7. Submit your selues (saith S. Peter) vnto1, Pet. 3, 13 14. all maner ordinaunce of man for the Lords sake: vvhether it be vnto the King, as vn∣to the Superiour, or vnto Gouernours, as vnto them that are sent of him, for the pu∣nishment of euill dooers, and for the praise of them that doe well.
Yea; Let euery soule be subiect vnto theRom, 13, 1, 2. higher Powers; for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are or∣dained of God. Whosoeuer therefore resi∣steth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receiue to themselues condemnation. Be subiect [then] to the principalities &Titus, 3, 1, powers: be obedient; and ready to euerie good worke. For, obedience is better then sacrifice;1, Sam, 15, 22, 23. and to harken, is better then the fatte of Rammes. But rebellion is as the sinne of vvitchcraft; & transgression is wickednes, and idolatry. §. 8. Obedience, (saith Plotinus) is an incom∣parablePlotinus. vertue, and due both to God and man: that is to say, first and cheefely vnto God; secondly, vnto the Prince; and so consequently, vnto all other Magistrates that by him are placed in authoritie. For, as the Prince, beeing placed onelyVirgilius. by the prouidence of God in the highest seate of honour, oweth equall iustice and meeke conuersation to all his subiects: so ought the people to owe dutifull obedi∣ence to their Prince, in reuerencing his
person, and fulfilling his commaunde∣ments. And, hee that rightly obeyeth his supe∣riour,Cyrill. by his good ensample instructeth his inferiour. Also; hee that honoureth and obeyethTertullian. his Prince, honoureth and obeyeth God: for the Prince is Gods Vizegerent here on earth, and representeth amongst men, (vsing his authoritie as hee ought) the glo∣rious state and high Maiestie of GOD in heauen. §. 9. Obey them, (saith the Apostle) that haueHeb, 13, 17, the ouer-sight of you, and submit your selues: for, they watch for your soules, as they that must giue accounts, that they may doe it with ioy, & not with griefe: for that is vnprofitable for you. The Elders that rule well, (saith hee) are1, Tim, 5, 17. 18, woorthy of double honour; specially they that labour in the Word & doctrine. For, the Scripture saith; Thou shalt not mou∣sell the mouth of the Oxe that treadeth out the corne: and, The labourer is wor∣thy of his wages. Nowe [therefore▪] we beseech you bre∣thren,1, Thes. 5, 12, 13, that yee knowe them which labour
among you, and are ouer you in the Lord, and admonish you; that yee haue them in singuler loue for their workes sake. * AndPhilip. 2. 29. make much of such. §. 10. Honour all men: loue brotherly fellow∣ship:1, Pet, 2, 17. feare God: honour the King. For, the Kings wrath, is like the roaringProu, 19, 12 of a Lyon; but his fauour is like the dewe vpon the grasse. And as Princes are men before God; soLactantius. are they Gods before men. This alwaies yet remember; That vveeActs. 5, 29. ought rather to obey God than man.
¶ A further declaration, of diuers other speciall commaundements which we finde con∣tained in the Booke of GOD: concerning our dutie towards him, and our loue towards our neighbour. With many profitable sayings tending to the same effect and purpose, collected foorth of the workes of sundry learned and worthy Writers. ¶ Against the worshipping of Images and false Gods. §. 1. THus spake the Almightie vnto Is∣raellExod. 20▪ 1, 2, 3. in the twenty chapter of Exo∣dus, saying; I am the Lorde thy GOD, which haue brought thee out of the Lande of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Thou shalt haue none other Gods but mee. Thou shalt make thee no grauen Image,verse. 4. neyther any similitude of things that are in heauen aboue, neither that are in the earth beneath, nor that are in the waters vnder the earth.
Thou shalt not bowe downe to them,Exod, 20, 5, nor serue them: for, I am the Lorde thy God, a ielous God, visiting the iniquitie of the fathers vppon the children, vnto the third and fourth generation of them that hate mee. And shewing mercy vnto thousands inverse, 6. them that loue mee, and keepe my com∣maundements. §. 2. To vvhom (saith Esay,) vvill yee likenEsay, 40, 18. GOD? or what similitude will yee set vp vnto him? Hee is a King euerlasting, immortall,1, Tim, 1, 17 and invisible. * And, there is none like vn∣toDeu. 33. 26 to him. Take therefore good heede vnto yourDeut, 4, 15 16. selues: for ye saw no image in the day that the Lord spake vnto you in Horeb, out of the middes of the fire: that yee corrupt not your selues, & make you a grauen image, or representation of any figure, whether it be the likenes of male or female. The likenes of any beast that is on theverse, 17, 18, earth, or the likenes of any fethered foule that flieth in the ayre. The likenesse of any thing that creepeth on the earth; or the
likenes of any fish that is in the vvaters be∣neath the earth. &c. For, the Lord thy GOD, is a consu∣mingDeut, 4, 24, fire, and a ielous God. §. 3. Confounded be all they (saith Dauid,)Psalm, 97, 7, that serue grauen Images: and that glorie in their Idols. Miserable are they, and among the deadWisd, 13, 10 is their hope, that call them Gods, which are the workes of mens hands. For, the worshipping of Idols, vvhichWisd, 14, 26 ought not to be named, is the beginning, the cause, and the end of all euill. The inuenting of them, was the begin∣ningWisd, 14, 11 of whoredome; and the finding of them, is the corruption of life. For, they were not from the beginning;verse, 12. 13, neyther shall they continue for euer. The vaine-glory of men, brought them into the world; therefore shal they come shortly to an end. They haue mouthes and speake not:Psalm▪ 115, 5. 6. 7. they haue eyes and see not: they haue eares and heare not: they haue noses and smell not: they haue hands and touch not: they haue feete & walk not: neither make they any sound with theyr throate.
They that make them, are like vnto thē: and so are all they that put theyr trust inPsal, 115, 8, them. But] cursed be the Image, & the image∣maker:Wisd. 14, 8, hee, because hee made it; and it, because that beeing a corruptible thing, it was called God. §. 4. VVho-soeuer (saith S. Augustine) ado∣reth or maketh his prayer, beholding an I∣mage;Augustine. hee is so moued thereby in his owne minde, that he thinketh the Image heareth him: and also hopeth that it will performe his peticion. An vnhappy memory (therfore) is that, which to remember Christ, vvho neuerCarolus magnus. ought to depart out of the hart of the iust man, standeth in neede of a sightfull con∣ceite; nor otherwise can haue the presence of Christ within him, vnlesse hee haue his Image painted on a vvall, or expressed in some other matter: for such a memory, as is nourished and kept by Images, procee∣deth not of harty loue, but necessitie of eye∣sight. And, out of all doubt there is no true re∣ligionLactantius. to be looked for, wheresoeuer an I∣mage hath any abyding.
¶ Against swearing. §. 1. THou shalt not take the Name of theExod, 20, 7, Lord thy God in vaine: for the Lorde will not holde him guiltlesse that taketh his Name in vaine. Yee haue heard that it was saide to themMath, 5, 33, of old time; Thou shalt not forsweare thy selfe, but shalt performe thine oath vnto the Lord. But I say vnto you, sweare not at all: nei∣therverse, 34, 35 by heauen, for it is the throne of God, nor yet by the earth, for it is his footestoole, neyther by Ierusalem, for it is the Cittie of the great King. Neyther shalt thou swear by thine head,verse, 36. because thou canst not make one hayre white or blacke. But let your communication bee, Yea,verse, 37, yea; Nay, nay: for vvhat-soeuer is more then these, commeth of euill. §. 2. Aboue all thinges my brethren sweareIames, 5, 12. not; neither by heauen, nor by earth, nor by any other oath: but let your yea, be yea, and your nay, nay, least yee fall into con∣demnation.
Accustome not thy mouth to swearing,Eccl{us}, 23, 9, for in it there are many falles: neyther take vp for an ordinary vse the naming of the Holy one: for thou shalt not escape vnpu∣nished for such things. For, as a seruaunt that is often beaten,verse, 10. cannot be without some skarre, so hee that sweareth, and nameth GOD continually, shall not be faultlesse. But as hee blasphemeth the Name ofSigismund. GOD, by his often swearing: so he dailie procureth vnto himselfe, many plague for his punishment. Yea; the man that vseth much swea∣ring;Eccl{us}, 23, 11 shall be filled with wickednes: & the plague shall neuer goe from his house: when he shall offend, his fault shall be vp∣pon him: and if hee acknowledge not his sinne, hee maketh a double offence: & if hee sweare in vaine, he shall not be inno∣cent, but his house shall be full of plagues. Vse not thy mouth [therefore] to igno∣rauntEccl{us}, 23, 13 rashnesse: for therein is the occasion of sinne.
¶ Of sanctifying the Sabaoth-day. §. 1. REmember thou keep holy the SabaothExod 20. 8. day. Sixe dayes shalt thou labour, and doe all that thou hast to doe. But the seuenth day is the Sabaoth of theverse. 9. Lord thy God: in it thou-shalt do no man∣ner of worke; neither thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, nor thy man seruaunt, nor thy mayd seruaunt, nor thy cattell, nor the stranger that is within thy gates. For, in sixe dayes, the Lord made hea∣uen,verse, 10. and earth, the Sea, and all that in them is, and rested the seuenth day: wherefore, the Lord blessed the seuenth day, and hal∣lowed it. §. 2. If, (saith the Almighty,) thou turne a∣wayEsay. 58. 13. thy foote from the Sabaoth, from do∣ing thy will on mine holy day, and call the Sabaoth a delight, to consecrate it, as glo∣rious vnto the Lord, & shalt honour him, not dooing thine owne wayes, nor seeking thine ovvne vvill, nor speaking a vaine vvord; Then shalt thou delight in the Lorde:verse, 14. and I will cause thee to mount vpon the
hie places of the earth; & feede thee vvith the heritage of Iacob thy Father: for, the the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. But,] take heede to thy foote when thouEcclesi. 4, 7 entrest into the House of GOD, and be more neere [or ready] to heare, then to giue the sacrifice of fooles: for, they know not that they doe euill. ¶ Of honouring our Parents. §. 1. HOnour thy father & thy mother, thatExod, 20, 12 thy dayes may be prolonged in the Land which the Lord thy GOD giueth thee. Honour thy father from thy whole hart,Ecclus, 7, 27 28. & forget not the sorrowes of thy mother. Remember that thou wast borne of them, and how canst thou recompence them the things that they haue done for thee? Obey thy father [therfore] that hath be∣gottenProu, 23, 22. thee; and despise not thy mother when shee is old. For▪ the Lord will haue the father hono∣redEcclus, 3, 3, of the children: and hath confirmed the authoritie of the mother ouer them.
§. 2. It is the first lawe, euen of nature, (saithVal. Max. Valerius) that we should in all kindnes and affection, deerelie loue our parents. And, the honour which wee owe vntoChilo. them, is no otherwise to be vnderstood, but to iudge discreetly, reuerently, and honou∣rably of them; & to esteeme wel of all their dooings: not onely because they are our elders, but chiefely because they are our parents; whom it pleased God to vse as in∣struments, to the intent, that by them wee might haue our first beginning, and natu∣rall entrance into this world: & by whom also, after our birth, wee be most tenderlie brought vp, carefully attended on, natural∣lie beloued, and most daintily fedde and nourished, both in sicknes & in health. Also; in dutifully honouring of our pa∣rents,Chilo. wee doe not onely honour the great vertue and power of God, but also the ex∣cellencie of his goodnesse, whereby we are made men, and borne into the world, euen of the blood of man. §. 3. Honour thy father & thy mother, (saithEccl{us}, 3, 9, 10. Sirach) in deede and in word, and in all pa∣tience, that thou mayst haue Gods bles∣sing,
and that his blessing may abide with thee in the end. For, the blessing of the fa∣ther, establisheth the houses of the chyl∣dren; and the mothers curse rooteth out the foundations. Helpe thy father in his age, and grieueEcclus, 3, 13 him not as long as he liueth. And, if his vnderstanding faile, haue pa∣tienceverse, 14. with him, and despise him not when thou art in thy full strength. For, the good intreatie of thy father shallverse, 15, not be forgotten, but it shall be a fortresse for thee against sinnes. And, in the day of trouble thou shalt beverse, 16. remembred: thyne iniquities also shal melt away as the ye in the faire weather. §. 4. Who so honoureth his father, his sinnesEccl{us}, 3, 4, 5, shall be forgiuen him; and he shal abstaine from them, and shall haue his daily desires. And, he that honoureth his mother, is like one that gathereth treasure. VVho so honoureth his father, shallverse, 6, haue ioy of his owne chyldren: and vvhen hee maketh his prayer, he shal be eard. Who so honoreth his father, shall haue averse, 7, long life; and hee that is obedient vnto the Lord, shall comfort his mother.
But,] hee that forsaketh his father, shallEccl{us}, 3, 17 come to shame; and hee that despiseth his mother, is cursed of God. Hee [also] that curseth his father, or hisExod, 21, 17 mother, shall die the death. And, that childs light, shall be put outProu, 20, 20. in obscure darknes. ¶ Against Pride. §. 1. THere are sixe things (as Salomon saith)Prou, 6, 16. 17, 18, 19. which the Lord hateth, yea, his soule abhorreth seauen: [namely these;] hautie [or proude] lookes; a lying tongue; the hands that shedde innocent blood; a heart that imagineth wicked enterprises; feete that be swift in running to mischiefe; a false witnes that speaketh lyes; and him that rai∣seth vp contentions among bretheren. §. 2. Pride, (as Pacuuius saith) is a subtile Ser∣pent,Pauuius. which slilie insinuateth her selfe into the mindes of men; and the very cheefe cause of all superstition and enuie. It is an vgly and lothsome monster bothPlato. in the sight of God & man, & continually
accompanied with these foure bad compa∣nions: Folly; Rashnes; Audacitie; and Impudencie. The beginning of mans pride, is to fallEccl{us}, 10, 13 away from God, & to turne away his hart from his Maker. For, pride is the originall of sinne, & heverse. 14. that hath it, shall powre out abhomination, till at last himselfe be ouerthrowne. But] the rewarde of humilitie and theProu, 22, 4, feare of God, is riches, honour, & health. §. 3. Pride, enuie, and impatiencie, are theAugustine. three capitall enemies of mans constancie. And, it commonly falleth out, that heeArnobius. which is proud himselfe, thinketh it a mat∣ter vnpossible, for any man to be humble. Pride is also such a turbulent euill to himAmbrose. that is possessed there-with, that it maketh his maister like a shyp without a Pilot, tost vp and downe vppon the waues, by the windes & tempests. For, by reason of his vnquiet thoughts,Pyndarus. and aspiring spirit, hee can neuer content himselfe in any meane vocation. But still striueth higher and higher to beHemingius. exalted, till the burden of his sin bruse both his life and soule with the weight.
§. 4. My sonne, (saith Sirach) be not proudeEccl{us}, 6. 2. 3, in the deuise of thine owne minde, least thy soule rent thee as a Bull; and eate vp thy leaues, and destroy thy fruite: and leaue thee like a dry tree in the wildernes. For, a wicked soule destroyeth him thatEcclus. 6. 4. hath it, and maketh him to be laughed to scorne of his enemies; and bringeth him to the portion of the vngodly. Wherefore, if thou wilt be beloued bothPlotinus. of God and good men, endeuour diligent∣ly to abstaine from pride; and be not of an hautie, stoute, and stately spirit: neyther arrogantly boast thy selfe at any time of the good gifts of God; whether of vvisedom, beautie, policie, strength, authority, or ri∣ches. For, it is one God that is onelie wise, amiable, puissant, wealthy, and full of all felicitie. Which God, ought of euery man to bee worshipped vvith humblenesse of hart. For, who separateth thee? [ô man, from other men and preferreth thee?] or what1, Cor, 4, 7, hast thou, that thou hast not receiued? if thou hast receiued it, why reioycest thou, as though thou haddest not receiued it?
§. 5. And, although it please God to bestowMar. Bucer. some kinde of gift on some men, in more plentifull manner then on others; and to place one man in authoritie aboue another heere on earth; yet ought not hee that is so enriched, or raised, to swell in pride against his inferiour therefore. For, God by creation hath made all menHermes. alike: and hovv-soeuer vvee deceiue our selues, as deere vnto him is the poorest begger, as the most pompous Prince in the world. Also; thus fore-warneth vs the Lorde himselfe, saying: Let not the vvise-man glorie in his wisedom; nor the strong manIerem, 9, 23, 24, glory in his strength; nor the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glori∣eth, glory in this, that hee vnderstandeth & knoweth me. For, I am the Lord which shew mercie, iudgement, & righteousnes in the earth. &c. §. 6. Why is earth and ashes proude, seeingEccl{us}, 10, 12 that when a man dyeth, hee is the heyre of Serpents, beasts, and wormes▪ And, hee that thinks himselfe as rich asPlato. the richest during his life, shall bee made
as poore as the poorest, soone after his death. For, all men haue one entrance vnto life,Wisd, 7, 6, and a like going out. Be not proude then of clothing and ray∣ment;Eccl{us}. 11. 4, neyther exalt thy selfe in the day of honour. For, pride goeth before destruction, andProu, 16. 18, an high minde before the fall. As may for example be seene in the sto∣rieActs. 12. 21. 22. 23. of Herod: who beeing in the midst of his pride and royaltie, was suddainly smyt∣ten by the Angell of God, and forced spee∣dily to forgoe his life, riches, and glory. The like example also, as a speciall fore∣warning,2. Mac. 9. is left vnto vs in the story of An∣tiochus; whose wicked life, and miserable death, is sette downe at large in the second Booke of the Maccabees. Let men therefore feare the Almightie:Iob, 37, 24. for hee will not regard any that are wise in theyr owne conceite.
¶ Against enuie, hatred, malice, anger, wrath, & murder. §. 1. THou shalt not (saith the Lord) hate thyLeuit, 19, 17 neighbour [or brother] in thine heart, but thou shalt plainely rebuke thy neigh∣bour, and suffer him not to sinne. Thou shalt not auenge, nor be mindfullLeuit, 19, 18 of wrong against the chyldren of thy peo∣ple, but shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Say not thou, I will recompence euill:Prou, 20, 22. & 24, 29 or, I will doe to him, as hee hath doone to mee: but waite vpon the Lord, & he shall saue thee. For, where enuying and strife is, there isIames, 3, 16 sedition, and all manner of euill workes. §. 2. Enuie, (saith Plato) is the daughter ofPlato. Pride, the authour of murther & reuenge, the beginner of all secret sedition, and the perpetuall enemie to vertue. So that there is not a more wicked thing, thē for a man to hate, or be enuious: by theMar. Aur. which effect, the deuils be most miserable. And, the onely difference betweene en∣uieAristotle. and hatred is this: the first, worketh
euill secretly: the second, pursueth after reuenge publiquely. §. 3. As of all vices Pride is the greatest, so ofSocrates. all euils, Enuie is the most auncient, and Gluttony the foulest. Enuie neuer walkes abroad, without hisPythag. companion Slaunder in his company: for they are as it were two brothers, linked to∣gether to worke wickednesse. And, as enuie intends euill against hisPhocilides. neighbour secretly in his thought, so slaun∣der endeuoureth priuily to defame him with his tongue. §. 4. The malicious man, doth alwayes drinkSeneca. the most part of his owne poyson. And, like as yron is consumed with rust, so the harts of the enuious, are daily eaten & con∣sumed by enuie. The man also that is enuious, becom∣methBoetius. euer-more a troublesome tormentor to himselfe during his life; and neuer hur∣teth any man else by his hatred whilst hee liueth, so much as hee harmeth himselfe at the time of his death. An example heereof may be seene in the2. Sam, 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. &c. actions of Ahitophell; who hauing greatly
abused his wit, by beating his braine to giue wicked counsel to king Dauids sonne against his Father; & seeing afterward his purpose preuented, and his counsell con∣temned, he was presently so molested with inward malice, and ouer-come of secret enuie, that more Asse-like then the Asse vvhich hee rode on, he made hast home to hang himselfe. §. 5. Be not thou (saith Salomon) of an hastyEccles, 7, 11. spirit to be angry; for anger resteth in the bosome of fooles. And, as the vapour and smoake of theEccl{us}. 22. 24 chimney goeth before the fire, so euill words, rebukes, and threatnings, goe be∣fore blood-shedding. §. 6. If thy anger be but a small time deferred,Dion. thou shalt plainly perceiue that it will ther∣by be greatly abated; but if thou nourish and suffer the same to continue, it will ne∣uer cease, vntill by reuenge it bring thee to ruine. He therefore may well be said to be con∣querourChilo. ouer a stoute enemy, that can by his wisedome and patience, ouercome his owne anger.
For, hee that delights in peace and qui∣etnesse,Perdicas. sleepeth secure: but he that loueth strife and anger, is continually subiect to wrath and danger. §. 7. Yee haue heard (saith Christ) that it wasMath, 5, 21, said vnto them of the old time; Thou shalt not kill: for, who-soeuer killeth, shall be culpable of iudgement. But I say vnto you, whosoeuer is angryverse, 22. with his brother vnaduisedly, shall be cul∣pable of iudgement. If any man kill with a sword, he must beReue, 13, 10 killed by a sword. And who so sheddeth mans bloode, byGene, 9, 6, man shall his blood be shed: for in the I∣mage of GOD hath the Almightie made man. §. 8. Cease from anger, and leaue off wrath:Psalm, 37. 8. 9. fret not thy selfe also to doe euill: for euill dooers shall be cut off; and they that waite vpon the Lorde, they shall enherite the Land. Be angry, but sin not; let not the SunneEphe, 4, 26, 27. goe downe vpon thy wrath: neyther giue place to the deuill.
If thou haue not so much power ouerHermes. thy selfe, as presently to refraine thine an∣ger; yet striue to dissemble it, and so by lit∣tle and little forget it. For, hee that is slowe to anger, is betterProu, 16, 32 then the mighty man: and hee that ruleth his owne minde, is better then he that win∣neth a Cittie. §. 9. Beware of strife, and thou shalt makeEcclus, 28, 8, thy sinnes fewer: for an angry man kind∣leth strife. The more wood there is, the more ve∣hementEccl{us}, 28, 10. is the fire, and the mightier that a man is, the greater is his wrath: & the lon∣ger the strife endureth, the more vvrath is enflamed. An hastie brauling kindleth a fire: andverse. 11. an hastie fighting sheddeth blood. Meddle therefore as little as thou mayst,Thales. vvith the man that is not able to rule his owne anger: for, eyther by his company keeping, thou shalt be made like him: or else on the suddaine, thou shalt receiue some vnloo-ked-for-euill by him. §. 10. Striue not with a mighty man, least thouEccl{us}, 8, 1. 2, 3, happen to fall into his hands: neither make
any variance with a rich man, least hee on the other side wey downe thy weight: for, gold and siluer hath destroyed many, and hath subuerted the harts of Kinges. Striue not with a man that is full of words; ney∣ther lay thou any sticks vpon his fire. Trauaile not by the way with him that isEccl{us}, 8, 15, rash, least hee doe thee iniurie: for such a man will follow his owne wilfulnes; and so shalt thou perrish through his folly. As innocent Abel perrished by theGene, 4, 8, hands of his elder brother Caine, in his vn∣aduised rage and furie. §. 11. If thine enemie haue threatned thee, bePlutarch. not too hastie to giue credite to his flatte∣ring speeches: for Serpents neuer sting so deadly, as when they bite without any hys∣sing. Hee that hateth, will counterfet with hisProu, 26, 24 lippes; but in his hart hee hourdeth vp de∣ceit. VVherefore,] if hee speake thee fayre,verse, 25, beleeue him not; for there are many abho∣minations in his hart. Blood is as nothing in such a mans sight,Hermes. and when thou least thinkest harme, hee wil then be most ready to hurt thee.
As may for example be perceiued, by the trecherous dealing of Ioab, with Abner &2, Sam. 3. 27 and 20. 10. Amafa; whose blood hee spilt Iudas-like; saluting thē with outward signes of peace, and inward intent of murder. ¶ Against Sloth, and Idlenes. §. 1. LOue not sleepe, (saith Salomon) leastProu, 20, 13 thou come to pouerty: but open thine eyes, that thou mayst bee satisfied vvith bread. Let not laborious worke seeme tediousEccl{us}, 7, 15. vnto thee: neyther the husbandry vvhich the most High hath created. Seeke not excuses when thou shouldestEccl{us}, 10, 27 doe thy work: neyther be ashamed there∣of through pride in the time of aduersity. For, slothfulnesse causeth a man to fall aProu, 19, 15 sleepe: and a deceitfull soule shall suffer hunger. §. 2. Idlenes, (saith Cicero) is the onely nurseCicero. and nourisher of all sin, and the sole main∣tainer of fleshlie affections.
It is an enemie to all vertuous endeuours,Plotinus. and the very traine or high-way to want & ruine. It is a vice that greatly dulleth a mans vn∣derstanding;Gallen. breedeth melancholie; in∣creaseth many bad humours in the bodie; choketh the braine; hindereth thrift; and prouoketh the anger of God. §. 3. God, (as the holy scripture testifieth) hath generally commaunded, that man should labour all the dayes of his life, saying first vnto Adam after hee was cast out of Paradice; * In the sweat of thy face shaltGene, 3, 19. thou eate bread, till thou returne vnto the earth from whence thou camst. Wherefore, if there be any that refuseth2. Thes. 3, 10. to labour, let him not eate. For, idle people in a Common-vvealth,Thales. are as hurtfull to be suffered, as Drones a∣mong the Bees. §. 4. By slothfulnes (saith Salomon) the roofeEccle, 10, 18 of the house goeth to decay; and by the idlenes of the hands, the house droppeth through. As a doore (saith hee) goeth too and froProu, 26, 14 vppon his hinges, so turneth the slothfull
man vppon his bed. Hee hideth his hand in his bosome, andProu, 26, 15 it greeueth him to put it againe to his mouth. Hee is wiser in his owne conceite, thenverse, 16. seauen men that can render a reason. Hee sayth, a Lyon is without, I shall beProu, 22, 13 slaine in the streete. Hee will not goe to plowe, because it isProu, 20, 4, Winter; therefore shall hee begge in the Sommer, but haue nothing. § 5. Suffer not thy selfe (saith Aurelius) to beMar. Aurel. subiect to sloth and idlenes: for if thou vse thy selfe thereto, thou shalt not bee able to endure labour in time of neede. Though thou maist liue at ease, becauseTertullian. thou hast store of riches, yet forget not to labour sometimes of thine owne accord: for, if it chaunce thee afterward to be com∣pelled thereto, thou shalt away with it the better. §. 6. Employ thy selfe alwayes about someMar. Aurel. laudable exercise, and let not idlenes haue any rule ouer thee. For, idlenes may vvell be counted the graue of liuing men. It is an euill wherein life dyeth, and the soule of
man is thereby twice buried in him: once in his body; next, in his sloth. This odious sinne also of idlenes, is theMar. Aurel very sinke that receiueth in to it selfe, all the filthy channels of vice whatsoeuer: which beeing once brimme full, suddainly run∣neth ouer, thorowe the whole Citty or Country: and with his pestiferous ayre, in∣fecteth and poysoneth a great multitude of people, before it can be remedied. Yea; neyther the filth of secrete cham∣bers;Alex. Seue. the stinch of pumps in ships, nor the ordures of whole Citties, do so much cor∣rupt the ayre, as idle persons do infect the people. Hee therefore that passeth his life in aPlato. Common-wealth vvithout profit, ought (as one vnworthy to liue,) to haue the rest of his life taken from him. For, there is nothing more reprochful &Macrobius. cruell in any Kingdome, then are a multi∣tude of vagabonds and idle people: vvho by theyr sloth and negligence, do not one∣lie liue wickedly themselues, but also daily induce others to doe like them, by theyr bad ensample, & want of punishment.
¶ Against Couetousnes. §. 1. TAke heede, and beware (saith Christ)Luke, 12, 15 of couetousnesse; for, though a man haue abundance, yet his life standeth not in his riches. Godlines is great gaine, if a man be con∣tent1. Tim. 6. 6. 7. with that he hath: for we brought no∣thing into the world, and it is certaine that we shall carry nothing out. Therefore, when we haue foode & ray∣ment, let vs ther-with be content. For, theyverse, 8, 9. that will be rich, fall into tentation and snares, and into many foolish & noysome lusts, which drowne men in perdition and destruction. For, the desire of money, is the roote ofverse, 10. all euill; which while some lusted after, they erred from the fayth, & perced them∣selues thorow with many sorrowes. §. 2. There is not a more wicked thing (saithEccl{us}, 10. 9. Sirach) then for a man to be couetous, and a louer of money: for, such an one will e∣uen sell his soule. And, vvhere a greedie desire of gaineIraeneus. resteth, there raigneth all manner of sinne
and wicked workes. Besides, a couetous mans eye, hath neuerEccl{us}, 14, 9, enough of a portion: and his wicked ma∣lice withereth his owne soule. While such a man liueth, the poore peo∣pleMacrobius. daily curse him: and after hee is dead, his owne kindred fall at strife and conten∣tion about his goods. §. 3. Couetousnes is such a poysoned euill, &Erasmus. of such force where it is rooted in the heart of man, that it worketh in him, not onely a carelesnes of Gods holy will, but an vtter contempt also of God himselfe. For, who∣soeuer with that infection is sick, & intang∣led, endeuoureth with all his might to fol∣low the loue of filthy lucre, and the lyfe of Gods holy word is lothsome vnto him. Hee maketh none account eyther of hisCleobulus. good name, or office in which he is placed to doe iustice; but flieth as greedilie after gaine, as hungry Rauens doe after stinking carrion. And, the better to attaine his pur∣pose, hee will vndermine all men, & proue trustie to no man; but craftily lie in waite for euery ones goods: neuer making any conscience, whom, or by what meanes hee
doth deceiue, so hee may get golde by the bargaine. For, as the Gluttons cheefest desire is toBernard. fill his belly, and the Lechers to satisfie his lust; so the couetous mans minde, is whol∣ly imployed to get abundance of gold. Hee so well loueth lucre, that he makethBoetius. gold his God: and his chiefest confidence, is lockt vp close in his coffers. He miserably spareth both from his ownAnachar. belly and backe; and liues like a begger all his life, coueting onely to be found rich in money at his death. But,] hee that loueth gold, shall not beEccl{us}, 31, 5. iustified; and hee that followeth corrupti∣on, shall haue enough thereof. §. 4. The minde of a couetous rich man, saithPacuuius. Pacuuius, can neuer be thorowly satisfied or contented so long as hee liueth, though hee possesse plenty of all things; for, the more he hath, the more hee still desireth. And, like as a greedy curre speedily de∣uourethHermes. whatsoeuer hee can catch, & pre∣sently gapeth for more: so when it hap∣neth the couetous man to obtaine any thing that hee desireth, hee seemeth not∣withstanding to set little by it, & saith, Alas,
it is nothing; but wisheth euer to haue it doubled. The onely reason is, because his couetousnesse increaseth, as fast as his sub∣stance is augmented. §. 5. It is no maruaile (saith Aurelius) thoughAurelius. hee bee good, which is not couetous, but it were a vvonder to see a couetous man good. For, great abundance of gold and siluer,Ierome. cannot of any man, be both gathered and kept without sinne. To delight in riches, is a foule and dan∣gerousSocrates. vice, but to be a bond-slaue to co∣uetousnes, is the confusion of a mans own soule. §. 6. O thou horrible hunger of gold and sil∣uer,Tully. what is it not that thou doost compell, the harts of men to buy and to sell? VVho hath beene tryed thereby, andEccl{us}, 31, 10 found perfect? Let him be an example of glory. VVho might offend, and hath not offended? or doe euill thereby, and hath not done it? Many are destroyed by reason of gold;Eccl{us}, 31, 6, and diuers haue founde theyr destruction before them.
It is as a stumbling blocke to them thatverse, 7. sacrifice vnto it, and euery foole is taken there-with. §. 7. There is (saith Salomon) an euill sick∣nesEccles, 5, 12, 13, which I haue seene vnder the Sunne: to wit, riches reserued to the owners there∣of for theyr euill. Now surely, none can be more wretchedFulgosius. by the riches which he possesseth, then the hungry-harted money-monger; whose de∣sire is neuer satisfied, though he haue suffi∣cient; but is euer complaining of vvant, when hee is most stored with wealth. For; his very trauaile after riches, pinethEccles, 31, 1, away his body; and the care thereof, dri∣ueth away his sleepe. Many wayes dooth hee daily molest hisClem. Alex. minde, first to get gaine; & when through much troublesome busines he hath obtay∣ned abundance, hee is then no lesse com∣bred with care, howe to keepe safely that which hee hath gotten: but aboue all; his greatest dolour is at the day of death; to think with himselfe, that he must then per∣force depart from whatsoeuer he hath, and leaue all behind him.
VVhere-vpon Sirach very well sayth:Eccl{us}, 41, 1, O Death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee, to a man that liueth at rest in his possessions: yea, to the man that hath no∣thing to vexe him, and that hath prosperi∣tie in all things! For doubtlesse, to him that makethEuagoras. vvealth his onely happines in this vvorld, Death at his comming, is a most vnwel∣come guest. Thus is it with the man that gathereth ri∣chesLuke, 12, 21 to himselfe, and is not rich in God. §. 8. Trust not [therefore,] in oppression,Psal, 62, 10. nor in robberie: be not vaine; if riches in∣crease, set not your hart thereon. Put no confidence in thy riches: neitherEccl{us}, 5, 1, 8, say vnto thy selfe; I haue enough for my life: for riches shall not helpe thee in the time of vengeance and indignation. Let not thy soule be subiect to the sinneMar. Bucer. of couetousnes; but liue content with that which thou hast, though it be but little, ne∣uer seeking to increase thy substance by deceit: for, goods gotten by honest labour, bring with them ioy of hart, and peace of conscience: but the wealth that is wonne by any vvicked meanes, cannot long be
possessed, vvithout some inward griefe & vexation. §. 9. If thou vvilt liue according to nature,Seneca. thou shalt neuer be poore: but if thou wilt liue after thine owne greedy desire, thou shalt neuer be rich. If thou couet to bee rich in vvorldlyHermes. wealth, thou shalt receiue there-with, sor∣row, care, trouble of minde, & many other greeuances: but if thou seeke to be godly, thou shalt thereby finde comfort, quiet, & euerlasting felicitie. Prepare thy selfe therfore of such riches,Plotinus. as when the shyp is broken, may swimme, and scape to land with theyr maister. For, no man is more wealthy, then heeAugustine. that is rich in good workes. ¶ Against Ʋsury. §. 1. IF thou lend money to my people, (saythExod, 22, 25 the Lord) that is, to the poore with thee, thou shalt not be as an Vsurer vnto him: yee shall not oppresse him with vsury. If thy brother bee impouerished, andLeuit, 25, 35 fallen in decay▪ with thee, thou shalt re∣lieue
him; and as a stranger and soiour∣ner, so shall hee liue with thee. Thou shalt take no vsury of him, nor ad∣uantage;Leuit, 25, 36 but thou shalt feare thy GOD, that thy brother may liue by thee. Thou shalt neither giue him thy moneyverse, 37, to vsury, nor lend him thy victuals for in∣crease. Moreouer;] if thou take thy neigh∣boursExod, 22, 26 raiment to pledge, thou shalt restore it vnto him before the Sunne goe downe. For, that is his couering onely, and thisverse, 27. is his garment for his skinne: wherein shall he sleepe? Therefore, when he cryeth vnto mee, I will heare him: for, I am mercifull. §. 2. Some men, (saith S. Ierome) thinke vsu∣rieIerome. to be onely in money; which thing the Scripture fore-seeing, doth name the ouer∣plusse in all things. For, vsurie is, vvhere more is requiredBernard. then was deliuered, whether in money, or in meates, or in any other thing. As if thou deliuer tenne shillings, & lookest for more at the returne thereof: or deliuerest a bu∣shell of Corne, and requirest aboue that. So, after the like sort in any thing els, what∣soeuer
is receiued more then the principall, it is vsury. Yea, whatsoeuer name thou giuest it, theAmbrose. ouer-plus in all things receiued, more then was deliuered, is vsurie. §. 3. Vsury, (saith Constantius) is the daugh∣terConstantius. of Auarice, the nurse of Idlenes, & the cause of ciuill discord among brethren. It is also a secret euill, which daily deuou∣rethCassianus. the wealth of our neighbour; & may wel be likened to a greedy whirle-poole, which speedily swalloweth what-soeuer it catcheth. Of all euill members therfore in a Com∣mon-wealth,Perdicas. none is more perrillous then the greedy-minded Vsurer: for, he priuily deceiueth euery man with whom he med∣leth, and neuer doth good to any, so long as he liueth. Hee is worse then a theefe; for, a theefeAgesilaus. robbeth onely by night, but the Vsurer robbeth both by day and night. And, like as a Hare deliuereth, nourish∣eth,Pet. Lomb. and is with young all at once; so the fraudulent Vsurer, before hee hath fully finished his deceite against one man, ca∣steth
in his mind, how he may best beguile another, through some subtile bargaine. §. 4. But,] hee that increaseth his riched by v∣surieProu▪ 28, 8, and interest; gathereth them for him which will be mercifull vnto the poore. And, as a Partrich gathereth togetherIere, 17, 11, the young vvhich shee hath not brought forth; [who afterward forsake her, vvhen they perceiue that she is not their damme,] so he that getteth riches, and not by right, shall leaue them in the middes of his dayes, and at his end, shal be a foole. For,] the gathering of treasures by a de∣ceitfullProu, 21, 6, tongue is vanity tossed to and fro, of them that seeke death. And, hee that through vsury oppressethBasill. the poore, robbeth both his conscience of comfort, and his soule of saluation. ¶ Against Gluttony and drun∣kennesse. §. 1. BE not greedy (saith Sirach,) in all de∣lights; neyther be thou too hastie vpon all meates. For, excesse of meates bringeth
sicknes, & gluttony turneth into cholerick diseases. By surfet many haue perrished; but hee that deteth himselfe, prolongeth his life. Oh how little is sufficient for a man wellEccl{us}, 31, 19 taught? For, thereby hee belcheth not in his chamber, nor feeleth any paine. A sweet & wholsome sleepe [also] com∣methverse, 20. of a temperate feeding: such a man feeleth no inward paine; hee riseth vp be∣times in the morning, and is well at ease in himselfe. But an vnsatiable eater sleepeth vnquietly; and is troubled with panges of the belly, and many other hurtfull diseases. §. 2. Gluttony, is a filthy, vile, and vgly vice,Gueuara. consisting onely in a greedie desire after daintie fare. It is the sworne enemie to temperance;Hipocrates. a mortall or deadly foe to health; and a most lothsome blemish to humanitie. Oh what a monstrous sight is it to be∣holdProtogenes. the full furnished table of some vnsa∣tiable and rich glutton; & how with sun∣dry sorts of the most rarest meates & cost∣liest delicates it is thorowly beset and coue∣red, from end to end. And as the maister of the feast is himselfe there-vnto strangely
affected, such guests for his companions will he cōmonly be sure to haue about him, who (like flattering Parasites,) weighing his inclination, will for theyr owne profit sake, highly extoll him in his grosse worke of vvickednesse; and feede his humour, not onely with vaine talke and foolish ie∣sting, but nowe and then also with some shew of scurility, to make his meate haue the better digestion. But, they that are so greatly addicted toCrates. belly-cheere, and regard more the pampe∣ring of theyr panch, then the wisedome of the minde; may well be likened to fooles, who giue more credite to theyr owne con∣ceit, then to any other mans grounded rea∣son. And, the man that refraineth not his ap∣perite,Prou, 25, 28 is like a Citty broken downe, and without walles. §. 3. It is not the needfull vse of meate, thatAugustine. any man ought to forbeare; but it is the in∣ordinate desire thereof, which ought to be blamed. And, he is not to be counted a glutton,Aristotle. which feedeth onely sufficiently for the nourishment of his owne nature: but hee
that gurmundizeth much more in quanti∣tie then sundry other men; & hee that dai∣lie delighteth to fare deliciously; satisfying the pleasure of his sensual appetite through excesse, and making his belly his God. For, meate and drinke are the good giftsGueuara. of God, and ought of all men thankfullie to be receiued; and moderately taken at times conuenient for our naturall vse and sustenaunce: but hee that greedily consu∣meth more then hee needeth, abuseth both his body through his misdiet, & the good gifts of God; by turning them from the right vse for which they were ordained. §. 4. Of all the parts of mans body, (saythTully. Tully) the bolly is the most vnthankfull; for it neuer requiteth any pleasure doone vnto it, but continually craueth, more then is needfull for it. And when it is full fraught with daintieGregory. fare, then are the prickings and prouocati∣ons to lust, most forward to stirre vp the flesh to filthy sinne. VVherefore, if thou sitte at a costly ta∣ble,Eccl{us}, 31, 12 13. open not thy mouth wide vpon it, & say not, Behold much meate. Remember that an euill eye is a shrew: and what thing
created is worse then a wicked eye? for, it weepeth for euery cause. Stretch not thine hand where-soeuer itEccl{us}. 31, 14. looketh, neyther thrust it with thine eye in∣to the dish. Ponder vvith thy selfe vvhat thy negh∣bourverse, 15, would faine haue that sitteth by thee: and be discreet in euery poynt. Eate modestly that which is sette beforeverse. 16. thee, and deuoure not, least thou be hated of them that behold thee. Leaue thou off first for nurtures sake: &verse, 17. be not insatiable, least thou offend. §. 5. My sonne (saith Tobie) drinke not wineTob, 4, 15, to make thee drunken; neyther let drun∣kennesse goe with thee in thy iourney. For, drunkennes increaseth the courageEccl{us}, 31, 30 of a foole till hee offend▪ it diminisheth his strength, and maketh woundes. Shewe not thy valiantnes at any time inEccl{us}, 31, 25 vvine; for wine hath beene the destruction of many. And, as the fierie fornace prooueth theverse, 36, yron in the tempering; so doth wine proue the harts of the proude by drunkennes.
§. 6. Drunkennesse, (saith Macrobius) is aMacrobius. deformed monster with many heads: as filthy talke; fornication; wrath; murther; swearing; cursing; and diuers other disho∣nest actions. It disturbeth mans reason; robbeth himBoetius. of his sences; enfeebleth his remembrance; sendeth in forgetfulnes; powreth in errors, induceth to sluggishnes: & in the end, vt∣terly vndooeth him that delighteth there∣in. §. 7. Wine was made from the beginning toEcclus, 31, 27, 28, make men glad, and not for drunkennes. Wine measurably drunken, and in time, is profitable for the life of man: & bringeth gladnesse of heart, and cheerefulnesse of minde. But wine drunken with excesse, makethverse, 29. bitternesse of minde, with sundry brab∣lings, and much strife. Also; of two much drinking, proceedeGallen. dropsies, where-with the body, and often∣times the visage, is svvolne and defaced: bedlam furie, where-with the mind is mo∣lested and perrished: but of all other euils most odious, swinish beastlines, wher-with
both the body and soule is defiled: and the figure of man, is as it were by enchaunt∣ment, transformed into the likenes of some mishapen creature. §. 8. Men ouer-come with wine, are far worseDiogenes. then beastes: for beasts will not enfor∣ced to drink any more then may well con∣tent them: but such men as take pleasure in excesse of drinking, voluntarily swal∣low down more then is sufficient for them, and beeing oftentimes not able when they haue it, to carry it clenly away, they are thereby constrained to shewe foorth theyr owne shame, euen in the viewe of euery present beholder. And, like as when the Wine purgeth, itPlutarch. commonly breaketh the vessels, and that which before lay in the bottom, commeth nowe vp to the brim: euen so the tongue of a drunkard, in the mids of his vncomly mirth, sticketh not to reueale to euery new acquaintance in his company, the secrete thoughts of his hidden hart. §. 9. VVine, is a mocker, and strong drinkeProu, 20, 1, is raging: & whosoeuer is deceiued there∣by, is not wise.
For,] to whom is vvoe? to whom is sor∣row?Prou, 23, 29. to whom is strife? to whom is mur∣muring? to whom are woundes vvithout cause? and to whom is the rednesse of the eyes? Euen to them (saith Salomon) that tarryverse, 30. long at the wine: to them that goe & seeke mixt wine. VVoe [therefore] to all such as rise vpEsay, 5, 11, early to followe drunkennes: and to them that continue vntill night, till the vvine doe inflame them. VVoe vnto them that are mightie toverse, 22, drinke wine, and to them that are strong to powre in strong drinke. For, it is a propertie meeter for a spungeDemosth. then for a man, to drinke much. §. 10. Looke not thou vpon the wine when itProu, 23, 31 is redde▪ (saith the wiseman) and vvhen it sheweth his colour in the euppe; or goeth downe pleasantly. For,] in the end it will bite like a serpent,verse, 32, and hurt like a Cockatrise. Thine eyes shall looke vpon strange wo∣men,verse, 33, 34, and thine heart shall speake lewde things: and thou shalt be as one that slee∣peth
in the middes of the Sea; and as hee that sleepeth in the top of the mast. Yea; in such danger shalt thou be by rea∣sonIraeneus. of thy drunkennes, that thou shalt ve∣rie hardly be able to vvithstand the sundry prouokements of thine owne flesh, which as then will be most prone and readie, to pricke thee forward to euill. For, it is one of the first euils that spring∣ethAmbrose. from drunkennes, to make shipwracke of chastitie. As may for an example appeare, by the ardent desire of Olophernes toward Iu∣dethIudith, 13. in the time of his banketting. Who notwithstanding, cleane contrary to his expectation, after hee had fully tippled som-what more then enough, lost his head for his labour, by the handes of the selfe same woman, vvhilst hee lay in his bedde soundly sleeping. ¶ Against adultery and fornication. §. 1. THou shalt not (saith the Almightie,)Exod, 20, 14 commit adulterie. Thou shalt not giue thy selfe vnto thyLeuit. 18. 20 neighbours wife, by carnall copulation to be defiled with her.
§. 2. He that committeth adultery with a wo∣man,Prou, 6, 32, (sayth Salomon) is destitute of vn∣derstanding: hee that doth it, destroyeth his owne soule. And, all the chyldren that are borne ofWisd, 4, 6, the wicked bed, shall be witnes of the wic∣kednesse against theyr Parents when they be asked. §. 3. Yee haue heard, (saith Christ) that it wasMath. 5. 27 28. sayd to them of olde time; Thou shalt not commit adultery. But I say vnto you, that whosoeuer looketh on a woman to lust af∣ter her, hath committed adultery with her already in his hart. Wherefore, if thy right eye cause thee to offend, plucke it out, and cast it from thee.Math, 5, 29. For, better it is for thee, that one of thy members perrish, then that thy whole bo∣die should be cast into hell. §. 4. To plucke out the eye that offendeth, is not meant by the wordes of Christ, that thou shouldest disfigure thy face; but ra∣ther, as Sirach saith, to turne away thineEcclus, 9, 8. eye from beholding a beautifull woman: and not to looke vpon others beauty. For,
many haue perrished by the beautie of wo∣men; and through the beholding thereof, loue is kindled as a fire. King Dauid, by ouer-much looking2, Sam, 11, 2, 3, &c. at the bayte of beautie, forgot himselfe, & so fell in loue vvith another mans vvife: from loue, hee fell to vnlawfull lust; from lust, to dissembling, and counterfet shewe of kindnes towards her innocent husband. And, in the end, when he could deuise no other shift to couer his owne shame, hee caused Vriah himselfe, to carry a letter to Ioab his cheefe Captaine; wherin was po∣litiquely plotted, the death of him that brought it. Moreouer; a rash and wicked eye, thatPlat. delighteth to behold vanitie, may well be called the windowe of death: for it is the deadly minister of the harts cōcupiscence, and the fore-runner of filthy facts, thefts, robberies, extortions, & sundry other ini∣quities. §. 5. All men are (indeede) by nature natural∣lieAeneas Siluius. giuen, to feele in themselues, the boy∣ling and raging lusts of the fraile and vn∣constant flesh▪ Notwithstanding, hee that suffereth himselfe to be led captiue in the
filthy sinne of whoredome and adulterie, falleth thereby into innumerable inconue∣niences. For first of all, this wicked euill cleane taketh away from a man his good name and credite. It also consumeth his substance, and bringeth him in the end to plaine beggery. It killeth at once, both the strength and beautie of the body. It decay∣eth and greatly hurteth health. It ingende∣reth many bad diseases. It disfigureth the flower of youth long before the time. It hasteth or draweth on riueled & ill-fauou∣red age. It diminisheth the strength and quicknes of the wit: It dulleth the sight of the minde. It draweth from him all honest studies, & maketh him delight in nothing but that which is vile and vnhonest. It ta∣keth away the vse of reason, which is the natiue propertie of man. It maketh a young man peeuish, melancholy, & slaun∣derous. It maketh an olde man odious, wretched, & filthy. Demonax, Finally, it is a plea∣sure bought vvith paine; a delight hatcht with disquiet; a content passed with feare; and a sinne finished with sorrowe. §. 6. Can a man (saith Salomon) carry coalesProu, 6, 27, 28, 29. in his bosome, & his clothes not be burnt?
or, can a man goe vpon coales, & his feete not be hurt? So, hee that goeth in to his neighbours wife & toucheth her, shall not be guiltlesse. Flie therfore, the filthy lusts of the flesh:Hermes. and as thou wouldest willingly for thy bo∣dily healths sake, abstaine from hurtfull meate; so oughtest thou to abstaine from sinne, for the saluation of thy soule. For, when lust hath conceiued, it bring∣ethIames, 1, 15, forth sinne; and sinne vvhen it is fini∣shed, bringeth forth death. §. 7. Know yee not, that your bodies are the1, Cor, 6, 15, 16, 17. members of Christ? shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid: Doe yee not knowe, that hee which coupleth himselfe with an harlot, is one body? For, two, saith hee, shall be one flesh. But hee that is ioyned vnto the Lord, is one spirit. Know yee not [also,] that the vnrighte∣ous1, Cor, 6, 9. 10, shal not inherite the kingdom of God? Be not deceiued; neither fornicatours, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor buggerers, nor theeues, nor couetous, nor drunkards, nor raylers, nor extortioners, shall inherite the kingdome of God.
§. 8. Woe then be vnto that man, which con∣temningSocrates. the excellencie of his own nature, and the diuine part that is in him, serueth onely his bodily lusts; defiling his ovvne soule, through his lasciuious desires, and beastly delights. For, hee ceaseth to be a man; and is in∣deedPlato. no better then a brute beast, that lea∣ueth the rules of reason, & giueth his mind solely to the fulfilling of his fleshlie inclina∣tions. Besides; if they bee counted miserable,Aristotle. which haue cruell Maisters, although they may be released from them: hovve much more are they miserable, which serue theyr bodily lusts as theyr maisters, from vvhich they cannot flie? For, hee that hath enthraled himselfe toHermes. the fulfilling of his fleshly motions, is ther∣by more bound, then any bond-man else what-soeuer. Yea, such a man, neuer ceaseth to waste &Pauius. consume the strength of his owne bodie; hee daily spotteth and polluteth the beauty of his soule; hee continually draweth vnto himselfe diuers diseases; & walketh houre∣ly in danger of eternall damnation.
§. 9. Enforce thy selfe therefore vvith all theErasmus. might thou maist, to abstaine from vngod∣ly lusts: and the better to bridle the vn∣rulie passions of thine ovvne affections, endeuour diligently to study and follovve vertue: for, the desires that are good, vvill euermore mortifie and destroy, the desires that are euill. But if so be that thou canst not abstaine,1. Cor, 7, 9. thou maist then vse the lawful remedy that God hath appoynted: namely, marriage. For, it is better to marry, then to burne. Also;] to auoyde fornication, let euerie1, Cor, 7, 2, man haue his vvife, and let euery vvoman haue her owne husband. For,] marriage is honourable among allHebr, 13, 4, men, and the bedde vndefiled: but whore∣mongers and adulterers, God will iudge. ¶ Against stealing, lying, slaundering, false∣witnes-bearing, and coueting of our neighbours wealth. §. 1. YEe shall not steale; (saith the Lord ourLeuit, 19, 11 God,) neyther deale falsely; nor lie one to another.
Let him that stole, steale no more: butEphe, 4, 28, let him rather labour and worke vvith his handes the thing that is good: that he may haue to giue vnto him that needeth. §. 2. My sonne, (saith Sirach) sow not a lye a∣gainstEcclus, 7, 12, 13. thy brother, neyther doe the same a∣gainst thy friende. Vse not to make any manner of lye; for the custome thereof is is not good. Aristotle, beeing demaunded what van∣tageAristotle. a man might gette by lying? aunswe∣red: To be vnbeleeued vvhen hee telleth the truth. §. 3. Doubtlesse;] a lie is a wicked shame inEccl{us}, 20. 23 a man, yet is it often in the mouth of the vnwise. A thiefe is better then a man that is accu∣stomedverse, 24. to lie: but they both shall haue de∣struction euerlastingly. For, by lying, the truth is broken, GodHermes. himselfe greeuously offended, & the state of our neighbour & our selues greatly im∣paired. §. 4. The conditions of lyers are alwayes vn∣honest:Eccl{us}. 20, 25 & their shame is euer with them.
He that is knowne to be a lyer, shal com∣monlyThales. be helde in contempt amongst all men; & such onely as before thought well of his company, will afterward care verie little for his acquaintance. Besides; hee that is accustomed to lying,Becon. looseth not onely his credite & good name amongst men, but also shutteth himselfe out from the grace and fauour of GOD, and most horribly ioyneth himselfe to the deuill, who hath no truth in him. But is a lyer from the beginning; & theIohn, 8, 44, father of lyes. VVherefore, cast off lying; and speakeEphe, 4, 25, euery man the truth vnto his neighbour: for, we are members one of another. §. 5. Thou shalt not (saith the Lord) vvalkeLeuit. 19. 16 about with tales among thy people. If thou hast heard a vvorde against thyEccl{us}, 19, 10 neighbour, let it die with thee: and be sure it will not burst thee. Declare not other mens manners ney∣therEccl{us}, 19. 8, to friend nor foe: and if the sin apper∣taine not vnto thee, reueale it not. For, he shall harken vnto thee, & markeverse. 9. thee: and when hee findeth opportunitie, hee will hate thee.
§. 6. Men ought alwayes to heare, twise soThales. much as they speake: for, to that end (saith Thales,) Nature hath giuen vs two eares, and but one tongue. A wise man will therefore, well considerCrates. of a matter when he hath heard it, & pon∣der thereof aduisedly with himselfe, before he speake of it againe. But a foole trauaileth whē he hath heardEccl{us}, 19, 11 a thing, like vnto a woman that is about to bring forth a child. And, as an arrow that sticketh in a mansverse, 12. thigh, so is newes in a fooles hart. §. 7. The words of a tale-bearer, (saith Salo∣mon)Prou, 18, 8, are as flaterings; & they goe downe into the bowels of the belly. They sinck deepely into the memory ofGueuara. him that willingly giueth eare there-vnto: but he that resisteth a tale-bringer, putteth thereby a perrillous enemy to silence. For,] without vvoode, the fire is quen∣ched,Prou, 26, 20 and without a tale-bearer, strife cea∣seth. But] as the coale maketh burning coales,verse, 21. and wood a fire, so the contentious man is apt to kindle strife.
Be not [then] counted a tale-bearer,Ecclus, 5, 15 neither lie thou in waite with thy tongue: for shame & repentance follow the thiefe, and an euill condemnation is ouer his head that is double tunged; but he that is a back∣biter, shalbe hated, enuied, & confounded. §. 8. Slaunder no man; vvhether hee be thyBoetius. friend or thy foe; neither speake any euill of thy neighbour behind his back. For hee that defameth another vvith his tongue, woundeth his owne soule by his words. And, a common slaunderer, striuing toPolion. bring other men forth of fauour, through his detracting speeches, becommeth there∣by odious himselfe. §. 9. Thou shalt not (saith the Lord) beareExod, 20, 16 false witnesse against thy neighbour. Thou shalt not receiue [or, report] aExod, 23, 1, false tale; neyther shalt thou put thy hand with the vvicked, to be a false witnesse. Thou shalt not couet thy neighboursDeut, 5, 21, wife, neither shalt thou desire thy neygh∣bours house, nor his land, nor his man ser∣uaunt, nor his maide seruaunt, nor his oxe, nor his asse, nor any thing that thy neigh∣bour hath.
§. 10. Let no man vvith coyne corrupt thee,Hemingius. to beare false witnes at any time against the vnguiltie person: neither suffer thy tunge to testifie an vntruth, through the vaine hope of worldly preferment. But be well aduised what thou vnderta∣kestTully. before thou speakest; and consider rightly of the cause, before thou giue re∣cord thereof in the presence of any Ruler. For,] a false witnesse shall not scape vn∣punished:Prou, 19, 9, and he that speaketh lyes, shall perrish. ¶ Against iniustice, wrongfull dea∣ling, and oppressing the poore. §. 1. YE shall not (saith the Lord) doe vniust∣lyLeuit, 19, 15 in iudgement. Yee shall haue no respect of person inD, 1, 17, iudging; but shall heare the small as vvell as the great: yee shall not feare the face of man: For, the iudgement is Gods. §. 2. Thou shalt not fauour the person of theeuit. 19. 15 poore, nor honor the person of the mighty:
but thou shalt iudge thy neighbour iustly. Thou shalt keepe thee farre from a falseExod, 23, 7, matter; and shalt not sley the innocent and the righteous: for, I will not iustifie a wic∣ked man. §. 3. VVrest not the law, (saith Moises,) norDeut, 16, 19 respect any person; neither take reward: for the rewarde blindeth the eyes of the wise, & peruerteth the words of the iust. And maketh Magistrates dumbe, thatEccl{us}, 20, 28 they cannot reproue faults. That which is iust and right, shalt thouDeut, 16, 20 follow; that thou maist le & possesse the land which the Lorde thy GOD giueth thee. But to haue respect of any person inProu, 24, 23 iudgement, is not good. For, if yee regard the persons, yee com∣mitIames, 2, 9▪ sinne, and are rebuked of the Lawe as transgressours. §. 4. Hee that is placed to be a Iudge, (saithTertullian. Tertullian,) ought alwayes to be true in his worde; honest in his thought; and vertu∣ous in his deede: vvithout feare of any but GOD; and vvithout hate of any but the wicked.
For, equitie or iustice, is a measure or∣dainedLactantius. of GOD amongst men vppon earth; to defend the feeble frō the mighty; the truth from falshood; and to roote out the euill from among the good. Notwithstanding; wee oftentimes per∣ceiueAristotle. it to fall out, that eyther through af∣fection to theyr friendes; hatred to theyr aduersaries; or corruption by gifts; the Iudges doe forget the truth: and so leaue vndone the iust execution of theyr dutie and straight charge. Also; as the Iudge of the people himselfeEcclus. 10, 2. is, so are his officers vnder him; and what manner of man the Ruler of the Citty is, such are all they that dwell therein. But, as the Lord loueth righteousnesse,Becon. and hateth iniquitie; so he will reward the iust man for his iustice, and punish the vn∣godly person for his sinne. §. 5. Yee shall not, (saith the Almightie) doeLeuit, 19, 35 36, vniustly in iudgement, in line, in weight, or in measure. Thou shalt haue iust bal∣lances, true weights, a true Ephah, and a true Hin. Thou shalt not haue in thy bagge tvvoDeut. 25, 13 14. manner of weights, a great, and a small:
neyther shalt thou haue in thy house di∣uers measures, a great and a small. But thou shalt haue a right and iustDeut, 25, 15 weight; and a perfect & iust measure shalt thou haue: that thy dayes may be lengthe∣ned in the Land which the Lord thy God giueth thee. For, all that doe such things, and all thatDeut, 25, 16 doe vnrighteously; are bhomination vn∣to the Lord thy GOD. * But a perfectProu, 11, 1, weight pleaseth him. §. 6. Thou shalt not peruert the right of theDeut, 24, 17 stranger, nor of the fatherlesse; Neyther shalt thou take a Widdowes rayment to pledge. Yee shall not trouble any widdow, norExod, 22, 22, 23, fatherlesse childe. If thou vexe or trouble such, and so he call and cry vnto me, I will surely heare his cry. Then shall my wrath be kindled, and Iverse, 24. wil kill you with the sword: & your wiues shall be widdowes; and your children fa∣therlesse. §. 7. Complaints and teares, (saith Gueuara,) are the cheefest reuenge of the fatherlesse,Gueuara. and oppressed. For, hee that is rich, com∣monly
seeketh to reuenge himselfe eyther by lawe or armes: but the poore mans re∣medy, is wholy procured from God, by his pittifull lamentations & mournings. Doth not the teares runne downe theEccl{us}, 35, 15 widdowes cheekes? and her cry is against him that caused them: for, frō her cheekes doe they goe vp vnto heauen: & the Lord which heareth them, doth accept them. For,] hee despiseth not the desire of theEccl{us}, 35, 14 fatherlesse, nor the widdowe, when shee powreth out her prayer before him. But heareth the peticion of the partieEccl{us}, 35, 13 oppressed. §. 8. Thou shalt not (saith the Lord) doe thyLeuit. 19. 13 neighbour wrong; neither rob him. The worke-mans hire shall not abide with thee vntill the morning. Thou shalt not oppresse an hired ser∣uauntDeut, 24, 14 that is needy and poore; neyther of thy brethren, nor of the stranger that is in the Land within thy gates. But] thou shalt giue him his hire for the day, and shalt not let the sunne goe downeverse, 15. vpon it: for, hee is poore, & there-withall sustaineth his life: least hee cry against thee vnto the Lord, & it be sinne vnto thee.
§. 9. Rob not the poore, because he is poore:Prou, 22, 22 23. neither oppresse the afflicted in iudge∣ment: for, the Lorde will defende theyr cause, and spoyle the soule of those that spoyle them. With-hold not the good from the ovv∣nersProu, 3, 23, thereof, though there be power in thy hand to doe it. Neyther let the vvages of any man thatTob, 4, 24, hath wrought for thee, tarry with thee, but giue it him out of hand. The bread of the needfull, is the life ofEccl{us}, 34, 22 the poore, & he that defraudeth him there∣of, is a murtherer. Hee that taketh away his neighbours li∣uing,verse, 23, sleyeth him: & he that with-holdeth the labourers hire from him, is a blood∣shedder. And, this yee know; that no man-sleyer1. Ioh, 3, 15, hath eternall life abyding in him. §. 10. Vse therefore mercie, gentlenes, pittie,ulgosius. and compassion towards the poore: and suffer not him that hath done thy vvill, to make sute vnto thee for, his recompence. Defraude not the poore of his liuing;Eccus, 4, 1. neither make the needy eyes to waite long.
Make not an hungry soule sorrowful, ney∣ther vexe a man in his necessity. Troubleverse, 2, 3, not the heart that is greeued, neyther defer thou the gift of the needy. Refuse not the prayer of him that is in trouble, neyther turne away thy face fromverse, 4, 5. 6, the poore. Turne not thine eyes aside in anger from the poore, neither giue him a∣ny occasion to speake euill of thee. For, if hee curse thee in the bitternes of his soule, his prayer shall be heard of him that made him. For,] the prayer of the poore, going outEcclus, 21, 5. of the mouth, commeth vnto the eares of the Lord; and iustice is doone him incon∣tinently. Yea, the prayer of him that humbleth himselfe, [is of such force] that it piercethEccl{us}, 35, 17 thorow the clowdes, and ceaseth not till it come neere, & will not depart till the most High haue respect there-vnto, to iudge righteously, and to execute iudgement. And, the Almighty wil not be slack, norEccl{us}, 35, 18 tarry long from them; till hee hath smitten in sunder the loynes of the vnmercifull, & auenged himselfe of the heathen; [or vn∣godly ones,] till hee hath taken away the multitude of the cruell, and broken the
scepter of the vnrighteous; till he giue eue∣rie man after his works, and reward them after theyr deuises; till he haue iudged the cause of his people, and comforted them with his mercie. §. 11. Let it not [then] grieue thee to boweEcclus, 4, 8, downe thyne eare vnto the poore: but pay thy debt, and giue him a friendlie aun∣swere. For, if thou shewe compassion vo theIsidorus. poore that can doe but little; thou shalt be highly fauoured of GOD, that can doe much. But who soeuer stoppeth his eare at theProu, 21, 13 crying of the poore; he shall also cry him∣selfe, and not be heard. ¶ Against ouer-hastie and rash iudgement. §. 1. IVdge not, (saith Christ) and ye shall notLuke, 6, 37, be iudged: condemne not, and yee shall not be condemned. For, with what iudgement yee iudge, yeMath, 7, 2, shall be iudged; and with what measure ye mete, it shall be measured vnto you againe.
§. 2. Thou art inexcusable, ô man, (saith theRom, 2, 1. Apostle,) whosoeuer thou art that iudgest. For, in that, that thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy selfe: for thou that iudgest, doost the same things. VVhy seest thou the mote that is in thyMath, 7, 3, 4, brothers eye, & perceiuest not the beame that is in thine owne eye? Or, howe sayest thou to thy brother: Suffer me to cast out the te out of thine eye, and beholde a beame is in thine owne eye? Hypocrite, first cast out the beame thatverse, 5, is in thine owne eye, & then shalt thou see cleerly to cast out the mote out of thy bro∣thers eye. Besides,] who art thou that iudgest orRom, 14, 4, Iames. 4. 12, condemnest another mans seruaunt? hee standeth or falleth to his owne maister. Iudge nothing therfore before the time,1, Cor, 4. 5. vntill the Lord come; who will lighten the the things that are hid in darknes, & make the counsels of each hart manifest: & then shall euery man haue prayse of God. §. 3. Iudge not according to the appearance,Iohn. 7. 24. (saith Christ,) but iudge righteous iudge∣ment.
For, Eli the priest, being some-what too forward to iudge by coniecture, rashlie re∣prooued1. Sam. 1. 14. Hannah of the sinne of drunken∣nesse, when shee was zealously busied at her prayers. And, the barbarous people of Malta,Acts. 28. 3. 4, 5, 6. seeing a viper fastned to the hand of Paule, presently at the first sight thereof, condem∣ned him for a murtherer. But when they saw him shake off the worme into the fire, & feele no harme thereby; then, (shewing themselues as farre from reason, as they vvere before from wisedome) they imagi∣ned him to be a God. §. 4. Commend no man for his beautie (saythEccl{us}, 11, 2. Sirach,) neyther despise a man in his vtter appearance. For,] the Bee is but small among theverse, 3, foules; yet dooth the fruite of her labour passe in sweetnesse. Blame no man, before thou hast enqui∣redEccl{us}, 11, 7, the matter; vnderstand first, and then reforme righteously. Giue no sentence, before thou hast heardEcclus. 11. 8. the cause; neyther interrupt any man in the midst of his tale.
For, hee that giueth sentence before theThales. matter be throughly heard, shewes himselfe eyther partiall in affection, or culpable in dooing wrong, for some priuate aduaun∣tage. And, hee that taketh a tale out of hisPltarch. neighbours mouth, is like him which see∣ing another about to be kissed, will needes thrust forth his head, to take away the cur∣tesie from him. ¶ Against iustifying our selues, foolish boa∣sting, and regarding of other mens faultes. §. 1. IVstifie not thy selfe before the Lorde,Ecclus, 7, 5, (saith Sirach) for he knoweth thy hart. Neyther boast thy selfe at any time of thyPet. Lomb. good deedes, least thy euill be also layde to thy charge. For, hee that prayseth himselfe, is not al∣lowed;2, Cor. 10, 18. but he whom the Lord prayseth. Besides, he that supposeth himselfe to beFulgosius. righteous, falleth thereby vnaduisedly from his hope in God; & by trusting too much to his owne merrites, looseth the cōfidence
he should haue in his Creators mercy. Resembling the folly of the foolish-brag∣gingLuke, 18, 11 Pharisee, which entred into the tem∣ple with the Publican to pray. But S. Paule teacheth vs better wisedom by his owne example, where he saith: * I1, Cor, 4, 4, know nothing by my selfe, yet am I not thereby iustified: but he that iudgeth mee, is the Lord. §. 2. How, (saith Iob) should man comparedIob, 9, 2, 3, vnto God, be iustified? If God would di∣spute with him, man could not aunswere him one thing of a thousand. If I woulde iustifie my selfe, (saith hee)Iob, 9, 20, mine owne mouth shall condemne mee: and if I would be perfit, he shall iudge me wicked. For, hee is not a man, as I am, that IIob, 9, 32, should aunswere him, if wee come toge∣ther to iudgement. Well therefore saith the Psalmist: * En∣terPsal. 143, 2, not (ô Lord) into iudgement vvith thy seruaunt: for, in thy sight shall no man ly∣uing be iustified. §. 3. Let no man glory in his works, (saith S.Ambrose. Ambrose,) because no man is iustified by
his workes: but hee that is iust, hath it free∣ly by gift. For, if God would deale with vs accor∣dingAugustine. to that we haue deserued; he should find nothing but that he might condemne. And, woe would be to all our righteous∣nesse,Augustine. if it be iudged: mercie beeing taken away, or set aside. §. 4. If any man, (saith the Apostle) seeme toGala, 6, 3▪ himselfe that hee is some-what, when he is nothing; he deceiueth himselfe in his ima∣gination. Let him therefore that thinketh he stan∣deth,1. Cor. 12. 10. take heede least hee fall. And, let not the sinner say, that hee hath2, Esdr, 16, 45. not sinned: for, coales of fire shall burne vppon his head, which sayth: I haue not sinned before the Lord God & his glory. §. 5. This (saith S. Bernard) is our righteous∣nesse;Bernarde. to lay sure holde on the worthines of Christ by faith, and humbly to confesse before God, that we of our selues, are alto∣gether vnrighteous. And, then are wee said to be righteous,Ierome. when as we doe acknowledge our selues to be wicked sinners.
But if wee behold our owne merrits, weeIerome. shall thereby be driuen to desperation. For, vvee are counted but vnprofitableLuke, 17, 10 seruaunts, when we haue done all that wee can do; seeing we haue done no more then was our dutie to doe. And, in dooing no more but vvhat weeChrisostome. ought, we deserue no greater reward, then that we beare about vs. §. 6. If our dooings were good indeed, (saithOrigen. Origen) then vvere vvee not vnprofitable seruaunts: but any good deede of ours, is called good, not rightly, nor duly, but by abuse of speech. For, holy men do know, that euer since theGregory. fall of the first father Adam, they be borne of a corruptible stocke; and that they bee not by any vertue of theyr owne, but onely by the heauenly grace that doth preuent them, turned into good desires or workes: and what euill soeuer they knowe to bee in themselues, they confesse that it is deserued, and come of theyr mortall kinde; but what good soeuer they see to be in themselues, they acknowledge it to be the gift of the immortall God. And, for this gift which they haue receiued, they count themselues
debters vnto him, vvhich by preuenting them, did giue vnto them grace, that they should will that good thing which they would not; and by following, did graunt, that they should be able to doe, that good thing which they would. §. 7. Be not vain-glorious at any time of thineIunius. owne dooings, (saith Iunius,) neyther vse to speak many words in thine own praise. For, it is farre better to bee silent, thenAlex▪ See. to bragge or boast vaine-gloriously anie thing in our owne commendation. Let another man praise thee, and notProu, 27, 2, thine owne mouth; a stranger, and not thine owne lips. For, nothing dispraiseth a man so muchArnbius. as his owne praysing; especially, vvhen he maketh repeticion of his charitable deeds. §. 8. It is a token of an impudent creature,Plato. (saith Plato) to seeke to gette credite vvith others, by commending himselfe. And, such kinde of people as praise thē∣selues,Pltarch. may fitly be compared to famished persons: for, like as the famished, for lacke of other meate, are faine some-times to eate theyr owne flesh; so many that are vaine▪
glorious, are forced to prayse themselues, because no man else will giue them any cō∣mendation. §. 9. Despise not the man (saith Sirach,) thatEcclus, 8, 9, turneth himselfe away from sinne, neyther cast him in the teeth with his former fault: but remember that vvee are all vvoorthy blame. Be▪ not glad when thine enemy falleth,Prou, 24, 17 18. neyther let thy hart reioyce when he stum∣bleth: least the Lord see it, and it displease him, and he turne his wrath from him. Laugh no man to scorne in the heauinesEccl{us}, 7, 11, of his soule: for, GOD vvhich seeth all things, is hee that can bring downe, and set vp againe. §. 10. To reioyce at the harme which anotherSocrates. man receiueth, is a signe of an euill nature in thy selfe. And busily to vpbrayd a penitent personCrates▪ with his passed offences, is the next way to depriue thy selfe of all mens compassion, when thou standest in neede. Flie therefore and eschew thine owne vi∣ces,Socrates. and be not curious in serching after o∣ther mens sinnes.
For, it is the propertie of a foole, to lookeTully▪ narrowly into other mens faultes, & to for∣get his owne. But it is a signe of great wisedome, wari∣lieThales. to auoyde those euils our selues, vvhich wee thinke worthy to be blamed in other men. ¶ Against the following of false∣tehers. §. 1. BE not carried about (saith the Apostle)Hebr. 13. 9. with diuers and strange doctrines. For, he that is hastie to giue credit, is lightEccl{us}, 19. 4, minded; & he that erreth, sinneth against his owne soule. Let no man deceiue you vvith vaineEphe. 5. 6. vvordes. But] beware of false Prophets, vvhichMath, 7, 15, 16. come to you in sheepes clothing, but in∣wardly they are rauening Wolues. Ye shall know them by theyr fruites. Beleeue not euery spirit; but try the spi∣rits,1, Ih, 4. 1, whether they are of God, [or no] for many false Prophets are gone out into the vvorlde.
Yea,] many deceiuers are entred into the world, which confesse no that Iesus Christ2, Ioh, 1, 7, is come in the flesh. Hee that is such a one, is a deceiuer, and n Antichrist. §. 2. I beseech you Brethren▪ (saith S. Paule,)Rom, 16, 17 18, marke them diligently▪ which cause diuisi∣on and offences▪ contrary to the doctrine which yee haue learned▪ and aoyde them. For, they that are such srue not the Lorde Iesus Christ, but they owne : and with faire speeches and flattering▪ deeue the harts of the simple. Yee are deerely bought; be not the ser∣uaunts1. Cor, 7, 23, of men. But] stand fast, and keepe the instructi∣ons2. Thes. 2. 15 which you haue beene taught, eyther by word, or by our Epistle. If any man teach otherwise, and consen∣teth1, Tim, 6, 3, 4, 5. not to the wholesome wordes of our lord Iesus Christ, & to the doctrine which is according to godlines, he is puf vp, and knoweth nothing: but doateth about que∣stions, and strife of words: whereof com∣meth enuie, strife▪ raylings, euill surmi∣sings, vaine disputations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, vvhich
thinke that gaine is godlinesse. From such separate thy selfe. §. 3. Brethren; (saith the same Apostle,) bePhil. 3, 17, followers of me, & looke on them which walke so, as yee haue vs for an ensample. For, many walke, of whom I haue toldeverse, 18, 19, you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are the enemies of the Crosse of Christ: whose ende is damnation, vvhose God is theyr belly, and vvhose glorie is to their shame, which mind earthly things. But our conuersation is in heauen, fromverse, 20, whence also we looke for the Sauiour euen the Lord Iesus Christ. Who shall change our vile body, that itverse, 21. may be facioned like vnto his glorious bo∣die, according to the working, whereby hee is able euen to subdue all thinges vnto himselfe. §. 4. Let vs henceforth be no more chyldren,Ephe, 4, 14, 15. wauering, and carried about with euerie winde of doctrine, by the deceit of men & with craftnes; wherby they lay in waite to deceiue. But let vs follow the truth in loue, and in all things grow vp vnto him, which is the head; euen Christ.
And] beware least any man spoyle youColos, 2, 8. thorow Philosophy, and vaine deceite, af∣ter the traditions of men, and according to the ordinaunces of the world, and not af∣ter Christ. For,] whosoeuer transgresseth, and aby∣deth2, Ioh. 9. 10, not in the doctrine of Christ, he hath not God. He that endureth in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the Sonne. If there come any vnto you, and bringverse. 11. not this doctrine, receiue him not to house, neither bid him, God speede. For hee that biddeth him God speede, is partaker of his euill deedes. ¶ Against the choyse of meates, and diffe∣rence of dayes. §. 1. LEt no man (saith the Apostle) troubleColos. 2, 16, 17. your conscience about meate & drink, or, in respect of an holy-day, or of the new Moone, or of the Sabboth dayes: vvhich are but shadowes of thinges to come: but the body is in Christ. It is a good thing that the hart be stabli∣shedHeb, 13, 9, with grace, & not with meates, which
haue not profited them that haue been oc∣cupied therein. For, the kingdome of God, is not meateRom, 14, 17 nor drinke; but righteousnesse, and peace, and ioy in the holy Ghost. For, whosoeuer in these thinges seruethverse, 18. Christ, is acceptable vnto God, & is com∣mended of men. §. 2. One beleeueth that he may eate al things,Rom, 14, 2, and another that is weake, eateth hearbs. This man esteemeth one day aboue an∣otherRom. 14, 5, day, and another man counteth eue∣rie day alike. Let not him that eateth, despise him thatRom, 14, 3, eateth not: and let not him vvhich eateth not, iudge him that eateth: for, God hath receiued him. Let euery man [also] be fully perswadedRom. 14, 5. 6. in his minde, that hee which obserueth the day, obserueth it to the Lord: and hee that obserueth not the day, obserueth it not to the Lord. He that eateth, eateth to the lord, for he giueth God thanks: and he that ea∣teth not, eateth not to the lord, and giueth God thanks. Meate maketh not vs acceptable to God.1, Cor, 8, 8, For, neither if we eate, are wee the better;
neither if we eate not, are we the worse. VVhat-soeuer is solde in the Shambles,1, Cor, 10, 25, 26, eate ye, & aske no question for conscience sake. For, the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. §. 3. And, seeing that GOD hath created allErasmus. things for the vse of man, & requireth no∣thing of vs but holinesse, what forceth hee whether vvee eate flesh of foure-footed beastes, or of fishes, or of Birds that flie? There is none of all these that eyther ma∣keth or marreth holinesse: neither putteth any thing to it, or taketh any thing from it. The choyse of these things, and the put∣tingErasmus. of difference betweene one and ano∣ther, may make a man superstitious, & to haue vaine religion in himselfe, but it can∣not make him holie. Christ taught no difference heerein: therefore it may bee counted great rashnes, if a wretched man, should goe about to burthen & charge any man with such ordinances. Let euery man eate what hee liketh, as his body requireth, so it be doone soberlie, & measurably; and for all thinges, let him giue thankes vnto God.
For, to beleeue that meates are euill, orAugustine. causeth euill, or sinne to them that receiue them; it is the propertie, not of Christian men, but peculiarly of the Hierarchies, & Maniches, which were heretiques. §. 4. VVherefore, if yee be dead with ChristColos. 2. 20. 21. 22, from the ordinaunces of the world, vvhy, as though yee liued in the world, are yee burdened with traditions? As, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not. Which all perrish with the vsing, & are after the commaun∣dements and doctrines of men. VVhich things haue indeed a shewe ofColos. 2. 23, wisedome, in voluntarie religion & hum∣blenesse of minde, and in not sparing the body: neither haue they it in any estimati∣on to satisfie the flesh. But] I know, & am perswaded throughRom. 14, 14 the Lord Iesus, that there is nothing vn∣cleane of it selfe: but vnto him that iudg∣eth any thing to be vncleane, to him it is vncleane. Vnto the pure, all things are pure: butTitus. 1. 15. to them that are defiled and vnbeleeuing, is nothing pure: but euen theyr mindes and consciences are defiled.
§. 5. Nowe the Spirit speaketh euidently, that1, Tim, 4, 1, 2. 3. in the latter times some shall depart from the fayth, and shall giue heede vnto spirits of errour, and doctrines of deuils: vvhich speake lyes through hypocrisie, and haue theyr consciences burned with an hote y∣ron; forbidding to marry, and commaun∣ding to abstaine from meates, which God hath created to be receiued vvith giuing thanks, of them which beleeue and knowe the truth. For, euery creature of God is good, andverse, 4, 5, nothing ought to be refused, if it be recei∣ued with thanksgiuing. For, it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. Yee therefore beloued, seeing yee know2. Pet. 3. 17, these things before, beware; least ye be al∣so plucked away vvith the errour of the wicked, and fall from your owne stedfast∣nesse. For, of this sort are they vvhich creepe2. Tim. 3. 6. 7. into houses, and leade captiue simple wo∣men laden with sinnes, and led with diuers lusts. VVhich vvomen are euer learning, and are neuer able to come to the know∣ledge of the truth.
¶ Against ouer-curious searching: and ad∣ding of any thing to the word of God. §. 1. SEeke not out (saith Sirach) the thingesEcclus, 3, 22. that are too hard for thee: neither search the things rashly which are too mightie for thee. But what God hath commaunded thee,verse, 23. thinke vpon that with reuerence, and bee not curious in many of his workes: for it is not needfull for thee, to see with thine eyes the things that are secrete. Be not curious in superfluous matters, forverse, 24, 25, many things are shewed vnto thee aboue the capacitie of men. The medling vvith such, hath beguiled many; & an euill opi∣nion hath deceiued their iudgement. Thou canst not see without eyes: pro∣fesseverse, 26. not the knowledge therefore vvhich thou hast not. §. 2. I, through the grace that is giuen vntoRom, 12, 3, mee, (saith the Apostle,) say to euery one that is among you, that no man presume to vnderstand, aboue that which is meet to vnderstand: but that he vnderstand accor∣ding
to sobrietie; as GOD hath dealt to euery man the measure of fayth. For, hee is sufficiently rich in vnderstan∣ding,Hermes. that knoweth how to doe well: and hee hath power enough, that can refraine from dooing euill. §. 3. Ye shal put nothing vnto the word whichDeut, 4, 2, I commaund you, saith Moises: neyther shall yee take ought there-from: that yee may keepe the commaundements of the Lord your GOD, which I commaund you. Therefore, what soeuer I commaundeDeut. 12. 32. you, take heede you doe it. Thou shalt not turne away from it to theIosua, 1, 7. right hand, nor to the left: that thou maist prosper whether soeuer thou goest. §. 4. Put nothing vnto the word of God, saithProu. 30. 6. Salomon, least hee reproue thee, and thou be founde a lyer. For, I protest (saith the holy Ghost) vntoReue. 22. 18 euery man that heareth the wordes of the prophecie of this booke; If any man shall adde vnto these things, God shall adde vn∣to him the plagues, that are written in thys Booke.
And, if any man shall diminish of theReue. 22, 19 words of the booke of this prophesie God shall take away his part out of the booke of life; and out of the holy Citty, and from those thinges vvhich are vvritten in this booke. ¶ Against foolish securitie. §. 1. SAy not thou, I will hide my selfe fromEccl{us}. 16, 17 the Lord: for, who will think vpon me from aboue? I shall not be knowne in so great an heape of people: for, what is my soule, among such an infinite number of creatures? But rather remember vvhat our Sauiour Christ saith in Saint Mathewes Gospell: namely, that one sparrow falleth not to the ground, without the will of God our hea∣uenlyMath. 10. 29. 30. Father: and, that all the haires of our head are numbred by him. Howe much more then may wee vndoubtedly beleeue, that wee our selues are knowne and num∣bred of him? For, hee onely is the Crea∣tor and Preseruer of men: and without his permission▪ wee are not able to drawe our breath a minutes while.
§. 2. Besides, thus speaketh the Lord himselfeIere, 23, 23, 24. interrogatiuelie, by the mouth of Ieremy, saying: Am I a GOD at hand, and not a GOD farre off? Can any hide himselfe in secrete places, that I shall not see him, saith the Lord? Doe not I fill heauen and earth, saith the Lord? And, to this effect likewise, tendeth the speech of the Prophet Dauid in the 139. psalme, where he saith: O Lord, thou hastPsalme, 139. 1. 2, 3, &c. tryed mee, & knowne mee: thou knowest my sitting, & my rising, thou vnderstan∣dest my thought a farre off: thou compas∣sest my pathes, and my lying downe, and art accustomed to all my wayes. For, there is not a word in my tongue, but loe, thou knowest it vvholie, ô lord. Thou holdest mee straite behinde and be∣fore▪ and layest thy hand vpon mee. Thy knowledge is too wonderfull for mee: it is so high that I cannot attaine vnto it. Whether shall I goe from thy Spirit? or whether shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend into heauen, thou art there: If I lie downe in hell, thou art there. Let mee take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the vttermost parts of the sea,
yet thither shall thy hand leade mee, & thy right hand hold mee. If I say, yet the dark∣nesse shall hide me, euen the night shall be light about mee. Yea, the darknes hideth not from thee: but the night shineth as the day; and the darknes and the light are both alike. For, thou hast possessed my reines: thou hast couered mee in my mothers vvombe. ¶ Against the loue of the world. §. 1. LOue not the vvorld, (saith Saint Iohn,)1, Ioh, 12, 15. neither the things that are in the world. If any man loue the world, the loue of the Father is not in him. For, all that is in the worlde, (as the lustverse, 16, 17 of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, & the pride of life,) is not of the Father, but is of the World. And, the vvorld passeth away, & the lust thereof, but hee that fulfilleth the will of God, abideth euer. Yee adulterers, and adultresses, know yeIames, 4, 4, not, that the amitie of the world, is the eni∣mitie of God? Whosoeuer therefore vvill be a friende of the world, maketh himselfe the enemie of God.
And, they that waite vpon lying vanities,Ionas. 2. 8. forsake theyr owne mercie. §. 2. VVhat is there in the World, (saith Se∣neca,)Seneca. wherefore it should be loued? The flowers of this life, to wit, the lusts & plea∣sures thereof, are all of them false shewes, shadowes, and vanities: the fruites of it, are labour, care, sicknes, and tediousnesse: the tree it selfe, is corruption & frailety. And, hee that is enamored of the world,Seneca. may well be likened to the man which vo∣luntarily runneth into the Sea: who if hee chaunce to scape the dangers thereof, men will say, hee is greatly fortunate; but if hee perrish, they will say, he was wilfully decei∣ued. §. 3. The vvorld, (saith Socrates) hath so ma∣nieSocrates. sundry changes in the vanitie thereof, that it leadeth all men vvandering in vn∣stedfastnesse. It is a speciall enemy to those vvhom itCrates. hath raised to honour. It neuer paieth vnto any man, that whichEuripides. it promiseth. It endeuoureth daily, to drawe the souleAristotle. from God, through fained delights.
And, whosoeuer busily seeketh after theHermes. pleasures thereof, followeth a shaddovve; which when hee thinketh he is surest of, it speedily vanisheth away, & turneth to no∣thing. Besides, if any man desire to reade more largely of the delights of the world, & the seuerall falshoods of them; let him looke into the Booke of Ecclesiastes, & there heEcclesi. cap. 1. 2, 3. &c. shall finde what the Preacher (through his owne experience) speaketh of them. And how withall, after a long repetition of the tryall of all the pleasures vnder the sunne, hee at last, giueth forth these words in their discommendation; saying: * Vanitie ofEccle, 12, 8, vanities; all is vanitie. Put no confidence (therfore) in the mu∣table vanities of this euer-changing world:Plotinus. neither suffer thy selfe to be seduced by the deceits thereof: for, the pleasures of the world, leade diuers men to perdition; and whosoeuer trusteth vnto them, shall most certainly be deceiued. §. 4. A man may vse this world indeede, (asPlato. Plato saith,) for necessities sake; but hee that abuseth it: that is, hee that wholy de∣lighteth therein, looseth thereby his loue to
God, & depriueth himselfe of eternall sal∣uation. To preuent vvhich danger, * Let him1, Cor, 7, 31, that vseth this world, be as though hee vsed it not. For, the too much loue of this Worlde, was the onely cause why the Noble men of Iurie coulde not resolue themselues to fol∣lowe Christ. For, * they loued the prayseIohn, 12, 43 of men, more then the prayse of God. And, deceiued themselues as vnaduised∣ly2, Tim, 4, 10 in theyr choyse, as euer Demas did, whē he forsooke S. Paule, to embrace vanitie. ¶ Against euill company-keeping. §. 1. MY sonne, (saith Salomon) if sinnersProu. 1, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, doe entise thee, consent thou not. If they say, Come with vs, we will lay vvaite for blood, and he priuily for the innocent without a cause: vvee will swallowe them vp aliue like a graue; euen whole, as those that goe downe into the pit: we shall find all precious riches, and fill our houses with spoyle: cast in thy lot among vs, wee will all haue one purse.
My sonne, vvalke not thou in the vvay with them; refraine thy foote from theyrProu, 1, 15. 16. path. For, theyr feete runne to euill, and make hast to shedde blood. They cannot sleepe except they haueProu, 4, 16, 17. done euill; and their sleepe departeth, ex∣cept they cause some to fall. For, they eate the bread of wickednes, & drinke the wine of violence. Hee that toucheth pitch, shall be defiledEccl{us}, 13, 1, with it; and hee that is familiar vvith the proude, shall become like vnto him. For, it is a corrupting of the godly, toGregory. keepe company with the wicked. §. 2. Shnne the company of a lyer as muchHermes. as thou mayst: and beware least any one through flattery, perswade thee to thinke otherwise of thy selfe, then thou art indeed. But, if thou must needs keepe companyThales. with the man that vseth to lye, in anie wise beleeue him not: for, if thou credite him to day, which telleth thee a lie of another body, hee will not sticke to morrowe, to tell an vntruth of thee to another man. §. 3. Moreouer; a man vvere better (saithPlutarch. Plutarch) to fall amongst a sort of Rauens,
then to giue entertainement to flattering companions: for, Rauens neuer seeke to eate a man till hee be dead; but flatterers will not spare to feede vpon him while hee is aliue. And like as a Camelion can change him∣selfeHermes. into al colours saue white, so can a flat∣terer frame his tongue to any talke whatso∣euer, saue honestie. §. 4. Take not thy pleasure in great voluptu∣ousnes,Eccl{us}, 18, 32 neither intangle thy selfe with such company. Become not a begger by making ban∣ketsverse, 33, of that which thou hast borrowed; & so leaue nothing in thy purse. Keepe not company with drunkards norProu, 23, 20 with gluttons. For, the drunkard and the glutton shallverse, 21. be poore: and the sleeper shall be clothed with ragges. §. 5. Vse not the company of a woman thatEccl{us}, 9. 4, is a singer & a dauncer; neyther heare her, least thou be taken by her craftines. Cast not thy minde vpon harlots in anieEcclus, 9, 6, manner of thing, least thou destroy both thy selfe and thine heritage.
Meete not an harlot, least thou fall intoEccl{us}, 9, 3, her snares. Desire not her beauty in thy heart, ney∣therProu, 6, 25. let her take thee with her eye-lids. For, the whoredome of a woman may beEccl{us}. 26. 9, knowne by the pride of her lookes. And, an harlot will make a man to begProu. 6. 26, his bread. §. 6. I haue compassed about, saith Salomon,Eccles, 7, 27. 28. both I, and mine hart, to know, and to en∣quire, and to search wisedome, and reason, and to know the wickednes of folly, & the foolishnes of madnes: and I finde, more bitter then death, the woman whose hart is as nets and snares, and her hands as bands: hee that is good before God, shall be deli∣uered from her, but the sinner shall be ta∣ken by her. The lippes of a strange woman, (saithProu, 5, 3, 4, 5, hee) droppe as an honny-combe, and her mouth is more soft then oyle: but the end of her is bitter as vvorme-wood, and sharp as a two edged sword. Her feete goe down to death, and her steps take hold on hell. Shee weigheth not the vvay of life: herverse, 6. paths are moueable, thou canst not know them.
Beeing foule by nature, shee notwith∣standing deceiueth the simple vvith herHermes. painted face; and vnder faire white, & rud∣die colours, shee hideth her filthy and ill∣fauoured visage. Shee lyeth also in waite, as for a pray, &Prou, 23, 28 shee increaseth the transgressours among men. §. 7. Keepe thy way farre from her, and comeProu, 5, 8, not neere the doore of her house. For, a whore is as a deepe ditch: and aProu, 23, 27 strange woman is as a narrow pit. Let not thy heart decline to her wayes:Prou, 7, 25, 26, neither wander thou in her pathes: for she hath caused many to fall downe wounded: and the strong men are all slaine by her. Her house is the vvay vnto the graue,verse, 27. which goeth downe vnto the chambers of death: Her mouth [likewise] is as a deepe pit:Prou, 22, 14 and he with whom the Lord is angry, shall fall therein. Surely, her house tendeth to death, andProu, 2, 18, 19, 20. her pathes vnto the dead. All they that goe vnto her, returne not againe; neyther take they holde of the wayes of life. Therefore walke thou in the way of good men, and
keepe the wayes of the righteous. For, the iust shall dwell in the Land, andProu, 2, 21, 22, the vpright men shal remaine in it. But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth: and the transgressours shall be rooted out of it. ¶ A breefe collection, of certaine other god∣lie preceps and counsels. §. 1. THou shalt not (saith the Lord) raile vp∣onExod, 22, 28 the Iudges: neither speake euill of the Ruler of thy people. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: neither curse the rich in thy bed∣chamber.Eccle. 10. 20 For, the foule of the heauen shal carry the voyce, & that which hath winges shall declare the matter. Beware therefore of murmuring, whichWisd, 1. 11. profiteth nothing; & refraine your tunge from slaunder: for, there is no word so se∣crete, that shall goe for nought, and the mouth that speaketh lyes, slayeth the soule. §. 2. Thou shalt not follow a multitude to doExod, 23, 2, euill; neither agree in a controuersie to de∣cline after many, & ouerthrow the truth.
Be not carried about with euery winde,Eccl{us}, 5, 9, and goe not into euery way: for so dooth the sinner that hath a double tongue. Stand fast in thy sure vnderstanding, &verse, 10. in the way and knowledge of the Lord: & haue but one manner of word, and follow the word of peace and righteousnes. In no wise speake against the vvorde ofEccl{us}, 4, 25, truth; but be ashamed of the lyes of thine owne ignoraunce. Be not disobedient to the feare of theEcclus, 1, 33 Lord, and come not vnto him with a dou∣ble hart. Be not an hypocrite, that men shouldeverse, 34. speake of thee, but take heede vvhat thou speakest. Exalt not thy selfe, least thou fall, andEcclus, 1, 35 bring thy soule to dishonour, and so God discouer thy secrets, and cast thee downe in the middes of the congregation: because thou wouldest not receiue the true feare of God: and because thine heart is full of de∣ceite. §. 3. My Son (saith Salomon) feare the Lord,Prou, 24, 21 22, and the King, and meddle not with them that are sedicious: for, theyr destruction shall come suddainly.
Goe not forth hastilie to strife, least thou know not what to doe in the end thereof,Prou, 25, 8, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame. Striue not for a matter that thou hast not to doe with: and sitte not downe in theEccl{us}. 11, 9, iudgement of sinners. For,] hee that passeth by, and medleth with the strife that belongeth not vntoProu, 26, 17 him, is as one that taketh a dogge by the eares. §. 4. Grieue not (saith the Apostle) the holieEphe, 4, 30, Spirit of God, by whom yee are sealed vn∣to the day of redemption. But stand alwayes in dread to doe any thing, whereby thy conscience may beeTheophil. wounded: for, the conscience is soone wounded; yea, sooner then thou art aware of. §. 5. Let none (saith Moises,) be founde a∣mongDeut, 18, 10 11. you that maketh his sonne or his daughter to goe thorowe the fire; or that vseth witch-craft; or a regarder of times; or a marker of the flying of foules; or a Sorcerer; or a Charmer; or that counsel∣leth with spirits; or a Sooth-sayer; or that
asketh counsell at the dead. For, all that doe such things, are abhomi∣nationDeut, 18, 12 vnto the Lord. §. 6. Giue not that which is holy vnto dogs,Math, 7, 6, (saith Christ,) neither cast yee your pearles before swine; least they treade them vnder theyr feete; and turning againe, all to rent you. Seeke not to reforme him that will heareHermes. no reason; neither contend much with a foole, about matters of wisedome. For, hee that is obstinate in euill, vvillSocrates. scorne to be reclaimed by any counsell. And, doctrine vnto a foole, is as fettersEccl{us}, 21, 19 vpon his feete, and manicles vpon his right hand. But] hee that despiseth the vvorde [ofProu, 13, 13 God,] hee shall be destroyed. And,] hee that turneth avvay his eareProu, 28, 9 from hearing the law, euen his prayer shall be abhominable. §. 7. Let no man say when hee is tempted, IIames, 1, 13, am tempted of God: for, God cannot bee tempted with euill, neyther tempteth hee any man.
But euery man is tempted, when hee isIames, 1. 14, drawne away by his owne concupiscence, and is intised. Say not thou it is through the Lord thatEccl{us}, 15. 11 I turne back: for, thou oughtest not to do the things which hee hateth. Doe not say the Lord hath caused me toverse, 12, erre: for hee hath no neede of the sinfull man. Besides,] the Lord hateth all abhomina∣tionverse, 13, of errour: and they that feare GOD, loue it not. Hee made man from the beginning, &Eccl{us}, 15, 14 15, 16, left him in the hand of his counsell, & gaue him his commaundements & precepts. If thou wilt, thou shalt obserue the cōmaun∣dements, & testifie thy good will. He hath set water and fire before thee: stretch out thine hand vnto which thou wilt. Hee hath commaunded no man to doeEccl{us}, 15. 20 vngodlie, neyther hath hee giuen any man licence to sin: for, hee desireth not a mul∣titude of infidels, and vnprofitable chyl∣dren. §. 8. Thinke not thy selfe to bee that vvhichSeneca. thou art not; neyther desire to seeme in shew, more rich then thou art in substance.
Burthen not thy selfe aboue thy power whilst thou liuest: neither keepe companyEcclus, 13, 2, with one that is mightier & richer then thy selfe: for, howe agree the Kettle and the earthen pote together? for if the one bee smitten against the other, it shall be bro∣ken. Say not, I haue enough, & possesse ma∣nyEccl{us}, 11, 24 things, & what euill can come vnto me heereafter? In thy good state remember aduersitie,Eccl{us}, 11, 25 and in aduersitie, forget not prosperitie. When thou hast enough, remember theEcclus, 18, 24. 25. time of hunger; and when thou art rich, thinke vpon pouertie and neede: from the morning vntill the euening, the time is changed; & all such things are soone done before the Lord. §. 9. If thou hast riches, spend them not tooPlato. prodigally, nor too sparingly: so shalt thou neither be needy, nor in bondage to thine owne wealth. If thou seeme to be rich, when thou artDiogenes. poore, it betokeneth that thy minde is proude, though thy wealth be weake: but if thou seeme to be poore, when thou art
rich; it argueth a couetous desire vvith a full coffer. §. 10. Be not careful for your life, (saith Christ)Math, 6, 25, 26, 27, &c. what yee shall eate, or what ye shal drinke, nor yet for your body, what yee shall put on. Is not the life more woorth then meate? and the body then rayment? Behold the foules of the heauen, for they sow not, ney∣ther reape, nor carry into the Barnes: yet your heauenly father feedeth them: Are yee not much better then they? Which of you by taking care, is able to adde one cubite vnto his stature? And why care yee for raiment? Learne, how the Lil∣lies of the fielde do grow: they labour not, neither spinne: Yet I say vnto you, that e∣uen Salomon in all his glory, was not aray∣ed like one of these. Wherefore, if God so clothe the grasse of the fielde, which is to day, and to mor∣row is cast into the ouen, shall hee not doe much more vnto you, ô ye of little faith? Take no thought therfore, saying: what shall we eate? or what shall we drinke? or where-with shall we be clothed? (For after all these things seek the Gentiles,) for your
heauenly Father knoweth that yee haue neede of all these things. But seeke ye first the kingdome of God, and the righteous∣nesse thereof, and all these thinges shall be ministred vnto you. §. 11. My sonne, saith Sirach, leade not a beg∣gersEcclus, 40, 28, life, for better it were to die, then to begge. The life of him that dependeth on ano∣therverse, 29, mans table, is not to be counted for a life: for he tormenteth himselfe after other mens meate. But a wise man and wel nur∣tured, will beware thereof. It is not freedome to liue licentiously:Alex. Seue. neyther is it libertie to liue without labour. To liue idely, is to liue wickedly: & toCrates. depend vpon other mens liberalitie, is the ready way to bring thee to misery. But to labour, and to be content withEccl{us}, 40, 18 that a man hath, is a sweete life. §. 12. Beware least thou say in thine hart: MyDeut. 8. 17, 18, power, and the strength of mine owne hand, hath prepared me this aboundance. But remember the Lord thy God, for it is hee which giueth thee power to gette sub∣stance.
And, it is an easie thing with him, sud∣dainlyEccl{us}, 11, 21 to make a poore man rich. §. 13. Say not thou, Why is it that the formerEccles. 7. 12, dayes vvere better then these? for thou doost not enquire wisely of this thing. Say not, The time that our fore-fathersIerome. liued in, was better then this present age: for vertue and good life, make good daies; but aboundance of vice corrupteth the time. §. 14. Many miseries and calamities, (saith Es∣dras)2, Esdr. 8. 50 remaine for them that shall liue in the latter time: because they shall walke in great pride. And, the weaker that the worlde is by2. Esdr. 14. 16. reason of age, the more shal the euils be in∣creased vpon them that dwell therein. This knowe also, that in the last dayes,2. Tim, 3, 1, shall come perrillous times. For, men shall be louers of their owneverse, 2, selues; couetous, boasters, proude, cursed speakers, disobedient to parents, vnthank∣full, vnholy. Without naturall affection, truce-brea∣kers,verse, 3, 4, false accusers, intemperate, fierce, de∣spisers of thē that are good, traitours, hea∣die,
high minded, louers of pleasures more then louers of GOD; hauing a shewe ofverse, 5, godlines, but haue denied the power ther∣of: turne away therefore from such. §. 15. Aske no counsell for religion, (saith Si∣rach,)Eccl{us}, 37, 11 of him that is without religion: nor of iustice, of him that hath no iustice: nor of a woman, touching her of whom shee is iealous: nor of a coward, in matters of warre: nor of a Merchant, concerning ex∣change: nor of a buyer, for the sale: nor of an enuious man, touching thankfulnesse: nor of the vnmercifull, touching kindnes: nor of an vnhonest man, of honestie: nor of the slothfull for any labour: nor of an hireling for the finishing of a work: nor of an idle seruaunt for much busines: harken not vnto these in any matter of counsell. But be continually with a godly man,Ecclus, 37, 12, 13. whom thou knowest to keep the cōmaun∣dements of the Lorde: whose minde is ac∣cording to thy minde, and is sorry for thee whē thou stumblest. And, hold thy coun∣sell fast in thine heart: for, there is no man more faithfull to keepe it, then thou thy selfe.
§. 16. Despise not the exhortations of thoseEcclus, 8, 8, Elders that be wise, but acquaint thy selfe with theyr sentences: for, of thē thou shalt learne wisedome, and the doctrine of vn∣derstanding: and howe to serue great men without complaint. Stand with the multitude of the Elders that are wise, & ioyne thy selfe to him thatEcclus. 6, 35. 36, hath wisedome. Desire to heare all godly talke, and let not the graue sentences of knowledge escape thee. And, if thou seest a man of vnderstan∣ding,verse, 37. get thee soone vnto him, and let thy foote weare the steppes of his doores. If thou doubt in any thing, aske counselSocrates. of such men as haue knowledge; and bee not angry if they chaunce to reproue thee. For, if when thou art reproued, thou de∣partMar. Aurel. immediatly hating thy coūseller, thou shalt be like vnto the sicke man, which so soone as his Surgion hath cut his vlcer, go∣eth his way; not tarrying till his wound be dressed, & his griefe asswaged. §. 17. Lende not vnto the man that is mightierEccl{us}, 8, 12. [or richer] then thy selfe: for, if thou len∣dest to such an one, count it but lost.
Lende to thy neighbour in time of hisEcclus, 29, 2, 3. neede, and pay thou thy neighbour againe in due season. Keepe thy worde, and deale faithfully with him; and thou shalt alway finde the thing that is necessary for thee. Many after a thing is once lent thē, rec∣konverse, 4, it to be founde, & thereby grieue him that hath helped them. Till they receiue, they kisse his hands, &verse, 5, for theyr neighbours good they humble theyr voyce: but when they should pay a∣gaine, they prolong the terme, and giue a carelesse aunswer, & make excuses by rea∣son of the time. And though hee be able, yet giueth heeverse, 6, scarce the halfe againe, and reckoneth the other as a thing found: else, hee deceiueth him of his money, and maketh him an ene∣mie without a cause: hee payeth him with cursing and rebuke, and giueth him euill words for his good deede. There be many which refuse to lend be∣causeEccl{us}, 29, 7, of this inconuenience, fearing to be defrauded without cause. Yet haue thou patience with him thatverse, 8, 9, humbleth himselfe, and deferre not mercy from him. Helpe the poore for the com∣maundements sake, & turne him not away
because of his pouertie. Loose thy moneyEccl{us}, 29, 10 for thy brothers and neighbours sake, and let it not rust vnder a stone to thy destruc∣tion. §. 18. Be not suretie aboue thy power, (saithEcclus, 8, 13 Sirach) for if thou be suretie, thinke to pay it. A man destitute of vnderstanding, tou∣chethProu, 17. 18 the hand, and becommeth surety for his neighbour. And, is thereby snared and taken, euenProu, 6, 1, 2, with the words of his owne mouth. Beware therefore howe thou passe thyEuripides. word for another man; least he scape free, and thou fall into danger. For, suretiship hath destroyed manie aEccl{us}. 29. 20 rich man, and remoued them as the waues of the sea: mighty men hath it driuen away from theyr houses, & caused them to wan∣der among strange Nations. §. 19. My sonne (saith Tobie) sette our LordeTob. 4. 6, God alwayes before thine eyes, and let not thy will be set to sinne▪ or to transgresse the commaundements of the Almighty: Doe vprightly all thy life long, and follow not the wayes of vnrighteousnes: for if thou
deale truly, thy dooings will prosperously succeed to thee, and to all them which liue iustly. Doe no euill, so shall no harme come vn∣toEccl{us}, 7, 12. thee: depart from the thing that is wic∣ked, and sin shall turne away from thee. Resist the deuill, and hee will flee fromIames, 4, 7, thee. But if thou yeelde vnto his desire in oneBullenger. sinne, he will presently seeke to drawe thee to another. Sowe not therefore vppon the furrowesEcclus, 7, 3, of iniqitie, least thou reape them seauen∣folde. §. 20. Be not deceiued; God is not mocked,Gala, 6, 7, 8, for whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he also reape. He that soweth to his flesh, shal of the flesh reape corruption: but hee that soweth to the spirit, shall of the spirit reape life euerlasting. Now,] the workes of the flesh are mani∣fest;Gala, 5, 19, 20, 21. which are adultery, fornication, vn∣cleanenesse, wantonnesse, idolatry, vvitch∣craft, hatred, debate, emulation, vvrath, contentions, seditions, heresies, enuy, mur∣ders, drunkennes, gluttony, and such like: wherof I tell you before, as I also haue told
you in time past, that they which doe such things, shall not inherite the kingdome of GOD. But the fruite of the Spirit, is loue, ioy,Gala, 5, 22, 23. peace, long suffering, gentlenes, goodnes, faith, meekenes, [&] temperancie: against such, there is no lawe. §. 21. Looke well to thy selfe, least the reyneMar. Aurel. of thy youth, and the libertie of thine own estate, cause thee to commit that which is euill. Follow not thy lusts, but turne thee frōEccl{us}, 8, 30, 31, thine own appetites: for if thou giuest thy soule her desires, it shall make thine ene∣mies that enuy thee, to laugh thee to scorne. Doe not what thou wouldest, but whatHermes. thou shouldest: and the better to abstaine from euill, keepe thy selfe from the com∣pany of those that are wicked. §. 22. Suffer not thy hands to work, thy tungeSocrates. to speak, or thine eares to heare, that which is euill, or wicked. But beware of sinne, as the serpent of thePlato. soule, which spoyleth men of all theyr or∣naments
and seemely apparrell in the sight of God. Binde not two sinnes together: for inEcclus, 7, 8, one sinne shalt thou not be vnpunished. §. 23. Be not secure, least want of care, pro∣cureThales. thy calamity, neither be thou too care∣full, least pensiue thoughts oppresse thee with misery. Be not too rash in wordes, nor too for∣wardCrates. and hastie in thy deedes. But what-soeuer thou takest in hand, re∣memberEcclus, 7, 36 the end, and thou shalt neuer doe amisse. For, good respect, & due considerationPlato. to the end of things, preserueth both body and soule. §. 24. Take good aduisement vvith thy selfe,Alex. Seue. before thou beginne any thing: but vvhen thou hast begunne, dispatch it speedily. Attempt not two things at once, for theCrates. one of them will hinder the other. Begin nothing before thou first call forHermes. the helpe of God: for God, whose power is in all things, giueth most prosperous fur∣therance and happy successe, vnto all such good works as we doe begin in his name.
§. 25. Be not faint-hearted when thou makestEccl{us}, 7, 10, thy prayer neither slack or negligent in gi∣uing of almes. Let not thy hand be stretched out to re∣ceiue,Eccl{us}, 4. 31, & shut when thou shouldest giue. For it is a more blessed thing to giue, thēActs, 20, 35, to receiue. §. 26. Be not hasty in thy tongue, neither slackEccl{us}, 4, 29, and negligent in thy works. Desire not to be wise in wordes, but inHermes. workes: for wisdome of speech wasteth with the world; but workes wrought by wisedom, increase into the world to come. Powre not out words, where there is noEccl{us}, 32, 4, audience, and shew not forth wisedom out of time. For,] a wise man wil hold his tongue tillEccl{us}, 20, 7, he see opportunitie: but a trifler & a foole, will regard no time. Reproue not another man, for such euilsSocrates. as are founde in thy selfe vnreformed: but first learne to liue wel, then teach others by thyne owne example. For, hee that teacheth good, and doothPlutarch. euill, is like him which lighteth vp a candle to other men, and goeth darkling himselfe.
§. 27. Comber not thy minde vvith worldlieSeneca. carefulnes, neither let the vaine delights of this life, draw thy thoughts from vertue, to followe the falshoods of them. But seeke to inrich thy selfe with store ofZenophn. vvisedome and vnderstanding: that thou maist rather profit thy Country by thy good instructions, then proue preiudiciall to the people by thy bad example. Let iust men eate and drinke with thee;Ecclus, 9, 18 and let thy reioycing be in the feare of the Lord. Be not proude in prosperitie, neither de∣spaireTully, in aduersitie. VVish not for those thinges that thouCrates. maist not obtaine: neither praise any vn∣worthy person because thou knowest him wealthy. Take not thy enemie for thy friend, norQuintil. thy friend for thyne enemie. Be not too hastie to meddle with mattersDion. that are doubtfull, neyther let thy tongue runne beyond thy wit. §. 28. If thou talkest with any man, haue re∣spectAristotle. to keepe a measure in thy communi∣cation: for, if thou be too breefe, thou
shalt not well be vnderstood: and if thou be too long, thou shalt not well be borne in minde of him that heareth thee. Be not too hastie to giue credite to ano∣therDemonax. mans wordes, neither laugh his spee∣ches to scorne that talketh with thee: for, the one is the propertie of a foole; the o∣ther, the conditions of a mad man. Affirme nothing before thou knowe theDemosth. truth: neither let thine owne beautie, thy youth, or thy riches deceiue thee. Doe good to other men, but harme notSigismund. thy selfe; be bountifull, but not prodigall: be readie to relieue him that is in necessitie, but let not thy gifts be aboue thine ability. §. 29. Bee not vnthankfull to him that hathProtogenes. done thee good. Seeke not to rule others before thou thyPythagoras. selfe hast first learned to obey. Speake no vntruth of any man liuing,Plutarch. neither suffer thy tongue to slaunder them that be dead. Be alwayes one to thy friende, aswell inMar. Aur. aduersitie as in prosperitie; and keepe thy promise as truly as thou wouldest pay thy debt.
Vse in all things, and towards all men, aSocrates. simple veritie; without fraude, deceit, or guile, eyther in word or deed. And be not ashamed to doe iustice to e∣ueryBoetius. man, for, what-soeuer is doone vvith∣out iustice, is tyrannie. §. 30. Doe no secrete thing before a stranger,Eccl{us}, 8, 18, for thou canst not tell vvhat hee goeth a∣bout. Neither tell the thoughts of thy heartEccl{us}, 8, 19, vnto euery man, least he be vnthankfull to thee, and put thee to reproofe. Dishonour no man in his olde age: for,Ecclus, 8. 6, they were as wee which are not old. Sit not at all with another mans wife, nei∣therEccl{us}, 9, 11, lie with her vpon the bed, nor banket with her, least thine hart incline vnto her: and so through thy desire thou fall into de∣struction. Be not glad of the death of thine enemy:Ecclus. 8, 7, but remember that wee must die all, and so enter into ioy. Be gentle and curteous to euery one, butTheophras. flatter no man, neyther suffer thy selfe to be flattered of any. Be familiar with fewe men, and bewareMacrobius. whom thou trustest.
Be patient & constant in the time of ad∣uersitie;Arnobius. and, in thy prosperitie be of an humble spirit. §. 31. If thy parents wexe poore, supply theyrSocrates. want with thy wealth: if froward with age, beare patiently with their imperfections. And striue not with thy father & motherAnacharsis. in words, although thou tell the truth. If thou haue sonnes, bring them vp inEccl{us}, 7, 23, nurture and learning, & hold them in awe euen from their youth. Chasten thy childe while there is hope,Prou. 19, 18 and let not thy soule spare for his murmu∣ring. For, it is better that thou should'st makeAntisth. thy sonne weepe in his youth, then hee should make thee mourne when thou art old. If thou haue daughters, keepe theyr bo∣die,Eccl{us}, 7, 24, and shewe not thy face cheerefull to∣wards them. Suffer not thy daughter to walke abroadAnaxag. after her owne will, for it is the ready vvay to bring her to wickednesse. If thy daughter be not shamefast, holdeEccl{us}, 26, 10 her straitly, least she abuse herselfe through ouermuch libertie.
Take heed of her that hath an vnshame∣fastEccl{us}, 26, 11 looke: & meruaile not if she trespasse against thee. For.] as one that goeth by the way, andEccl{us}, 26, 12 is thirstie, so shall shee open her mouth & drink of euery next water: by euery hedge shall she sitte downe, and open her quiuer against euery arrow. §. 32. Let no couetous man haue any rule ouerAristotle. thee, neither yeeld thy selfe subiect vnto co∣uetousnesse: for the couetous man wil de∣ceiue thee of thy goods, and couetousnesse will defraude thee of thy life. If thou intendest any thing whereof mayXenocrates. grow any goodnes, deuise to proceed with all diligence; but if by thy workes may chaunce that which is euill, then be as for∣ward to conquer thy will. Sowe good works, and thou shalt reapeSocrates. the flowers of ioy and gladnesse. When thou risest in the morning, de∣terminePythagoras. so to spend the day following, as though at night a graue should be thy bed. Endeuour thy selfe at all times to doe soPlato. well, that the wicked may rather enuie thee for thy vertuous life, then good men pitty thee for thy euill liuing.
So liue, and so hope, as though thouThales. shouldest die immediatly. Order thy selfe so, that thy soule may al∣wayesPythago. be in good estate, what-soeuer be∣come of thy body. §. 33. Be not as a Lyon in thine owne house,Ecclus, 4, 30 neyther beate thy seruaunts for thy fanta∣sie; nor oppresse them that are vnder thee. Doe nothing vvithout aduisement, soEccl{us}, 32, 20 shall it not repent thee after the deede. Be not excessiue toward any, & withoutEccl{us}, 33, 28 discretion doe nothing. Let reason goe before euery enterprise,Eccl{us}, 37, 16 and counsell before euery action. Thinke first, then speake, and last of allIsocrates. fulfill. Liue alwayes with thine vnderlings, asMar. Aurel. thou wouldest thy betters should liue with thee, & do to all men, as thou wouldest be done by. §. 34. Be not ashamed to heare the truth, ofSocrates. whomsoeuer it be: for truth is so noble of it selfe, that it maketh them honorable that pronounce it. Be sober and chast among young folkes,Plato. that they may learne of thee, and among
old, that thou mayst learne of them. Learne those thinges whilst thou art aAnaxag. chylde, as may afterward profite thee by practise when thou art a man. And let it not grieue thee in youth toSocrates. follow vertue; for if thou deferre it off till age, it will seeme like a heauie burden vn∣pleasant to be borne. §. 35. Holde friendship with many men: ne∣uerthelesse,Ecclus, 6, 6, haue but one counsellour of a thousand. If thou get a friende, proue him first, &verse, 7, 8, be not hastie to credite him. For, some man is a friende for is owne occasion, and will not abide in the day of thy trouble. Againe, some friende is but a compani∣onverse, 10. at thy table, and in the day of thine af∣fliction he continueth not. But in thy prosperitie, he will be as thouverse. 11. thy selfe, and will vse libertie ouer thy ser∣uaunts. If thou be brought low, he wil be againstverse, 12, thee, and will hide himselfe frō thy face. Contrariwise,] a faithfull freende is averse, 14. strong defence, & hee that findeth such an one, findeth a treasure.
§. 36. Abide not thou in the errour of the vn∣godly,Eccl{us}, 17, 27 but prayse the Lord before death. For,] thankfulnes perrisheth from theverse, 28. dead, as though hee were not: but the li∣uing, and he that is sound of hart, praiseth the Lord, and reioyceth in his mercy. Number not thy selfe in the multitudeEcclus, 7, 16 17, of the wicked, but remember that venge∣ance will not be long in tarrying: and that the rewarde of the vngodly is fire and wormes. Seeke not death in the error of your life:Wisd, 1, 12, 13. destroy not your selues, thorow the works of your owne hands: for, GOD hath not made death; neither hath hee pleasure in the destruction of the liuing. Righteousnes is euerlasting and immor∣tall,Wisd. 1. 15, but vnrighteousnes bringeth death. To depart from euill, is a thankful thingEcclus, 35, 3. to the Lord; and to forsake vnrighteous∣nesse, is a reconciling vnto him.
¶ Of trouble and affliction: whereby GOD tryeth the harts of all such as faith∣fully loue him. PROVERBS. 17. verse. 3. As is the sining pot for siluer, and the fornace for gold, so the Lord tryeth the harts. ¶ Of trouble and affliction. §. 1. MY sonne, (saith Sirach,) if thou wiltEcclus. 2. 1. 2 come into the seruice of GOD, stand fast in righteousnes & feare, and prepare thy soule to tentation. Settle thine hart & be patient, bow downe thine eare, and receiue the words of vnder∣standing: & shrinke not away when thou art assayled, but waite vpon GOD pati∣ently. Ioyne thy selfe vnto him, and depart notverse, 3, 4, 5, away, that thou maist be increased at thy last end. Whatsoeuer commeth vnto thee, receiue it patiently, and be patient in the change of thine affliction. For, as gold & siluer are tryed in the fire, euen so are men acceptable in the fornace of aduersitie.
And, as the fornace proueth the PottersEccl{us}, 27, 5, vessell, so dooth tentation try the thoughts of men. §. 2. The Lord will try the righteous, (saythPsalm. 11. 5, Dauid) but the wicked, and him that lo∣ueth iniquitie, doth his soule hate. Hee ledde the chyldren of Israel (whomDeut. 8. 2. he deerely loued,) fortie yeeres together in the Wildernesse, before hee brought them to the Land of Promise; onely to humble them, and to proue and know what was in theyr harts, whether they would keepe his commaundements, or no. §. 3. Hee commaunded the Patriarch Abra∣hamGene. 22, 1, 2. (as we reade) to kill and offer vp vnto him, his true-borne & best-beloued sonne Isaac; whom (not many yeeres before) hee had giuen him for the comfort of his age; promising withall, that in that child, and in his seed, all the Nations of the earth should be blessed: yet on the suddaine, when A∣braham least thought of any such matter, he willed him to the performance heereof, and told him also in what place hee would haue it done. All this it pleased him to do, not for any desire hee had to receiue at his
seruaunts hand any such kinde of offering, or bloodie sacrifice; but onely to prooue what faithfull loue was harboured in the hart of Abraham towards him. For, when hee perceiued the PatriarchsGene. 22, 15, 16, 17, 18, readie obedience here-vnto, hee speedilie sent his Angell, and caused him to forbeare to doe it: saying and swearing vnto Abra∣ham by himselfe, that because he had been found faithfull in his triall, and had not re∣fused at his commaundement, to offer vp his onely sonne; his seede should surely be multiplied as the starres of heauen, and the sand vpon the Sea-shoare; and all Nations should be blessed in him, according to his former promise. §. 4. He proued likewise the loue & patienceTobie, 2, of old Tobias, by suffering him in his sleep to be depriued of his eye-sight: and after his triall, restored his sight againe, vvith greater cause of comfort & reioycing then he had before. Howe many troubles also the Prophet Dauid sustained, (as seuerall proofes and tryalls of his vertue & patience) before hee coulde peaceably possesse the kingdome which God had promised vnto him, may
be seene at large, in the sundry conflicts1, Sam. chap. 16. 17, 18, 19, 20, &c. which he had with his hate-bearing enemie King Saule. §. 5. But, among diuers other examples in the Booke of God concerning this matter, we finde, that it pleased the Lord to proceede very farre in prouing the constant loue & patience of holy Iob; when he gaue sathan leaue to try him by sixe seuerall temptati∣ons, as namely thus. First, hee maliciously brought the Shabeans vpon his Heards∣menIob. 1. 14. 15. and other seruaunts, as they were bu∣sie at theyr labour; who violently slew the keepers of his cattell, and carried his Oxen and Asses away. Secondly, he caused fire to fall from hea∣uenIob. 1. 16. vpon his sheepe & their sheepheards, which speedily burnt and consumed them, leauing but one amongst many to bring him the bad newes. Thirdly, he procured the Chaldeans to sette out three bands of men, who likewiseIob. 1. 17, by violence ouercame his seruaunts, & car∣ried his Camels away. Fourthly, hee caused a furious and tem∣pestiousIob, 1, 18, 19, winde to ouer-turne the house wherein all his children were banquetting;
and suddainly, in the midst of theyr mirth, depriued them of theyr liues. Not content with all this, (because Iob still continued constant) he obtained leaue of God, to proceede with his fift plague: which was, the afflicting of Iobs own bo∣dieIob, 2, 6, 7, with greeuous botches and boyles: not in one place or two, but all ouer, euen from the sole of his foote, to the crowne of his head. These fiue plagues beeing fully practi∣sed to proue him, and sathan notwithstan∣ding still preuented of his purpose: deter∣mined once more to try him by a more ter∣rible temptation then all the rest, namely, with the temper of his wiues tunge, which last plague, onely of it selfe exceeded all the former, as far as they in theyr degrees sur∣passed one another. As for the first affliction, (Iob beeing a man of such wonderfull wealth as the be∣ginning of his booke reporteth him to be,)Iob, 1, 3. it could surely of him be counted no more harme, but euen as it were the sting of a nettle, or a flea-byting. The second, was a shrewd pinch. The third, was a sore bruze. The fourth, more greeuous to be borne then all the former. The fift, exceeded
them all; and went so neere his hart, that it caused him more to complaine then any of the rest. But the sixt and last, went manie degrees beyond the whole number of the other, in that it leueld at his vtter ouer∣throwe and finall destruction, both of bo∣dy and soule. For, after hee had lost all his substance, and his children, and was brought to such a miserable estate, (through the sundry sores vpon his body,) that he knew not where to rest himselfe, or by what meanes to finde any ease; but was constrained to forsake all company, & sitting vpon a heape of ashes, or dunghill, to scrape away the filthy mat∣terIob, 2, 7, 8, that issued from his fleshe with a pot∣shard: now, euen nowe, in the midst of all his anguish and sorrowe; his wife, (vvhich in all humaine reason should haue been his most kinde comforter) forgetting both her owne present state, & her husbands future felicitie, came vppon him in rayling man∣ner, with an open mouth, saying: * DoostIob, 2, 9, thou continue yet in thine vprightnesse? Curse God, and die. But holy Iob, (more regarding his soules good, then the pacifying of his bodies paine, & also to make manifest to all men,
howe much in hart he honoured his Ma∣ker,) presently rebuked her for her follie, saying; Thou speakest like a foolish vvo∣man:Iob, 2, 10, What? shall we receiue good at the hand of God, and not receiue euill? Also, in the thirteenth chapter of his Booke, and, as it seemeth, euen in the ex∣treamest time of his fierie tryall, hee vehe∣mently brake forth into this confident and prayse-worthy resolution, saying: * Loe,Iob, 13, 15, though GOD kill mee, yet will I trust in him. And, after all his troubles were ended, and his vertuous patience thorowly proo∣ued,Iob, 42, 12, 13, 14. &c. we find in the latter end of his booke, that it pleased God to blesse him, not one∣ly with twise so much riches as he lost, but also with as many sonnes & daughters; & the length of an hundred and fortie yeeres life. So that before hee died, hee sawe his sonnes, and his sonnes sonnes, euen foure generations. §. 6. Thus God, (as Salomon saith) proouethWisd, 3, 5, 6. the righteous, and findeth them meete for himselfe. Hee tryeth them as the golde in the fornace; and receiueth them as a per∣fect fruite offering.
Hee also, chasteneth them measurablieWisd, 12, 2. that goe wrong; and vvarneth them, by putting thē in remembrance of the things wherein they haue offended, that leauing theyr wickednesse, they may beleeue in him. Yea;] whom-soeuer the Lorde loueth,Heb, 12, 6, him he chasteneth; and he scourgeth euery sonne that he receiueth. If ye endure chastening, God offerethverse, 7, himselfe vnto you, as vnto Sons: for what sonne is it whom the Father chasteneth not? But if yee be without correction, where∣ofHebr, 12, 8, all are partakers, then are ye bastards, & not sonnes. §. 7. My sonne, (saith the wise-man,) refuseProu, 3, 11, 12. not the chastening of the Almightie, ney∣ther be thou greeued with his correction: for the Lord correcteth him whom hee lo∣ueth, euen as the father doth the childe in whom he delighteth. And, as a Father nurtureth his sonne, soDeut, 8, 5, the Lord thy God nurtureth thee. His rodde or scourge of affliction, is noFulgosius. signe of his disfauour to those that beare it with patience; but rather a most necessarie
meane to put a man in remembrance of his former iniquities; and to cause him to liue more godly euer after, for feare of some further chastisement. It is a heauenly Herrald sent from God,Hermes. to forewarne men to leaue the loue of tran∣sitory pleasures; and to seeke after such things as cause comfort in death. It is a speciall benefite vnto all the chyl∣drenIust. Mar, of GOD; in that it reformeth them from vnrighteousnesse, and maketh them meete to receiue wisedome and vnderstan∣ding. §. 8. Thus much in effect confesseth Dauid, in the 119. psalme, where hee saith: * It isPsal, 119, 71 good for mee (ô Lord) that I haue beene afflicted, that I may learne thy statutes. Before I was afflicted, I went astray, butPsal. 119, 67 now (ô Lord) I keepe thy word. Also, in the 94. psalme, hee plainly pro∣nounceth those men to be blessed whom it pleaseth the Lorde to correct: saying; Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, ôPsalm, 94, 12, 13. Lord, and teachest him in thy Lawe, that thou maist giue him rest from the dayes of euill, whiles the pitte is digged for the vn∣godly.
And, blessed likewise doth holy Iob ac∣countIob, 5, 17, the man whom GOD correcteth: therefore refuse not thou, the chastising of the Almightie. For, hee maketh the wound, & bindethverse, 18, 19, it vp: hee smiteth, and his handes make whole. Hee shall deliuer thee in sixe trou∣bles, and in the seauenth the euill shall not touch thee. He will not forsake for euer. But thoughLam. 3, 31, 32, hee send affliction, yet will hee haue com∣passion according to the multitude of his mercies. For, hee will not lay on man so much,Iob, 34, 23, that hee should enter into iudgement with God. §. 9. VVee haue had (saith the Apostle) theHeb, 12, 9, fathers of our bodies, vvhich corrected vs, and we gaue them reuerence: should vvee not much rather, be in subiection vnto the Father of spirits, that we might liue? For, they verily for a few daies chastenedverse, 10, vs after theyr owne pleasure: but hee cha∣steneth vs for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holines. If we would iudge our selues, we should1. Cor, 11, 31, not be iudged.
But when we are iudged, we are chaste∣ned of the Lord; to the end we should not1, Cor, 11, 32, be condemned with the world. §. 10. Let not [then] the force of anie afflicti∣onIgnatius. ouer-throw the vertue of thy patience. (For, patience and perseuerance in vvel∣dooing,Tertullian. are two speciall notes, whereby the children of God are truly discerned, from hypocrites, counterfets, & dissemblers.) But rather follow the counsell which S. Iames giueth; saying: * If any man be af∣flicted,Iames. 5, 13, let him pray. For, the Lorde is neere vnto them thatPsal, 34, 18, are of a contrite hart, and will saue such as be afflicted in spirit. Yea; the Lorde [our God] is good, andNahum, 1, 7 as a strong hold in the day of trouble: and hee knoweth them that trust in him. Hee is neere vnto all that call vpon him.Psal, 145, 18 Yea, to all that call vpon him in truth. Hee will fulfill the desire of them thatverse, 19, feare him; hee also will heare theyr cry, and vvill saue them: * Because they trust inPsal, 37. 40, him. For, he knoweth how to deliuer the god∣ly2, Pet, 2, 9, out of tentation, & to reserue the vniust vnto the day of iudgment to be punished.
§. 11. My brethren, (saith the Apostle) countIames, 1, 2, 3 it exceeding ioy when yee fall into diuers tentations, knowing that the trying of your fayth bringeth forth patience; and let pa∣tience haue her perfect worke, that yee may bee perfect and entire, lacking no∣thing. For this know, that trouble & afflictionEugeniu. is sent of God vnto good men, not vniust∣ly, or cruelly; but for a good considerati∣on, and most louing intent: like vnto the dooings of a kinde and discreete Father; who greatly desiring to bring his son whō he loueth, to perpetuall honour & dignity, by such manner of exercise, most aptly tri∣eth his vertue, and proueth his patience. It is [also] very necessary, that the chyl∣drenGueuara. of God should be often tryed in thys life by trouble and affliction; that thereby they may the better be brought to knowe theyr owne weakenes; & thorowly taught in all theyr conflicts, to lift vp theyr eyes vnto heauen for helpe & succour. Besides; as yron except it bee sundryPet. Lomb. times scoured, will speedily corrupt, and wexe rustie; so, the vncleane hart & flesh of man, except it be often scoured with the
whetstone of aduersitie, it will quickly for∣get God, and soone be ouer-growne vvith the rust of all filthines and sinne. §. 12. Indeed, it cannot be, but that the mindesCicer. of men, are oftentimes through trouble & affliction, moued with vexations & griefes, but yet a meane must be kept in all calami∣ties what-soeuer: beyond the which, no man that is wise ought of right to passe. For, although no chastising for the pre∣sentHeb, 12, 11, time that it lasteth, seemeth to be ioy∣ous, but greeuous: yet afterward, it bring∣eth the quiet fruite of righteousnesse, vnto them which are thereby exercised. And euery man ought for his better cō∣fort in this case, to lay sure holde on the words of the Apostle, vsed vnto the Co∣rinthians, where he saith: * There hath no1, Cor, 10, 13. tentation taken you, but such as appertai∣neth to man: & God is faithfull, which wil not suffer you to be tempted aboue your strength; but will euen giue the issue vvith the tentation, that yee may be able to beare the same. His grace alone is sufficient for as many2, Cor, 12, 9, as shall vnfainedly put theyr confidence in
him: and, his power is made perfect through our weakenes. §. 13. And although, (as Dauid affirmeth) thePsal, 34, 19, troubles of the righteous are great, yet this comfort, euen by the selfe same mans say∣ing, presently followeth; that the Lorde deliuereth him out of them all. Hee also, maketh the afflictions of theTertullian. godly, serue as fit occasions to drawe theyr mindes wholy vnto him: and in the end, turneth all the sufferings of his Saints, to theyr names eternall prayse, & their soules greater glory. So that it is a surer signe of Gods loueGregory. and fauour towards vs, when hee giueth vs force and strength to beare troubles, then it is when hee taketh the same temptations away from vs. And, no man deserueth to be countedBernard. constant in his tryall, except he arme him∣selfe with patience, and be renewed vvith fresh courage, euen in the midst of his af∣flictions. Remembring, that all the miseries in mans life, can neuer be so sharp and bitter,Erasmus. as euerlasting felicitie will proue vnto the godly sweet and pleasant.
§. 14. Hold fast therfore the vertue of patienceMar. Aurel. in all thine aduersitie. Sorrow truly for thy former sinnes, andEugnius. practise to please GOD by thy vertuous amendement. Let hope encourage thee to be constant,Euagoras. though thy miseries be daily augmented. And put alwaies such faithful trust in theRauisius. promises of Gods mercy, as may keep thee from despaire, & make lesse thy calamity. §. 15. Behold, wee count them blessed vvhichIames. 5, 11▪ endure. Yee haue heard of the patience of Iob, & haue knowne what end the Lord made. For, the Lord, [as hath already been said,] is very pittifull and mercifull. VVho-soeuer shall call vpon his Name,Rom, 10, 13 shall be saued. And hee that trusteth in the Almightie,Eccl{us}, 32, 24 shall take no hurt. §. 16. Consider, (saith Sirach) the old genera∣tionsEcclus, 2, 11 of men, & marke them well, was there euer any one confounded that put his trust in the Lord? or who hath continued in his feare, and was forsaken? or whom did hee euer despise, that called vpon him?
I haue been young, and nowe am olde,Psal, 37, 25, (saith the Psalmist,) yet neuer sawe I the righteous forsaken; nor his seede begging bread. Wherefore; though the Lord seeme forAmbrose. a time to be angry with thee, and to turne away his face from beholding thine afflic∣tion, yet be not thou any whit thereby dis∣couraged; but rather endeuour to be the more patient; & thou shalt assuredly find, that hee will not forget thee. For, hee endureth but a vvhile in his an∣ger,Psalm, 30, 5. but in his fauour is life: weeping may abide in the euening, but ioy commeth in the morning. Hee himselfe hath commaunded vs to call vpon him in the time of our trouble:Psal, 50, 15, and with more then promise to heare, hee hath plainly said, that he will deliuer vs, & we shall glorifie him. Doubtlesse, hee is now no lesse power∣full then heere-to-fore hee hath been; for, hee is still * God all-sufficient.Gene, 17, 1, His hand is not shortned, that it cannotEsay, 59, 1, saue; neyther is his eare heauie, that it can∣not heare. But hee delighteth in them that fearePsal, 147, 11 him, and attend vpon his mercie.
And, is theyrs onelie, that patientlie a∣bideEccl{us}, 34, 19 him in the vvay of truth and righte∣ousnesse. ¶ Of trouble and persecution for the Gospells sake: where-vnto euery faithfull Christian is continually subiect, during this life. §. 1. IF any man will follow me, (saith Christ)Math, 16, 24 let him forsake himselfe, and take vp his crosse, and follow mee. Yea,] if any man will come after me,Luke, 9, 23, let him denie himselfe, & take vp his crosse daily, and follow mee. For,] whosoeuer beareth not his crosse,Luke, 14, 27 and commeth after mee, cannot be my di∣sciple. §. 2. Thinke not, (saith hee) that I am comeMath, 10. 34 to sende peace into the earth: I came not to sende peace, but the sword. For, from hence-foorth, there shall beLuke, 12, 52, 53. fiue in one house deuided, three against two, and two against three. The Father shall be deuided against the sonne, and the
sonne against the father: The mother a∣gainst the daughter, and the daughter a∣gainst the mother: the mother in lawe, a∣gainst the daughter in law, and the daugh∣ter in law, against her mother in law. And, who-soeuer will seeke to saue hisMark, 8, 35 Luk, 17, 3, life, hee shall lose it; but who-soeuer shall lose his life for my sake, & the Gospels, he shall saue it. §. 3. Hee that loueth father or mother moreMath, 10, 37 then mee, is not worthy of mee. And hee that loueth sonne or daughter more then mee, is not worthy of mee. If any man come to me, and hate not hisLuk, 14. 26, father and mother, and wife and chyldren, and brethren and sisters; yea, & his owne life also, hee cannot be my disciple. The disciple is not aboue his maister, norMath, 10, 24, 25, the seruaunt aboue his Lord. It is enough for the disciple to be as his Maister is, and the seruaunt as his Lord. And, who-soeuer will be a perfect disci∣ple,Luke, 6, 40, shall be as his Maister is. §. 4. Behold, (saith our Sauiour vnto his fol∣lowers.)Math, 10, 16 17, 18. I send you foorth, as sheepe in the mids of wolues, be ye therefore wise as Ser∣pents,
and innocent as Doues. But beware of men, for they will deliuer you vp to the Counsels, and will scourge you in theyr Sinagogues; and ye shal be brought to the Gouernours & Kings for my sake, in wit∣nes to them, and to the Gentiles. Yea; the brother shall deliuer the bro∣therMarke, 13, 12, to death, and the father the sonne, and the chyldren shall rise against their parents, and shall cause them to die. And yee shal be hated of all men for myverse, 13, Names sake: but who-soeuer shall endure vnto the end, he shall be saued. If the world hate you, yee knowe that itIohn, 15, 18, 19, hated mee before you. If yee were of the world, the world would loue his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I haue chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember that I saide vnto you; Theverse, 20. seruaunt is not greater then his maister. If they haue persecuted mee, they will perse∣cute you also. If they haue called the Maister of theMath, 10, 25 house Beelzebub, howe much more them of his houshold? But all these thinges will they doe vntoIohn, 15, 21, you for my Names sake; because they haue
not knowne him that sent mee. Yea, the time shall come, that whosoeuerIohn. 16. 2. killeth you, will thinke that he dooth God seruice. Notwithstanding, blessed are ye, if you1. Pet. 3. 14. suffer for righteousnes sake. For, vnto such appertaineth the king∣domeMath, 5, 10, of heauen. Yea,] blessed are yee, when men reuileMath. 5, 11, 12. you, and persecute you, and say all manner of euill against you for my sake, falselie; reioyce and be glad, for great is your re∣ward in heauen: for, so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you. §. 5. Let not (saith he) your harts be troubled,Iohn, 14. 1. yee beleeue in God, beleeue also in me. In the world ye shall haue affliction; butIohn, 16, 33 be of good comfort: I haue ouer-com the world. And, feare not them which kill the bo∣die,Math. 10. 28 Luk. 12, 4. 5, and after that are not able to doe any more: but rather feare him which is able to destroy both body & soule in hell: yea, I say vnto you, feare him. For, what shall it profit a man, thoughMath, 16. 26 hee should winne the whole world, if hee
lose his ovvne soule? or what shall a man giue for recompence of his soule? VVho-soeuer therefore shall confesseMath, 10, 32 mee before men, him will I confesse also before my Father, which is in heauen. But vvho-soeuer shall denie mee beforeverse, 33, men, him will I also denie before my Fa∣ther which is in heauen. Who-soeuer [likewise] shal be ashamedLuke. 9. 26 of mee, and of my words, of him shall the sonne of man be ashamed, when hee shall come in his glory▪ and in the glory of the Father, and of the holy Angels. §. 6. Deerely beloued, (saith S. Peter) thinke1. Pet. 4, 12. it not strange concerning the fierie tryall which is among you, to prooue you, as though some strange thing were come vn∣to you. But reioyce, in as much as yee are parta∣kersverse, 13. of Christes sufferings: that when his glorie shall appeare, yee may be glad and reioyce. For, vvee must through many afflictionsActs, 14, 22▪ enter into the kingdome of God. And, all that will liue godly in Christ Ie∣sus,2. Tim. 3. 12 shall suffer persecution.
§. 7. If yee be railed vppon for the Name of1. Pet, 4, 14. Christ, blessed are you; for, the Spirit of glory, & of God resteth vpon you: which on their part is euill spoken of, but on your part, is glorified. But, let none of you suffer as a murthe∣rer,1. Pet, 4, 15. or as a theefe, or as an euill dooer, or as a busie-body in other mens matters. But, if any man suffer as a Christian, letverse, 16. him not be ashamed: but let him glorifie God in that behalfe. For, it is better (if the will of God be so)1, Pet, 3, 17. that yee should suffer for well-doing, then for euill doing. And, the lesse iustice that a godly manTremelius. findeth at the handes of the vngodly, the more comfort shall he receiue in cōscience, at the mercifull hand of God. §. 8. My sonne, (saith Sirach) submit not thyEcclus, 4, 27, 28. selfe vnto a foolish man, neyther accept thou the person of the mightie. But striue for the truth vnto death: and defende iu∣stice euen to the losse of thyne owne life: and the Lord thy God shall fight for thee against thine enemies.
Be fauourable to all men; be likewise inSocrates. subiection to al lawes: but aboue al things, fulfill the will of God, rather then the will of man. For,] a righteous and godly man, ha∣uingPet. Ramus. in him the spirit of zeale and constan∣cie, neuer feareth in his afflictions the cru∣eltie of any man: but vvill boldlie to the death, stand vnto the truth. And, forasmuch as hee knoweth thatRauisius. almightie God is the truth, and that truth is GOD; hee likewise wisely considereth, that he which departeth from the one, de∣parteth from the other. But, hee that eyther for feare of punish∣ment,Hemingius. or else in hope of a Tyrants fauour, forsaketh the truth before men vpon earth, leaueth the most certaine promise of per∣petuall felicitie, for an vncertaine assurance of short-lasting vanitie: and by seeking to deliuer his body from danger, cloggeth his conscience with griefe, and his soule with sorrow. §. 9. If then thou be desirous to liue euerla∣stingly,Gueuara. faint not at any time vnder the bur∣den of thine afflictions; neither be thou mooued from thy hope of heauens helpe,
through the multitude of thy miseries: but patiently put thy trust in the promises of Gods mercie, and pray often for such per∣seuerance, as may bring thee to eternall blessednes. In all thy troubles stand vnto the truth;Plotinus. and commit thy selfe in thy greatest neces∣sitie, wholy & altogether to the most high and mighty GOD; neyther fearing them that threaten, nor beleeuing thē that speak thee faire: but trust in him alone, that is most kinde and compassionate, true of his promise, and able to make both his vvord and worke good. For, more wisedome is it, that a man forHermes. his soules sake shoulde suffer death, then lose his soules happines for the loue of this life. Blessed [therfore] is the man that endu∣rethIames, 1, 12, tentation: for when hee is tryed, hee shall receiue the crowne of life, vvhich the Lorde hath promised to them that loue him. §. 10. The peaceable and blessed life of theBernard. godly, (saith S. Bernard) is in heauen: and is onely to be attained vnto by faith, pati∣ence, and perseuerance.
For, as without fayth, it is vnpossible toHillarius. please God; so without patience and per∣seuerance, no man shall see God. And although indeede, the death of theBasill. bodie, by diuers meanes, & for diuers cau∣ses, be vnto many men very tedious and bitter: yet the death therof for the testimo∣nie of Gods truth, is vnto the godly man most easie, most ioyfull, most sweete, and most delectable: because he seeth (through the eye of fayth) the present performance of all Gods heauenly promises, made vnto him in his holy word; if he zealously con∣tinue constant in the veritie of his Christi∣an profession. §. 11. Thou therefore my sonne, (saith Paule vnto Timothie,) suffer affliction as a good2. Tim. 2. 3. 4. souldiour of Iesus Christ. No man that warreth, entangleth himselfe with the af∣fayres of this life, because hee would please him that hath chosen him to be a Souldi∣our. And, Christ beeing our Captaine, hathRauisius. called vs by the voyce of his Gospell, to a spirituall warfare. The foes against whom wee must continually fight, are fleshlie as∣saultes, worldly wickednes, and the deceits
of the deuill. Our warre-weapons and armour, is the shielde of fayth, the sworde of the Spirit, the brest-plate of righteous∣nesse, and the helmet of saluation. The reward of conquest, is a crowne ofRauisius. life to him that ouer-cōmeth: which God himselfe hath promised, to euery man that perseuereth in vvell-dooing to the end. But hee that coward-like leaueth the bat∣taile and forsaketh the fielde; shall be pur∣sued, spoyled, and made a pray to his infer∣nall enemy. For, no man that striueth for a maisterie,2, Tim, 2. 5, shall be crowned, except hee striue as hee ought to doe. Neyther is hee that putteth his hande toLuke. 9, 62. the plowe, and afterward looketh backe, any meete member for the kingdome of God. §. 12. If vve suffer with Christ, wee shall also2. Tim. 2. 12 raigne with him: [but] if wee denie him, hee also will denie vs. And, looke vvith what courage a Chri∣stian,Pet. Mar. in the time of his triall shall confesse the truth, and acknowledge Christ to be his Captaine: with as great consolation & inward ioy, shal his conscience be comfor∣ted,
at the houre of death, when his soule is forsaking the prison of his bodie. For, this is thanke-worthy, if a man for1. Pet, 2, 19. conscience toward God, endure greefe, & suffer wrong vndeserued. §. 13. Take, my brethren, the Prophets (saithIames, 5, 10. Saint Iames) for an ensample of suffering aduersitie, & of long patience, which haue spoken in the Name of the Lord. And, let likewise that generall testimo∣nie, which the Writer to the Hebrues gi∣ueth, in commendation of all the Saints of the olde Testament, sufficiently moue vs, to be perfectly patient in all our tribulati∣ons, according to their example: where he saith: Some of them were tryed by mock∣ingsHebr, 11, 36 37, 38, and scourging; some by bondes and imprisonment; some were stoned; some vvere hewen in sunder; some were temp∣ted; some were slaine with the sword; som went vp and downe in Sheepes skinnes & Goates-skinnes, in great neede, afflicted & tormented: vvandering in Wildernesses, in Mountaines, in Dennes, and in hollowe Caues of the earth: the World not beeing worthy of them.
Others, also were racked, & woulde notHebr. 11, 35 be deliuered: that they might receiue a better resurrection. §. 14. Besides these; we finde also, that the A∣postle S. Paule himselfe, & his fellow ser∣uaunts vnder Christ, in the Newe-testa∣ment, are most worthy examples to be re∣membred. For, in diuers places of his Epi∣stles, hee spareth not to speake both of his owne, and the rest of the disciples suffe∣rings: but for himselfe onely, in his Epistle to the Corinthians he saith: I take pleasure2. Cor. 12. 10. in infirmities, in reproches, in necessities, in persecutions, and in anguish for Christes sake: for, vvhen I am vveake, then am I strong: Likewise in the Acts we read, that when he was fore-told by a certaine Prophet na∣medActs, 21, 11, 12. Agabus, what trouble shoulde befall him at Ierusalem: he desisted not from his iourney thether, but rather reproued them that sought (with teares) to perswade him to the contrarie, saying: * What doe youverse, 13, weeping and breaking mine hart? For, I am ready, not to be bound onely, but also to die at Ierusalem for the Name of the Lord Iesus.
For, Christ is to mee, both in life and inPhilip, 1, 21, death, aduantage. And, I count all things to be losse, andPhil. 3, 8, 9. iudge them to be dunge, that I may winne Christ, and be found in him. §. 15. Also; in the afore-named Epistle to the Corinthians, (both in the behalfe of him∣selfe, and the rest of his fellow helpers,) he saith: Brethren, wee would not haue you2. Cor. 1. 8. 9 ignorant of our affliction, which came vn∣to vs in Asia, how we were pressed out of measure, passing strength, so that we alto∣gether doubted, euen of life. Yea, wee re∣ceiued the sentence of death in our selues, because wee should not trust in our selues, but in God, which raiseth the dead. Againe, in the 4. chapter of the same2, Cor, 4, 8, 9 Epistle, he saith: Wee are afflicted on eue∣rie side, yet are we not in distresse: we are in doubt, but yet we despaire not: wee are persecuted, but not forsaken: cast downe, but we perrish not. Euery where wee beare about in our bo∣dieverse, 10, 11, the dying of the Lord Iesus, that the life of Iesus might also be made manifest in our bodies: for, wee which liue, are al∣waies deliuered vnto death for Iesus sake;
that the life also of Iesus might be made manifest in our mortall flesh. As it is written; For thy sake (ô Lorde)Rom, 8, 36. are we killed all the day long, we are coun∣ted as sheepe appoynted to be slaine. Neuerthelesse, in all these things wee areverse, 37, more then conquerours, through him that loued vs. §. 16. VVherefore, let vs also, seeing that weeHeb, 12, 1, 2 are compassed with so great a clowde of witnesses, cast away euery thing that pres∣seth downe, and the sinne that hangeth so fast on: Let vs run with patience the race that is set before vs; looking vnto Iesus, the authour and finisher of our fayth, who for the ioy that was sette before him, endured the crosse, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Consider therfore him that endured suchverse, 3, speaking against of sinners; least ye should be wearied, and faint in your mindes. Cast not away your confidence, vvhichHeb, 10, 35. 36, 37. hath great recompence of reward: for wee haue neede of patience, that after yee haue done the will of God, ye might receiue the promise. For yet a very little while, & hee that shall come, wil come, & will not tarry.
Be patient therefore brethren, vnto the comming of the Lord. Behold, the hus∣bandmanIames, 5, 7, 8 waiteth for the precious fruite of the earth, and hath long patience for it, vn∣till he receiue both the former & the latter raine. Be yee also patient therefore, & set∣tle your harts; for the cōming of the Lord draweth neere. And the GOD of all grace, which hath1, Pet, 5, 10, called vs vnto his eternall glory by Christ Iesus, after that yee haue suffered a little, make you perfect, confirme, strengthen, and stablish you. For, if wee liue, wee liue vnto the Lord,Rom, 14, 8, & if we die, we die vnto the Lord; so that whether we liue or die, we are the Lords. And, none neede to feare death, saueSocrates, those which haue committed so much wic∣kednes, as after death deserueth damnation. §. 17. Wherfore, let them that suffer, according1, Pet, 4, 19, to the will of God, cōmit their soules vnto him in wel doing, as vnto a faithful Creator. And, let all the troubles that can comePet. Lomb. vppon thee for thy good conuersation in Christ, be borne with boldnes; comforted with confidence; & vnder-propped with patience.
For, the necessary patience of him thatEccl{us}, 20, 31 followeth the Lord, is better then hee that gouerneth his life without the Lord. And, our light affliction, which is but for2. Cor. 4. 17. a moment, causeth vnto vs a far more ex∣cellent and eternall waight of glory; while we looke not on the thinges that are seene, but the things which are not seene. For, the things that are seene, are tempo∣rall;verse, 18, but the things which are not seene, are eternall. For, vvee are saued by hope: but hopeRom. 8. 24. 25. that is seene, is no hope: for howe can a man hope for that which he seeth? But if wee hope for that we see not, we doe with patience abide for it. Likewise, the Spirit [of God] also help∣ethRom, 8, 26. our infirmities: for, we know not what to pray as we ought: but the Spirit it selfe maketh request for vs with sighes, vvhich cannot be expressed. But he that searcheth the harts, knowethverse. 27. what is the meaning of the Spirit: for hee maketh request for the Saints, according to the will of God. Also wee knowe, that all things workeverse, 28. together for the best vnto them that loue GOD.
And I count, (saith the Apostle) that theRom, 8, 18, afflictions of this present time, are not wor∣thie of the glory, which shall be shewed vn∣to vs. Neyther may the many yeeres of thys World, be any way comparable vnto the length of dayes in the life to come. * For,Eccls. 18, 9. as drops of raine are vnto the Sea, and as a grauell stone is in comparison of the Sand, so are a thousand yeeres to the dayes euer∣lasting.
Of the manifold blessings and fauours of Al∣mightie God, extended vnto the godly heere in this life: with the promises of theyr euerla∣sting felicitie in the World to come. PROVERBS. 21. verse. 21. Hee that followeth after righteousnes & mercy, shall finde life, righteousnes, and glory. §. 1. BLessed is the man, (saith Dauid) thatPsal. 1. 1. 2. doth not walke in the counsell of the wicked, nor stand in the way of sin∣ners; nor sit in the seate of the scorne∣full: But hath his delight in the lawe of the Lord, and in that lawe doth exercise himselfe both day and night. For, he shall be like a tree planted by theverse, 3, waters side, vvhich will bring foorth her fruite in due season; whose leafe shall not wither, or fade away: and looke what-soe∣uer hee doth, it shall prosper. Blessed, (saith Ieremy,) is the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope is theIere. 17. 7. Lord himselfe. For, hee shall be as a tree
planted by the water, which spreadeth out her rootes by the riuer, and shall not feeleverse, 8, when the heate cōmeth; but her leafe shall be greene, & shall not care for the yeere of drought; neither shall cease from yeelding fruite. Yea,] blessed is the man, (saith Sirach,)Eccl{us}, 14, 21 that doth meditate honest things by vvise∣dome, and exerciseth himselfe in iustice, & reasoneth of holy things by his vnderstan∣ding: Which considereth in his hart the wayesverse, 22. 23. of VVisedome, and vnderstandeth her se∣crets; and goeth after her, and continueth in her wayes. For,] he shall looke in at her windowes,Eccl{us}. 14. 24 25, and harken at her doores; hee shall abide beside her house, and shall fasten a stake in her walles. Hee shall pitche his tent nie vnto herverse, 26. 27. hand; and in his lodging shall good things rest for euermore. Hee shall sette his chil∣dren vnder her couering, & he shall dwell vnder her branches. By her hee shal be de∣fended from the heate; and in her glory shall hee rest. For, life is in the way of righteousnesse,Prou, 12, 28 and in that path-way there is no death.
§. 2. Blessed [therefore] is the man, that fea∣rethPsal. 112. 1. the Lord, and delighteth greatly in his commaundements. Yea,] blessed is he that maketh the LordPsalm, 40, 4, his trust: and regardeth not the proude, nor such as turne aside to lies. For,] his seed shalbe mighty vpon earth,Psa. 112. 2, 3 and his generation shall be blessed. Riches and treasures shall be in his house: and his righteousnes shall endure for euer. Though he fall, hee shall not be cast off,Psal. 37. 24, for the Lord putteth vnder his hand. Surely, hee shall neuer be mooued, butPsal. 112. 6. shall be had in euerlasting remembrance. For, the Lord loueth iudgement, & for∣sakethPsal. 37. 28. not his Saints: they shall be preser∣ued for euer-more. §. 3. If, (saith the Almightie vnto Israel) yeeLeuit. 26. 3. 4. 5. walke in mine ordinaunces, and keepe my commaundements, and doe them; I will then send you raine in due season, and the Land shall yeeld her increase; and the trees of the fielde shall giue their fruite: & your threshing shall reach vnto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach vnto the sowing time: and you shall eate your breade in
plenteousnes, & dwell in your land safely. For, I will haue respect vnto you, andLeuit, 26, 9, make you increase, and multiply you, and establish my couenaunt [or promise] with you. Also, I will walke among you: & I willLeuit. 26. 12 be your God, and yee shal be my people. §. 4. Yea,] all these [following] blessings, (ôDeut. 28. 2. Israel, saith Moises,) shall come vpon thee, and ouer-take thee, if thou shalt obey the voyce of the Lord thy God. Blessed shalt thou be in the Cittie, andverse, 3, 4, blessed also in the fielde. Blessed shall be the fruite of thy body, and the fruite of thy ground, and the fruite of thy Cattell, the increase of thy Kine, and the flocks of thy sheepe. Blessed shalbe thy basket & thy dough.verse 5, 6, Blessed shalt thou be, when thou commest in, and blessed also when thou goest out. §. 5. The Lorde [likewise,] shall cause thineDeu. 28. 7. enemies that rise against thee, to fall before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way, and shall flee before thee seauen wayes.
The Lord shall commaunde the blessing to be with thee in thy store-houses, and inDeut, 28, 8. all that thou settest thine hand vnto, & will blesse thee in the Land vvhich hee giueth thee. The Lord shall make thee an holie peo∣pleverse, 9, vnto himselfe, as hee hath sworne vnto thee; if thou shalt keepe the commaunde∣ments of the Lord thy God, and walke in his wayes. Then all people of the earth shal see thatverse, 10, the Name of the Lord is called vpon ouer thee; and they shall be afraid of thee. And the Lord shall make thee plenteousDeut, 28, 11 in goods, in the fruite of thy body, and in the fruite of thy cattell, and in the fruite of thy ground; in the land which the Lorde sware vnto thy fathers to giue thee. The Lord shall open vnto thee his goodverse, 12. treasure, euen the heauen to giue raine to thy land in due season, and to blesse all the worke of thine hands: and thou shalt lend vnto many Nations, but shalt not borrow thy selfe. §. 6. VVith all these heere rehearsed; and sundry other benefites, both corporall and spirituall, did the Lord God (as we read,)
promise to blesse his then peculiar people, the children of Israel, if they woulde faith∣fully beleeue in him, and diligentlie ende∣uour to liue vprightly in all theyr dooings, according to the meaning of his cōmaun∣dements. By which protestation made vnto them, we may verie well be drawne vndoubtedly to beleeue, that hee (whose power in time past; was sufficiently able, to performe so many fauours, to one speciall Nation that serued him,) is now, as well able as euer he was, not onely to extend the like mercy to one Nation alone, (because hee is for euer the selfe same God,) but also to euery Na∣tion vnder the sun, where soeuer his Name is called vpon: and, to euery priuate man, (in what Prouince soeuer) that truly trust∣eth in him; and vnfainedly frameth all his actions & will, according to his holy word. For, vvhat necessary benefite is it, (saithVincentius. Vincentius,) that the Lord our God vvill deny to grant, vnto any one of vs when we pray, if we religiously liue after the rule of his law, & sincerely seeke to serue him, in the way of truth and righteousnes? Or, who is he that will harme you, (saith1. Pet, 3, 13. S. Peter,) if yee follow that which is good?
§. 7. Blessed [therfore] is the man that findethProu, 3, 13, 14. wisedome, and the man that getteth vnder∣standing: for, the merchandise thereof, is better then the merchandise of siluer, and the gaine thereof, is better then gold. It is more precious then pearles, and allverse, 15, things that thou canst desire, are not to be compared vnto her. Length of dayes is in her right hand, &Prou. 3, 16. in her left riches and glory. Her wayes are wayes of pleasure, and allverse, 17, 18, her pathes prosperitie. Shee is a tree of life to them that lay holde on her; and blessed is the man that retaineth her. §. 8. The word of GOD most high, is theEcclus, 1, 5, fountaine of Wisedome, & the euerlasting commaundements are the entrance vnto her. Wherefore,] if thou desire Wisedome,Eccl{us}, 1, 31, keepe the commaundements, & the Lord God shall giue her vnto thee. And shee shall instruct and teach thee inHermes. the true path of his precepts, and lead thee the right vvay to life euerlasting. By her, thou shalt possesse a peaceableConstantius. and pleasant life: and through her, thou
shalt attaine vnto a happy end. For, hee that findeth her, findeth life, &Prou, 28, 34, 35, shall obtaine fauour of the Lord: but hee that sinneth against her, hurteth his owne soule: and all that hate her, loue death. §. 9. If thou followe after righteousnes, (saithEccl{us}, 27, 8, Sirach,) thou shalt get her, and put her on as a faire garment, & shalt dwell with her, and shee shall defende thee for euer: and in the day of knowledge, thou shalt finde stedfastnes. Yea,] if thou callest after knowledge, &Prou, 2, 3, 4, 5, cryest for vnderstanding: if thou seekest her as siluer, & searchest for her as for trea∣sures, then shalt thou vnderstand the feare of the Lorde, and finde the knowledge of God. Then shalt thou vnderstand righteous∣nesse,Prou, 2, 9, and iudgement, and equitie, & eue∣rie good path. §. 10. When wisedom (aith Salomon) enterethProu, 2, 10, 11, 12, 13, into thy hart, & knowledge delighteth thy soule, then shall counsell preserue thee, & vnderstanding shall keepe thee; and deli∣uer thee from the euill way, and from the man that speaketh froward thinges: and
from them that leaue the wayes of righte∣ousnes, to walke in the waies of darknes. It shall [likewise] deliuer thee from theProu. 2, 16, 17, strange woman, euen frō the stranger that flattereth with her words. Which forsaketh the guide of her youth, and forgetteth the couenaunt of her God. Thou shalt [also] vvalke safely by thyProu, 3, 23, way, and thy foote shall not stumble. If thou sleepest, thou shalt not be afraid,verse, 24, and when-soeuer thou sleepest, thy sleepe shall be sweete. Thou shalt not feare for any suddaineProu, 3, 25. feare: neyther for the destruction of the wicked, when it commeth. For, the Lord shal be for thine assurance,verse, 26, and hee shall preserue thy foote from ta∣king. §. 11. Surely, hee will deliuer thee frō the snarePsalm, 91, 3, of the hunter, & from the noysome pesti∣lence. Hee will couer thee vnder his wings, andverse, 4. thou shalt be safe vnder his feathers: his truth shall be thy shielde and buckler. Thou shalt not be afraide of the feare ofverse, 5, 6, the night, nor of the arrovve that flyeth by day: Nor of the pessilence that walketh in
the darknesse: nor of the plague that de∣stroyeth at noone day. A thousand shall fall at thy side, & tennePsalm, 91, 7, thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come neere thee. In famine, hee shall deliuer thee fromIob, 5, 20, 21. death, and in battell, from the power of the sword. Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue, and thou shalt not be afraid of destruction when it commeth. But thou shalt laugh at destruction andIob, 5, 22, 23, dearth, and shalt not be afraid of the beasts of the earth. For, the stones of the fielde shall be in league with thee, and the beasts of the fielde shall be at peace with thee. And thou shalt knowe, that peace shallIob, 5, 24, be in thy Tabernacle, and thou shalt visite thine habitation, and shalt not sinne. There shall none euill come neere thee,Psal, 91, 10, neither shall any plague come nie vnto thy dwelling. For, the Lord shal giue his Angels chargeverse, 11, ouer thee, to keepe thee in all thy wayes. And they shall beare thee in theyr hands,verse, 12, that thou hurte not thy foote against a stone. Thou shalt walke vpon the Lyon & thePsal, 91, 13. Aspe: & the young Lyon & the Dragon
shalt thou treade vnder thy feete. Also;] vvhen thou eatest the labours ofPsal. 128. 2. thine hands thou shalt be blessed, & it shall be well with thee. Thy wife shall be as the fruitefull Vineverse, 3, on the sides of thy house; and thy chyl∣dren like the Oliue plants round about thy table. Thou shalt perceiue also, that thy seedeIob, 5, 25, shall be great, & thy posteritie as the grasse of the earth. And, thou shalt goe to thy graue in a fullverse, 26. age; as a rick of corne which commeth in∣to the barne in due season. Loe, thus haue wee enquired of it, andIob. 5, 27. so it is. Surely, thus shall the man be blessed thatPsal, 128, 4, feareth the Lord. For, the Lord will blesse the righteous;Psalm. 5. 12. and with fauour will compasse him, as with a shielde. The wicked shall see the same & be an∣gry:Psal, 112. 10 hee shall gnash with his teeth, and consume away. §. 12. Feare the Lorde [therefore] yee that bePsalm. 34, 9. his Saints: for nothing vvanteth to them that feare him.
The Lyons doe lacke and suffer hunger,Psal, 34, 10. but they that seeke the Lord, shall want no manner of thing that is good. Neither shall any euill happen vnto theEccl{us}. 33. 1. man that feareth him: but when hee is in tentation, the Lord will deliuer him, and keepe him from harme. For, his eyes are ouer the righteous, and1, Pet, 3, 12, his eares are open vnto theyr prayers. Hee knoweth the dayes of vpright men,Psal, 37, 18, & theyr inheritance shall be perpetuall. §. 13. Hee [also,] preserueth the state of theProu, 2, 7, righteous, & is a shield to them that walke vprightly. They shall not be confounded in thePsal, 37, 19, perrillous time: and in the dayes of famine they shall haue enough. For, his eye is vpon them that feare him,Psalm, 33, 18, 19, and vpon them that trust in his mercy: to deliuer theyr soules from death, & to pre∣serue them in the time of dearth. Yea,] his eyes haue respect vnto themEccl{us}. 34, 16 that loue him: hee is theyr mightie protec∣tion, and strong ground, a defence from the heate, and a shadow for the noone day, a succour from stumbling, and a helpe from falling.
§. 14. They that put theyr trust in him, shallPsal. 125. 1. be euen as the mount Sion, which cannot be remoued; but remaineth stedfast for euer. They shall florish like a Palme tree, andPsal. 92. 12. shall spread abroade like a Cedar in Leba∣non. They shall inherite the land, and dwellPsal, 37, 29, therein for euer. They shall still bring forth fruite in theirPsal, 92. 14. age; and shall be fat and florishing. §. 15. The man that serueth him, shall be ac∣ceptedEccl{us}, 35, 16 with fauour, and his prayer shall reach vnto the clowdes. His prayer shall pierce thorowe theMart. Bucer. clowdes; and preuaile mightily in the pre∣sence of his Maker. That which a wicked man feareth, shallProu, 10, 24 come vpon him, but GOD will grant the desire of the godly. For,] a good man getteth fauour of theProu, 12, 2, Lord, but a man of vvicked imaginations will the Almightie condemne. He respecteth not the speech of vngod∣lyIohn, 9. 31, persons, when they pray vnto him: but if any man be a vvorshipper of him, and
obedient vnto his will, him he will heare. For, as hee himselfe is all goodnes, so lo∣uethPlato. hee all those that loue goodnes: and as hee can haue no euill in himselfe, so can he not away with the workers of iniquitie. §. 16. They that trust in the Lord, shall vnder∣standWisd. 3. 9. the truth, and the faithfull shall re∣maine with him in loue; for grace & mer∣cie is among his Saints, and hee regardeth his elect. His secrete is reuealed to them that fearePsal. 25. 14, him, and his couenaunt to giue them vn∣derstanding. Hee is euer-more mindfull of those men,Theophilact, that make his Word the guide vnto theyr waies; and neuer ceaseth to succour his ser∣uants which (through faith & confidence) continually cleaue vnto him. For, he alwaies loueth them that loue hisLyra. law, and bestoweth many benefites on the man that maketh his cōmaundements his daily meditation. §. 17. Hee highly regardeth euery one that be∣leeuethOrigen. in him; and will in time performe what-soeuer hee hath promised vnto the faithfull.
Hee will most certainly graunt vnto theEuagoras. godly, all things that are needfull for theyr life present. And, at his pleasure, hee will make theVirgilius. penitent to reioyce greatly in his loue and mercie. He will [also] be fauourable to the righ∣teous,Eugenius. in the time of theyr affliction. And be ready to heare the cry of the con∣fidentHillarius. when-soeuer they call vpon him. Yea; before they call, hee will aunswere;Esay. 65. 24. and whiles they speake, [or whiles they are thinking what to speake] hee will heare them. By all vvhich former speeches, most plainly (according to the saying of the Psalmist) it appeareth, That * they whichPsalm, 119. 165. loue the lawe of the Lord, shall haue great prosperitie; and shall haue no hurt. That they vvhich obey and serue him,Iob. 36. 11. shall end theyr dayes in prosperitie, and theyr yeeres in pleasures. And, that the man that is faithfull, shallProu. 28. 20 abound in blessings. §. 18. Taste yee [then] and see, how graciousPsal. 34, 8. the Lord is: blessed is the man that trust∣eth in him.
Yea,] blessed is the man, whose strengthPsal. 84. 5, is in the Lord, and in vvhose hart are the vvayes of God. Blessed is euery one that feareth thePsal, 128, 1. Lord, and walketh in his wayes. For, to them that thinke on good things,Prou. 14. 22. shall be mercie and truth. And, as many as in this world, endeuourPhil. Mel. to liue vprightly, shall after death, be recei∣ued of God into euerlasting glory. §. 19. A booke of remembrance, (saith Mala∣chie,)Mala. 3. 16. is written before the Lord, for all them that feare him, and that thinke vpon his Name. Many sorrowes shall come vnto the vn∣godly;Psal, 32, 10, but hee that trusteth in the Lord, shall be compassed with mercie. He will honour them that honour him:1. Sam, 2, 30 but whosoeuer despiseth him, shall of him be despised. Hee hath alwayes a speciall respect vntoPet. Lomb. the godlie: and will neuer suffer any that serue him, to want theyr reward. For, the righteous Lord, loueth righte∣ousnes,Psalm, 11, 7, his countenaunce doth behold the iust.
VVhen] they cry, hee heareth them; &Psal, 34, 17, deliuereth them out of all theyr troubles. So that theyr hope shall neuer come toGregory. confusion; but prosper, euen in the time of perrill; and lay sure hold on heauen, as the cheefest harbour of theyr perfect hap∣pinesse. §. 20. Hee that walketh in iustice, (saith Esay,)Esay, 33, 15, and speaketh righteous thinges, refusing gaine of oppression, shaking his handes from taking of gifts, stopping his eares from hearing of blood, and shutting his eyes from seeing euill: Hee shall dwell on hie: his defence shallverse, 16. be the munitions of Rocks; breade shall be giuen him; and his waters shall be sure. Hee shall receiue a blessing frō the Lord,Psalm, 24, 5, and righteousnesse from the God of his saluation. For, the Lorde preserueth all them thatPsal, 145. 20 loue him. Hee delighteth in them that feare him.Psal. 147. 11 Hee careth for all those that haue confi∣dence1. Pet. 5. 7, in him. And no good thing will hee with-holdPsal, 84, 11 from them that walke vprightly.
§. 21. Hee that walketh in his integritie, is iust,Prou, 20. 7, (saith Salomon,) and blessed shall his chil∣dren be after him. The path of the righteous, is to declineProu, 16, 17 from euill; and hee keepeth his soule that keepeth his way. The way of the wicked is abhominationProu. 15. 9, vnto the Lord: but he loueth him that fol∣loweth righteousnes. And, better is the poore that walketh inProu. 28, 6. his vprightnes, then he that peruerteth his wayes, though hee be rich. For, there can be no greater gaine, thenBullenger. the good that commeth by godlinesse; nor any sweeter comfort, then the inward so∣lace of an vnpolluted soule. §. 22. The way of the righteous shineth as theProu. 4. 18, light: which shineth more and more, vnto the perfect day. And, vnto them ariseth light in darknes.Psal. 112, 4, Through his religious knowledge andPacuuius. vnderstanding, the godly man shal diuers wayes be helpfull to others: & by his own vertues, hee shall be able to withstand ma∣ny vices.
For, the righteousnes of an vpright man,Prou, 11, 5, ordereth his way. It preserueth him in his life. * And cau∣sethProu. 13. 6 Prou, 14, 32 him to haue hope in his death. It [also] deliuereth from death.Prou, 11, 4, And defendeth the faithfull from eter∣nallPet. Mar. destruction. For, hee that walketh [or continueth toProu, 28, 18 the end] in his vprightnes, shall be saued. And there is no confusion vnto themDan, 3, 40, that put theyr trust in God. §. 23. Doubtlesse, (saith Marlorate,) diuers areMarlorate. the fauours, and many the mercies, which almightie GOD sheweth vnto the godly heere in this life: but most vnspeakeable are the sundry consolations, which through fayth they feele in conscience, at the verie houre of theyr death. Marke (as Dauid saith) the vpright man,Psal. 37, 37 & behold the iust: for the end of that man is peace. And the last houre of his life, is the firstCyrill. houre of his soules entrance into endlesse felicitie. §. 24. Thus much (in effect,) Balaam the lucre∣louing Prophet, could confesse to be true
(vnto the comfort of other men, though hee himselfe walked in the way of wicked∣nes;) when hee saide: * Oh that my souleNum, 23, 10 might die the death of the righteous: and that my last end might be like his. For, as many as in this life, beleeue in Christ, and keepe his doctrine, * they shallIohn, 8, 51. neuer see death. Nor come into condemnation: but haueIohn, 5, 24, [euen as it were alreadie] passed frō death vnto life. They finde by experience, that the true seruice of GOD, giueth inward testimo∣nieMar. Bucer. of eternall saluation vnto theyr soules: vvhere-vnto all worldly wealth is not wor∣thy to be compared: and that the peace of conscience, excelleth al earthly possessions. Death vnto them, is no death; but ratherErasmus. a long-desired releasement from their ma∣ny molestations in this life: & a most plea∣sant passage into the Paradise of GOD. VVhere, with a number, more then may bee numbred, of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Saints, and holy Martyrs, they shall be made partakers of euer-during happinesse: and continue alwayes in the company of Christ Iesus, theyr most mer∣cifull Protector.
VVherfore, if thou desire to prosper inOrigen. thy life, and to speede well at thy death, be∣stow thy studie in the lawe of the Lord, & practise to please him according to his pre∣cepts. For, it is a pleasure full of profit, & a so∣lacePlotinus. voyde of all sorrow, for a man to giue his minde to godly meditation. §. 25. Light, (saith the Psalmist) is sowen forPsal. 97, 11 the righteous; and ioy for the vpright in hart. To euery man that doth good, shall beRom. 2. 10. glory, and honour, and peace. And to the righteous, God will recom∣penceProu. 13, 21 good. For, GOD greatly esteemeth vertuousSocrates. people, though in this worlde they be little set by. For them, are good things created fromEccl{us}, 39, 25 the beginning; and euill thinges for the vvicked. For them, is euerlasting rest and glorie2. Esdr, 8, 59 made ready: but thirst and paine is [long since] prepared of God for the vngodly. Yea, the Lord himselfe hath promised,2. Esdr. 8. 39. that he wil reioyce in the wayes of the righ∣teous; and that hee will remember the pil∣grimage,
the saluation, and the revvard that they shall haue. (For, glorious is the fruite of good la∣bours;Wisd. 3, 15, and the roote of wisedome shal ne∣uer fade away.) §. 26. Theyr first felicitie after this life, is theIust. Mar. sweete rest & quiet peace that their soules possesse in Christ. But the second, shall be the immortalitie and glory, both of theyr body and soule together, at the day of ge∣nerall iudgement: when, with triumphant ioy, they shall (in the sight of all their ene∣mies) receiue openly theyr portion, in the kingdome of perpetuall blessednes. For, they shall liue for euer: their rewardWisd. 5. 15. also is with the Lord, and the most High hath care of them. Therefore shall they receiue a gloriousverse, 16. kingdome, and a beautifull crowne at the Lords hand: for with his right hand shall he couer them, and with his arme shall hee defend them. Their recompence or reward, consistethConstantiu. not onely in Gods grace and fauour to∣wards them during this life; but also in his most mercifull receiuing them into eternall felicitie: and safe preseruing them, frō the
danger of damnation, which is the second death of the vngodly. So that, heauen is not onely the seate ofErasmus. Gods glory, and the habitation of his holie Angels; but it is also the resting place of the faithfull, and the inheritance of all his Saints. §. 27. The certaine truth vvhereof, is further vvitnessed vnto vs, by the words of Christ himselfe: where, among many other peti∣tions made vnto his Father, both for him∣selfe and the faithfull; in the end, hee con∣cludeth his speech with this saying: * Fa∣ther,Iohn, 17, 24 I will that they which thou hast giuen mee, be with mee, euen where I am: that they may beholde my glory vvhich thou hast giuen mee. Also, in another place he sayth: * If anyIohn, 12, 26, man serue mee, let him followe mee: for, where I am, there shall also my seruant be: and who-soeuer serueth mee, him will my Father honour. And, what honour receiued from anieTertullian. Prince in this vvorld, be it neuer so great; is worthy any way to be compared, vnto the least honour, vvhich the seruaunts of GOD shall receiue from theyr Creator
in the kingdome of Heauen? VVhere life shall not be limitted vntoBeda. them by number of monthes or yeeres: nor theyr pleasures appointed at certaine times and seasons: but as God himselfe is without any ending, so shall theyr life be euerlasting: And, as his power endureth perpetually; so shall their pleasures last continually. §. 28. For, it is a thing agreeable to reason, thatMar. Aurel. those men which be good, among so ma∣ny euils in this life, should be greatly ho∣noured with God, after theyr death. And, assuredly it is to be beleeued, thatPlato. all they which in this worlde follow vertue, and liue more godly then other men, shall (after their soule is by the stroke of death departed from theyr body) ascend vp into a purer life; and dwell for euer in the pre∣sence of God. Happy therefore are the righteous: yea,Gueuara. double happy are the righteous. First, for that they shal in this life, be blessed in their labours from GOD, with aboundance of all things necessary for them. Secondly, for that they shall be made partakers of Gods endlesse glory, in the world to come.
§. 29. VVhere, among many other fauours and inestimable delights, from the MakerHemingius. of all things granted vnto them; they shall be permitted, daily to behold, the beautie of all beauties most to bee reioyced in: namely, the vnmeasurable maiestie & ami∣able countenaunce of Almightie GOD, theyr Creator, Father, and Preseruer. According to that sentence of our Saui∣our in the Gospell, where he saith: * Bles∣sedMath. 5. 8. are the pure [or vpright] in hart; for they shall see GOD. Not as wee see nowe; for nowe wee see1. Cor. 12. 13. through a glasse darkly: but then shall vve see face to face. Nowe wee knowe in part, but then shall we knowe, euen as wee are knowne. §. 30. Then [also] shall the iust men shine asMath. 13. 43 the Sunne in the kingdome of theyr Fa∣ther. And they that [in this world] turne ma∣nyDan, 12, 3, to righteousnes, shall shine as the starres for euer and euer. They shall sit also vvith Christ himselfeMath. 19. 28 in his kingdome, vpon twelue thrones, & iudge the twelue Tribes of Israell.
Yea,] they shall iudge the Nations, andWisd. 3, 8, haue dominion ouer the people: & theyr Lord shall raigne for euer-more. §. 31. Then shall the righteous stand in greatWisd. 5. 1. boldnesse, before the face of such as haue dealt extreamely with them, and taken a∣way theyr labours. And vvhen the vngodly see them, theyverse, 2, shall be vexed with horrible feare, & shall stand amazed at theyr wonderfull deliue∣rance. And, changing then theyr mindes, andverse, 3, sighing through inward greefe, they shall say within thēselues: These are they whom wee some-time had in derision and iested vpon. VVee fooles, thought theyr life to beWisd, 5, 4, madnesse, and theyr end to be without ho∣nour. But loe, howe they are counted amongverse, 5, the chyldren of God, and theyr portion is among the Saints! §. 32. Then, (as Anselmus saith,) shall all theAnselmus. whole company or number of the righte∣ous, receiue fully theyr rewarde together from GOD; and they shall euery one of
them be blessed of him, with sundry bles∣sings both in bodie and soule. They shall first and formost, be blessedThe seuerall blessings that the bo∣dies of the faithfull shall receiue in the king∣dome of heauen. According to the say∣ing of An∣selmus. in body, with such wonderfull beauty, that they shall euery way be equall to the Sunne in brightnes and glory. Secondly, they shal be endued with such agilitie or quicknes, that they shall be like vnto the Angels of GOD, in theyr spee∣die moouing. Thirdly, theyr fortitude shall be so suffi∣cient, that no creature what-soeuer, shall be able to withstand theyr strength. Fourthly, theyr libertie shall be so free & secure; that nothing shall haue any power eyther to hinder or resist them. Fiftly, they shall possesse perfect health, vvithout any manner of greefe, or infir∣mitie. Sixtly, they shal be throughly filled with an ineffable delight: and vvholy repleni∣shed, with an vnspeakeable aboundance of inestimable ioy. Yea, euery part and mem∣ber of them, shall be filled with such won∣derful sence and feeling of incomparable pleasure and delight, that the whole man shall quaffe of the riuer of Gods pleasure, and be made drunke vvith the plentie of
ioy vvhich hee shall haue in the House of the Lord. Seauenthly, they shall be blessed vvith such length and perpetuity of life, as shall neuer receiue any end: but cōtinue alwaies in eternall ioy and pleasure: and endure therein euen with GOD himselfe, so long as his life and power lasteth; which can ne∣uer come to conclusion, nor at any time be diminished. §. 33. And, as concerning the soules of theThe seuerall beatitudes of glorified soules in the kingdom of God. Accor∣ding to the saving of Anselmus. righteous, they shal then also, be enriched with as many fauours from GOD as each glorified body hath. The first beatitude which shal be giuen them, is perfect wise∣dome: for, there the soule of euery simple Swaine, shall possesse more knowledge & vnderstanding, then euer did all the Phy∣losophers or greatest Clarkes in this life. The second beatitude or blessednesse of the soule, shal be the true amitie, & vnfay∣ned friendship of one righteous person to another, as members all of one body, whose head is Christ Iesus the Lord. And in that blessed societie, shal neuer be any enuy, ha∣tred, or discorde: but euen as long and as well, as any man in that kingdome dooth
loue himselfe, so long, and so well, shall he loue euery one else, that resteth in the same fellowship with him. Theyr third beatitude, shall be the con∣cord or agreement which then shal rest be∣tweene the body and the soule of euery Saint that disagreed in this life; for they shal then be at peace and vnitie: the body shall will as the soule willeth, and the soule shall desire as the body desireth: so that in all poynts there shall be perfect agreement betweene them. Besides, this concord shal not onely rest betweene the body & soule of euery particuler Saint, but also between the whole congregation of the godly; for they shal will no contrarieties, but all shall will as one willeth, and one shall will as all willeth. Their fourth beatitude, shal be honour: for, almightie GOD shal then fully deli∣uer all his Saints from the filthy vlcers of sinne, many miseries, and infinite infirmi∣ties & passions, where-vnto the corrupti∣on of the flesh made them in this vvorlde daily subiect. Hee shall heale them, & re∣store them to perfect health; & most mer∣cifully adorne them, with the ornament of absolute righteousnes and immortality. He
shall adopt them for his sonnes and chyl∣dren, and shall make them inheritours of his heauenly kingdome, and coheires with his best beloued and onely begotten sonne Christ Iesus. Theyr fift beatitude, shall be power: for the righteous shal then be able to doe what they wil: because they shal haue the Crea∣tor of heauen and earth, agreeable in all things to what-soeuer they desire. Theyr sixt beatitude, shall be securitie: that is, they shal not onely haue power to doe what they wil, and to enioy what plea∣sure soeuer theyr hart desireth; but they shall also be without any feare or doubt of euer losing the same: seeing God which is the giuer thereof, wil neuer alter his mind, nor change his first determination. Theyr seauenth and last beatitude, shall be absolute or perfect ioy: such as no pen can expresse, nor any mortall hart be able to comprehend. For, there shall be thou∣sands of thousands, and more then tenne thousand hundred of thousandes of the righteous, whom no tongue can number, which shall all enioy this heauenly happi∣nesse; and ioy altogether in the same bles∣sednes. And euery one of this blessed cō∣panie,
shall as much reioyce & giue thanks vnto GOD for the felicitie of others, as for himselfe. They shall also aboue all this, [as hath partly before by another Authour beene expressed,] reioyce with an admirable ioy at the onely sight of almightie GOD, in whose presence they shall cōtinually abide, and whose glory they shall alwaies behold. They shall delight in him, more then in themselues: and they shall for euer be be∣loued of him, more then they can loue themselues. They shall abound in all ioy, and be filled there-with both within and without: they shall haue ioy aboue them, and ioy beneath them, and ioy on euerie side, and round about them: so that theyr reioycing shal be incomparable, and theyr felicitie without measure or end. For, as there is no end of Gods greatnes,Augustine. nor number of his wisedome, nor measure of his benignitie: so is there neither end, number, nor measure of his rewards, to∣wards them that loue him, and continue constant in his truth vnto the death. §. 34. Now then, there is no condemnation toRom, 8, 1. them that are in Christ Iesus, which walke
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For, as many as are led by the Spirit ofRom, 8, 14. God, they are the sonnes of God. And if wee be sonnes, then are vve alsoRom, 8, 17, heires; euen the heires of God; & heyres annexed with Christ. And shall, vvith all the righteous and elect of the Lord, (at the day of our Saui∣ours comming to iudgement,) be called to the possession of that kingdome, vvhichMath, 25, 34 was prepared of God for the godly, from the beginning of the world. Or, as Saint Paule saith; * Before theEphe, 1, 4, foundations of the world were layd. Where, the beloued & chosen of God,Eugenius. shall neuer be crost with any moe calami∣ties, nor combred with any more care or greefe: but dwell in euerlasting delight, without dread of danger; & raigne in per∣petuall pleasures, without feare of paine. Where also, they shall hunger no more,Reue. 7. 16. 17. neyther thirst any more: neyther shall the Sunne light on them; neyther any heate. For the Lambe [of GOD, Iesus Christ, theyr Mediatour and Redeemer, vvhich sitteth in his kingdome of glory in the mids of his throne,] shal gouerne them, & shall leade them vnto the liuely Fountaines of
waters; and GOD shall vvipe avvay all teares from theyr eyes. And they shall see his face; & his NameReue. 22. 4, shal be in their fore-heads. And there shall be no more death, ney∣therReue. 21. 4, sorrow, neither crying; neyther shall there bee any more paine: for, the first things are passed away. §. 35. Be glad [therefore,] ô yee righteous, &Psal, 32, 11 reioyce in the Lord: and be ioyfull all yee that are vpright in hart. For, the things which eye hath not seene,1. Cor, 2, 9. neyther eare hath heard, neither haue en∣tred into the hart of man to conceiue, are, which GOD hath prepared for them that loue him. Hee that is righteous, let him be righte∣ousReue, 22, 11 still: and hee that is holy, let him be holy still. And beholde, (saith Christ,) I comeverse, 12, shortly, and my reward is with me, to giue euery man according as his worke shall be.
¶ Of the heauie wrath of GOD against the vngodly, here in this life: with his threatnings, of theyr eternall torments in the world to come. PROVERBS. 11. verse. 19. As righteousnesse leadeth vnto life, so hee that followeth euill, seeketh his owne death. §. 1. FRet not thy selfe, (saith Dauid,) be∣causePsalm, 37, 1, of the vvicked, [or vngodlie,] neither be thou enuious against the euill dooers. For, they shall soone be cut downe likeverse, 2, the grasse, and shal wither away, as dooth the greene hearbe. They are exalted for a little; but shortlyIob, 24, 24, are they gone, and are brought lowe as all others: they are destroyed & cut off, euen as the top of an eare of corne. Though they florish in the world for aCyprian. season, yet is their safety in the same, alwaies most vncertaine: and, when they perswade themselues to be farthest from perrill, then commeth theyr confusion speedily vppon them.
They haue (as the Prophet affirmeth,)Psal. 17, 14, theyr portion in this life. They liue for a time in most prosperousBasill. estate; they enioy vvealth according to their wish, and haue chyldren at theyr de∣sire: they spend whole months in mirth & banquetting, and fill themselues with all varietie of delights: but at vnawares, they end theyr dayes in sorrow; and die without any hope of the felicitie to come. Therefore shal not the wicked be ablePsal, 1, 5, 6, to stand in iudgement, nor sinners in the assemblie of the righteous: for the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous: and the way of the wicked shal perrish. His owne iniquities shal take the wickedProu, 5, 22, 23. himselfe, and hee shal be holden vvith the cordes of his owne sinne. Hee shal die for faute of instruction, & goe astray through his great folly. Lewde things are in his hart: hee imagi∣nethProu, 6, 14, 15, euil at al times, and raiseth vp conten∣tions. Therefore shal his destruction come hastilie vpon him: & he shal be destroyed suddainly, without recouery. §. 2. As for my selfe, (saith Dauid,) my feetePsalm, 73. 2, were almost gone, my steps had wel-neere
slipt. For, I fretted at the foolish, when IPsal, 73, 3, saw the prosperitie of the wicked. For, there are no bandes in theyr death,verse, 4, 5, but they are lustie and strong. They come into no misfortune like other folke, ney∣ther are they plagued like other men. Therefore, pride is as a chayne vnto thē,verse, 6, 7, and crueltie couereth them as a garment. Theyr eyes stand out for fatnes: and they haue more then hart can wish. They trust in their goods, and boastPsal, 49, 6, themselues in the multitude of their riches. They see that wise men die, and also thatPsalm, 49, 10, 11, the ignorant and foolish perrish, and leaue theyr riches for others: Yet they thinke, theyr houses & theyr habitations shall con∣tinue for euer: euen from generation to generation, and call theyr landes by theyr names. Theyr seede [also,] is established in theirIob, 21, 8, sight with them, and theyr generation be∣fore theyr eyes. Theyr houses are peaceable vvithoutverse, 9. feare, and the rodde of God is not vppon them. Theyr Bullocke gendereth, and faylethverse, 10, not: theyr Cowe calueth, and casteth not her calfe.
They sende foorth theyr chyldren byIob, 21, 11, 12, 13, flocks, and theyr sonnes leade the daunce. They beare with them Tabrets & Harps, and haue instruments of musicke at theyr pleasure. They spende their dayes in wel∣thines, and suddainely they goe downe to the graue. They say also vnto God, Depart fromIob, 21, 14, 15, vs: for we desire not the knowledge of thy wayes. VVho is the Almighty, that vvee should serue him? and, what profit should we haue, if we should pray vnto him? They are licentious, and presumptiousPsal, 73, 8, 9, boasters. They sette theyr mouth against heauen: & theyr tongue walketh through the earth. Loe, these are the vvicked: yet prosperPsal, 73, 12, they in the world, and haue riches plenti∣fully in possession. §. 3. Then thought I, (saith the Psalmist) toPsalm, 73, 16, 17, know this; [or to vnderstand the reason of thys matter,] but it was to hard for me▪ vn∣till I went into the Sanctuary of God: then vnderstood I the end of these men. Namely, how the Lord hath sette themverse, 18, in slipperie places, & casteth them downe into desolation.
Oh howe suddainly doe they consume,Psal, 37, 19, perrish, and come to a fearefull end! Euen as a dreame when one awaketh, soverse, 20. shall God make theyr image to vanish out of the Cittie. §. 4. I my selfe (saith hee) haue seene the vn∣godlyPsalm. 37. 35, 36, in great power, and spreading him∣selfe like a greene Bay-tree. Yet he passed away, and lo, hee was gone; and I sought him, but hee could not be found. Therefore yet a little while, and the wic∣kedPsal. 37. 10. shall not appeare: & thou shalt looke after his place, and he shall not be found. Doubtlesse, vvith thine eyes, shalt thouPsal. 91. 8. behold and see the reward of the wicked. For, the Lord hateth all them that workPsalm. 5. 5. iniquitie. And his face is against them that doe e∣uil,Psal, 34, 16, to cut off their remembrance from the earth. §. 5. The vvicked (saith Dauid) practiseth a∣gainstPsal. 37. 12, 13, 14, 15, the iust; & gnasheth vpon him with his teeth: but the Lord shall laugh him to scorne; for hee seeth that his day is com∣ming. Though he haue drawn his sword, and haue bent his bow, to cast downe, the
poore and needy, and to slay such as be of vpright conuersation; yet shall his sworde goe thorow his owne hart, & his bow shal be broken. §. 6. My hart (saith the Prophet) shewethPsal, 36, 1. mee the wickednes of the vngodly: that there is no feare of GOD before his eyes. For, hee flattereth himselfe in his owneverse, 3, 4, eyes, till his abhominable iniquity be found out. The words of his mouth are vnrigh∣teous, and full of deceit: he hath left off to vnderstand and to doe good. Hee imagineth mischiefe vpon his bed:Psal, 36, 5, hee setteth himselfe vpon a way, that is not good, and doth not abhor to doe euill. He is so proude that hee seeketh not forPsal, 10, 4, 5, GOD: hee thinketh alwayes, There is no God. His wayes alway prosper; and the iudgements of the Lord are hie aboue his sight: therefore defieth he all his enemies. He saith in his hart, I shall neuer be mo∣ued,Psal, 10, 6, 7, nor be in any danger. His mouth is ful of cursing, deceit, and fraude: vnder his tongue is misciefe and iniquity. Hee sitteth lurking in the theeuish cor∣nersPsal, 10, 8, 9, of the streets; and in the secrete places doth he priuily murther the innocent. His
eyes are bent against the poore. Hee lyeth in waite secretly: euen as a Lyon, so lur∣keth hee in his denne, that hee may spoyle the poore. And heapes of thē doe fall by his might.Psal, 10, 10, 11. Hee hath [also,] saide in his hart, Tush, God hath forgotten: hee hideth away his face, and will neuer see this. Notwithstanding: God hath seene al hisPsal, 10, 14, dooings. For hee [from whose eyes no se∣crete can be hid,] beholdeth mischiefe and wrong: that hee may take the matter into his hands. And, when hee maketh inquisition forPsal, 9, 12, blood, hee remembreth it; and forgetteth not the complaint of the poore. But vvill recompence the vngodly, ac∣cordingPsal, 94, 23, to theyr vngodlines; and destroy them in theyr owne malice. Yea, the Lord our God shall destroy them. For it is a righteous thing vvith him, to2, Thes. 1, 6, recompence tribulation to them that trou∣ble his seruaunts. §. 7. And though (as Salomon saith,) handProu, 11, 21 ioyne in hand, yet shall not the vngodly escape vnpunished.
But] his mischiefe shall returne vpon hisPsal, 7, 16, owne head; and his crueltie shall fall vpon his owne pate. For the right hand of the Lord, shall not2. Esd. 15. 22 spare the vvicked, neither shall the sworde cease from them, that shed innocent blood vpon the earth. §. 8. Knowest thou not this of old? and sinceIob, 20, 4, 5. GOD placed man vpon the earth, (saith Iob,) that the reioycing of the vvicked is short, and that the ioy of hypocrites is but a moment? Though the excellencie of the vngodlyIob, 20, 6, 7, man mount vp to the heauen, & his head reach vnto the clowdes, yet shall he perrish for euer, like his dung: & they which haue seene him, shall say, VVhere is hee? Hee shall flee away as a dreame, & theyverse, 8, shall not finde him: and shall passe away as a vision of the night. So that the eye which sawe before, shallIob, 20, 9, haue no more sight of him: neither shall his place know him any more. His children shall be faine to agree withverse, 10. 11. the poore: and his hands shall restore his substance. His bones are full of the sinne
of his youth, & it shal lie downe with him in the dust. §. 9. The riches that hee hath deuoured, heeIob, 20. 15, 16, 17. shal pabrake againe: for God shall drawe them out of his belly. He shal suck the gall of Aspes, and the Vipers tongue shall sley him: So that he shall no more see the riuers and brookes of hony and butter. The things that other men haue labou∣redverse, 18, 19, for, he shal restore againe: & shall not eate them vp. Great trauaile shall he make for riches, but he shal not enioy them. And why? hee hath oppressed the poore, and not helped them: houses hath hee spoyled, and not builded them. Surely, hee shal feele no quietnes in hisIob, 20, 20, 21. 22, body: neyther shall hee reserue of that which hee desired. There shal none of his meate [or substance] be left: therfore none shal hope for his goods. When he shall be filled with his abundance, hee shall be in paine; and the hand of all the wicked shall assaile him. (According to that sentence of Erasmus,Erasmus. where hee sayth: It pleaseth GOD many times, to make one wicked man his instru∣ment, to plague another for his iniquitie.)
Hee shall be about to fill his belly, but God shal send vpon him his fierce wrath:Iob. 20, 23, 24, & shal cause his indignation to raigne ouer him: so that if he flee from the yron vvea∣pons, he shal be shot with the steele bow. §. 10. Affliction and anguish shall make himIob, 15, 24, afraide: they shal preuaile against him as a King ready to the battaile. Fearefulnes shal make him afraid on eue∣rieIob. 18. 11, side, and shal driue him to his feete. Though hee dwell in desolate Citties, &Iob. 15, 28, 29, in the houses which no man inhabiteth, but are become heapes of stones, yet shall hee not be rich, neither shall his substance con∣tinue, or increase vpon the earth. All darknes, [or, all feare and sorrowe,]Iob, 20, 26, shall be hidde in his secrete places: the fire that is not blowne shal deuoure him, and that which remaineth in his Tabernacle, shal be destroyed. Hee shal neuer come out of darknesse:Iob. 15, 30, the flame [of Gods anger] shall dry vp his branches: and vvith the blast of Gods mouth hee shall be taken away. The heauen shal declare his wickednes,Iob. 20, 27 28. & the earth shall rise vp against him. The increase [also] of his house shal passe away:
it shall euen perrish & be consumed in the day of the Lords wrath. §. 11. Hee beleeueth not that hee erreth in va∣nitie,Iob. 15, 31, 32, therefore vanitie shall be his recom∣pence. Hee shall perrish before his time be vvorne out; and his branch shall not be greene. God shall destroy him, as the Vine dothverse, 33, her sower grape: and shal cast him off, as the Oliue doth her flower. His light shal be quenched, & the sparkIob, 18, 5, 6. of his fire shal not burne. The light shal be darke in his dwelling, and his candle shall be put out with him. The steps of his strength shall be restrai∣ned,verse. 7. and his owne counsell shall cast him downe. For, his feete are taken as it vvere in aIob. 18. 8. 9. Net, and hee vvalketh vppon dangerous snares. The grenne as he goeth, shall catch him by the heele: and ere hee is aware, the theefe shall come vppon him. §. 12. Hunger shal be his strength, & destruc∣tionIob, 18, 12, 13. shall be ready at his side. It shall de∣uoure the inner parts of his skin, & the first borne of death shall consume his strength.
His hope shal be rooted out of his dwel∣ling;Iob. 18. 14. and shal cause him to go to the King of feare. Feare shal dwell in his house because it isverse, 15. 16. not his: and brimstone shall be scattered vppon his habitation. His rootes shall be dried vp beneath, and aboue, all his bran∣ches shal be cut downe. His remembrance shall perrish from theIob. 18. 17, 18, earth, and hee shall haue no name in the streete. They shall driue him out of the light vnto darknes, and chase him cleane out of the world. Hee shal neyther haue sonne nor Ne∣phewverse. 19. among his people, nor any posteri∣tie left in his dwellings. §. 13. If his chyldren be in great number, theIob. 27. 14, 15, sword shall destroy them: and his posteri∣tie shall not be satisfied with breade. His remnant shal be buried in death, and his widowes shal not weepe. Though hee should heape vp siluer asverse, 16. 17. the dust, and prepare rayment as the clay; hee may prepare it, but the iust shall put it on, and the innocent shal deuide the siluer. His confidence also shall be cut off, andIob. 8, 14. his trust shal be as the house of a Spyder.
He shall leane vpon his house, but it shalIob, 8, 15, not stand: hee shal hold fast by it, yet shall it not endure. Hee shall see with his eyes, his owne de∣structionIob, 21, 20, and misery approching: and hee shall bee made to drinke of the fearefull vvrath of the Almightie. Destruction shall take hold vpon him, asIob, 27, 20, 21, 22, a fierce water flood; & a tempest shall take him away by night. A vehement East∣winde shall carry him hence: and a migh∣tie storme shal pluck him out of his place. It shall rush vpon him, and not spare him, though he would faine flee from the force thereof. This is the portion that the wicked manIob. 27, 13, shall haue from God, and the heritage that tyrants shall receiue of the Almighty. For, the most High hateth the wicked,Eccl{us}, 12, 6. and vvill repay vengeance vnto the vn∣godly: hee also keepeth them, against the day of horrible vengeance. §. 14. In the hand of the Lord, (saith Dauid,)Psal, 75. 8. there is a cup, and the wine therein is red; it is full mixt, and hee powreth out of the same: Surely, all the wicked of the earth,
shall vvring out and drinke the dregges thereof. God shall raine vppon them snares, fire,Psalm, 11, 6, and brimstone, and stormie tempest: thys shal be the portion of their cup to drink. God shal bring them downe, into the pitPsal. 55. 23, of corruption: the blood-thirsty & deceit∣full men, shall not liue halfe their dayes. They shall be euen as stubble before theIob, 21. 18. winde: and as the chaffe that the storme carrieth away. They shall be as the grasse growing vp∣ponPsal, 129, 6, the house toppes, which withereth a∣fore it commeth forth. And, as the whirle-winde that speedilieProu. 10, 25. passeth, so shall the vngodly be no more. For, God will take vengeance on his ad∣uersaries:Nahū. 1, 2, and hee reserueth wrath for his enemies. Hee will surely wounde the head of hisPsal. 68, 21, enemies: and the hearie pate of him that walketh in his sinnes. So that the vngodly, shal haue the yeeresProu. 10. 27 of theyr life diminished. And all the workers of iniquitie shall bePsalm 92. 9. destroyed. They shall be destroyed (as the PsalmistPsal. 92, 7, saith) for euer.
And there shall be no end of plagues to the euill man. §. 15. VVoe vnto them [therfore] that sinne,2, Esdr. 15, 24, 25, and keepe not the commaundements of GOD: for, the Lord himselfe hath pro∣mised, that he will not spare them. VVoe vnto them that imagine iniqui∣tie,Micah, 2, 1. and deuise wickednesse vppon theyr beddes: thinking to performe the same vvhen it is day-light, because their hands haue power. VVoe vnto them that ioyne house toEsay, 5, 8, house; and lay fielde to fielde; till there be no place left by them, for the poore to dwell in. VVoe vnto them that dravve iniquitieEsay, 5, 18, with cordes of vanitie: and sinne as vvith cart ropes. VVoe vnto them that are wise in theyrEsay. 5, 21, owne eyes, & prudent in their own sight. VVoe vnto them that are bounde with2. Esd. 16, 68, theyr sinnes, and couered with theyr ini∣quities, as a fielde is hedged in with bushes, and the path thereof couered with thornes, whereby no man may trauaile. VVoe vnto them that speake good ofEsay, 5, 20, euill, and euill of good: which put darke∣nesse
for light, and light for darkenes: that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sower. VVoe vnto them that excell in gluttonyEsay, 5, 22, 23, and drunkennes: which iustifie the vvic∣ked for a reward, and take away the righ∣teousnes of the righteous from them. For, as the flame of fire deuoureth theEsay. 5. 24. stubble, & as the chaffe is consumed of the flame, so shal theyr roote be as rottennesse, and theyr blossome shall vanish avvay like dust: because they haue cast off the Lawe of the Lord of hostes, and contemned the word of the holie one of Israell. §. 16. There is a way (saith Salomon,) vvhichProu. 14. 12 13. seemeth right to a man: but the issues ther∣of are the wayes of death: Euen in laugh∣ing the hart is sorrowfull, and the ende of that mirth is heauinesse. Doubtlesse, the Wiseman in this speech of his, meaneth the way of worldly plea∣sures. VVhere-into Euagoras. the wicked beeing once entred, they are daily so ledde away vvith the vaine delights thereof: that they neuer regard godlines, till the deceits of iniquitie bring them to destruction. For, the end of all worldly pleasure, isTheophilact. sorrow and paine.
And, the stipend or revvard of sinne,Rom, 6. 23, is death. Not the death of the body onely, for thatRauisius. (as all men knowes) is naturall and ordina∣rie; but the death, both of body and soule, which is endlesse and eternall. §. 17. Through the sundry subtilties of sinne,Origen. and the contempt of Gods law, (saith Ori∣gen,) many thousands in this world, passe after death to perpetuall perdition. And, vvho-soeuer refuseth to followeVirgilius. righteousnesse, shall for his recompence, dwell with confusion. For, destruction shall be to the workersProu. 21. 15 of iniquitie. And the man that wandereth out of theProu, 21, 16 way of wisedome, shall remaine in the con∣gregation of the dead. §. 18. The hart that is obstinate, shall be ladenEccl{us}, 3. 29. with sorrowes: and the wicked man shall heape sinne vpon sinne. Because he hath refused knowledge, heeHosea. 4. 6. shall be refused of the Lord. And, for that he hath left the way of vn∣derstandingGueuara. and life: he shal fal into diuers dangers, by the deceits of false doctrine.
For, errour and darknesse are appoyn∣tedEccl{us}. 11, 16 for sinners. And they that worke wickednes, shal beEccl{us}, 27. 27 wrapped in euils. §. 19. Inquisition, (saith the Wiseman) shall beWisd, 1, 9, made for the thoughts of the vngodly, & the sounde of his wordes shall come vnto God for the correction of his iniquities. The wicked deedes which he hath done,Bernard. shall stand vp to declare against him: and the reward of his vnrighteousnes, shall be powred vppon him. His vnquiet conscience shal be his chie∣festPet. Lomb. accuser: and the sinne of his owne im∣pietie, shall bee most forward to conuict him. §. 20. The vngodly shall be punished accor∣dingWisd. 3. 10. to theyr imaginations for they haue despised the righteous, and forsaken the Lord. They haue thought euill in theyr hartsWisd, 2, 21. 22. against the godly, and haue gone astray through theyr owne folly: for theyr owne wickednesse hath blinded them: and they doe not vnderstand the misteries of God, neither hope they for the reward of righ∣teousnes:
nor can discerne the honour of the soules that are faultlesse. The way that they walke, is as the dark∣nes:Prou. 4. 19, they know not wherein they shal fall. They meete with darknes, euen in theIob. 5. 14. day time: and grope at noone day, as in the night. The hope that they haue, is indignation.Prou. 11, 23 Prou, 13. 21 Psal. 112. 10 * Affliction dooth followe them. * And theyr desire shall perrish. Theyr hope is a false hope. Like vnto the hope of * Siseras mother: vvho plea∣santlyIudges. 5. 28 29. 30. perswaded herselfe, that her Sonne was gorgiously attyred in roabes of needle worke; and very busie (after the battell) in deuiding the spoyles of Israel; when hee lay sencelesly sleeping in * Iaels tent, withIudges. 4. 21 a nayle driuen through his forehead. Or, like the hope of Haman: * WhoEster▪ 6, 6, 7. 8. 9. &c. proudly thought in his hart, that King A∣hashuerosh would doe honour to no man, more then to him: vvhen contrariwise, all the glory which he wisht vnto himselfe, he was cōmaunded to shew vnto Mordeca; (the man, whom aboue all men els he most hated,) and * the euill death, vvhich heeEster. 7, 10. prepared for the same man, was his ovvne latter ending.
§. 21. All iniquitie, (saith Sirach) is as a doubleEccl{us}. 21. 3. edged sword, the wounds whereof cannot be healed. Dishonour, shame, euill death, & dam∣nation,Paius. waite vpon pride, enuie, murther, and such other like vices. And, the match that kindleth againstCicero. vngodly people the fierce wrath of God, is their owne wilful persisting in sinne and iniquitie. For, as theyr harts wexe harder and har∣der,Arnobius. through theyr custome in sinning, & daily more and more impenitent, so they hourely heape vp displeasure vnto them∣selues, against the day of Gods wrath, and the terrible appearing of his iust iudge∣ment. §. 22. Oh howe vnhappy then are the liues ofConstantius. all those men, that leaue vertue to follovve vice; and forsake wisedome, to embrace wickednesse! For they thereby make theyr mindes vn∣aptPlotinu. to receiue any goodnes, and clog theyr consciences vvith many molestations. They liue alwaies doubtfull of their ownPet. Lomb. safetie in the day time: and theyr sleepe is
vnquiet, and full of feares in the night. The morning is euen to them, as theIob. 24. 17. shadow of death. And they buy hell, dearer then goodGregory. men buy heauen. §. 23. They are ready to flee, when none pur∣suethProu. 28, 1. them. And are very often dreading, that somePt. Mart. deserued danger will suddainely fall vpon them. The reason is, for that all wickednes in itOrosius. selfe is full of feare. And the conscience that is touched, dothWisd. 17, 10 alwayes fore-cast cruell things. For, there can be no greater trouble toTremelius. the vngodly in this lyfe, then the inward vexations of their own guiltie conscience. The testimony whereof, is as a thousandMarlorate. witnesses against them: and the doome of it, is euerlasting damnation. Insomuch, that the consciences of theMart. Bucer▪ wicked, which are wounded & ouer-bur∣dened with the weight of sinne, doe most certainly feele, euen in thys world, part of hell torments. And, many times the sting or gnawingErasmus▪ vvorme thereof, enforceth the miserable
offender, cleane to remooue all his con∣fidence from the comfort of Gods mercie, and wretchedly to end his dayes in anguish and desperation. For, saluation is farre from the vngodlie,Psalm. 119. 155, because they seeke not the statutes of the Almightie. But ceaselesse sorrowes, and perpetuallCyprian. paines continually doe attende them: as a iust reward ordained of GOD for theyr loue of vnrighteousnes, & carelesse neg∣lecting the knowledge of his waies. For, they that plow iniquitie, and soweIob. 4. 8. wickednes, shall reape the same. And such as forsake the Lord, shall beeEsay. 1. 28. consumed. §. 24. These few, & many moe such like spee∣ches (to expresse the wrath of God against the wicked) are set downe, not onely in the sacred Scriptures, but also in the works of diuers worthy Writers: which being right∣ly considered, wee may well be mooued at the remembrance thereof, to say with Ori∣gen: * Farre better were it for the vngod∣ly,Origen. that they had neuer beene at all, then to be borne into the world, and not liue as they should doe.
For, besides all the former places to this purpose already recited, wee finde it fur∣ther (to the terrour of the vnrighteous) by seueral sentences affirmed: * That the vn∣godlyWisd. 14. 9. man, and his vngodlines, are both alike hated of God. And that a wicked mans life is his soulesChrisostome. death. That, hee that committeth sinne, is of1. Ioh. 3. 8. the deuill. And the vengeance belonging to theEccl{us}. 7. 17. vnrighteous, is fire and wormes. That, hee which worketh wickednesse,Eccl{us}. 27. 27 shal be wrapped in euills, & shal not know from whence they come vnto him. That, malice shall sley the vngodly man,Psal. 34. 21. and they that hate the righteous, shall per∣rish. That, the congregation of the vvicked,Eccl{us}. 21. 9. is like towe wrapped together, and theyr end is a flame of sire to destroy them. That, the transgression of a wicked man,Prou. 29. 6. is his snare. And he that soweth iniquitie, shall reapeProu. 22. 8. affliction. That, hee which diggeth a pit, shall fallEccl{us}. 27. 26 therein: and he that layeth a snare for ano∣ther, shal be taken in it himselfe.
That, the way of the vngodly, is madeEccl{us}. 21, 10 plaine with stones: but at the end thereof, is hell, darknes, and paines. That, as the dry ground and heate con∣sumeIob. 24. 19, the snow waters, so shal the graue the sinners. That, when the vngodly man dyeth hisProu. 11. 7. hope perrisheth, & the confidence of the wicked shal come to nought. That, although men mourne for theyrEcc{us}. 41. 11. body, yet shall the wicked name of the vn∣godly be put out. That, their portion shall be cursed in theIob. 24. 18. earth. Theyr name shall rotte.Prou. 10, 7. Iob. 8. 22. Prou. 24. 22 Prou. 14, 11 Iob, 24. 20. Theyr dwelling places shal not remaine. Theyr destruction shal come suddenly. Theyr houses shal be destroyed. And they themselues shall be no more remembred. That, hee that is wicked, shall fall in hisProu. 11. 5. owne wickednes. And hee that transgresseth, shall be ta∣kenProu. 11, 6. in the sinne of his transgression. That, the curse of God, is in the habita∣tionProu, 3, 33. of the vngodly. And the vnrighteous mans substanceEccl{us}, 40, 13 shall be dryed vp like a riuer.
That, vvicked men, wanting the feare ofBoetius. GOD, are hunted of euill, to theyr owne ouerthrow and destruction. That, as vnto the good, theyr goodnesseHermes. is a reward, so vnto the wicked theyr owne euill is a punishment. That, the eyes of the wicked shall fayle,Iob, 11, 20, theyr refuge shall perrish, and theyr hope shal be sorrow of minde. That, such as seeke to get wealth by anyPlato. wicked meanes, shall possesse there-with more vnquietnes then profit: and the sub∣stance that by sinne is attained, shall by some misfortune be consumed. That, the robbery of the vnrighteousProu. 21, 7, shall destroy them. And the riches of the vngodly, are laydeProu, 13, 22, vp for thst. That, e Lord will be a swift witnesseMala, 3, 5, against the Southsayers, and against the a∣dulterers, and against false swearers, and a∣gainst those that wrongfully keepe backe the hyrelings wages, and vexe the widow, and the fatherlesse, and oppresse the stran∣ger, and feare not to offend him. That, the vngodly are kept vnto the dayIob, 20, 30, of destruction, and shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.
That, for vnrighteousnes, & other mis∣chieuousSocrates. deedes, the soules of the vngodly shall (after this life) be greeuously tormen∣ted in hell. That, when the vngodly shall say, Peace,1, Thes, 5, 3, and safetie: then shall come vppon them suddaine destruction; as the trauaile vpon a woman vvith childe, and they shall not escape. That, the wicked haue no gaine by theCyprian. death of Christ, but all the benefites (com∣ming to mankinde by his Passion,) vvhich they haue despised: doe most iustly con∣demne them. That, outwardly they receiue the Sacra∣mentAugustine. of Christes body and blood, but the thing it selfe, inwardly in theyr harts, they haue not: and therefore they eate & drink thevr owne iudgement. That, the wicked, [by reason of their vn∣quietEsay, 57, 20, conscience which alwaies tormenteth them,] are like the raging Sea, that cannot rest: whose waters cast vp mire and dyrt. And the Lord himselfe hath said it, thatEsay. 48, 22, there is no peace to the vngodly person. That, the Lord hath made all things forProu, 16, 4, his owne sake: yea, euen the vvicked for the day of euill.
And as] all that is of the earth, shal turneEccl{us}, 41, 10 to earth againe: so the vngodly goe from the curse to destruction. That, as GOD greatly delighteth in theHillarius. louers of his Law; so hee highly contem∣neth the peticions of the disobedient. That, the chyldren of the vngodly, areEccl{us}, 41, 5, abhominable chyldren. And the of-spring of the vnrighteous,Eccl{us}. 40. 15 shall not obtaine many branches. That, God will lay vp the sorrow of theIob, 21, 19, [wicked] father for his children. And the posteritie of the vngodly gene∣rationEccl{us}. 41, 6. shall haue a perpetuall shame. That, if the vnrighteous, happen to liuePet. Ramus. long, theyr sorrowes at theyr death shall be the greater. And according to the number of theyrMar. Buer. sinnes here on earth, such shal be the quan∣titie of theyr punishments in hell. That, as GOD vnto the godly is mostPlotinus. sweet, gentle, and louing: so vnto the wic∣ked, proude, and disobedient; hee is verie seuere, sharpe, and rough: specially appea∣ring and felt for euer vpon them, in the ter∣rible day of damnation and vengeance. That, as euerlasting felicitie doth quick∣lyLactantius. follovv the godly, after the short race of
theyr orldly miserie: so euerlasting wret∣chednes, speedily followeth the vngodly, after the short race of their earthly felicitie. That, all such as for the multitude of theyr sinnes and wickednes are hopelesse,Vincentius. and such as haue committed thefts, mur∣ders, adulteries; or any other the like of∣fences: the iustice of GOD, and theyr owne deserts, damne them after thys lyfe ended, vnto euerlasting destruction; from the which they shall neuer be deliuered. §. 25. VVoe [therefore] be vnto you, ô yeeEcclus, 41, 8. 9. vngodly, which haue forsaken the Law of the most high God; for, though you in∣crease, yet shall you perrish. If ye be borne, ye shall be borne to cursing: if ye die, the curse shal be your portion. For, the fearefull and vnbeleeuing, the abhominable and murtherers, the whore∣mongers,Reue, 21, 8, and sorcerers, the idolaters & all lyers; shall haue theyr part in the Lake vvhich burneth vvith fire and brimstone, which is the second death. VVhere, there shall be weeping & gna∣ningMath, 25, 30 of teeth. VVhere, theyr worme dyeth not, andMark, 9, 44, the fire neuer goeth out.
For, the breath of the Lord, like a RiuerEsay, 30, 33, of brimstone doth kindle it. And the smoake of their torment, shallReue, 14, 11 ascend euermore: and they shall haue no rest, day nor night. §. 26. Good men, (saith Lactantius,) haueLactantius. theyr hell in thys World, that they may knowe there is a heauen after death to re∣ward the vertuous: but wicked men escape torments in this life, because they shal find there is a iudgement to come, wherein all vnrighteous people sha be punished, ac∣cording to the measure of their iniquities. For, eternall death is the reward of allGregory. wickednes; & hell is the place of punish∣ment, which God hath appointed for re∣probates after this life. So that, when the godly shall haue theirPaiu. full entrance and beginning to euerlasting blessednes, and make theyr happy change from mortalitie to immortalitie; and leaue the corruptible drosse of this life, for trea∣sures incorruptible: for golde, glory; for siluer, solace without end; for vaine ap∣parrell, roabes royall; for earthly houses, eternal pallaces; with mirth immeasurable, pleasure without paine, and felicitie end∣lesse:
then also shall the estate of the vvic∣ked be most lamentable; then shall hastilie come vpon them theyr iust reward of ven∣geance; then shall they, with the end of this worlds vaine felicitie, enter into eter∣nall damnation and miserie; then shal they cry, woe, woe, woe, vnto themselues, with endlesse sorrow, for theyr carelesse life, & worldly securitie. §. 27. Then, (saith the Lorde,) shall they haue2, Esdr, 9, 9, pitty of themselues which now haue abu∣sed my waies: and they that haue cast them out despightfully, shall dwell in paines. For, such as in theyr life haue receiued benefites and haue not knowne mee, but2, Esd, 9, 10, 11, 12, haue abhorred my lawes, while they vvere yet in libertie, and when they had yet ley∣sure of amendement, and would not vn∣derstand but despised it; they must be taught it after death by payne. §. 28. Then shal the wicked, [seeing the righ∣teous, whom in this life they contemned, receiued into Gods kingdome, and them∣selues kept out,] be enforced through in∣ward anguish, to breake foorth into this following complaint, saying: * Wee haueWisd, 5. 6,
erred from the way of truth, the light of righteousnes hath not shined vnto vs, and the sunne of vnderstanding rose not vpon vs. We haue wearied our selues in the wayWisd. 5. 7. of wickednes & destruction, and we haue gone through dangerous waies: but as for the way of the Lord, we haue not knowne it. VVhat good hath our pride done vntoWisd, 5, 8, 9 vs? or vvhat profit hath the pompe of ri∣ches brought vs? All those things are pas∣sed away like a shadowe, and as a messen∣ger that rideth post. As a ship that passeth ouer the waues ofverse, 10. the water, which when it is gone by, the trace thereof cannot be found, neyther the path of it in the floods. Or as a byrd that flieth thorow the ayre,verse, 11, and no man can see any token of her pas∣sage, but onely heare the noyse of her winges, beating the light winde, parting the ayre through the vehemencie of her going, and fleeth on shaking her winges, whereas afterward no token of her way can be found. Or as when an arrowe is shot at a mark,verse, 12, it parteth the ayre, which immediatly com∣meth together againe, so that a man cannot
knowe where it went thorowe. Euen so wee, as soone as we were borne,verse, 13, wee began to draw to our end, and haue shewed no token of vertue, but are consu∣med in our owne wickednes. Such words, (saith Salomon) shal they that haue sinned, speake in hell. Where, theyr complaints shall be boote∣lesse,Pet. Mar. and theyr repentance vnprofitable. For, theyr punishment shal be endlesse,Phil. Mel. and theyr paynes vnceaseable. §. 29. And, to the end (saith S. Gregory,) thatGregory. the damned wretches in hell, may be the more seuerely punished, for their obstinacy and wicked deeds done in this world, there shall all the miseries and torments that pos∣sibly may be deuised, be heaped together vpon them. There shal be fire vnquenchable, coldeGregory. intollerable, the worme of conscience that cannot die, and a most horrible stench that cannot be abidden. There shal be palpable darknes, whyps of tormentors, visions of foule fiendes and vglie deuils, confusion of sinnes, and desperation of all goodnes. There, they shal haue teares in their eyes,Fulgentius. gnashing in theyr teeth, stinch in theyr no∣strils,
howling in their mouthes, mourning in theyr throats, terror in their eares, bonds and manicles vpon theyr hands and feete: and eternall fire burning all theyr parts and members. Yea, such a fire, so stored with cruelty & torment, (through the wonderfull heate & vehement strength therof,) that, as S. Au∣gustineAugustine. saith, there is as much difference betweene naturall fire, and the fire of hell, as there is betweene painted fire on a wall, and the ordinary fire which we daily vse. §. 30. Besides; the rigour of their paine in thatBullenger. tormenting fire, shall be so great, that de∣spising life, which all so deerely loue, they shall earnestly desire death, which all men hate, but it shal not come at them, nor neere them. For, all helpe shal be wanting: the gateCassianus. of Gods mercy shall be shut against them: and the righteous, which then shall behold them in their restlesse torments, shall neuer be mooued thereat to any pitty or compas∣sion; but rather reioyce the more at theyr destruction, and greatly giue thankes vnto God, for his vpright iustice shewed vpon them.
Also; that they may bee the more cer∣tainlyGranado. assured, that this horrible fire in hell, shall neuer be quenched, the deuils haue alwayes in charge to blow the same, and to keepe it cōtinually burning: who, as they be immortall, so shall they neuer cease, or be wearie of blowing therein. And though they should be weary, yet isGranado. there the blast of the Almightie and euer∣liuing GOD to maintaine it, which shal neuer be wearie. §. 31. Rightly therefore is hell termed the holdrasmus. of horrour, distresse, and misery: and the Cell of torment, griefe, and vexation. Wherein, nothing els is to be heard, butCassidorus. onely the furious raging of hellish tormen∣tors, and the ruthfull lamentations of dam∣ned persons. Where, all hope of ease and comfort, forGregory. euer is exempted; & no redemption from thence may be expected. For, after the vvhole company of mostAnselmus. miserable damned vvretches, haue there suffered torments both in soule and bodie for their sinnes, as many thousand yeres, as there haue been dayes since the beginning of the vvorld, or as there be drops of water
in the deepest Sea, yet shall they then (not∣withstanding) haue as farre to the ende of theyr punishment, as they had the first day of theyr entrance into those greeuous ca∣lamities. And, as long as Almighty God shall be GOD, which is for euer and euer, world without end, so long shall the wic∣ked burne in the tormenting lake of fire & brimstone, vvithout mittigation of theyr miseries, hope of heauenly fauour, or like∣lihood of any releasement. From the which pit of endlesse perditi∣on, and stinking dungion of eternall dark∣nesse, hee that is the Father of mercies, and God of euerlasting glory, deliuer all those that belong vnto him, for his beloued Sonne Iesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Sauiour. Amen. FINIS. ¶ Behold howe I haue not laboured for my selfe onely, but for all them that seeke vvise∣dome. Ecclus. 24. 39. Vnto God alone, be giuen all praise, honour, & glory.
❧ A necessary Table, of all the speciall matters contained in this Booke. ¶ The seuerall matters handled in the first Discourse. THat the Lord our God, is immor∣tall, inuisible, & euerlasting. page. 1. 2. 3. 4. Of the mightie power of GOD. page. 6. 7. 8. 9. &c. That it belongeth onely vnto GOD to pardon our sinnes. page. 23. 24. 25. Of the wisedome of God. page. 31. Of the knowledge of God. page, 38. That the Lord God knoweth both the godly and vngodly. page. 40. 41. Of the great mercie and louing kindnes of God. page. 43. 44. That the mercy of God, is both generall and speciall. page, 46. Of the iustice of God. page. 53. The iustice of God, deuided by S. Am∣brose into three parts. page, 56. Of three speciall causes, that daily moue men to sinne against God. page, 57. Of the vvayes of God. page. 63. That the wayes of God are to be taken for all manner of his dooings. page, 64.
That the Lorde is righteous in all his wayes. page, 65. That the wayes of God, are not like vn∣to the wayes of man. page, 66. Of the word of God. page, 68, The authoritie of Gods word. page, 70, That Gods word cōtaineth in it al things needfull for our saluation. page, 72 That Gods vvorde is easie to be vnder∣stoode. page, 74, 75, Of the workes of God. 76, 77, That of all the works of God, man is the cheefest. page, 83, Howe man is saide to be the Image of GOD. page, 83, 84 God hath created man, foure seuerall vvayes. page, 84, ¶ The seuerall matters handled in the second Discourse. OF man, & of his naturall inclination. page, 90, 91, 92, &c That, man hath no free-will of himselfe, to doe any thing that is good. page, 97, 98, 99, &c That, mans naturall free-will, reacheth onely but to carnall and worldly matters. page, 100.
Of the shortnes and vncertaintie of mans life. page, 106, Of the many miseries hapning to man in this life. page, 113, The causes why God suffereth man to be so much subiect to misery. page, 121 Of the parting of the soule from the bo∣die, and of the immortalitie thereof. 125, Of the first Iudgement after death. page 132, 133, Of the last Iudgement after death. page 135, 136 Of the vncertaine time of the last Iudge∣ment. page, 142 ¶ The seuerall matters handled in the third discourse. OF Christ. page, 146. That, by him were all things created. page, 147 That, Christ hath all power giuen him, both in heauen and in earth. page, 148 That, Christ is the way, the truth, & the life, vnto the kingdome of heauen. page, 148, 149, That, Christ is both the power of God, and the wisedome of God. page, 150
That, Christ is our wisedome and righ∣teousnes, sanctification, and redemption. &c. page, 150, 151, The seuerall causes of Christes cōming into the world, and the necessity thereof. page, 152, 153, That, Christ came to offer grace vnto all men. page, 152. That, Christ came to fulfill the Lawe, & to make satisfaction vnto his Father for our offences. page, 153 That, Christ came into the world, both true God, and true man. page, 154 That, Christ came downe from heauen to vs, that wee might ascend vp to heauen by him. page, 157 That, Christ came to loose, or destroy the workes of the deuill. page 157 That, Christ came to seeke and to saue that which was lost. page. 157. Of the Passion, Death, Buriall, Resur∣rection, & ascention of our sauiour Christ, according to the Scriptures. page, 158, 159, 160, 161, &c That, Christ was deliuered to death, by the determinate counsell, and fore-know∣ledge of God. page, 165, 166 Of the seuerall benefites which wee haue
by the death, resurrection, and ascention of our Sauiour Christ. page, 172, 173. &c That, Christ by his death, gaue himselfe a raunsome for all men. page, 172 That, Christ was clothed vvith death, that hee might thereby kill death for vs. page, 173 That, Christ by his death, hath destroy∣ed him that had the power of death. 173. That, Christ hath taken on him our in∣firmities, and borne our paines. page. 174 That, Christ hath redeemed vs from the curse of the law, when he was made a curse for vs. page, 176, That, when Christ suffered death in his flesh vpon the Crosse, the God-head and manhood were together. page, 177, Of foure benefites that wee receiue by the death of Christ. page, 177 That, the meanes of our saluation by the death of Christ, are two-fold. 178 That, Christ by his death, hath put out the hand-writing that was against vs, con∣tained in the Law written. page, 178. That, like as Christ by his owne power raised himselfe to life, so by his own power hee is able to raise vp all them that are his members. page▪ 183.
That, the resurrection of Christ, vvas long since prefigured in Adam. 184, That, Christ our Sauiour is ascended in∣to heauen, and sitteth for euer at the right hand of God. page, 185, That, although Christ be absent from vs, as concerning his humanitie, yet hee is alwaies present with vs by the power of his diuinitie. page, 186 That, Christ by his ascention, hath taken sinne, and sathan prisoners. page, 187, That, Christ is ascended to prepare a place for vs in heauen. page, 187, That, Christ being in heauen at the right hand of God, maketh request vnto his Fa∣ther for vs. page, 189 That, although Christ be both GOD and man, yet doth hee not make intercessi∣on for vs, vnto himselfe. page, 197, 198, That, in Christ, and through Christ, we haue all things. page, 198, 199. ¶ The seuerall matters handled in the fourth Discourse. OF Fayth. page, 200. What fayth is. page, 200. The force of faith. page, 201, 202
Onely beleeuing is righteousnes. 210. That, the doctrine of fayth is the orna∣ment of the Law. page, 211, That, a man is iustified by faith, without the workes of the Law. page, 213 Of good workes. page, 213, 214 That, fayth without works, is vaine, page 214, 215, The agreement of the two Apostles, S. Paule, and S. Iames, concerning fayth and workes. page, 215, 216 ¶ Of Feare. page, 227, That, there are two sorts of Feare. page, 217. 218, The difference betweene seruile feare, & filiall feare. page, 218, 219 The worthines of true feare. page, 220, 221, 222. &c. ¶ Of Loue. page, 227, That there are two sorts of Loue. page, 227. 228, The difference between Concupiscence and diuine Loue. page. 227. 228, The worthines of diuine loue, and the sundry effects thereof. page, 228, 229,
¶ The seuerall matters handled in the fift Discourse. WHat the will and desire of GOD is concerning men. page. 240 That, it is the will of God, that all men should be saued. page, 241, Gods desire and willingnes that sinners should repent and amend. page, 242. What true repentance is, & the seuerall parts thereof. page, 248. 249, That, in the worke of true repentance, satisfaction ought to be made three seuerall wayes. page, 251, 252 ¶ The seuerall matters handled in the sixt Discourse. WHat seruice God requireth of man, during this life. page, 264, The seruice which God requireth of vs, is, that vvee keepe his commaundements. page, 264, 265, 266, 267, &c. Of compassion towardes our brethren, and forgiuing one another. page, 280, 281. 282, 283, Of Prayer. page, 228. Of thankes-giuing. page, 293▪
Of Fasting. page, 295, Of Almes-deedes. page, 299, To beware that the almes vvhich wee giue, be of our owne true-gotten goods. page, 306. 307. Of Humilitie. page, 308, That, there be three degrees of humili∣tie. page, 308, Of Obedience. page, 311. 312, ¶ A further Declaration, of our dutie towardes God and our neyghbour. 315. Against Images. page, 315, Against swearing. page, 319, Of sanctifying the Sabaoth day. 321. Of honouring our Parents. page, 322, Against pride. page. 325. Against enuie, hatred, malice, anger, wrath, and murther. page, 330, Against sloth and idlenes, page, 336. Against couetousnes. page, 340, Against vsury. page, 346, Against gluttony. page, 349, Against drunkennesse. page 353, Against adultery and fornication. page, 357, 358, 359, Against stealing, lying, slaundering, fals∣witnes bearing, & coueting another mans
vvealth. page, 363, 364, 365, 366. &c. Against iniustice, wrongfull dealing, & oppressing the poore. page, 368, Against ouer-hastie & rash iudgement. page. 375. Against iustifying our selues, foolish boasting, and ouer-much regarding of o∣ther mens faultes. page. 378. &c Against the following of false-teachers. page. 384 Against the choyse of meates, and diffe∣rence of dayes. page. 387. Against ouer-curious searching, & ad∣ding of any thing to the vvorde of God. page. 392. Against foolish securitie. page. 394 Against the loue of the world. 396. Against euill company keeping. 399. ¶ A breefe collection of certaine other godly precepts and counsels, from page 404. to page 429. ¶ The seuerall matters handled in the seuenth Discourse. OF trouble and affliction, wherby God tryeth his chyldren. page, 429.
The tryall of Abraham. page, 430. The tryall of Tobie. page, 431, The tryals of Dauid. page. 431. The tryals of Iob. page. 432, 433. 434, Of trouble and persecution for the Go∣spels sake. page, 445, &c The example of S. Paules sufferings, & diuers other Saints of God. 455. 456, 457, ¶ The seuerall matters handled in the eyght Discourse. OF the many fauours of God, towards the godly, heere in this lyfe. &c. page 462, 463, 464, &c. The seuerall blessings of glorified bodies in the kingdome of heauen. page, 488. The sundry beatitudes of the soules of Gods Saints, in heauen. page, 489, ¶ The seuerall matters handled in the ninth Discourse. OF the heauie wrath of God against the vngodly heere in thys life. &c. page, 495, 496, 497, &c. The prosperitie of the wicked, & theyr suddaine fall. page, 498, 499.
Theyr seuerall practises against the god∣ly, and the euill successe that followes them in the end. page, 499, 500, &c. The fearefull trouble of conscience that many times molesteth the vnrighteous in this life. page, 515, Of the seuerall torments and perpetuitie of the paines, that the damned shall suffer after this life, in hell. page, 523, 524, 525, 526, 527, &c. FINIS. Nicholas Ling's device N L
