18956 99845834 10760
The .xv. Bookes of P. Ouidius Naso, entytuled Metamorphosis, translated oute of Latin into English meeter, by Ar∣thur Golding Gentleman, A worke very pleasaunt and delectable. With skill, heede, and iudgement, this worke must be read, For else to the Reader it standes in small stead. Imprynted at London, by Willyam Seres.
To the ryght Honorable and his singu∣lar good Lord, Robert Erle of Leycester, Baron of Denbygh, knyght of the most noble order of the Garter. &c. Arthur Gol∣ding Gent. wisheth continuance of health, with prosperous estate and felicitie. AT length my chariot wheele about the mark hath found the way, And at their weery races end, my breathlesse horses stay. The woork is brought too end by which the author did account (And rightly) with eternall fame aboue the starres too mount. For whatsoeuer hath bene writ of auncient tyme in greeke By sundry men dispersedly, and in the latin eke, Of this same dark Philosophie of turned shapes, the same Hath Ouid into one whole masse in this booke brought in frame. Fowre kynd of things in this his worke the Poet dooth conteyne. That nothing vnder heauen dooth ay in stedfast state remayne. And next that nothing perisheth: but that eche substance takes Another shape than that it had. Of theis twoo points he makes The proof by shewing through his woorke the wonderfull exchaunge Of Goddes, men, beasts, and elements, too sundry shapes right straunge, Beginning with creation of the world, and man of slyme, And so proceeding with the turnes that happened till his tyme. Then sheweth he the soule of man from dying to be free, By samples of the noblemen, who for their vertues bee Accounted and canonized for Goddes by heathen men, And by the peynes of Lymbo lake, and blysfull state agen Of spirits in th'Elysian feelds. And though that of theis three He make discourse dispersedly: yit specially they bee Discussed in the latter booke in that oration where He bringeth in Pythagoras disswading men from feare Of death, and preaching abstinence from flesh of liuing things. But as for that opinion which Pythagoras there brings Of soules remouing out of beasts too men, and out of men Too birdes and beasts both wyld and tame, both too and fro agen: It is not too be vnderstand of that same soule whereby Wee are endewd with reason and discretion from on hie: But of that soule or lyfe the which brute beasts as well as wee Enioy. Three sortes of lyfe or soule (for so they termed bee) Are found in things. The first giues powre too thryue, encrease & grow, And this in senselesse herbes and trees and shrubs itself dooth show. The second giueth powre too moue and vse of senses fyue, And this remaynes in brutish beasts, and keepeth them alyue. Both theis are mortall, as the which receyued of the aire By force of Phbus, after death doo thither eft repayre. The third giues vnderstanding, wit, and reason: and the same Is it alonly which with vs of soule dooth beare the name.
And as the second dooth conteine the first: euen so the third Conteyneth both the other twaine. And neyther beast, nor bird, Nor fish, nor herb, nor tree, nor shrub, nor any earthly wyght (Saue only man) can of the same partake the heauenly myght. I graunt that when our breath dooth from our bodies go away, It dooth eftsoones returne too ayre: and of that ayre there may Both bird and beast participate, and wee of theirs likewyse. For whyle wee liue, (the thing itself appeereth to our eyes) Bothe they and wee draw all one breath. But for too deeme or say Our noble soule (which is diuine and permanent for a) Is common too vs with the beasts, I think it nothing lesse Than for too bee a poynt of him that wisdome dooth professe. Of this I am ryght well assurde there is no Christen Wyght That can by fondnesse be so farre seduced from the ryght. And finally hee dooth proceede in shewing that not all That beare the name of men (how strong, feerce, stout, bold, hardy, tall, How wyse, fayre, rych, or hyghly borne, how much renownd by fame, So ere they bee, although on earth of Goddes they beare the name) Are for too be accounted men: but such as vnder awe Of reasons rule continually doo liue in vertues law: And that the rest doo differ nought from beasts, but rather bee Much woorse than beasts, bicause they doo abace theyr owne degree. To naturall philosophye the formest three perteyne, The fowrth too morall: and in all are pitthye, apt and playne Instructions which import the prayse of vertes, and the shame Of vices, with the due rewardes of eyther of the same. ¶As for example,Out of the first booke. in the tale of Daphnee turnd too Bay, A myrror of virginitie appeere vntoo vs may, Which yeelding noyther vntoo feare, nor force, nor flatterye, Doth purchace euerlasting fame and immortalitye. ¶In Phaetons fable vntoo syght the Poet dooth expresseOut of the second. The natures of ambition blynd, and youthfull wilfulnesse. The end whereof is miserie, and bringeth at the last Repentance when it is to late that all redresse is past. And how the weaknesse and the want of wit in magistrate Confoundeth both his common weale and eeke his owne estate. This fable also dooth aduyse all parents and all such As bring vp youth, too take good heede of cockering them too much. It further dooth commende the meane: and willeth too beware Of rash and hasty promises which most pernicious are, And not too bee performed: and in fine it playnly showes What sorrow too the parents and too all the kinred growes By disobedience of the chyld: and in the chyld is ment The disobedient subiect that ageinst his prince is bent. The transformations of the Crow and Rauen doo declare That Clawbacks and Colcariers ought wysely too beware Of whom, too whom, and what they speake. For sore against his will Can any freendly hart abyde too heare reported ill The partie whom he fauoureth. This tale dooth eeke bewray
The rage of wrath and ielozie too haue no kynd of stay: And that lyght credit too reportes in no wyse should be giuen. For feare that men too late too iust repentance should bee driuen. The fable of Ocyroee by all such folk is told As are in serching things too come too curious and too bold. A very good example is describde in Battus tale For couetous people which for gayne doo set theyr toongs too sale. ¶All such as doo in flattring freaks, and hawks, and hownds delyght, And dyce,Out of the iij. and cards, and for too spend the tyme both day and nyght In foule excesse of chamberworke, or too much meate and drink: Uppon the piteous storie of Acteon ought too think. For theis and theyr adherents vsde excessiue are in deede The dogs that dayly doo deuour theyr followers on with speede. Tyresias willes inferior folk in any wyse too shun Too iudge betweene their betters least in perill they doo run. Narcissus is of scornfulnesse and pryde a myrror cleere, Where beawties fading vanitie most playnly may appeere. And Echo in the selfsame tale dooth kyndly represent The lewd behauiour of a bawd, and his due punishment. ¶The piteous tale of Pyramus and Thisbee doth conteineOut of the iiij. The headie force of frentick loue whose end is wo and payne. The snares of Mars and Uenus shew that tyme will bring too lyght The secret sinnes that folk commit in corners or by nyght. Her maphrodite and Salmacis declare that idlenesse Is cheefest nurce and cherisher of all volupteousnesse, And that voluptuous lyfe breedes sin: which linking all toogither Make men too bee effeminate, vnweeldy, weake and lither. ¶Rich Piers daughters turnd too Pies doo openly declare, That none so bold too vaunt themselues as blindest bayardes are.Out of the v. The Muses playnly doo declare ageine a toother syde, That whereas cheefest wisdom is, most meeldnesse dooth abyde. ¶Arachnee may example bee that folk should not contend Ageinst their betters,Out of the vj. nor persist in error too the end. So dooth the tale of Niobee and of her children: and The transformation of the Carles that dwelt in Lycie land, Toogither with the fleing of of piper Marsies skin. The first doo also show that long it is ere God begin Too pay vs for our faults, and that he warnes vs oft before Too leaue our folly: but at length his vengeance striketh sore. And therfore that no Wyght should striue with God in word nor thought Nor deede. But pryde and fond desyre of prayse haue euer wrought Confusion too the parties which accompt of them doo make. For some of such a nature bee that if they once doo take Opinion (be it ryght or wrong) they rather will agree To dye, than seeme to take a foyle: so obstinate they bee. The tale of Tereus, Philomele, and Prognee dooth conteyne That folke are blynd in thyngs that too their proper weale perteyne. And that the man in whom the fyre of furious lust dooth reigne Dooth run too mischeefe like a horse that getteth loose the rene▪
It also shewes the cruell wreake of women in their wrath And that no hainous mischiefe long delay of vengeance hath. And lastly that distresse doth driue a man too looke about And seeke all corners of his wits, what way too wind him out. ¶The good successe of Iason in the land of Colchos,Out of the vij. and The dooings of Medea since, doo giue too vnderstand That nothing is so hard but peyne and trauell doo it win, For fortune euer fauoreth such as boldly doo begin: That women both in helping and in hurting haue no match When they too eyther bend their wits: and how that for too catch An honest meener vnder fayre pretence of frendship, is An easie matter. Also there is warning giuen of this, That men should neuer hastely giue eare too fugitiues, Nor into handes of sorcerers commit their state or lyues. It shewes in fine of stepmoothers the deadly hate in part, And vengeaunce most vnnaturall that was in moothers hart. The deedes of Theseus are a spurre too prowesse, and a glasse▪ How princes sonnes and noblemen their youthfull yeeres should passe. King Minos shewes that kings in hand no wrongfull wars should take▪ And what prouision for the same they should before hand make. King Aeacus giues also there example how that kings Should keepe their promise and their leages aboue all other things. His graue description of the plage and end thereof, expresse The wrath of God on man for sin: and how that nerethelesse He dooth vs spare and multiply ageine for goodmens sakes. The whole discourse of Cephalus and Procris mention makes That maried folke should warely shunne the vyce of iealozie And of suspicion should auoyd all causes vtterly. Reprouing by the way all such as causelesse doo misdeeme The chaste and giltlesse for the deedes of those that faultie seeme. ¶The storie of the daughter of king Nisus setteth outOut of the viij. What wicked lust drues folk vntoo too bring their wills about. And of a rightuous iudge is giuen example in the same, Who for no meede nor frendship will consent too any blame. Wee may perceyue in Dedalus how euery man by kynd Desyres too bee at libertie, and with an earnest mynd Dooth seeke too see his natiue soyle, and how that streight distresse Dooth make men wyse, and sharpes their wits to fynd their own redresse. Wee also lerne by Icarus how good it is too bee In meane estate and not too clymb too hygh, but too agree Too wholsome counsell: for the hyre of disobedience is Repentance when it is too late forthinking things amisse. And Partrich telles that excellence in any thing procures Men enuie, euen among those frendes whom nature most assures. Philemon and his feere are rules of godly pacient lyfe, Of sparing thrift, and mutuall loue betweene the man and wyfe, Of due obedience, of the feare of God, and of reward For good or euill vsage shewd too wandring straungers ward. In Erisicthon dooth appeere a lyuely image both
Of wickednesse and crueltie which any Wyght may lothe, And of the hyre that longs theretoo. He sheweth also playn That whereas prodigalitie and gluttony dooth reigne, A world of riches and of goods are euer with the least Too satisfye the appetite and eye of such a beast ¶In Hercules and Acheloyes encounters is set outOut of the ix. The nature and behauiour of twoo wooers that be stout. Wherein the Poet couertly taunts such as beeing bace Doo seeke by forged pedegrees too seeme of noble race. Who when they doo perceyue no truth vppon their syde too stand, In stead of reason and of ryght vse force and myght of hand. This fable also signifies that valiantnesse of hart Consisteth not in woords, but deedes: and that all slyght and Art Giue place too prowesse. Furthermore in Nessus wee may see What breach of promise commeth too, and how that such as bee Unable for too wreake theyr harmes by force, doo oft deuyse Too wreake themselues by pollicie in farre more cruell wise. And Deyanira dooth declare the force of iealozie Deceyued through too lyght beleef and fond simplicitie. The processe following peinteth out true manlynesse of hart Which yeeldeth neyther vntoo death, too sorrow, greef, nor smart. And finally it shewes that such as liue in true renowne Of vortue heere, haue after death an euerlasting crowne Of glorie. Cawne and Byblis are examples contrarie: The Mayd of most outrageous lust, the man of chasitie. ¶The tenth booke cheefly dooth containe one kynd of argument Reprouing most prodigious lusts of such as haue bene bentOut of the x. Too incest most vnnaturall. And in the latter end It sheweth in Hippomenes how greatly folk offend, That are ingrate for benefis which God or man bestow Uppon them in the time of neede. Moreouer it dooth show That beawty (will they nill they) aye dooth men in daūger throw: And that it is a oolyshnesse too stryue ageinst the thing Which God before determineth too passe in tyme too bring. And last of all Ados death dooth shew that manhod striues Against sorewaning though men see the perill of theyr lyues. ¶The death of Orphey sheweth Gods iust vengeance on the vyle And wicked sort which horribly with incest them defyle.Out of the xj. In Midas of a couetous wretch the image wee may see Whose riches iustly too himself a hellish torment bee, And of a foole whom neyther proof nor warning an amend, Untill he feele the shame and smart that folly doth him send. His Barbour represents all blabs which seeme with chyld too bee Untill that they haue blaazd abrode the things they heare or see. In Ceyx and Alyone appeeres most constant loue, Such as betweene the man and wyfe too bee it dooth behoue. This Ceyx also is a lyght of princely courtesie And bountie toward such whom neede compelleth for too flye. His viage also dooth declare how vainly men are led.
Too vtter perill through fond toyes and fansies in their head. For Idols doubtfull oracles and soothsayres prophecies Doo nothing else but make fooles fayne and blynd their bleared eyes. Dedalions daughter warnes too vse the toong with modestee And not too vaunt with such as are their betters in degree. ¶The seege of Troy,Out of the xij. the death of men, the razing of the citie, And slaughter of king Priams stock without remors of pitie, Which in the xij. and xiij. bookes bee written, doo declare How heynous wilfull periurie and filthie whoredome are In syght of God. The frentick fray betweene the Lapithes and The Centaures is a note wherby is giuen too vnderstand The beastly rage of drunkennesse.Out of the xiij. ¶Ulysses dooth expresse The image of discretion, wit, and great aduisednesse. And Aiax on the other syde doth represent a man Stout, headie, irefull, hault of mynd, and such a one as can Abyde too suffer no repulse. And both of them declare How couetous of glorie and reward mens natures are. And finally it sheweth playne that wisdome dooth preuayle In all attempts and purposes when strength of hand dooth fayle The death of fayre Polyxena dooth shew a princely mynd And firme regard of honor rare engraft in woman kynd. And Polymnestor king of Thrace dooth shew himself to bee A glasse for wretched coutous folke wherein themselues to see This storie further witnesseth that murther crieth ay For vengeance, and itself one tyme or other dooth bewray. The tale of Gyant Polypheme doth euidently proue That nothing is so feerce and wyld, which yeeldeth not to loue. And in the person of the self same Gyant is set out The rude and homely wooing of a country cloyne and lout. ¶The tale of Apes reproues the vyce of wilfull periurie,Out of the xiiij. And willeth people too beware they vse not for too lye. Aeneas going downe too hell dooth shew that vertue may In saufty trauell where it will, and nothing can it stay. The length of lyfe in Sybill dooth declare it is but vayne Too wish long lyfe, syth length of lyfe is also length of payne. The grecian Achemenides dooth lerne vs how we ought Bee thankfull for the benefits that any man hath wrought. And in this Achemenides the Poet dooth expresse The image of exceeding feare in daunger and distresse. What else are Circes witchcrafts and enchauntments than the vyl And silthy pleasures of the flesh which doo our soules defyle? And what is else herbe Moly than the gift of stayednesse And temperance which dooth all fowle concupiscence represse? The tale of Anaxaretee willes dames of hygh degree Too vse their louers courteously how meane so ere they bee. And Iphis lernes inferior folkes too fondly not too set Their loue on such as are too hygh for their estate too get. ¶Alemons sonne declares that men should willingly obayOut of the xv. What God commaundes, and not vppon exceptions seme to stay.
For he will find the meanes too bring the purpose well about, And in their most necessitie dispatch them saufly out Of daunger. The oration of Pithagoras implyes A sum of all the former woorke. What person can deuyse A notabler example of true loue and godlynesse Too ones owne natyue countryward than Cippus dooth expresse? The turning to a blazing starre of Iulius Cesar showes, That fame and immortalitie of vertuous dooing growes. And lastly by examples of Augustus and a few Of other noble princes sonnes the author there dooth shew That noblemen and gentlemen shoulde stryue too passe the fame And vertues of their aunceters, or else too match the same. Theis fables out of euery booke I haue interpreted, Too shew how they and all the rest may stand a man in sted. Not adding ouer curiously the meening of them all, For that were labor infinite, and tediousnesse not small Bothe vntoo your good Lordship and the rest that should them reede Who well myght think I did the bounds of modestie exceede, If I this one epistle should with matters ouercharge Which scarce a booke of many quyres can well conteyne at large. And whereas in interpreting theis few I attribute The things too one, which heathen men to many Gods impute, Concerning mercy, wrath for sin, and other gifts of grace: Described for examples sake in proper tyme and place. Let no man maruell at the same. For though that they as blynd Through vnbeleefe, and led astray through error euen of kynd, Knew not the true eternall God, or if they did him know, Yit did they not acknowledge him, but vaynly did bestow The honor of the maker on the creature: yit it dooth Behoue all vs (who ryghtly are instructed in the sooth) Too thinke and say that God alone is he that rules all things And worketh all in all, as lord of lords and king of kings, With whom there are none other Gods that any sway may beare, No fatall law too bynd him by, no fortune for too feare. For Gods, and fate, and fortune are the termes of heathennesse, If men vsurp them in the sense that Paynims doo expresse. But if wee will reduce their sense too ryght of Christian law, Too signifie three other things theis termes wee well may draw. By Gods wee vnderstand all such as God hath plaast in cheef Estate to punish sin, and for the godly folkes releef. By fate the order which is set and stablished in things By Gods eternal will and word, which in due season brings All matters too their falling out. Which falling out or end (Bicause our curious reason is too weake too comprehend The cause and order of the same, and dooth behold it fall Unwares too vs) by name of chaunce or fortune wee it call. If any man will say theis things may better lerned bee Out of diuine philosohie or scripture, I agree That nothing may in worthinesse with holy writ compare.
Howbeeit so farre foorth as things no whit impeachment are Too vertue and too godlynesse but furtherers of the same, I trust wee may them sauy vse without desert of blame. And yet there are (and those not of the rude and vulgar sort. But such as haue of godlynesse and lerning good report) That thinke the Poets tooke their first occasion of theis things From holy writ as from the well from whence all wisdome springs. What man is he but would suppose the author of this booke The first foundation of his woorke from Moyses wryghtings tooke▪ Not only in effect he dooth with Genesis agree, But also in the order of creation, saue that hee Makes no distinction of the dayes. For what is else at all That shapeless, rude, and pestred heape which Chaos he dooth call, Than euen that vniuersall masse of things which God did make In one whole lump before that ech their proper place did take. Of which the Byble saith that in the first beginning God Made heauen and earth: the earth was waste, and darknesse yit abod Uppon the deepe: which holy wordes declare vntoo vs playne That fyre, ayre, water, and the earth did vndistinct remayne "In one grosse bodie at the first. ¶For God the father that "Made all things, framing out the world according too the plat, "Conceyued euerlastingly in mynd, made first of all "Both heauen and earth vncorporall and such as could not fall "As obiects vnder sense of sight: and also aire lykewyse, "And emptynesse: and for theis twaine apt termes he did deuyse. "He called ayer darknesse: for the ayre by kynd is darke. "And emptynesse by name of depth full aptly he did marke: "For emptynesse is deepe and waste by nature. Ouermor "He formed also bodylesse (as other things before) "The natures both of water and of spirit. And in fyne "The lyght: which beeing made too bee a patterne most diuine "Whereby too forme the fixed starres and wandring planets seuen, "With all the lyghts that afterward should beawtifie the heauen, "Was made by God both bodylesse and of so pure a kynd, "As that it could alonly bee perceyued by the mynd. To thys effect are Philos words. And certainly this same Is it that Poets in their worke confused Chaos name. Not that Gods woorkes at any tyme were pact confusedly Toogither: but bicause no place nor outward shape whereby To shew them too the feeble sense of mans deceytfull syght Was yit appointed vntoo things, vntill that by his myght And wondrous wisdome God in tyme set open too the eye The things that he before all tyme had euerlastingly Decreëd by his prouidence. But let vs further see How Ouids scantlings with the whole true patterne doo agree. The first day by his mighty word (sayth Moyses) God made lyght, The second day the firmament, which heauen or welkin hyght. The third day he did part the earth from sea and made it drie, Commaunding it too beare all kynd of frutes abundantly.
The fowrth day he did make the lyghts of heauen to shyne from hye, And stablished a law in them too rule their courses by. The fifth day he did make the whales and fishes of the deepe, With all the birds and fethered fowles that in the aire doo keepe. The sixth day God made euery beast both wyld and tame, and woormes That creepe on ground according too their seuerall kynds and foormes. And in the image of himself he formed man of clay Too bee the Lord of all his woorkes the very selfsame day. This is the sum of Moyses woords. And Ouid (whether it were By following of the text aright, or that his mynd did beare Him witnesse that there are no Gods but one) dooth playne vphold That God (although he knew him not) was he that did vnfold The former Chaos, putting it in forme and facion new, As may appeere by theis his woordes which vnderneath ensew. "This sryfe did God and nature breake and set in order dew. "The earth from heauen the sea from earth he parted orderly, "And from the thicke and foggie aire he tooke the lyghtsome skye. In theis few lynes he comprehends the whole effect of that Which God did woork the first three dayes about this noble plat. And then by distributions he entreateth by and by More largely of the selfsame things, and paynts them out too eye With all their bounds and furniture: And whereas wee doo fynd The terme of nature ioynd with God: (according too the mynd Of lerned men) by ioyning so, is ment none other thing, But God the Lord of nature who did all in order bring. The distributions beeing doone right lernedly, anon Too shew the other three dayes workes he thus proceedeth on. "The heauenly soyle too Goddes and starres and planets first he gaue "The waters next both fresh and salt he let the fishes haue. "The suttle ayre to flickering fowles and birds he hath assignd, "The earth too beasts both wyld and tame of sundry sorts and kynd. Thus partly in the outward phrase, but more in verie deede, He seemes according too the sense of scripture too proceede. And when he commes to speake of man, he dooth not vainly say (As sum haue written) that he was before all tyme for ay, Ne mencioneth mo Gods than one in making him. But thus He both in sentence and in sense his meening dooth discusse. "Howbeit yit of all this whyle the creature wanting was "Farre more diuine, of nobler mynd, which should the resdew passe "In depth of knowledge, reason, wit and hygh capacitee, "And which of all the resdew should the Lord and ruler bee. "Then eyther he that made the world and things in order set, "Of heauenly seede engendred man: or else the earth as yet "But late before, the seedes thereof as yit hild inwardly. "The which Prometheus tempring streyght with water of the spring, "Did make in likenesse to the Goddes that gouerne euery thing. What other thing meenes Ouid heere by terme of heauenly seede, Than mans immortall sowle, which is diuine, and commes in deede
From heauen, and was inspyrde by God, as Moyses sheweth playne? And whereas of Prometheus he seemes too adde a vayne Deuyce, as though he ment that he had formed man of clay, Although it bee a tale put in for pleasure by the way: Yit by thinterpretation of the name we well may gather, He did include a misterie and secret meening rather. This woord Prometheus signifies a person sage and wyse, Of great foresyght, who headily will nothing enterpryse. It was the name of one that first did images inuent: Of whom the Poets doo report that hee too heauen vp went, And there stole fyre, through which he made his images alyue: And therfore that he formed men the Paynims did contryue. Now when the Poet red perchaunce that God almyghty by His prouidence and by his woord (which euerlastingly Is ay his wisdome) made the world, and also man to beare His image, and too bee the lord of all the things that were Erst made, and that he shaped him of earth or slymy clay: Hee tooke occasion in the way of fabling for too say That wyse Prometheus tempring earth with water of the spring, Did forme it lyke the Gods aboue that gouerne euery thing. Thus may Prometheus seeme too bee theternall woord of God, His wisdom, and his prouidence which formed man of clod. "And where all other things behold the ground with groueling eye: "He gaue too man a stately looke replete with maiesty: "And willd him too behold the heauen with countnance cast on hye, "Too mark and vnderstand what things are in the starrie skye. In theis same woordes, both parts of man the Poet dooth expresse As in a glasse, and giueth vs instruction too addresse Our selues too know our owne estate: as that wee bee not borne Too follow lust, or serue the paunch lyke brutish beasts forlorne, But for too lyft our eyes as well of body as of mynd Too heauen as too our natiue soyle from whence wee haue by kynd Our better part: and by the sight thereof too lerne too know And knowledge him that dwelleth there: and wholly too bestow Our care and trauell too the prayse and glorie of his name Who for the sakes of mortall men crated first the same. Moreouer by the golden age what other thing is ment, Than Adams tyme in Paradyse, who beeing innocent Did lead a blist and happy lyfe vntill that thurrough sin He fell from God? From which tyme foorth all sorrow did begin. The earth accursed for his sake, did neuer after more Yeeld foode without great toyle. Both heate and cold did vexe him sore. Disease of body, care of mynd, with hunger, thirst and neede, Feare, hope, ioy, greefe, and trouble, fell on him and on his seede. And this is termd the siluer age. Next which there did succeede The brazen age, when malice first in peoples harts did breede, Which neuer ceased growing till it did so farre outrage, That nothing but destrucion could the heate thereof asswage For why mens stomackes wexing hard as steele ageinst their God,
Prouoked him from day too day too strike them with his rod. Prowd Gyants also did aryse that with presumptuous wills Heapt wrong on wrong, and sin on sin lyke howge and lofty hilles Whereby they stroue too clmb too heauen and God from thence too draw, In scorning of his holy woord and breaking natures law. For which anon ensewd the slood which ouerflowed all The whole round earth and drowned quyght all creatures great and smal, Excepting feaw that God did saue as seede whereof should grow Another ofspring. All these things the Poet heere dooth show In colour, altring both the names of persons, tyme and place. For where according too the truth of scripture in this cace, The vniuersall flood did fall but sixteene hundred yeeres And sixnd fifty after the creation (as appeeres By reckening of the ages of the fathers) vnder Noy, With whom seuen other persons mo like saufgard did enioy Within the arke, which at the end of one whole yeere did stay Uppon the hilles of Armenie: The Poet following ay The fables of the glorying Greekes (who shamelessely did take The prayse of all things too themselues) in fablyng wyse dooth make It happen in Deualions tyme, who reignd in Thessaly Eyght hundred winters since Noyes flood or therevpon well nye, Bicause that in the reigne of him a myghty flood did fall, That drownde the greater part of Greece, townes, cattell, folk, and all, Saue feaw that by the help of boats atteyned vntoo him, And too the highest of the forkt Parnasos top did swim. And for bycause that hee and his were driuen a whyle to dwell Among the stonny hilles and rocks vntil the water fell, The Poets herevpon did take occasion for too feyne, That he and Pyrrha did repayre mankynd of stones ageyne. So in the sixth booke afterward Amphions harp is sayd The first foundation of the walles of Thebee too haue layd, Bycause that by his cloquence and iustice (which are ment By true accord of harmonie and musicall consent) He gathered intoo Thebee towne, and in due order knit The people that disperst and rude in hilles and rocks did sit. So Orphey in the tenth booke is reported too delyght The sauage beasts, and for too hold the fleeting birds from flyght, Too moue the senselesse stones, and stay swift riuers, and too make The trees too follow after him and for his musick sake Too yeeld him shadow where he went. By which is signifyde That in his doctrine such a force and sweetnesse was implyde, That such as were most wyld, stowre, feerce, hard, witlesse, rude, and bent Ageinst good order, were by him perswaded too relent, And for too bee conformable too liue in reuerent awe Like neybours in a common weale by iustyce vnder law. Considring then of things before reherst the whole effect, I trust there is already shewd sufficient too detect That Poets tooke the ground of all their cheefest fables out Of scripture: which they shadowing with their gloses went about
Too turne the truth too toyes and lyes. And of the selfsame rate Are also theis: Their Phlegeton, their Styx, their blisfull state Of spirits in th'Elysian feelds. Of which the former twayne Seeme counterfetted of the place where damned soules remaine, Which wee call hell. The third dooth seeme too fetch his pedegree From Paradyse which scripture shewes a place of blisse too bee. If Poets then with leesings and with fables shadowed so The certeine truth, what letteth vs too plucke those visers fro Their doings, and too bring ageine the darkened truth too lyght, That all men may behold thereof the cleernesse shining bryght? The readers therefore earnestly admonisht are too bee Too seeke a further meening than the letter giues too se. The trauell ane in that behalf although it haue sum payne Yit makes it double recompence with pleasure and with gayne. With pleasure, for varietie and straungenesse of the things, With gaine, for good instruction which the vnderstanding brings. And if they happening for too meete with any wanton woord Or matter lewd, according as the person dooth aoord In whom the euill is describde, doo feele their myndes thereby Prouokte too vyce and wantonnesse, (as nature commonly Is proe to euill) let them thus imagin in their mynd. Behold, by sent of reason and by perfect syght I fynd A Panther heere, whose peinted cote with yellow spots like gold And pleasant smell allure myne eyes and senses too behold. But well I know his face is grim and feerce, which he dooth hyde Too this intent, that whyle I thus stand gazing on his hyde, He may deuour mee vnbewares. Ne let them more offend At vices in this present woork in lyuely colours pd, Than if that in a chrystall glasse fowle images they found, Resembling folkes fowle visages that stand about it round. For sure theis fables are not put in wryghting too thentent Too further or allure too vyce: but rather this is ment, That men beholding what they bee when vyce dooth reigne in stead Of vertue, should not let their lewd affections haue the head. For as there is no creature more diuine than man as long As reason hath the souereintie and standeth firme and strong: So is there none more beastly, vyle, and deulish, than is hee, If reason giuing ouer, by affection mated bee. The vse of this same booke therfore is this: that euery man (Endeuoring for too know himself as neerly as he can,) (As though he in a chariot sate well ordered,) should direct His mynd by reason in the way of vertue, and correct His feerce affections with the bit of temprance, least perchaunce They taking bridle in the teath lyke wilfull iades doo praunce A way, and headlong carie him to euery filthy pit Of vyce, and drinking of the same defyle his soule with it: Or else doo headlong harrie him vppon the rockes of sin, And ouerthrowing forcibly the chariot he sits in, Doo teare him woorse than euer was Hippolytus the sonne
Of Theseus when he went about his fathers wrath too shun. This worthie worke in which of good examples are so many, This Ortyard of Alcimous in which there wants not any Herb, tree, or frute that may mans vse for health or pleasure serue, This plenteous horne of Acheloy which iustly dooth deserue Too beare the name of treasorie of knowledge, I resent Too your good Lordship once agein not as a member rent Or pared from the resdew of the body any more: But fully now accomplished, desiring you therfore Too let your noble courtesie and fauor counteruayle My faults where Art or eloquence on my behalf dooth fayle. For sure the marke whereat I shoote is neyther wreathes of bay, Nor name of Poet, no nor meede: but cheefly that it may Bee lyked well of you and all the wise and lerned sort, And next that euery wyght that shall haue pleasure for to sport Him in this gardeine, may as well beare wholsome frute away As only on the pleasant owres his rechlesse senses stay. But why seeme I theis doubts too cast, as if that he who tooke With fauor and with gentlenesse a parcell of the booke Would not likewyse accept the whole? or euen as if that they Who doo excell in wisdome and in lerning, would not wey A wyse and lerned woorke aryght? or else as if that I Ought ay too haue a speciall care how all men doo apply My dooings too their owne behoof? as of the former twayne I haue great hope and confidence: so would I also fayne The other should according too good meening find successe: If otherwyse, the fault is theyrs not myne they must confesse. And therefore breefly too conclude, I turne ageine too thee O noble Erle of Leycester, whose lyfe God graunt may bee As long in honor, helth and welth as auncient Nestors was, Or rather as Tithonussis: that all such students as Doo trauell too enrich our toong with knowledge heretofore Not common too our vulgar speech, may dayly more and more Proceede through thy good furtherance and fauor in the same. Too all mens profit and delyght, and thy eternall fame. And that (which is a greater thing) our natyue country may Long tyme enioy thy counsell and thy trauell too her stay. At Barwicke the .xx. of Aprill. 1567. Your good L. most humbly too commaund Arthur Golding.
Too the Reader. I Would not wish the simple sort offended for too bée, When in this booke the heathen names of feyned Godds they sée. The trewe and euerliuing God the Paynims did not knowe: Which caused them the name of Godds on creatures too bestow. For nature beeing once corrupt and knowledge blynded quyght By Adams fall, those little séedes and sparkes of heauenly lyght That did as yit remayne in man, endeuering foorth too burst And wanting grace and powre too growe too that they were at furst, Too superstition did decline: and draue the fearefull mynd, Straunge woorshippes of the liuing God in creatures for too fynd. The which by custome taking roote, and growing so too strength, Through Sathans help possest the hartes of all the world at length. Some woorshipt al the hoste of heauen: some deadmens ghostes & bones: Sum wicked féends: sum wormes & fowles, herbes, fishes, trées & stones. The fyre, the ayre, the sea, the land, and euery roonning brooke, Eche queachie groue, eche cragged cliffe the name of Godhead tooke. The nyght and day, the fléeting howres, the seasons of the yéere, And euery straunge and monstruous thing, for Godds mistaken wéere. There was no vertue, no nor vice: there was no gift of mynd Or bodye, but some God thertoo or Goddesse was assignde. Of health and sicknesse, lyfe and death, of néedinesse and wealth, Of peace and warre, of loue and hate, of murder, craft and stealth, Of bread and wyne, of slouthfull sléepe, and of theyr solemne games, And euery other tryfling toy theyr Goddes did beare the names. And looke how euery man was bent too goodnesse or too ill, He did surmyse his foolish Goddes enclyning too his will. For God perceyuing mannes peruers and wicked will too sinne Did giue him ouer too his lust too sinke or swim therin. By meanes wherof it cam too passe (as in this booke yée sée) That all theyr Goddes with whoordome, theft, or murder blotted bée. Which argues them too bee no Goddes, but woorser in effect Than they whoose open ponishment theyr ooings dooth detect. Whoo séeing Ioue whom heathen folke doo arme with triple fyre In shape of Eagle, ll or swan too winne his foule desyre?
Or grysly Mars theyr God of warre intangled in a net By Venus husband purposely too trappe him warely set? Whoo séeing Saturne eating vp the children he begate? Or Venus dalying wantonly with euery lustie mate? Whoo séeing Iuno play the scold? or Phoebus moorne and rew For losse of her whom in his rage through iealous moode he slew? Or else the suttle Mercurie that beares the charmed rod Conueying neate and hyding them would take him for a God? For if theis faultes in mortall men doo iustly merit blame, What greater madnesse can there bée than too impute the same Too Goddes, whoose natures ought too bee most perfect, pure and bright, Most vertuous, holly, chaast, and wyse, most full of grace and lyght? But as there is no Christen man that can surmyse in mynd That theis or other such are Goddes which are no Goddes by kynd: So would too God there were not now of christen men profest, That worshipt in theyr déedes theis Godds whose names they doo detest. Whoose lawes wée kéepe his thralles wée bée, and he our God indéede. So long is Christ our God as wée in christen lyfe procéede. But if wée yéeld too fleshlye lust, too lucre, or too wrath, Or if that Enuy, Gluttony, or Pryde the maystry hath. Or any other kynd of sinne the thing the which wée serue, Too bée accounted for our God most iustly dooth deserue. Then must wée thinke the learned men that did theis names frequent, Some further things and purposes by those deuises ment. By Ioue and Iuno vnderstand all states of princely port: By Ops and Saturne auncient folke that are of elder sort: By Phoebus yoong and lusty brutes of hand and courage stout: By Mars the valeant men of warre that loue too feight it out: By Pallas and the famous troupe of all the Muses nyne, Such folke as in the sciences and vertuous artes doo shyne. By Mercurie the suttle sort that vse too filch and lye, With théeues, and Merchants whoo too gayne theyr trauell doo applye. By Bacchus all the meaner trades and handycraftes are ment: By Venus such as of the fleshe too filthie lust are bent. By Neptune such as kéepe the seas: By Phebe maydens chast, And Pilgrims such as wandringly theyr tyme in trauell waste.
By Pluto such as delue in mynes, and Ghostes of persones dead: By Vulcane smythes and such as woorke in yron, tynne or lead. By Heat witches, Coniurers, and Necromancers réede: With all such vayne and deulish artes as superstition bréede. By Satyres, Syluanes, Nymphes and Faunes with other such besyde, The playne and simple country folke that euery where abyde. I know theis names too other thinges oft may and must agrée In declaration of the which I will not tedious bée. But leaue them too the Readers will too take in sundry wyse, As matter rysing giueth cause constructions too deuyse. Now when thou readst of God or man, in stone, in beast, or trée It is a myrrour for thy self thyne owne estate too sée. For vnder feyned names of Goddes it was the Poets guyse, The vice and faultes of all estates too taunt in couert wyse. And likewyse too extoll with prayse such things as doo deserue. Obseruing alwayes comlynesse from which they doo not swarue. And as the persone greater is of birth, renowne or fame, The greater euer is his laud, or fouler is his shame. For if the States that on the earth the roome of God supply, Declyne from vertue vntoo vice and liue disorderly, Too Eagles, Tygres, Bulles, and Beares, and other figures straunge Bothe too theyr people and themselues most hurtfull doo they chaunge, And when the people giue themselues too filthie life and synne, What other kinde of shape thereby than filthie can they winne? So was Licaon made a Woolfe: and Ioue became a Bull: The tone for vsing crueltie, the toother for his trull. So was Elpenor and his mates transformed intoo swyne, For following of theyr filthie lust in women and in wyne. Not that they lost theyr manly shape as too the outward showe. But for that in their brutish brestes most beastly lustes did growe. For why this lumpe of flesh and bones this bodie is not wée. Wée are a thing which earthly eyes denyed are too sée. Our soule is wée endewd by God with reason from aboue: Our bodie is but as our house, in which wée woorke and moue. Tone part is common too vs all, with God of heauen himself: The toother common with the beastes, a vyle and stinking pelf.
The one bedect with heauenly giftes and endlesse: toother grosse, Fraylie, filthie, weake, and borne too dye as made of earthly drosse. Now looke how long this clod of clay too reason dooth obey, So long for men by ust desert account our selues wée may. But if wée suffer flshly lustes as lawlesse Lordes too reigne, Than are we beastes, wée are no men, wée haue our name in vaine. And if wée be so drownd in vice that féeling once bée gone, Then may it well of vs bée sayd, wée are a block or stone. This surely did the Poets méene when in such sundry wyse The pleasant tales of turned shapes they studyed too deuyse. There purpose was too profite men, and also too delyght And so too hande euery thing as best might like the sight. For as the Image portrayd out in simple whight and blacke (Though well proportiond, trew and faire) if comly colours lacke, Delyghteth not the eye so much, nor yet contentes the mynde So much as that that shadowed is with colours in his kynde: Euen so a playne and naked tale or storie simply told (Although the matter bée in déede of valewe more than gold) Makes not the hearer so attent too print it in his hart, As when the thing is well declarde, with pleasant termes and art. All which the Poëts knew right well: and for the greater grace, As Persian kings did neuer go abrode with open face, But with some lawne or silken skarf, for reuerence of theyr state: Euen so they following in their woorkes the selfsame trade and rate, Did vnder couert names and termes theyr doctrines so emplye, As that it is ryght darke and hard theyr méening too espye. But béeing found it is more swéete and makes the mynd more glad, Than if a man of tryed gold a treasure gayned had. For as the body hath his ioy in pleasant smelles and syghts: Euen so in knowledge and in artes the mynd as much delights. Wherof aboundant hoordes and heapes in Poets packed béene So hid that (sauing vntoo fewe) they are not too bée séene. And therfore whooso dooth attempt the Poets woorkes too réede, Must bring with him a stayed head and iudgement too procéede. For as there bée most wholsome hestes and precepts too bée found, So are theyr rockes and shallowe shelues too ronne the ship a ground.
Some naughtie persone séeing vyce shewd lyuely in his hew, Dooth take occasion by and by like vices too ensew. Another beeing more seuere than wisdome dooth requyre, Béeholding vice (too outward shewe) exalted in desyre, Condemneth by and by the booke and him that did it make. And willes it too be burnd with fyre for lewd example sake. These persons ouershoote themselues, and other folkes deceyue: Not able of the authors mynd the méening too conceyue. The Authors purpose is too paint and set before our eyes The lyuely Image of the thoughts that in our stomackes ryse. Eche vice and vertue seemes too speake and argue too our face, With such perswasions as they haue theyr dooinges too embrace. And if a wicked persone séeme his vices too exalt, Estéeme not him that wrate the woorke in such defaultes too halt. But rather with an vpryght eye consyder well thy thought: Sée if corrupted nature hane the like within thée wrought. Marke what affection dooth perswade in euery kynd of matter. Iudge if that euen in heynous crymes thy fancy doo not flatter. And were it not for dread of lawe or dread of God aboue, Most men (I feare) would doo the things that fond affections moue. Then take theis woorkes as fragrant flowers most full of pleasant iuce. The which the Bée conueying home may put too wholsome vse: And which the spyder sucking on too poyson may conuert, Through venym spred in all her limbes and natiue in her hart. For too the pure and Godly mynd, are all things pure and cléene, And vntoo such as are corrupt the best corrupted béene: Lyke as the fynest meates and drinkes that can bée made by art In sickly folkes too nourishment of sicknesse doo conuert. And therefore not regarding sch whose dyet is so fyne That nothing can digest with them onlesse it bée deuine, Nor such as too theyr proper harme doo wrest and wring awrye The thinges that too a good intent are written pleasantly, Through Ouids woorke of turned shapes I haue with peinfull pace Past on vntill I had atteynd the end of all my race. And now I haue him made so well acquainted with our oong As that he may in English verse as in his owne bée soong.
Wherein although for pleasant style, I cannot make account, Too match myne author, who in that all other dooth surmount: Yit (gentle Reader) doo I trust my trauell in this cace May purchace fauour in thy sight my dooings too embrace: Considring what a sea of goodes and Iewelles thou shalt fynd, Not more delyghtfull too the eare than frutefull too the mynd. For this doo lerned persons déeme, of Ouids present woorke: That in no one of all his bookes the which he wrate, doo lurke Mo darke and secret misteries, mo counselles wyse and sage, Mo good ensamples, mo reprooues of vyce in youth and age, Mo fyne inuentions too delight, mo matters clerkly knit, No nor more straunge varietie too shew a lerned wit. The high, the lowe: the riche, the poore: the mayster, and the slaue: The mayd, the wife: the man, the chyld: the simple and the braue: The yoong, the old: the good, the bad: the warriour strong and stout: The wyse, the foole: the countrie cloyne: the lerned and the lout: And euery other liuing wight shall in this mirrour sée His whole estate, thoughtes, woordes and déedes expresly shewd too bée. Whereof if more particular examples thou doo craue, In reading the Epistle through thou shalt thy longing haue. Moreouer thou mayst fynd herein descriptions of the tymes: With constellacions of the starres and planettes in theyr clymes: The Sites of Countries, Cities, hilles, seas, forestes, playnes and floods: The natures both of fowles, beastes, wormes, herbes, mettals, stones & woods, And finally what euer thing is straunge and delectable, The same conueyed shall you fynd most featly in some fable. And euen as in a cheyne eche linke within another wynds, And both with that that went before and that that followes binds: So euery tale within this booke dooth séeme too take his ground Of that that was reherst before, and enters in the bound Of that that folowes after it: and euery one giues light Too other: so that whoo so méenes too vnderstand them ryght, Must haue a care as well too know the thing that went before, As that the which he presently desyres too sée so sore. Now too thintent that none haue cause héereafter too complaine Of mee as setter out of things that are but light and vaine,
If any stomacke be so weake as that it cannot brooke, The liuely setting forth of things described in this booke, I giue him counsell too absteine vntill he bée more strong, And for too vse Vlysses feat ageinst the Meremayds song. Or if he néedes will héere and sée and wilfully agrée (Through cause misconstrued) vntoo vice allured for too bée, Then let him also marke the peine that dooth therof ensue, And hold himself content with that that too his fault is due. FINIS.
¶The first booke of Ouids Metamor∣phosis, translated into Eng∣lyshe Meter. OF shapes transformde to bodies straunge, I purpose t entreate, Ye gods vouchsafe (for you are they y•wrought this wōdrous feate) To further this mine enterprise. And from the world begunne, Graunt that my verse may to my time, his course directly runne. Before the Sea and Lande were made, and Heauen that all doth hide. In all the worlde one onely face of nature did abide, Which Chaos hight, a huge rude heape, and nothing else but euen A heauie lump and clottred clod of séedes togither driuen, Of things at strife among themselues, for want of order due. No sunne as yet with lightsome beames the shapelesse world did vew. No Moone in growing did repayre hir hornes with borowed light. Nor yet the earth amiddes the ayre did hang by wondrous slight Iust peysed by hir proper weight. Nor winding in and out Did Amphitrytee with hir armes embrace the earth about. For where was earth, was sea and ayre, so was the earth vnstable. The ayre all darke, the sea likewise to beare a ship vnable. No kinde of thing had proper shape, but ech confounded other. For in one selfe same bodie stroue, the hote and colde togither. The moyst with drie, the soft with hard, the light with things of weight. This strife did God and Nature breake, and set in order streight. The earth from heauen, the sea from earth, he parted orderly, And from the thicke and foggie ayre, he tooke the lightsome skie. Which when he once vnfolded had, and seuered from the blinde And clodded heape. He setting eche from other did them binde In endlesse friendship to agree. The fire most pure and bright, The substance of the heauen it selfe, bicause it was so light Did mount aloft, and set it selfe in highest place of all. The second roume of right to ayre, for lightnesse did befall. The earth more grosse drew down with it eche weighty kinde of matter, And set it selfe in lowest place. Againe, the wauing water Did lastly chalenge for his place, the vtmost coast and bound, Of all the compasse of the earth, to close the stedfast ground. Now when he in this foresaid wise (what God so ere he was)
Had broke and into members put this rude confused masse, Then first bicause in euery part, the earth should equall bée, He made it like a mighty ball, in compasse as we sée. And here and there he cast in seas, to whome he gaue a lawe: To swell with euery blast of winde, and euery stormie flawe. And with their waues continually to beate vpon the shore, Of all the earth within their boundes enclosde by them afore. Moreouer, Springs and mighty Méeres and Lakes he did augment, And flowing streames of crooked brookes in winding bankes he pent. Of which the earth doth drinke vp some, and some with rest lesse race, Do séeke the sea: where finding scope of larger roume and space, In steade of bankes, they beate on shores. He did cōmaund the plaine And champion groundes to stretch out wide: and valleys to remaine Aye vnderneath: and eke the woods to hide them decently With tender leaues: and stonie hilles to lift themselues on hie. And as two Zones doe cut the Heauen vpon the righter side, And other twaine vpon the left likewise the same deuide, The middle in outragious heat excéeding all the rest: Euen so likewise through great foresight to God it séemed best, The earth encluded in the same should so deuided bée, As with the number of the Heauen, hir Zones might full agrée. Of which the middle Zone in heate, the vtmost twaine in colde Excéede so farre, that there to dwell no creature dare be bolde. Betwéene these two so great extremes, two other Zones are fixt, Where temprature of heate and colde indifferently is mixt. Now ouer this doth hang the Ayre, which as it is more sleightie Than earth or water: so againe than fire it is more weightie. There hath he placed mist and cloudes, and for to feare mens mindes, The thunder and the lightning eke, with colde and blustring windes. But yet the maker of the worlde permitteth not alway, The windes to vse the ayre at will. For at this present day, Though ech from other placed be in sundry coasts aside: The violence of their boystrous blasts, things scarsly can abide. They so turmoyle as though they would the world in pieces rende, So cruell is those brothers wrath when that they doe contende. And therefore to the morning graye, the Realme of Nabathie, To Persis and to other lands and countries that doe lie
Farre vnderneath the Morning starre, did Eurus take his flight Likewise the setting of the Sunne, and shutting in of night Belong to Zephyr. And the blasts of blustring Boreas raigne, In Scythia and in other landes set vnder Charles his waine. And vnto Auster doth belong the coast of all the South, Who beareth shoures and rotten mistes, continuall in his month. Aboue all these he set aloft the cleare and lightsome skie, Without all dregs of earthly filth or grossenesse vtterlie. The boundes of things were scarsly yet by him thus pointed out, But that appeared in the heauen, starres glistring all about, Which in the said confused heape had hidden bene before, And to thintent with liuely things eche Region for to store. The heauenly soyle, to Gods and Starres and Planets first he gaue. The waters next both fresh and salt he let the fishes haue. The suttle ayre to flickring fowles and birdes he hath assignde. The earth to beasts both wilde and tame of sundrie sort and kinde. Howbeit yet of all this while, the creature wanting was, Farre more deuine, of nobler minde, which should the residue pase In depth of knowledge, reason, wit, and high capacitie, And which of all the residue should the Lord and ruler bée. Then eyther he that made the worlde, and things in order set, Of heauenly séede engendred Man: or else the earth as yet Yong, lustie, fresh, and in hir floures, and parted from the kie, But late before, the séede thereof as yet held inwardlie. The which Prometheus tempring straight with waer of the spring, Did make in likenesse to the Gods that gouerne euerie thing. And where all other beasts behold the ground with groueling eie, He gaue to Man a stately looke reple with maiestie. And willde him to behold the Heen wyth countnance cast on hie▪ To marke and vnderstand what things were in the starrie skie. And thus the earth which late before had neyther shape nor hew, Did take the noble shape of man, and was transformed new. Then sprang vp first the golden age, which of it selfe maintainde, The truth and right of euery thing vnforst and vnconstrainde. There was no feare of punishment, there was no thrining lawe In brazen tables nayled vp, to éepe the folke inlawe. There was no man would cronch or créepe to Iudge with cap in hand,
They liued safe without a Iudge, in euerie Realme and lande. The loftie Pynetrée was not hewen from mountaines where it stood, In séeking straunge and forren landes, to roue vpon the flood. Men knew none other countries yet, than where themselues did kéepe: There was no towne enclosed yet, with walles and diches déepe. No horne nor trumpet was in vse, no sword nor helmet worne, The worlde was suche, that souldiers helpe might easly be forborne. The fertile earth as yet was frée, vntoucht of spade or plough, And yet it yéelded of it selfe of euery things inough. And men themselues contented well with plaine and simple foode, That on the earth of natures gift without their trauell stoode, Did liue by Raspis, heppes & hawes, by cornelles, plummes and cherries, By sloes and apples, nuttes and peares, and lothsome bramble berries, And by the acornes dropt on ground, from Ioues brode trée in fielde. The Springtime lasted all the yeare, and Zephyr with his milde And gentle blast did cherish things that grew of owne accorde, The ground vntilde, all kinde of fruits did plenteously auorde. No mucke nor tillage was bestowde on leane and barren land, To make the corne of better head, and ranker for to stand. Thē streames ran milke, then streames ran wine, & yellow honny flowde From ech gréene trée whereon the rayes of firie Phebus glowde. But when that into Lymbo once Saturnus being thrust, The rule and charge of all the worlde was vnder Ioue vniust, And that the siluer age came in, more somewhat base than golde, More precious yet than freckled brasse, immediatly the olde And auncient Spring did Ioue abridge, and made therof anon, Foure seasons: Winter, Sommer, Spring, and Autumne of and on. Then first of all began the ayre with feruent heate to swelt. Then Isyeles hung roping downe: then for the colde was felt Men gan to shroud themselues in house. their houses were the thickes, And bushie queaches, hollow caues, or hardels made of stickes. Then first of all were furrowes drawne, and corne was cast in ground. The simple Oxe with sorie sighes, to heauie yoke was bound. Next after this succeded streight, the third and brazen age: More hard of nature, somewhat bent to cruell warres and rage. But yet not wholy past all grace. Of yron is the last In no part good and traetable as former ages past.
For when that of this wicked Age once opened was the veyne Therein all mischief rushed forth. then Fayth and Truth were faine And honest shame to hide their heades: for whom stept stoutly in, Craft, Treason, Uiolence, Enuie, Pride and wicked Lust to win. The shipman hoyst his sailes to wind, whose names he did not knowe: And shippes that erst in toppes of hilles and mountaines had ygrowe, Did leape and daunce on vncouth waues: and men began to bound, With dowles and diches drawen in length the frée and fertile ground, Which was as common as the Ayre and light of Sunne before. Not onely corne and other fruites, for sustnance and for store, Were now exacted of the Earth: but eft thy gan to digge, And in the bowels of the ground vnsaciably to rigge. For Riches coucht and hidden déepe, in places nere to Hell, The spurres and stirrers vnto vice, and foes to doing well. Then hurtfull yron came abrode, then came forth yellow golde, More hurtfull than the yron farre. then came forth battle bolde, That feightes with bothe, and shakes his sword in cruell bloudy hand. Men liue by rauine and by stelth: the wandring guest doth stand In daunger of his host: the host in daunger of his guest: And fathers of their sonne in lawes: yea seldome time doth rest, Betwéene borne brothers such accord and loue as ought to bée. The goodman séekes the goodwiues death, and his againe séekes shée. The stepdames fell their husbandes sonnes, with poyson do assayle. To sée their fathers liue so long the children doe bewayle. All godlynesse lies vnder foote. And Ladie Astrey last Of heauenly vertues, from this earth in slaughter drowned past. And to thintent the earth alone thus should not be opprest, And heauen aboue in slouthfull ease and carelesse quiet rest, ¶Men say that Giantes went about the Realme of Heauen to win To place themselues to raigne as Gods and lawlesse Lordes therein. And hill on hill they heaped vp aloft vnto the skie, Till God almighty from the Heauen did let his thunder flie. The dint whereof the ayrie tops of high Olympus brake, And pressed Pelion violently from vnder Ossa strake. When whelmed in their wicked worke those cursed Catiues lay, The Earth their mother tooke their bloud yet warme and (as they say) Did giue it life. And for bicause some ympes should still remaine
Of that same stocke, she gaue it shape and limmes of men againe. This ofspring eke against the Gods did beare a natiue spight, In slaughter and in doing wrong was all their whole delight. Their déedes declared them of bloud engendred for to bée. The which as soone as Saturns sonne from Heauen aloft did sée, He fetcht a sigh, and therwithall reuoluing in his thought The shamefull act which at a feast Lycaon late had wrought, As yet vnknowne or blowne abrode: He gan thereat to storme And stomacke like an angry Ioue. And therfore to reforme Such haynous actes, he sommonde streight his Court of Parliament, Whereto resorted all the Gods that had their sommons sent. Highe in the Welkin is a way apparant to the sight. In starrie nights, which of his passing whitenesse milkie hight: It is the streete that to the Court and Princely Pallace leades, Of mightie Ioue whose thunderclaps eche liuing creature dreades. On both the sides of this same waye do stand in stately port The sumptuous houses of the Pieres. For all the common sort Dwell scattring here and there abrode: the face of all the skie, The houses of the chiefe estates and Princes doe supplie. And sure and if I may be bolde to speake my fancie frée I take this place of all the Heauen the Pallace for to bée. Now when the Goddes assembled were, and eche had tane his place, Ioue standing vp aloft and leaning on his yuorie Mace, Right dreadfully his bushie lockes did thrise or four times shake. Wherewith he made both Sea and Land & Heauen it self to quake, And afterward in wrathfull wordes his angrie minde thus brake. I neuer was in greater care nor more perplexitie, How to maintaine my soueraigne state and Princelie royaltie, When with their hundreth handes a piece the Addersooted rout, Did practise for to conquere Heauen and for to cast vs out. For though it were a cruell foe: yet did that warre depende Upon one ground, and in one stocke it had his finall ende. But now as farre as any sea about the worlde doth winde, I must destroy both man and beast and all the mortall kinde. I sweare by Styxes hideous streames that run within the ground, All other meanes must first be sought: but when there can be found No helpe to heale a festred sore, it must away be cut,
Least that the partes that yet are sound, in daunger should be put. We haue a number in the worlde that mans estate surmount, Of such whom for their priuate Gods the countrie folkes account, As Satyres, Faunes, and sundry Nymphes, with Siluanes eke beside, That in the woods and hillie grounds continually abide. Whome into Heauen since that as yet we vouch not safe to take, And of the honour of this place copartners for to make, Such landes as to inhabite in, we erst to them assignde, That they should still enioye the same, It is my will and minde? But can you thinke that they in rest and safetie shall remaine? When proud Lycaon laye in waite by secret meanes and traine: To haue confounded me your Lorde, who in my hand doe beare The dreadfull thunder, and of whome euen you doe stand in feare? The house was moued at his words and earnestly requirde, The man that had so traiterously against their Lord conspirde. Euen so when Rebels did arise to stroy the Romane name, By shedding of our Cesars bloud, the horror of the same, Did pierce the heartes of all mankinde, and made the world to quake. Whose feruent zeale in thy behalfe (O August) thou did take, As thankfully as Ioue doth heare the louing care of his. Who beckning to them with his hand, forbiddeth them to hisse. And therewithall through all the house attentiue silence is. Assoone as that his maiestie all muttring had alayde, He brake the silence once againe, and thus vnto them sayde. Let passe this carefull thought of yours: for he that did offende, Hath dearely bought the wicked Act, the which he did entende. Yet shall you heare what was his fault and vengeance for the same. A foule report and infamie vnto our bearing came, Of mischiefe vsed in those times: which wishing all vntrew I did descend in shape of man, th'infamed Earth to vew. It were a processe ouerlong to tell you of the sinne, That did abound in euery place where as I entred in. The brute was lesser than the truth, and partiall in report. The dreadfull dennes of Menalus where sauage beastes resort And Cyllen had I ouerpast, with all the Pynetrées hie, Of cold Lyceus, and from thence I entred by and by The herbroughlesse and cruell house of late Th'arcadian King,
Such time as twilight on the Earth dim darknesse gan to bring. I gaue a signe that God was come, and streight the common sort Deuoutly prayde, whereat Lycaon first did make a sport And after said by open proufe, ere long I minde to sée, If that this wight a mighty God or mortall creature bée. The truth shall trie it selfe: he ment (the sequele did declare) To steale vpon me in the night, and kyll me vnbeware. And yet he was not so content: but went and cut the throte, Of one that laye in hostage there, which was an Epyrote: And part of him he did to rost, and part he did to stewe. Which when it came vpon the borde, forthwith I ouerthrew, The house with iust reuenging fire vpon the owners hed. Who seeing that, slipt out of doores amazde for feare, and fled Into the wilde and desert woods, where being all alone, As he endeuorde (but in vaine) to speake and make his mone, He fell a howling: wherewithall for verie rage and moode He ran me quite out of his wits and waxed furious woode. Still practising his wonted lust of slaughter on the poore And stele cattle, thirsting still for bloud as heretofore. His garments turnde to shackie haire, his armes to rugged pawes: So is he made a rauening Wolfe: whose shape expressely drawes To that the which he was before: his skinne is horie graye, His looke still grim with glaring eyes, and euery kinde of waye, His cruell heart in outward shape doth well it selfe bewraye. Thus was one house destroyed quite. but that one house alone Deserueth not to be destroyde, in all the Earth is none, But that such vice doth raigne therein, as that ye would beleue, That all had sworne and solde themselues to mischiefe vs to greue. And therefore as they all offende: so am I fully bent, That all forthwith (as they deserue) shall haue due punishment. These wordes of Ioue some of the Gods did openly approue, And with their sayings more to wrath his angry courage moue. And some did giue assent by signes. Yet did it grieue them all That such destruction vtterly on all mankinde should fall. Demaunding what he purposed with all the Earth to doe, When that he had all mortall men so cleane destroyde, and whoe On holie Altars afterward should offer frankinsence,
And whother that he were in minde to leae the Earth fro thence To sauage beastes to wast and spoyle, bicause of mans offence. The king of Gods bade cease their thought & questions in that case, And cast the care thereof on him. within a little space, He promist for to frame a newe, an other kinde of men By wondros meanes, vnlike the first to fill the world agen. And now his lightning had he thought on all the earth to throw. But that he feared least the flames perhaps so hie should grow As for to set the Heauen on fire, and burne vp all the skie. He did remember furthermore how that by destinie, A certaine time should one day come, wherein both Sea and Lond And Heauen it selfe shoulde féele the force of Vulans scorching brond▪ So that the huge and goodly worke of all the worlde so wide Should go to wrecke, for doubt whereof forthwith he laide aside His weapons that the Cyclops made, intending to correct, Mans trespasse by a punishment contrary in effect. And namely with incessant showres from heauen ypoured downe, He did determine with himselfe, the mortall kinde to drowne. In Aeölus prison by and by he fettred Boreas fast, With al such winds as chase y• cloudes or breake thē with their blast, And set at large the Southerne winde: who straight with watry wings And dreadfull face as blacke as pitch, forth out of prison flings. His beard hung full of hideous stormes, all dankish was his head, With water streaming downe his haire that on his shoulders shead. His vgly forehead wrinkled was with foggie mistes full thicke, And on his fethers and his breast a stilling dew did sticke. Assoone as he betwéene his hands the hanging cloudes had crusht, With ratling noyse adowne from heauen the raine full sadly gusht. The Rainbow Iunos messenger bedect in sundrie hue, To maintaine moysture in the cloudes, great waters thither drue: The corne was beaten to the grounde, the Tilmans hope of gaine, For which he toyled all the yeare, lay drowned in the raine▪ Ioues indignation and his wrath began to grow so hot. That for to quench the rage thereof, his Heauen suffisde not. His brother Neptune with his waues was faine to doe him ease: Who straight assembling all the streames, that fall into the seas, Said to them standing in his house: Sirs get you home apace,
(You must not looke to haue me vse, long preaching in this case.) Poure out your foree (for so is néede) your heads ech one vnpende, And from your open springs, your streames with flowing waters sende. He had no sooner said the word, but that returning backe, Eche one of them vnlosde his spring, and let his waters slacke. And to the Sea with flowing streames yswolne aboue their bankes, One rolling in anothers necke, they rushed forth by rankes. Himselfe with his threetyned Mace, did lend the earth a blow, That made it shake and open wayes for waters forth to flow. The flouds at randon where they list, through all the fields did stray, Men, beastes, trées, corne, & with their gods, were Churches washt away. If any house were built so strong, against their force to stonde Yet did the water hide the top: and turrts in that ponde Were ouerwhelmde: no difference was betwéene the sea and ground, For all was sea: there was no shore nor landing to be found. Some climbed vp to tops of hils, and some rowde to and fro In Botes, where they not long before, to plough and Cart did go, One ouer corne and tops of townes, whome waues did ouerwhelme, Doth saile in ship, an other sittes a fishing in an Elme. In meddowes gréene were Anchors cast (so fortune did prouide) And crooked ships did shadow vynes, the which the floud did hide. And where but tother day before did féede the hungry ote, The vgly Seales and Porkepisces now to and fro did flote. The Seanymphes wondred vnder waues the townes and groues to ée, And Dolphines playd among the tops and boughes of euery trée. The grim and gréedy Wolfe did swim among the siely shéepe, The Lion and the Tyger fierce were borne vpon the déepe. It booted not the foming Boare his crooked tuskes to whet, The running Hart coulde in the streame by swiftnesse nothing get. The fléeting fowles long hauing sought for land to rest vpon, Into the Sea with werie wings were driuen to fall anon. Th'outragious swelling of the Sea the lesser hillockes drownde, Unwonted waues on highest tops of mountaines did rebownde. The greatest part of men were drownde, and such as scapte the floode, Forlorne with fasting ouerlong did die for want of foode. Against the fieldes of Aonie and Atticke lies a lande, That Phocis hight, a fertile ground while that it was a lande:
But at that time a part of Sea, and euen a champion fielde, Of sodaine waters which the floud by forced rage did yéelde. Where as a hill with forked top the which Parnasus hight, Doth pierce the cloudes and to the starres doth raise his head vpright. When at this hill (for yet the Sea had whelmed all beside) Deucalion and his bedfellow, without all other guide, Arriued in a little Barke immediatly they went, And to the Nymphes of Corycus with full deuout intent Did honor due, and to the Gods to whome that famous hill Was sacred, and to Themis eke in whose most holie will Consisted then the Oracles. In all the world so rounde: A better nor more righteous man could neuer yet be founde Than was Deucalion, nor againe a woman mayde nor wife, That feared God so much as shée, nor led so good a life. When Ioue behelde how all the worlde stoode lyke a plash of raine, And of so many thousand men and women did remaine But one of eche, howbeit those both iust and both deuout, He brake the Cloudes, and did commaund that Boreas with his stout And sturdie blasts should chase the floud, that Earth might see the skie And Heauen the Earth: the Seas also began immediatly Their raging furie for to cease. Their ruler laide awaye His dreadfull Mace, and with his wordes their woodnesse did alaye. He called Tryton to him straight his trumpetter, who stoode In purple robe on shoulder cast, aloft vpon the floode. And bade him take his sounding Trumpe and out of hand to blow Retreat, that all the streames might heare, and rease from thence to flow. He tooke his Trumpet in his hand, hys Trumpet was a shell Of some great Whelke or other she, in facion like a Bell That gathered narrow to the mouth, and as it did descende. Did waxe more wide and writhen still, downe to the nether ende: When that this Trumpe ami the Sea was set to Trytons mouth, He blew so loude that all the streames both East, West, North & South, Might easy heare him blow retreate, and all that heard the sounde Immediatly began to ebbe and draw within their bounde. Then gan the Sea to haue a shore, and brookes to finde a banke, And swelling streames of flowing flouds within hir chanels sanke. Then hils did ise aboue the waes that had them ouerflow,
And as the waters did decrease the ground did séeme to grow. And after long and tedious time the trées did shew their tops All bare, saue that vpon the boughes the mud did hang in knops. The worlde restored was againe, which though Deucalion ioyde Then to beholde: yet forbicause he saw the earth was voyde And silent like a wildernesse, with sad and wéeping eyes And ruthfull voyce he then did speake to Pyrrha in this wise. O sister, O my louing spouse, O sielie woman left, As onely remnant of thy sexe that water hath bereft. Whome Nature first by right of birth hath linked to me fast In that we brothers children bene: and secondly the chast And stedfast bond of lawfull bed: and lastly now of all, The present perils of the time that latelye did befall. On all the Earth from East to West where Phebus shewes his face There is no moe but thou and I of all the mortall race. The Sea hath swallowed all the rest: and scarsly are we sure, That our two liues from dreadfull death in safetie shall endure. For euen as yet the duskie cloudes doe make my heart adrad. Alas poore wretched sielie soule, what heart wouldst thou haue had? To beare these heauie happes, if chaunce had let thée scape alone? Who should haue bene thy cōfort then? who should haue rewd thy mone? Now trust me truly louing wife had thou as now bene drownde, I would haue followed after thee and in the sea bene fownde. Would God I could my fathers Arte, of claye to facion men And giue them life that people might frequent the world agen. Mankinde (alas) doth onely now wythin vs two consist, As mouldes whereby to facion men. For so the Gods doe lyt. And with these words the bitter teares did trickle down their chéeke, Untill at length betweene themselues they did agrée to séeke To God by prayer for his grace, and to demaund his ayde By aunswere of his Oracle. wherein they nothing stayde. But to Cephisus sadly went, whose streame as at that time Began to run within his banes though thicke with muddie ime, Whose sacred liquor straight they tooke and sprinkled with the same Their heads and clothes: and afterward to Themis chappell came, The roofe whereof with cidrie mosse was almost ouergrowne. For since the time the raging floud, the worlde had ouerflowne,
No creature came within the Churche: so that the Altars stood Without one sparke of holie fyre or any sticke of wood. Assoone as that this couple came within the chappell doore, They fell downe flat vpon the ground, and trembling kist the floore. And sayde: if prayer that procéedes from humble heart and minde May in the presence of the Gods, such grace and fauor finde As to appease their worthie wrath, then vouch thou safe to tell (O gentle Themis) how the losse that on our kinde befell, May now eftsoones recouered be, and helpe vs to repaire The world, which drowned vnder waues doth lie in great dispaire. The Goddesse moued with their sute, this answere did them make: Depart you hence: Go hille your heads, and let your garmentes slake, And both of you your Graundames bones behind your shoulders cast. They stoode amazed at these wordes, tyll Pyrrha at the last, Refusing to obey the hest the whych the Goddesse gaue, Brake ilence, and with trembling chéere did méekely pardon craue. For sure she saide she was afraide hir Graundames ghost to hurt By taking vp hir buried bones to throw them in the durt. And with the aunswere here vpon eftsoones in hand they go, The doubtfull wordes wherof they scan and canuas to and fro. Which done, Prometheus sonne began by counsell wise and sage His cousin germanes fearfulnesse thus gently to asswage. Well, eyther in these doubtfull words is hid some misterie, Whereof the Gods permit vs not the meaning to espie, Or questionlesse and if the snce of inward sentence déeme Like as the tenour of the words apparantly doe séeme, It is no breach of godlynesse to doe as God doth bid. I take our Graundame for the earth, the stones within hir hid I take for bones, these are the bones the which are meaned here. Though Titans daughter at this wise coniecture of hir fere Were somewhat moued, yet none of both did stedfast credit geue, So hardly could they in their heartes the heauenly hestes beleue. But what and if they made a proufe? what harme could come therby? They went their wayes and veild their heades, and did their cotes vntie. And at their backes did throw the stones by name of bones foretolde. The stones (who would beleue the thing, but that the time of olde Reportes it for a stedfast truth?) of nature tough and harde,
Began to warre both soft and smothe: and shortly afterwarde To winne therwith a better shape: and as they did encrease, A mylder nature in them grew, and rudenesse gan to cease. For at the first their shape was such, as in a certaine sort Resembled man, but of the right and perfect shape came short. Euen like to Marble ymages new drawne and roughly wrought, Before the Caruer by his Arte to purpose hath them brought. Such partes of them where any iuice or moysture did abound, Or else were earthie, turned to flesh: and such as were so sound, And harde as would not bow nor bende did turne to bones: againe The part that was a veyne before, doth still his name retaine. Thus by the mightie powre of God ere lenger time was past, The mankinde was restorde by stones, the which a man did cast. And likewise also by the stones the which a woman threw, The womankinde repayred was and made againe of new. Of these are we the crooked ympes, and stonie race in déede, Bewraying by our oyling life, from whence we doe procéede. The lustie earth of owne accorde soone after forth did bring, According to their sundrie shapes eche other liuing thing. Assoone as that the moysture once caught heate against the Sunne, And that the fat and slimie mud in moorish groundes begunne, To swell through warmth of Phebus beames, and that the fruitfull séede Of things well cherisht in the fat and liuely soyle in déede, As in their mothers wombe, began in length of time to grow, To one or other kinde of shape wherein themselues to show. Euen so when that seuen mouthed Nile the watrie fieldes forsooke▪ And to his auncient chanell eft his bridled streames betooke. So that the Sunne did heate the mud, the which he left behinde, The husbandmen that tilde the ground, among the cloddes did finde, Of sundrie creatures sundrie shapes: of which they spied some, Euen in the instant of their birth but newly then begone. And some vnperfect wanting brest or shoulders in such wise, That in one bodie oftentimes appeared to the eyes One halfe thereof aliue to be, and all the rest beside Both voyde of life and séemely shape, starke earth to still abide. For when that moysture with the heate is tempred equally, They doe conceyue▪ and of them twaine engender by and by
All kinde of things. For though that fire with water aye debateth Yet moysture mixt with equall heate all liuing things createth. And so those discordes in their kinde, one striuing with the other, In generation doe agrée and make one perfect mother. And therfore when the mirie earth bespred with slimie mud, Brought ouer all but late before by violence of the flud, Caught heate by warmnesse of the Sunne, and culmenesse of the skie, Things out of number in the worlde, forthwith it did applie. Whereof in part the like before in former times had bene, And some so straunge and ougly shapes as neuer erst were sene. In that she did such Monsters bréede, was greatly to hir woe, But yet thou ougly Python wert engendred by hir thoe. A terror to the new made folke, which neuer erst had knowne So foule a Dragon in their life, so monstrously foregrowne, So great a ground thy poyson paunch did vnderneath thée hide. The God of shooting who no where before that present tide Those kinde of weapons put in vre, but at the speckled Deare, Or at the Roes so wight of foote, a thousand shaftes well neare, Did on that hideous serpent spende, of which there was not one, But forced forth the venimd bloud along his sides to gone. So that his quiuer almost voyde, he nailde him to the grounde, And did him nobly at the last by force of shot confounde. And least that time might of this worke deface the worthy fame, He did ordeyne in minde thereof a great and solemne game, Which of the serpent that he slue of Pythians bare the name. Where who so could the maistrie winne in feates of strength or sleight Of hande or foote or rolling whéele, might claime to haue of right, An Oken garland fresh and braue. There was not any wheare As yet a Bay, by meanes whereof was Phebus faine to weare The leaues of euery pleasant trée about his golden heare. Peneian Daphne was the first where Phebus set his loue, Which not blind chaunce but Cupids fierce & cruel wrath did moue. The Delian God but late before surprisde with passing pride: For killing of the monstrous worme, the God of loue espide, With bowe in hand already bent and letting arrowes go: To whome he sayd, and what hast thou thou wanton baby so With warlike weapons for to toy? It were a better sight,
To sée this kinde of furniture on our two shoulders bright: Who when we list with stedfast hand both man and beast can wound, Who tother day wyth arrowes kéene, haue nayled to the ground, The serpent Python so forswolne, whose filthie wombe did hide So many acres of the grounde in which he did abide. Content thy selfe sonne, sorie loues to kindle with thy brand, For these our prayses to attaine thou must not take in hand. To him quoth Venus sonne againe, well Phebus I agree Thy bow to shoote at euery beast, and so shall mine at thée. And looke how far that vnder God eche beast is put by kinde, So much thy glorie lesse than ours in shooting shalt thou finde. This saide, with drift of fethered wings in broken ayre he flue, And to the forkt and shadie top of Mount Parnasus drue. There from hys quiuer full of shafts two arrowes did he take Of sundrie workes: tone causeth Loue, the tother doth it slake. That causeth loue, is all of golde with point full sharpe and bright, That chaseth loue is blunt, whose stéele with leaden head is dight. The God this fixed in the Nymph Peneis for the nones The tother perst Apollos heart and ouerraft his bones. Immediatly in smoldring heat of Loue the tone did swelt, Againe the tother in hir heart no sparke nor motion felt. In woods and forrests is hir ioy, the sauage beasts to chase, And as the price of all hir pain to take the skinne and case. Unwedded Phebe doth she haunt and follow as hir guide, Unordred doe hir tresses waue scarce in a fillet tide. Full many a wooer sought hir loue, she lothing all the rout, Impacient and without a man walkes all the woods about. And as for Hymen, or for loue, and wedlocke often sought She tooke no care, they were the furthest end of all hir thought. Hir father many a time and oft would saye, my daughter déere Thow owest me a sonneinlaw to be thy lawfull féere. Hir father many a time and oft would say my daughter deere, Of Nephewes thou my debtour art, their Graundsires heart to chéere. She hating as a haynous crime the bonde of bridely ed Demurely casting downe hir eyes, and blushing somwhat red, Did folde about hir fathers necke with auning armes: and sed, Deare father graunt me while I liue my maidenhead for to haue,
As to Diana here tofore hir father fréely gaue. Thy father (Daphne) could consent to that thou doest require, But that thy beautie and thy forme impugne thy chaste desire: So that thy will and his consent are nothing in this case, By reason of the beautie bright that shineth in thy face. Apollo loues and longs to haue this Daphne to his Féere, And as he longs he hopes, but his foredoomes doe fayle him there. And as light hame when corne is reapt, or hedges burne with brandes, That passers by when day drawes néere throwe loosely fro their handes, So into flames the God is gone and burneth in his brest And féedes his vaine and barraine loue in hoping for the best. Hir haire vnkembd about hir necke downe flaring did he sée O Lord and were they trimd (quoth he) how séemely would she bée? He sées hir eyes as bright as fire the starres to represent, He sées hir mouth which to haue séene he holdes him not content. Hir lillie armes mid part and more aboue the elbow bare, Hir handes, hir fingers and hir wrystes, him thought of beautie rare. And sure he thought such other parts as garments then did hyde, Excelled greatly all the rest the which he had espyed. But swifter than the whyrling winde shée flées and will not stay, To giue the hearing to these wordes the which he had to say. I pray thée Nymph Penaeis stay I chase not as a fo: Stay Nymph: the Lambes so flée y• Wolues, the Stags y• Lions so. With flittring feathers ielie Doues so from the Gossehauke flie, And euery creature from his foe. Loue is the cause that I Do followe thée: alas alas how would it grieue my heart, To sée thée fall among the briers, and that the bloud should start, Out of thy tender legges, I wretch the causer of thy smart, The place is rough to which thou runst, take leysure I thée pray, Abate thy flight, and I my selfe my running pace will stay. Yet would I wishe thée take aduise, and wisely for to viewe What one he is that for thy grace in humble wise doth sewe. I am not one that dwelles among the hilles and stonie rockes, I am no shéepehearde with a Curre, attending on the flockes: I am no Carle nor countrie Clwne, nor neathearde taking charge Of cattle grazing here and there within this Forrest large. Thou doest not know poore simple soule, God wote thou dost nor knowe▪
From whome thou fléest▪ For If thou knew, thou wouldste not flée me so. In Delphos is my chiefe abode, my Temples also stande At Glaros and at Patara within the Lycian lande. And in the Ile of Tenedos the people honour mée. The king of Gods himselfe is knowne my father for to bée. By me is knowne that was, that is, and that that shall ensue, By mée men learne to sundrie tunes to frame swéete ditties true▪ In shooting haue I stedfast hand, but sured hand had hée That made this wound within my heart that heretofore was frée. Of Phisicke and of surgerie I found the Artes for néede The powre of euerie herbe and plant doth of my gift procéede. Nowe wo is me that neare an herbe can heale the hurt of loue And that the Artes that others helpe their Lord doth helpelesse proue. As Phoebus would haue spoken more, away Penaeis stale With fearefull steppes, and left him in the midst of all his tale. And as she ran the méeting windes hir garments backewarde blue, So that hir naked skinne apearde behinde hir as she flue, Hir goodly yellowe golden haire that hanged loose and slacke, With euery puffe of ayre did waue and tosse behinde hir backe. Hir running made hir séeme more fayre, the youthfull God therefore Coulde not abyde to waste his wordes in dalyance any more. But as his loue aduysed him he gan to mende his pace, And with the better foote before the fléeing Nymph to chace. And euen as when the gréedie Grewnde doth course the sielie Hare, Amiddes the plaine and champion fielde without all couert bare, Both twaine of them doe straine themselues and lay on footemanship, Who may best runne with all his force the tother to outstrip, The tone for safetie of his lyfe, the tother for his pray, The Grewnde aye prest with open mouth to beare the Hare away, Thrusts forth his snoute and gyrdeth out and at hir loynes doth snatch, As though he would at euerie stride betwéene his téeth hir latch: Againe in doubt of being caught the Hare aye shrinking slips, Upon the sodaine from his Iawes, and from betwéene his lips: So farde Apollo and the Mayde: hope made Apollo swift, And feare did make the Mayden fléete deuising how to shift. Howebeit he that did pursue of both the swifter went, As furthred by the feathred wings that Cupid had him lent.
So that he would not let hir rest, but preased at hir héele So néere that through hir scattred haire she might his breathing féele. But when she sawe hir breath was gone and strength began to fayle, The colour faded in hir chéekes, and ginning for to quayle, Shée looked to Penaeus streame and sayde nowe Father dere, And if you streames haue powre of Gods then help your daughter here. O let the earth deuour me quicke, on which I séeme to fayre, Or else this shape which is my harme by chaunging straight appayre. This piteous prayer scarce sed: hir sinewes waxed starke, And therewithall about hir breast did grow a tender barke. Hir haire was turned into leanes, hir armes in boughes did growe, Hir feete that were ere while so swift, now rooted were as slowe. Hir crowne became the toppe, and thus of that she earst had beene, Remayned nothing in the worlde, but beautie fresh and gréene. Which when that Phoebus did beholde (affection did so moue) The trée to which his loue was turnde he coulde no lesse but loue. And as he softly layde his hande vpon the tender plant, Within the barke newe ouergrowne he felt hir heart yet pant. And in his armes embracing fast hir boughes and braunches lythe, He proferde kisses to the trée, the trée did from him writhe. Well (quoth Apollo) though my Féere and spouse thou can not bée, Assuredly from this tyme forth yet shalt thou be my trée. Thou shalt adorne my golden lookes, and eke my pleasant Harpe, Thou shalt adorne my Quyuer full of shafs and arrowes sharpe. Thou shalt adorne the valiant knyghts and royall Emperours: When for their noble feates of armes like mightie conquerours, Triumphantly with stately pompe vp to the Capitoll, They shall ascende with solemne traine that doe their déedes xtoll. Before Augustus Pallace doore full duely shalt thou warde, The Oke amid the Pallace▪ yarde aye faythfully to gade, And as my heade is neuer oulde nor neuer more without A séemely bushe of youthfull haire that spreadeth rounde about, Euen so this honour giue I thée continally to haue Thy braunches clad from time to tyme with leaues both fresh & braue. Now when that Pean of this talke had fully made an ende, The Lawrell▪ to his iust request did séeme to condescende, By bowing of hir newe made boughes and tender braunches downe,
and wagging of hir séemely toppe, as if it were hir crowne. There is a lande in Thessalie enclosd on euery syde With wooddie hilles, that Timpe hight, through mid whereof doth glide Penaeus gushing full of froth from foote of Pindus hye. Which with his headlong falling downe doth cast vp violently, A mistie steame lyke flakes of smoke, besprinckling all about The toppes of trées on eyther side, and makes a roaring out That may be heard a great way off. This is the fixed seate, This is the house and dwelling place and chamber of the greate And mightie Ryuer: Here he sittes in Court of Péeble stone, And ministers iustice to the waues and to the Nymphes eche one, That in the Brookes and waters dwell. Now hither did resorte, (Not knowing if they might reioyce and vnto mirth exhort Or comfort him) his Countrie Brookes, Sperchius well beséene, With sedgie heade and shadie bankes of Poplars fresh and gréene. Enipeus restlesse swift and quicke, olde father Apidane, Amphrisus with his gentle streame, and Aeas clad with cane: With dyuers other Ryuers moe, which hauing runne their race, Into the Sea their wearie waues doe lead with restlesse pace. From hence the carefull Inachus absentes him selfe alone. Who in a corner of his caue with doolefull teares and mone, Augments the waters of his streame, bewayling piteously His daughter Iö lately lost. He knewe not certainly And if she were a liue or deade. But for he had hir sought, And coulde not finde hir any where, assuredly he thought She did not liue aboue the molde, ne drewe the vitall breath: Misgiuing worser in his minde, if ought be worse than death. It fortunde on a certaine day that Ioue espide this Mayde Come running from hir fathers streame alone: to whome he sayde▪ O Damsell worthie Ioue himselfe like one day for to make Some happie person whome thou list vnto thy bed to take. I pray thée let vs shroude our selues in shadowe here togither, Of this or that (he poynted both) it makes no matter whither, Untill the whotest of the day and Noone be ouerpast. And if for feare of auage beastes perchaunce thou be agast To wander in the Woods alone, thou shalt not néede to feare, A God shall bée thy guide to saue thée harmelesse euery where.
And not a God of meaner sort, but euen the same that hath The heauenly scepter in his hande, who in my dreadfull wrath, Do dart downe thunder wandringly: and therefore make no hast To runne away. She ranne apace, and had alreadie past The Fen of Lerna and the field of Lincey set with trées: When Ioue intending now in vaine no lenger tyme to léese, Upon the Countrie all about did bring a foggie mist, And caught the Mayden whome poore foole he vsed as he list. Quéene Iuno looking downe that while vpon the open field, When in so fayre a day such mistes and darkenesse she behelde, Dyd maruell much, for well she knewe those mistes ascended not From any Ryuer, moorishe ground, or other dankishe plot. She lookt about hir for hir Ioue as one that was acquainted With such escapes and with the déede had often him attainted. Whome when she founde not in the heauen, onlesse I gesse amisse, Some wrong agaynst me (quoth she) now my husbande working is. And with that worde she left the Heauen, and downe to earth shée came, Commaunding all the mistes away. But Ioue foresées the same, And to a Cow as white as milke his Leman he conuayes. She was a goodly Hecfar sure: and Iuno did hir prayse, Although (God wot) she thought it not, and curiously she sought, Where she was bred? whose Cow she was, who had hir thither brought? As though she had not knowne the truth. Hir husband by and by (Bycause she should not search to neare) deuisde a cleanly lie, And tolde hir that the Cow was bred euen nowe out of the grounde. Then Iuno who hir husbands shift at fingers endes had founde, Desirde to haue the Cow of gift. What should he doe as tho? Great cruelnesse it were to yéelde his Louer to hir fo. And not to giue would bréede mistrust. As fast as shame prouoked, So fast agayne a tother side his Loue his minde reuoked. So much that Loue was at the poynt to put all shame to flight. But that he feared if he should denie a gift so light, As was a Cowe to hir that was his sister and his wyfe, Might make hir thinke it was no Cow, & bréede perchaunce some strife. Now when that Iuno had by gift hir husbands Leman got, Yet altogether out of feare and carelesse was she not. She had him in a ielousie and thoughtfull was she still.
For doubt he should inuent some meanes to steale hir from hir: till To Argus olde Aristors sonne she put hir for to kéepe, This Argus had an hundreth eyes: of which by turne did sléepe Alwayes a couple, and the rest did duely watch and warde, And of the charge they tooke in hande had euer good regarde, What way so euer Argus stood with face, with backe, or side, To Iö warde, before his eyes did Iö still abide. All day he let hir graze abroade, the Sunne once vnder ground, He shut hir vp and by the necke with wrythen With hir bound. With croppes of trées and bitter wéedes now was she dayly fed, And in the stead of costly couch and good soft featherbed, She sate a nightes vpon the ground, and on such ground whereas Was not sometime so much as grasse: and oftentymes she was Compeld to drinke of muddie pittes: and when she did deuise, To Argus for to lift hir handes in méeke and humble wise, She sawe she had no handes at all: and when she did assay To make complaint, she lowed out, which did hir so affray, That oft she started at the noyse, & would haue runne away. Unto hir father Inachs banckes she also did resorte, Where many a tyme and oft before she had béene wont to sporte. Now when she looked in the streame, and sawe hir horned hed, She was agast and from hir selfe would all in hast haue fled. The Nymphes hir sisters knewe hir not nor yet hir owne deare father, Yet followed she both him nd them, and suffred them the rather To touch and stroke hir where they list, as one that preaced still To set hir selfe to wonder at and gaze vpon their fill. The good olde Inach pulze vp grasse and to hir straight it beares. She as she kyst and lickt his handes did shed forth dréerie teares. And had she had hir speach at will to vtter forth hir thought, She would haue tolde hir name and chaunce and him of helpe besought. But for bicause she could not speake, she printed in the sande, Two letters with hir foote, whereby was giuen to vnderstande The sorrowfull chaunging of hir shape. Which séene straight cryed out Hir father Inach wo is me, and clasping hir about Hir white and séemely Hecfars necke and christal hornes both twaine, He shricked out full piteously, Now wo is me again. Alas art thou my daughter deare, whome through the worlde I sought
And could not finde? and now by chaunce art to my presence brought? My sorrow certesse lesser farre a thousande folde had béene If neuer had I séene thée more, than thus to haue thée séene. Thou standst as dombe and to my wordes no answere can thou giue, But from the bottom of thy heart full sorie sighes dost driue As tokens of thine inwarde griefe, and doolefully dost mooe Unto my talke, the onely thing least in thy powre to dooe. But I mistrusting nothing lesse than this so great mischaunce. By some great mariage earnestly did séeke thée to aduaunce, In hope somè yssue to haue séene betwéene my sonne and thée. But now thou must a husband haue among the Hrds I sée, And eke thine issue must be such as other cattles bée. Oh that I were a mortall wight as other creatures are, For then might death in length of time quite rid mée of this care, But now bycause I am a God, and fate doth death denie, There is no helpe but that my griefe must last eternallie. As Inach made this piteous mone quicke sighted Argus draue His daughter into further fieldes to which he could not haue Accesse, and he himselfe a loof did get him to a hill, From whence he sitting at his ease viewd euerie way at will. Now could no lenger Ioue abide his Louer so forlorne, And therevpon he cald his sonne that Maia had him borne, Commaunding Argus should be kild. He made no long abod, But tyde his feathers to his féete, and tooke his charmed rod. (With which he bringeth things a sléepe, and fetcheth soules from Hell) And put his Hat vpon his head: and when that all was well He leaped from his fathers towres, and downe to earth he flue And there both Hat and winges also he lightly from him thrue. Retayning nothing but his staffe, the which he closely helde Betwéene his elbowe and his side, and through the common fielde Went plodding lyke some good plaine soule that had some flocke to féede. And as he went he pyped still vpon an Oten Réede. Qéene Iunos Heirdman farre in loue with this straunge melodie. Bespake him thus: Good fellow mine, I pray thée heartely Come sitte downe by me on this hill, for better féede I knowe Thou shalt not finde in all these fieldes, and (as the thing doth showe) It is a coole and shadowie plot, for shéepeheirds verie itte
Downe by his elbow by and by did Atlas nephew sit. And for to passe the tyme withall for séeming ouerlong, He helde him talke of this and that, and now and than among, He playd vpon his merrie Pipe to cause his watching eyes To fall a sléepe. Poore Argus did the best he could deuise To ouercome the pleasant nappes: and though that some did sléepe, Yet of his eyes the greater part he made their watch to kéepe▪ And after other talke he askt (for lately was it founde) Who was the founder of that Pype that did so swéetely sounde. Then sayde the God, there dwelt sometime a Nymph of noble fame Among the hilles of Arcadie, that Syrinx had to name. Of all the Nymphes of Nonacris and Fairie farre and néere, In beautie and in parsonage thys Ladie had no péere. Full often had she giuen the slippe both to the Satyrs quicke And other Gods that dwell in Woods, and in the Forrests thicke, Or in the fruitfull fieldes abrode. It was hir whole desire To follow chaste Dianas guise in Maydenhead and attire. Whome she did counterfaite so nighe, that such as did hir sée Might at a blush haue taken hir, Diana for to bée, But that the Nymph did in hir hande a bowe of Eornell holde, Whereas Diana euermore did beare a bowe of golde. And yet she did deceyue folke so. Upon a certaine day God Pan with garland on his heade of Pinetrée, sawe hir stray From Mount Lyceus all alone, and thus to hir did say. Unto a Gods request, O Nymph, voucesafe thou to agrée That doth desire thy wedded spouse and husband for to bée. There was yet more behinde to tell: as how that Syrinx fled, Through waylesse woods and gaue no eare to that that Pan had sed, Untill she to the gentle streame of sandie Ladon came, Where, for bicause it was so déepe, she could not passe the same, She piteously to chaunge hir shape the water Nymphes besought: And how when Pan betwéene his armes, to catch y• Nymph had thought, In steade of hir he caught the Réedes newe growne vpon the brooke, And as he sighed, with his breath the Réedes he softly shooke Which made a still and mourning noyse, with straungnesse of the which And swéetenesse of the féeble sounde the God delighted mich, Saide certesse Syrinx for thy sake it is my full intent,
To make my comfort of these Réedes wherein thou doest lament: And how that there of sundrie Réedes with war together knit, He made the Pipe which of hir name the Gréekes call Syrinx yet. But as Cyllemus would haue tolde this tale, he cast his sight On Argus, and beholde his eyes had bid him all good night. There was not one that did not sléepe, and fast he gan to nodde, Immediately he ceast his talke, and with his charmed rodde, So stroked all his heauie eyes that earnestly they slept. Then with his Woodknife by and by he lightly to him sept, And lent him such a perlous blowe, where as the shoulders grue Unto the necke, that straight his heade quite from the bodie flue. Then tombling downe the headlong hill his bloudie coarse he sent, That all the way by which he rolde was stayned and besprent. There liste thou Argus vnder foote, with all thy hundreth lights, And all the light is cleane extinct that was within those sights. One endelesse night thy hundred eyes hath nowe bereft for aye, Yet would not Iuno suffer so hir Heirdmans eyes decay: But in hir painted Peacocks tayle and feathers did them set, Where they remayne lyke precious stones and glaring eyes as yet. She tooke his death in great dispight and as hir rage did moue, Determinde for to wréeke hir wrath vpon hir husbandes Loue. Forthwith she cast before hir eyes right straunge and vgly sightes, Compelling hir to thinke she sawe some Fiendes or wicked sprightes. And in hir heart such secret prickes and piercing stings she gaue hir, As though the worlde from place to place with restlesse sorrow draue hir. Thou Nylus wert assignd to stay hir paynes and trauelles past, To which as soone as Iö came with much a doe at last, With wearie knockles on thy brim she knéeled sadly downe, And stretching foorth hir faire long necke and christall horned crowne, Such kinde of countnaunce as she had she lifted to the skie, And there with sighing sobbes and teares and lowing doolefully Did séeme to make hir mone to Ioue, desiring him to make Some ende of those hir troublous stormes endured for his sake. He tooke his wife about the necke, and swéetely kissing prayde, That Iös penance yet at length might by hir graunt be stayde. Thou shalt not néede to feare (quoth he) that euer she shall grieue thée From this day forth. And in this case the better to beleue mée,
The Stygian waters of my wordes vnparciall witnesse béen. Assoone as Iuno was appeasde, immediately was séene That Iö tooke hir natiue shape in which she first was borne, And eke became the selfe same thing the which she was beforne. For by and by she cast away hir rough and hairie hyde, In stéede whereof a soft smouth skinne with tender fleshe did byde. Hir hornes sank down, hir eies and mouth were brought in lesser roome, Hir handes, hir shoulders, and hir armes in place againe did come. Hir clouen Clées to fingers fiue againe reduced were, On which the nayles lyke pollisht Gemmes did shine full bright & clere. In fine, no likenesse of a Cow saue whitenesse did remaine So pure and perfect as no snowe was able it to staine. She vaunst hir selfe vpon hir féete which then was brought to two. And though she gladly would haue spoke: yet durst she not so do, Without good héede, for feare she should haue lowed like a Cow. And therefore softly with hir selfe she gan to practise how Distinctly to pronounce hir wordes that intermitted were. Now as a Goddesse is she had in honour euerie where, Among the folke that dwell by Nyle ylad in linnen wéede. Of her in tyme came Epaphus begotten of the séede of myghtie Ioue. This noble ympe nowe ioyntly with his mother, Through all the Cities of that lande haue temples tone with toother. There was his match in heart and yeares the lustie Phaëton, A stalworth stripling strong and stout the golden Phoebus sonne. Whome making proude and stately vauntes of his so noble race, And vnto him in that respect in nothing giuing place, The sonne of Iö coulde not beare: but sayde vnto him thus. No maruell though thou be so proude and full of wordes yws. For euerie fonde and trifling tale the which thy mother makes Thy gyddie wit and hairebrainde heade forthwith for gospell takes. Well, vaunt thy selfe of Phoebus still, for when the truth is séene, Thou shalt perceyue that fathers name a forged thing to béene. At this reproch did Phaëton wax as red as any fire: Howbeit for the present tyme did shame represse his ire. Unto his mother Clymen straight he goeth to detect The spitefull wordes that Epaphus against him did obiect. Yea mother (quoth he) and which ought your greater griefe to bée,
I who at other tymes of talke was wont to be so frée And stoute, had néere a worde to say, I was ashamde to take So fowle a foyle: the more because I could none answere make. But if I be of heauenly race exacted as ye say, Then shewe some token of that highe and noble byrth I pray. And vouche me for to be of heauen. With that he gently cast His armes about his mothers necke, and clasping hir full fast, Besought hir as she loude his life, and as she loude the lyfe Of Merops, and had kept hir selfe as vndefiled wyfe, And as she wished welthily his sisters to bestowe, She would some token giue whereby his rightfull Sire to knowe It is a doubtfull matter whither Clymen moued more With this hir Phaëtons earnest sute exacting it so sore, Or with the slaunder of the brute layde to hir charge before, Did holde vp both hir handes to heauen, and looking on the Sunne, My right deare childe I safely sweare (quoth she to Phaëton) That of this starre the which so bright doth glister in thine ey: Of this same Sunne that cheares the world with light indifferently Wert thou begot: and if I fayne, then with my heart I pray, That neuer may I sée him more vnto my dying day. But if thou haue so great desire thy father for to knowe, Thou shalt not néede in that behalfe much labour to bestowe. The place from whence he doth arise adioyneth to our lande. And if thou thinke thy heart will serue, then go and vnderstande The truth of him. When Phaëton heard his mother saying so, He gan to leape and skip for ioye. He fed his fansie tho, Upon the Heauen and heauenly things: and so with willing minde, From Athiop first his natiue home, and afterwarde through Inde Set vnderneath the morning starre he went so long, till as He founde me where his fathers house and dayly rising was. Finis primi Libri.
THE SECONDE BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. THe Princely Pallace of the Sunne stood gorgeous to beholde On stately Pillars builded high of yellow burnisht golde, Beset with sparckling Carbuncles that like to fire did shine. The roofe was framed curiously of Yuorie pure and fine. The two doore leaues of siluer cleare a radiant light did cast: But yet the cunning workemanship of things therein farre past The stuffe wherof the doores were made. For there a perfect plat, Had Vulcane drawne of all the worlde: Both of the sourges that Embrace the earth with winding waues, and of the stedfast ground, And of the heauen it selfe also that both encloseth round. And first and formest in the Sea the Gods thereof did stande Loude sounding Tryton with his shirle & writhen Trumpe in hande: Unstable Protevv chaunging aye his figure and his hue, From shape to shape a thousande sithes as list him to renue: Aëgeon leaning boystrously on backes of mightie Whales And Doris with hir daughters all: of which some cut the wales With splaied armes, some sate on rockes and dride their goodly haire, And some did ryde vppon the backes of fishes here and theare. Not one in all poyntes fully lyke an other coulde ye sée, Nor verse farre vnlike, but such as sisters ought to bée. The Earth had townes, men, beasts & Woods with sundrie trées & rods, And running Ryuers with their Nymphes and other countrie Gods. Directly ouer all these same the plat of heauen was pight, Upon the two doore leaues, the signes of all the Zodiak bright, Indifferently six on the left and six vpon the right. When Clymens sonne had climbed vp at length with wéerie pace, And set his foote within his doubted fathers dwelling place, Immediately he preaced forth to put him selfe in sight, And stoode aloofe. For néere at hande he could not bide the light. In purple Robe and royall Throne of Emeraudes freshe and gréene Did Phoebus sitte, and on eche hande stoode wayting well beséene, Dayes, Monthes, yeares, ages, seasons, times, & eke the equall houres. There stoode the springtime with a crowne of fresh and fragrant floures.
There wayted Sommer naked starke all saue a wheaten Hat: And Autumne smerde with treading grapes late at the pressing Fat. And lasy quaking for the colde, stood Winter all forlorne, With rugged heade as white as Doue, and garments all to torne. Forladen with the Isycles that dangled vp and downe Uppon his gray and hoarie bearde and nowie frozen crowne. The Sunne thus sitting in the middes did cast his piercing eye, (With which full lightly when he list he all thinges doth espye) Upon his childe that stood aloofe agast and trembling sore At sight of such vnwoonted things, and thus bespake him thore. O noble ympe, O Phaëton which art not such (I sée) Of whome thy father should haue cause ashamed for to bée: Why hast thou traueld to my court? what is thy will with mée? Then answerde he, of all the worlde O onely perfect light, O Father Phoebus, (if I may vsurpe that name of right, And that my mother for to saue hir selfe from worldely shame, Hyde not hir fault with false pretence and colour of thy name) Some signe apparant graunt whereby I my be knowne thy Sonne, And let mée hang no more in doubt. He had no sooner donne, But that his father putting off the bright and fierie beames That glistred rounde about his heade like cleare and golden streames, Commaunded him to draw him néere, and him embracing sayde: To take mée for thy rightfull Sire thou néede not be afrayde. Thy mother Clymen of a truth from falshood standeth frée. And for to put thée out of doubt aske what thou wilt of mée, And I will giue thée thy desire, the Lake whereby of olde We Gods do sweare (the which mine eyes did neuer yet béeholde) Beare witnesse with thée of my graunt: he scarce this tale had tolde, But that the foolish Phaëton straight for a day did craue The guyding of his winged Stéedes, and Chariot for to haue. Then did his Father by and by forethinke him of his oth. And shaking twentie tymes his heade, as one that was full wroth, Béespake him thus: thy wordes haue made me rashly to consent To that which shortly both of vs (I feare mée) shall repent. Oh that I might retract my graunt, my sonne I doe protest I would denie thée nothing else saue this thy fond request. I may disswade, there lyes herein more perill than thou wéene:
The things the which thou doest desire of great importance béene: More than thy weakenesse well can wielde, a charge (as well appeares) Of greater weight, than may agree with these thy tender yeares. Thy state is mortall, weake and frayle, the thing thou doest desire Is such, whereto no mortall man is able to aspire. Yea foolish boy thou doest desire (and all for want of wit) A greater charge than any God coulde euer haue as yet. For were there any of them all so ouerséene and blinde. To take vpon him this my charge, full quickly should he finde That none but I could sit vpon the fierie Axeltrée. No not euen he that rules this wast and endlesse space we sée Not he that darts with dreadfull hande the thunder from the Skie, Shall driue this chare. And yet what thing in all the world perdie Is able to compare with Ioue? Now first the morning way Lyes stéepe vpright, so that the stéedes in coolest of the day And béeing fresh haue much a doe to climbe against the Hyll. Amiddes the heauen the gastly heigth augmenteth terror still. My heart doth waxe as colde yse full many a tyme and oft For feare to sée the Sea and land from that same place aloft. The Euening way doth fall plump downe requiring strength to guide That Tethis who doth harbrowgh mée within hir sourges wide Doth stand in feare least from the heauē I headlong down should slide Besides all this the Heauen aye swimmes and whéeles about full swift And with his rolling dryues the starres their proper course to shift. Yet doe I kéepe my natiue course against this brunt so stout, Not giuing place as others doe: but boldely bearing out The force and swiftnesse of that heauen that whyrleth so about. Admit thou had my winged Stéedes and Chariot in thine hande: What couldste thou doe? dost thinke thy selfe well able to withstande The swiftnesse of the whyrled Pooles? but that their brunt and sway (Yea doe the best and worst thou can) shall beare thée quite away? Perchance thou dost imaginee there some townes of Gods to inde, With groues and Temples richt with giftes as is among mankinde. Thou art deceyude vtterly: thou shalt not finde it so. By blinde bywayes and vgly shapes of monsters must thou go. And though thou knewe the way so well as that thou could not stray, Betwéene the dreadful bulles sharp hornes yet must thou make thy way.
Agaynst the cruell Bowe the which the Aemonian archer drawes: Against the ramping Lyon armde with gréedie téeth and pawes: Against the Scorpion stretching farre his fell and venymd clawes: And eke the Crab that casteth forth his crooked clées awrie Not in such sort as th'other doth, and yet as dreadfully. Againe thou neyther hast the powre nor yet the skill I knowe My lustie coursers for to guide that from their nosetrilles throwe And from their mouthes the fierie breath that bréedeth in their brest. For scarcely will they suffer mée who knowes their nature best When that their cruell courages begin to catch a heate. That hardely should I deale with them, but that I know the eate. But least my gift should to thy griefe and vtter perill tend My Sonne beware and (whyle thou mayst) thy fonde request amend. Bycause thou woulde be knowne to bée my childe thou séemst to craue A certaine signe: what surer signe I pray thée canst thou haue? Than this my feare so fatherly the which I haue of thée? Which proueth me most certainly thy father for to bée? Beholde and marke my countenaunce? O would to God thy sight Coulde pierce within my wofull brest, to sée the heauie plight, And heapes of cares within my heart. Looke through the worlde so round Of all the wealth and goodes therein: if ought there may be found In Heauen or Earth or in the Sea, aske what thou lykest best, And sure it shall not be denide. This onely one request That thou hast made I heartely beséech thée to relent, Which for to tearme the thing aright is euen a punishment, And not an honour as thou thinkest: my Phaëton thou dost craue In stead of honour euen a scourge and punishment for to haue. Thou fondling thou, what dost thou meane with fawning armes about My necke thus flattringly to hang? Thou néedest not to dout. I haue alreadie sworne by Styx, aske what thou wilt of mée And thou shalt haue. Yet let thy next wish somewhat wiser bée. Thus ended his aduertisment: and yet the wilfull Lad Withstood his counsell vrging still the promisse that he had, Desiring for to haue the chare as if he had béene mad▪ His father hauing made delay as long as he could shift, Did lead him where his Chariot stood, which was of Vulcans gift. The Axeltrée was massie golde, the Bucke was massie golde,
The vtmost fellies of the whéeles, and where the trée was rolde. The spokes were all of syluer bright, the Chrysolites and Gemmes That stood vppon the Collars, Trace, and hounces in their hemmes Did cast a shéere and glimmering light, as Phoebus shone thereon. Now while the lustie Phaëton stood gazing here vpon, And wondered at the workemanship of euerie thing: béeholde The earely morning in the East béegan mée to vnfolde Hir purple Gates, and shewde hir house bedeckt with Roses red. The twinckling starres withdrew which by the morning star are led: Who as the Captaine of that Host that hath no péere nor match, Dooth leaue his standing last of all within that heauenly watch. Now when his Father sawe the worlde thus glister red and trim, And that his waning sisters hornes began to waxen dim, He had the fetherfooted howres go harnesse in his horse. The Goddesses with might and mayne themselues thereto enforce. His fierifoming Stéedes full fed with iuice of Ambrosie They take from Maunger trimly dight: and to their heades doe tie Strong reyned its: and to the Charyot doe them well appoint. Then Phoebus did with heauenly salue his Phaëtons heade annoint, That scorching fire coulde nothing hurt: which done, vpon his haire He put the fresh and golden rayes himselfe was wont to weare. And then as one whose heart misgaue the sorrowes drawing fast, With sorie sighes he thus bespake his retchlesse sonne at last. (And if thou canst) at least yet this thy fathers lore obay: Sonne, spare the whip, & reyne them hard, they run so swift away As that thou shalt haue much a doe their fléeing course to stay Directly through the Zones all iue beware thou doe not ride, A brode byway cut out a skew that bendeth on the side, Contaynde within the bondes of thrée the midmost Zones doth lie: Which from the grisely Northren beare, & Southren Pole doth flie. Kéepe on this way: my Charyot rakes thou plainely shalt espie And to thintent that heauen and earth may well the heate endure, Driue neyther ouer high nor yet too lowe. For be thou sure, And if thou mount aboue thy boundes, the starres thou burnest cleane. Againe beneath thou burnst the Earth: most safetie is the meane. And least perchaunce thou ouermuch the right hand way should take, And so misfortune should thée driue vpon the writhen Snake,
Or else by taking ouermuche vpon the lefter hand. Unto the Aultar thou be driuen that doth against it stand: Indifferently betwéene them both I wish thée for to ride. The rest I put to fortunes will, who be thy friendly guide, And better for the than thy selfe as in this case prouide. Whiles that I prattle here with thée, behold the dankish night Beyond all Spaine hir vtmost bound is passed out of sight. We may no lenger tariance make: my wonted light is cald, The Morning with hir countnance cleare the darknesse hath appald▪ Take raine in hand, or if thy minde by counsell altred bée, Refuse to meddle with my Wayne: and while thou yet art frée, And doste at ease within my house in safegarde well remaine, Of this thine vnaduised wish not féeling yet the paine, Let me alone with giuing still the world his wonted light, And thou thereof as heretofore enioy the harmelesse sight. Thus much in vaine: for Phaeton both yong in yeares and wit, Into the Chariot lightly lept, and vauncing him in it. Was not a litle proud that he the brydle gotten had. He thankt his father whom it grieude to sée his childe so mad. While Phebus and his rechelesse sonne were entertalking this, Aeöus, Aethon, Phlegon, and the firie Pyrois The restlesse horses of the Sunne began to ney so hie Wyth flaming breath, that all the heauen might heare them perfectly. And with their houes they mainly beate vpon the lattisde grate. The which when Tethis (knowing nought of this hir cousins fate) Had put aside, and giuen the stéedes the frée and open scope Of all the compasse of the Skie within the heauenly Cope: They girded forth, and cutting through the Cloudes that let their race. With splayed wings they ouerflw the Easterne winde a pace. The burthen was so lyght as that the Genets felt it not. The wonted weight was from the Waine, the which they well did wot. For like as ships amids the Seas that scant of ballace haue, Doe réele and totter with the wynde, and yéeld to euery waue: Euen so the Waine for want of weight it erst was wont to beare, Did hoyse aloft and scayle and réele, as though it empty were. Which when the Cartware did perceyue, they left the beaten way And taking bridle in the téeth began to run astray.
The rider was so sore agast, he knew no vse of Reyne, Nor yet his way: and though he had, yet had it ben in vayne, Bicause he wanted powre to rule the horses and the Wayne. Then first did sweat cold Charles his Wain through force of Phebus rayes And in the Sea forbidden him to diue in vaine assayes. The Serpent at the frozen Pole both colde and slow by kinde, Through heat waxt wroth, and stird about a cooler place to finde. And thou Bootes though thou be but slow of footemanship, Yet wert thou faine (as Fame reports) about thy Waine to skip. Now when vnhappy Phaeton from top of all the Skie Behelde the Earth that vnderneath a great way off did lie. He waxed pale for sodaine feare, his ioynts and sinewes quooke, The greatnesse of the glistring light his eyesight from him tooke. Now wisht he that he neuer had his fathers horses sée It yrkt him that he thus had sought to learne his piedegre. It grieude him that he had preuailde in gaining his request. To haue bene counted Merops sonne he thought it now the best. Thus thinking was he headlong driuen, as when a ship is borne by blustring windes, hir saileclothes rent, hir sterne in pieces torne, And tacling brust, the which the Pilote trusting all to prayre Abandons wholy to the Sea and fortune of the ayre. What should he doe? much of the heauen he passed had behinde And more he saw before: both whiche he measurde in his minde, Eft looking forward to the West which to approch as then Might not betide, and to the East eft looking backe agen. He wist not what was best to doe, his wittes were rauisht so. For neither could he hold the Reynes, nor yet durst let them go. And of his horses names was none that he remembred tho. Straunge vncoth Monsters did he sée dispersed here and there And dreadfull shapes of vgly beasts that in the Welkin were. There is a certaine place in which the hidious Scorpion throwes His armes in compasse far abrode, much like a couple of bowes, With writhen tayle and clasping cles, whose poyson limmes doe stretch On euery side, that of two signes they full the roume doe retch, Whome when the Lad beheld all moyst with blacke and lothly swet, With sharpe and nedlepointed sting as though he séemde to thret, He was so sore astraught for feare, he let the bridels slacke.
Which when the horses felt lie lose vpon their sweating backe, At rouers straight throughout the Ayre by wayes vnknowne they ran Whereas they neuer came before since that the worlde began. For looke what way their lawlesse rage by chaunce and fortune drue. Without controlment or restraint that way they fréely lue Among the starres that fixed are within the firmament They snatcht the Chariot here and there. One while they coursing went Upon the top of all the skie: anon againe full round They troll me downe to lower wayes and nearer to the ground. So that the Moone was in a Maze to sée hir brothers Waine Run vnder hirs: the singed cloudes began to smoke amaine. Eche ground the higher that it was and nearer to the Skie. The sooner was it set on fire, and made therewith so drie. That euery where it gan to chinke. The Medes and Pastures gréene▪ Did seare away: and with the leaues, the trées were burned cléene. The parched corne did yéelde wherewith to worke his owne decaie. Tushe these are trifles. Mightie townes did perish that same daie. Whose countries with their folke were burnt: and forests ful of woo Were turnde to ashes with the ocks & mountains where they stood. Then Athe, Cilician, Taure and Tmle and Oeta flamed hie, And Ide erst full of flowing springs was then made vtter drie. The learned virgins daily haunt, the sacred Helicon And Thracian Hemus (not as yet surnamde Oeagrion,) Did smoke both twaine: and Aetna hote of nature aye before, Encreast by force of Phebus flame now raged ten times more. The forkt Parnasus, Eryx, Cynth, and Othrys then did swelt And all the snow of Rhodope did at that present melt. The like outrage Mount Dindymus, and Mime and Micale felt. Cytheron borne to sacred vse with Osse, and Pindus hie And Olymp greater than them both did burne excessiuely. The passing colde that Scithie had defended not the same But that the barren Caucasus was partner of this flame. And so were eke the Airie Alpes and Appennyne beside, For all the Cloudes continually their snowie tops doe hide. Then wheresoeuer Phaeton did chaunce to cast his vew, The world was all on staining fire. The breath the which he drew, Came smooking from his scalding mouth as from a séething pot.
His Chariot also vnder him began to waxe red hot. He could no lenger dure th sparkes and cinder flyeng out, Againe the culme and smouldring smoke did wrap him round about. The pitchie darkenesse of the which so wholy had him het As that he wist not where he was nor yet which way he went. The winged horses forcibly did draw him where they wolde. The Aethiopians at that time (as men for truth vpholde) (The bloud by force of that same heate drawne to the outer part And there adust from that time forth) became so blacke and swart. The moysture was so dried vp in Lybie land that time That altogither drie and scorcht continueth yet that Clyme. The Nymphes wt haire about their eares bewayld their springs & lakes Beötia for hir Dyces losse great lamentation makes. For Amimone Argos wept, and Corinth for the spring Pyrene, at whose sacred streame the Muses vsde to sing. The Riuers further from the place were not in better case. For Tanais in his déepest streame did boyle and steme apace. Old Penevv and Cayus of the countrie Teuthranie, And swift Ismenos in their bankes by like misfortune frie. Then burnde the Psophian Erymanth: and (which should burne ageine) The Troian Xanthus and Lycormas with his yellow veine. Meander playing in his bankes aye winding to and fro. Migdonian Melas with his waues as blacke as any slo. Eurotas running by the foote of Tenare boyled tho. Then sod Euphrates cutting through the middes of Babilon Then sod Orontes, and the Scithian swift Thermodoon. Then Ganges, Colchian Phasis, and the noble Istre Alpheus and Sperchins bankes with flaming fire did glistre. The golde that Tagus streame did beare did in the chanell melt. Amid Cayster of this fire the raging heat was felt. Among the quieres of singing Swannes that with their pleasant lay Along the bankes of Lidian brakes from place to place did stray. And Nyle for feare did run away into the furthest Clyme Of all the world, and hid his heade, which to this present tyme Is yet vnfound: his mouthes all seuen cleane voyde of water béene. Like seuen great valleys where (saue dust) could nothing else be séene. By like misfortune Hebrus dride and Strymon both of Thrace.
The Westerne Riuers Rhine and Rhone and Po were in likecase: And Tyber vnto whome the Goddes a faithfull promise gaue Of all the world the Monarchie and soueraigne state to haue. The ground did cranie euerie where and light did pierce to hell And made afraide the King and Quéene that in that Realme doe dwell. The Sea did shrinke and where as waues did late before remaine, Became a Champion field of dust and euen a sandy plaine. The hilles erst hid farre vnder waues like Ilelandes did appeare So that the scattred Cyclades for the time augmented were. The fishes drew them to the déepes: the Dolphines durst not play Aboue the water as before, the Seales and Porkpis lay With bellies vpward on the waues starke dead▪ and fame doth go That Nereus with his wife and daughters all were faine as tho To dine within the scalding waues. Thrise Neptune did aduaunce His armes aboue the scalding Sea with sturdy countenaunce: And thrise for hotenesse of the Ayre, was faine himselfe to hide. But yet the Earth the Nurce of things enclosde on euery side (Betwéene the waters of the Sea and Springs that now had hidden Themselues within their Mothers wombe) for all the paine abidden, Up to the necke put forth hir head and casting vp hir hand, Betwéene hir forehead and the sunne as panting she did stand With dreadfull quaking all that was, she fearfully did shake, And shrinking somewhat lower downe with sacred voyce thus spake. O King of Gods and if this be thy will and my desart, Why doste thou stay with deadly dint thy thunder downe to dart? And if that néedes I perish must through force of firie flame, Let thy celestiall fire O God I pray thée doe the same. A comfort shall it be to haue thée Author of my death. I scarce haue powre to speak these words (the smoke had stopt hir breath) Behold my singed haire: behold my dim and bleared eye, Sée how about my scorched face the scalding embers flie. Is this the guerdon wherewithall ye quite my fruitfulnesse? Is this the honor that ye gaue me for my plenteousnesse And dutie done with true intent? for suffring of the plough To draw déepe woundes vpon my backe and rakes to rend me through? For that I ouer all the yeare continually am wrought? For giuing foder to the beasts and cattell all for nought?
For yéelding corne and other foode wherewith to kéepe mankinde? And that to honor you withall swéete frankinsence I finde? But put the case that my desert destruction duely craue, What hath thy brother: what the Seas deserued for to haue? Why doe the Seas his lotted part thus ebbe and fall so low, Withdrawing from thy Skie to which it ought most neare to grow? But if thou neyther doste regarde thy brother, neyther mée, At least haue mercy on thy heauen, looke round about and sée How both the Poles begin to smoke which if the fire appall To vtter ruine (be thou sure) thy pallace néedes must fall. Behold how Atlas ginnes to faint▪ his shoulders though ull strong, Unneth are able to vphold the sparkling Extrée long. If Sea and Land doe go to wrecke, and heauen it selfe doe burne To olde confused Chaos then of force we must returne. Put to thy helping hand therfore to saue the little left If ought remaine before that all be quite and cleane bereft. When ended was this piteous plaint, the Earth did hold hir peace She could no lenger dure the heate but was complde to cease. Into hir bosome by and by she shrunke hir cinged heade More nearer to the Stygnan caues, and ghostes of persones deade. The Sire of Heauen protesting all the Gods and him also That lent the Chariot to his child, that all of fore must go To hauocke if he helped not, went to the highest part And top of all the Heauen from whence his custome was to dart, His thunder and his lightning downe. But neyther did remaine A Cloude wherewith to shade the Earth, nor yet a showre of raine. Then with a dreadfull thunderclap vp to his eare he bent His fist, and at the Wagoner a flash of lightning sent, Which strake his bodie from the life and threw it ouer whéele And so with fire he quenched fire. The Stéedes did also réele Upon their knees, and starting vp sprang violently, one here, And there another, that they brast in pieces all their gere. They threw the Cllars from their neckes, and breaking quite a sunder The Trace and Harnesse flang away: here lay the bridles: yonder The Extrée plucked from the Naues: and in another place The sheuered spokes of broken whéeles: and so at euery pace The pieces of the Chariot torne lay strowed here and there
But Phaeton (fire yet blasing stil among his yellow haire) Shot headlong downe, and glid along the Region of the Ayre Like to starre in Winter nights (the wether cleare and fayre) Which though it doe not fall in déede, yet falleth to our sight. Whome almost in another world and from his countrie quite The Riuer Padus did receyue, and quencht his burning head. The water Nymphes of Italie did take his carkasse dead And buried it yet smoking still, with Ioues thréeforked flame. And wrate this Epitaph in the stone that lay vpon the same. Here lies the lusty Phaeton which tooke in hand to guide His fathers Chariot, from the which although he chaunst to slide: Yet that he gaue a proud attempt it cannot be denide. Wyth ruthfull chéere and heauie heart his father made great moe. And would not shew himselfe abrode, but mournd at home alone. And if it be to be beleued, as bruted is by fame. A day did passe without the Sunne. The brightnesse of the flame Gaue light: and so vnto some kinde of vse that mischiefe came. But Clymen hauing spoke, as much as mothers vsually, Are wonted in such wretched case, discomfortablely, And halfe beside hir selfe for wo, with torne and scratched brest, Sercht through the vniuersall world, from East to furthest West, First séeking for hir sonnes dead coarse, and after for his bones. She found them by a forren streame, entumbled vnder stones. There fell she groueling on his graue, and reading there his name, Shed teares thereon, and layd hir breast all bare vpon the same. The daughters also of the Sunne no lesse than did their mother, Bewaild in vaine with flouds of teares, the fortune of their brother: And beating piteously their breasts, incessantly did call The buried Phaeton day and night, who heard them not at all, About whose tumbe they prostrate lay. Foure times the Moone had filde The Circle of hir ioyned hornes, and yet the sisters hilde Their custome of lamenting still: (for now continuall vse had made it custome.) Of the which the eldest Phaetuse About to knéele vpon the ground, complaynde hir féete were nom. To whome as fayre Lampetie was rising for to com, Hir féete were held with sodaine rootes. The third about to teare Hir ruffled lockes, filde both hir handes with leaues in steade of heare.
One wept to sée hir legges made wood: another did repine To sée hir armes become long boughes. And shortly to define, While thus they wondred at themselues, a tender barke began To grow about their thighes and loynes, which shortly ouerran Their bellies, brestes, and shoulders eke, and hands successiuely, That nothing (saue their mouthes) remainde, aye calling pitously Upon the wofull mothers helpe. What could the mother doe? But runne now here now there, as force of nature drue hir to? And deale hir kisses while she might? she was not so content: But tare their tender braunches downe: and from the sliuers went Red drops of bloud as from a wound. The daughter that was rent Cride spare vs mother spare I pray, for in the shape of tree The bodies and the flesh of vs your daughters wounded bée. And now farewell. That word once said, the barke grew ouer all. Now from these trées flow gummy teares that Amber men doe call. Which hardened with the heate of sunne as from the boughs they fal. The trickling Riuer doth receyue, and sendes as things of price To decke the daintie Dames of Rome and make them fine and nice. Now present at this monstruous hap was Cygnus Secls son Who being by the mothers side a kinne to Phaeton Was in condicion more a kinne. He leauing vp his charge. (For in the land of Ligurie his Kingdome stretched large) Went mourning all alone the bankes and plasant streame of Po Among the trées encreased by the sisters late age. Annon his voyce became more small and shrill than for a man. Gray fethers muffled in his face: his necke in length began Far from his shoulders for to stretche: and furthermore there goes A fine red string a crosse the ioyntes in knitting of his toes: With fethers closed are his sides: and on his mouth there grew A brode blunt byll: and finally was Cygnus made a new and vncoth fowle that hight a Swan, who neither to the winde, The Ayre, nor Ioue betakes himselfe, as one that bare in minde The wrongfull fire sent late against his cousin Phaeton. In Lakes and Riuers is his ioy: the fire he aye doth shon. And chooseth him the contrary continually to won. Forlorne and altogether voyde of that same bodie shene Was Phaetons father in that while which erst had in him bene,
Like as he looketh in Thelypse. He hates the yrkesome light, He hates him selfe, he hates the day, and settes his whole delight In making sorrow for his sonne, and in his griefe doth storme And chaufe denying to the worlde his dutie to performe. My lot (quoth he) hath had inough of this vnquiet state From first beginning of the worlde. It yrkes me (though too late) Of restlesse toyles and thankelesse paines. Let who so will for me Go driue the Chariot in the which the light should caried be. If none dare take the charge in hand, and all the Gods persist As insufficient, he himselfe go driue it if he list. That at the least by venturing our bridles for to guide His lightning making childlesse Sires he once may lay aside. By that time that he hath assayde the vnappalled force That doth remaine and rest within my friefooted horse, I trow he shall by tried proufe be able for to tell How that he did not merit death that could not rule them well. The Goddes stoode all about the Sunne thus storming in his rage Beseching him in humble wise his sorrow to asswage. And that he would not on the world continuall darkenesse bring, Ioue eke excusde him of the fire the which he chaunst to sting. And with entreatance mingled threates as did become a King. Then Phebus gathered vp his stéedes that yet for feare did run Like flaighted fiendes, and in his moode without respect begun To beate his whipstocke on their paes and lash them on the sides. It was no néede to bid him chaufe▪ for euer as he rides He still vpbraides them with his sonne, and layes them on the hides. And Ioue almighty went about the walles of heauen to trie, If ought were perisht with the fire, which when he did espie Continuing in their former state, all strong and safe and sound, He went to vew the workes of men, and things vpon the ground. Yet for his land of Arcadie he tooke most care and charge. The Springs and streames that durst not run he set againe at large. H clad the earth with grasse, the trées with leaues both fresh and grene Commaunding woods to spring againe that erst had burned bene. Now as he often went and came it was his chaunce to light Upon a Nymph of Nonacris whose forme and beautie bright Did set his heart on flaming fire. She vsed not to spinne
Nor yet to curle hir frised haire with bodkin or with pinne. A garment with a buckled belt fast girded did she weare And in a white and slender Call slight trussed was hir heare. Sometime a dart sometime a bow she vsed for to beare. She was a knight of Phebes troope. There came not at the mount Of Menalus of whome Diana made so great account. But fauor neuer lasteth long. The Sunne had gone that day A good way past the poynt of Noone: when werie of hir way She drue to shadowe in a wood that neuer had bene cut. Here off hir shoulder by and by hir quiuer did she put. And hung hir how vnbent aside, and coucht hir on the ground Hir quiuer vnderneth hir head▪ whom when that Ioue had found Alone and wearie sure (he said) my wife shall neuer know Of this escape, and if she do, I know the worst I trow. She can but chide, shall feare of chiding make me to forslow? He counterfeiteth Phebe streight in countnance and aray. And says O virgine of my troope, where didst thou hunt to day? The Damsell started from the ground and said hayle Goddesse deare, Of greater worth than Ioue (I thinke) though Ioue himselfe did heare. Ioue heard hir well and smylde thereat, it made his heart reioyce To heare the Nymph preferre him thus before himselfe in choyce. He fell to kissing: which was such as out of square might séeme, And in such sort as that a mayde coulde nothing lesse beséeme. And as she would haue told what woods she ranged had for game, He tooke hir fast betwéene his armes, and not without his shame, Bewrayed plainly what he was and wherefore that he came The wench against him stroue as much as any woman could I would that Iuno had it séene. for then I know thou would not take the déede so heynously: with all hir might she stroue. But what poore wench or who aliue could vanquish mighty Ioue? Ioue hauing sped flue straight to heauen. She hateth in hir hart The guiltlesse fields and wood where Ioue had playd that naughty part, Awaye she goes in such a griefe as that she had welnie, Forgot hir quiuer with hir shaftes and bow that hanged by, Dictynna garded with hir traine and proude of killing Déere, In raunging ouer Menalus espying cald hir néere. The Damsell hearing Phebe call did run away amaine,
She feared least in Phebes shape that Ioue had come againe, But when she saw the troope of Nymphes that garded hir about, She thought there was no more deceyt, and came among the rout. Oh Lord how hard a matter ist for guiltie hearts to shift? And kepe their countnance? frō the ground hir eyes scarce durst she lift. She prankes not by hir mistresse side, she preases not to bée The foremost of the companie, as when she erst was frée. She standeth muët: and by chaunging of hir colour ay. The treading of hir shooe awrie she plainely doth bewray, Diana might haue founde the fault but that she was a May. A thousand tokens did appeare apparant to the eye, By which the Nymphes themselues (they say) hir fault did well espie. Nine times the Moone full to the worlde had shewde hir horned face When fainting through hir brothers flames and hunting in the chace, She found a coole and shadie lawnde through midst whereof she spide A shallow brooke with trickling streame on grauell bottom glide. And liking well the pleasant place, vpon the vpper brim She dipt hir foote, and finding there the water coole and trim, Away (she sayd) with standers by: and let vs bath vs here. Then Parrhasis cast downe hir head with sad and bashfull chere. The rest did strip them to their skinnes▪ she only sought delay, Untill that would or would she not hir clothes were pluckt away. Then with hir naked body straight hir crime was brought to light. Which yll ashamde as with hir hands she would haue hid from sight, Fie beast (quoth Cynthia) get thée hence thou shalt not here defile This sacred Spring, and from hir traine she did hir quite exile. The Matrone of the thundring Ioue had incling of the fact, Delaying till conuenient time the punishment to exact. There is no cause of further stay. To spight hir heart withall, Hir husbands Leman bare a boy that Arcas men did call. On whome she casting lowring looke with fell and cruell minde Saide: was there, arrant strumpet thou, none other shift to finde? But that thou néedes must be with barne? that all the world must sée My husbandes open shame and thine in doing wrong to mée? But neyther vnto heauen nor hell this trespasse shalt thou beare. I will bereue thée of thy shape through pride whereof thou were So hardy to entyce my Féere. Immediatly with that
She raught hir by the foretop fast and fiercely threw hir flat Against the grounde. The wretched wench hir armes vp mekely cast, Hir armes began with griefly haire to waxe all rugged fast. Hir handes gan warpe and into pawes ylfauordly to grow. And for to serue in stede of féete. The lippes that late ago Did like the mightie Ioue so well, with side and flaring flaps Became a wide deformed mouth, and further least perhaps Hir prayers and hir humble wordes might cause hir to relent: She did bereue hir of hir speach. In steade whereof there went An yrefull horce and dreadfull voyce out from a threatning throte: But yet the selfe same minde that was before she turnde hir cote, Was in hir still in shape of Beare▪ the griefe whereof she showes by thrusting forth continuall sighes, and vp she gastly throwes Such kinde of handes as then remainde vnto the starrie Skie. And forbicause she could not speake she thought Ioue inwardly To be vnthankfull. Oh how oft she daring not abide, Alone among the desert woods, full many a time and tide, Would stalke before hir house in grounds that were hir owne erewhile? How oft oh did she in the hilles the barking houndes beguile? And in the lawndes where she hir selfe had chased erst hir game, Now flie hirselfe to saue hir life when hunters sought the same? Full oft at sight of other beastes she hid hir head for feare, Forgetting what she was hir selfe▪ for though she were a Beare, Yet when she spied other Beares she quooke for verie paine: And feared Wolues although hir Sire among them did remaine. Beholde Lycaons daughters sonne that Archas had to name About the age of fiftene yeares within the forrest came Of Erymanth, not knowing ought of this his mothers case. There after pitching of his toyles▪ as he the stagges did chase, Upon his mother sodenly it was his chaunce to light, Who for desire to sée hir sonne did stay hirselfe from flight. And wistly on him cast hir looke as one that did him know. But he not knowing what she was began his héeles to show. And when he saw hir still persist in staring on his face, He was afrayde, and from hir sight withdrew himselfe a pace, But when he coulde not so he rid▪ he tooke an armed pike, In full intent hir through the heart with deadly wound to strike.
But God almighty held his hand, and lifting both away Did disapoint the wicked Act. For straight he did conuay Them through the Ayre with whirling windes to top of all the skie, And there did make them neighbour starres about the Pole on hie. When Iuno shining in the heauen hir husbands minion found, She swelde for spight: and downe she comes to watry Tethys round And vnto olde Oceanus, whome euen the Gods aloft Did reuernce for their iust deserts full many a time and oft To whome demaunding hir the cause: And aske ye (quoth she) why That I which am the Quéene of Goddes come hither from the sky? Good cause there is I warrant you. Another holdes my roome. For neuer trust me while I liue, if when the night is coome, And ouercasteth all the world with shadie darknesse whole, Ye sée not in the heigth of heauen hard by the Northren Pole Whereas the vtmost circle runnes about the Axeltrée In shortest circuit, gloriously enstalled for to bée In shape of starres the stinging woundes that make me yll apayde. Now is there (trow ye) any cause why folke should be afrayde To do to Iuno what they list? or dread hir wrathfull mood? Which only by my working harme doe turne my foes to good? O what a mightie act is done? how passing is my powre? I haue bereft hir womans shape, and at this present howre She is become a Goddesse. Loe this is the scourge so sowre Wherewith I strike mine enimies▪ Loe here is all the spight That I can doe: this is the ende of all my wondrous might. No force. I would he should (for me) hir natiue shape restore, And take away hir brutish shape, Like as he hath before Done by his Paramour that fine and proper piece Of Argos whom he made a Cow, I meane Phoronevvs Niece. Why makes he not a full deuorce from me? and in my stead Straight take his Sweetheart to his wife, and coll hir in my bed? He can not doe a better déede (I thinke) than for to take Lycaon to his fatherinlaw. But if that you doe make Accompt of me your foster childe, then graunt that for my sake, The Oxen and the wicked Waine of starres in number seuen, For whoredome sake but late ago receyued into heauen, May neuer diue within your waues. Ne let that strumpet vyle
By bathing of hir filthie limmes your waters pure defile. The Gods did graunt hir hir request: & straight to heauen she flue, In hādsome Chariot through the Ayre. which painted peacocks drue As well beset with blasing eyes late tane from Argus hed, As thou thou prating Rauen white by nature being bred, Hadst on thy fethers iustly late a coly colour spred. For this same birde in auncient time had fethers faire and whight As euer was the driuen snow, or siluer cleare and bright. He might haue well comparde himselfe in beautie with the Doues That haue no blemish, or the Swan that running water loues: Or with the Géese that afterward should with their gagling out Preserue the Romaine Capitoll beset with foes about. His tongue was cause of all his harme, his tatling tongue did make His colour which before was white, became so foule and blake. Coronis of Larissa was the fairest maide of face, In all the land of Thessalie. Shée stoode in Phebus grace As long as that she kept hir chast, or at the least as long As that she scaped vnespide in doing Phebus wrong. But at the last Apollos birde hir priuie packing spide. Whome no entreatance could persuade but that he swiftly hide Him to his maister, to bewray the doings of his loue. Now as he flue, the pratling Crow hir wings apace did moue: And ouertaking fell in talke and was inquisitiue For what intent and to what place he did so swiftly driue. And when she heard the cause thereof, she said: now trust me sure, This message on the whiche thou goste no goodnesse will procure. And therefore hearken what I say: disdaine thou not at all, To take some warning by thy friende in things that may befall. Consider what I erst haue bene and what thou séest me now: And what hath bene the ground hereof. I boldly dare aow, That thou shalt finde my faithfulnesse imputed for a crime. For Pallas in a wicker chest had hid vpon a time A childe calde Ericthonius, whome neuer woman bare, And tooke it vnto Maidens thrée that Cecrops daughters were. Not telling them what was within, but gaue them charge to kéepe The Casket shut, and for no cause within the same to péepe. I standing close among the leaues vpon an Elme on hie,
Did marke their doings and their wordes, and there I did espie How Pandrosos and Herse kept their promise faithfully. Aglauros calles them Cowardes both, and makes no more a doe, But takes the Casket in hir hand and doth the knots vndooe. And there they saw a childe whose partes beneath were like a Snake. Straight to the Goddesse of this déede a iust report I make. For which she gaue me this reward that neuer might I more, Accompt hir for my Lady and my Mistresse as before. And in my roume she put the fowle that flies not but by night. A warning vnto other birdes my lucke should be of right To holde their tongues for being shent. But you will say perchaunce. I came vnsentfor of my selfe, she did me not aduaunce. I dare well say though Pallas now my heauie Mistresse stand. Yet if perhaps ye should demaund the question at hir hand, As sore displeased as she is, she would not this denie: But that she chose me first hir selfe to beare hir companie. For (well I know) my father was a Prince of noble fame, Of Phocis King by long discent, Coronevv was his name: (I was his darling and his ioy, and many a welthie Piere (I would not haue you thinke disdaine) did séeke me for their Fere. My forme and beautie did me hurt. For as I leysurely Went ietting vp and downe the shore vpon the grauell drie. As yet I customably doe the God that rules the Seas Espying me fell straight in loue. And when he saw none ease In sute, but losse of wordes and time, he offred violence, And after me he runnes apace. I skudde as fast fro thence, From sand to shore from shore to sand, still playing Foxe to hole, Untill I was so tirde that he had almost got the gole. Then cald I out on God and man. But (as it did appeare) There was no man so neare at hand that could my crying heare. A Uirgin Goddesse pitied me bicause I was a mayde: And at the vtter plunge and pinche did send me present ayde. I cast mine armes to heauē, mine armes waxt light with fethers black I went about to cast in hast my garments from my back, And all was fethers. In my skinne the rooted fethers sack. I was about with violent hand to strike my naked breast, But nether had I hand nor breast that naked more did reast▪
I ran. but of my féete as erst remained not the print. Me thought I glided on the ground. Anon with sodaine dint, I rose and houered in the Ayre. And from that instant time Did wait on Pallas faithfully without offence or crime. But what auailes all this to me, and if that in my place The wicked wretch Nyctyminee (who late for lacke of grace Was turned to an odious birde) to honor called bée? I pray thée didst thou neuer heare how false Nyctyminee (A thing all ouer Lesbos knowne) defilde hir fathers couch? The beast is now become a birde. whose lewdnesse doth so touch And pricke hir guiltie conscience, that she dares not come in sight, Nor shewe hirselfe abrode a dayes. but fléeteth in the night For shame least folke should sée hir fault. and euery other birde Doth in the Ayre and Iuie toddes with wondring at hir girde. A mischiefe take thy tatling tongue the Rauen answerde tho. Thy vaine forspeaking moues me not. And so he forth did go And tels his Lorde Apollo how he saw Coronis lie Wyth Isthyis a Gentleman that dwelt in Thessalie. When Phebus heard his louers fault, he fiersly gan to frowne, And cast his garlond from his head, and threw his viall downe. His colour chaungde, his face lookt pale, and as the rage of yre That boyled in his belking breast had set his heart on fyre, He caught me vp his wonted tooles, and bent his golden bow, And by and by with deadly stripe of vnauoyded blow Strake through the breast the which his owne had toucht so oft afore. She wounded gaue a piteous shrike, and (drawing from the sore The deadly Dart the which the bloud pursuing after fast Upon hir white and tender limmes a scarlet colour cast) Saide Phebus well, thou might haue wreakt this trespasse on my head And yet forborne me till the time I had bene brought a bed. Now in one body by thy meanes a couple shall be dead. Thus muche she saide: and with the bloud hir life did fade away. The bodie being voyde of soule became as colde as clay. Than all too late, alas too late gan Phebus to repent That of his louer he had tane so cruell punishment. He blames himselfe for giuing eare so vnaduisedly. He blames himselfe in that he tooke it so outragiously.
He hates and bannes his faithfull birde bicause he did enforme Him of his louers naughtinesse that made him so to storme. He hates his bow, he hates his shaft that rashly from it went: And eke he hates his hasty hands by whom the bow was bent. He takes hir vp betwéene his armes endeuoring all too late By plaister made of precious herbes to stay hir helplesse fate. But when he saw there was no shift: but that she néedes must burne, And that the solemne sacred fire was prest to serue the turne, Then from the bottome of his heart full sorie sighes he fet, (For heauenly powres with watrie teares their chéekes may neuer wet) In case as when a Cow beholdes the cruell butcher stand With launcing Axe embrewd with bloud and lifting vp his hand Aloft to snatch hir sucking Calfe that hangeth by the héeles And of the Axe the deadly dint vpon his forehead féeles. Howbeit after swéete perfumes bestowde vpon hir corse And much embracing, hauing sore bewailde hir wrong diuorse, He followed to the place assignde hir bodie for to burne. There coulde he not abide to sée his séede to ashes turne. But tooke the baby from hir wombe and from the firie flame, And vnto double Chyrons den conueyed straight the same. The Rauen hoping for his truth to be rewarded well, He maketh blacke, forbidding him with whiter birdes to dwell. The Centure Chyron in the while was glad of Phebus boy, And as the burthen brought some care the honor brought him ioy. Upon a time with golden lockes about hir shoulders spred, A daughter of the Centaurs (whome a certaine Nymph had bred About the brooke Caycus bankes) that hight Ocyroe Came thither. This same fayre yong Nymph could not contented be To learne the craft of Surgerie as perfect as hir Sire, But that to learne the secret doomes of Fate she must aspire. And therfore when the furious rage of frenzie had hir cought, And that the spright of Prophecie enflamed had hir thought, She lookt vpon the childe and saide: swéete babe the Gods thée make A man. for all the world shall fare the better for thy sake. All sores and sicknesse shalt thou cure: thy powre shall eke be syche, To make the dead aliue again. For doing of the whiche Against the pleasure of the Gods, thy Graundsire shall thée strike
So with his fire, that neuer more thou shalt performe the like. And of a God a bludlesse corse, and of a corse (full straunge) Thou shalt become a God againe, and twice thy nature chaunge. And thou my father liefe and deare, who now by destinie, Art borne to liue for euermore and neuer for to die, Shalt suffer such outragious paine throughout thy members all, By wounding of a venimde dart that on thy foote shall fall, That oft thou shalt desire to die, and in the latter end The fatall dames shall breake thy thréede and thy desire thée send. There was yet more behinde to tell, when sodenly she fet A sore déepe sigh, and downe hir chéekes the teares did trickle wet. Mine owne misfortune (quoth she) now hath ouertake me sure. I cannot vtter any more, for words waxe out of vre My cunning was not worth so much as that it should procure The wrath of God. I feele by proufe far better had it bene: If that the chaunce of things to come I neuer had foreséene. For now my natiue shape withdrawes. Me thinkes I haue delight To féede on grasse and fling in fieldes: I féele my selfe so light. I am transformed to a Mare like other of my kinne. But wherfore should this brutish shape all ouer wholy winne? Considering that although both horse and man my father bée: Yet is his better part a man as plainly is to sée. The latter ende of this complaint was fumbled in such wise, As what she meant the standers by could scarcely well deuise. Anon she neyther semde to speake nor fully for to ney, But like to one that counterfeites in sport the Mare to play. Within a while she neyed plaine, and downe hir armes were pight, Upon the ground all clad with haire, and bare hir bodie tight. Hir fingers ioyned all in one, at ende whereof did grow In stede of nayles a round tough hoofe of welked horne bylow. Hir head and necke shot forth in length, hir kirtle trayne became A faire long taile. Hir flaring haire was made a hanging Mane. And as hir natiue shape and doyce most monstrously did passe, So by the vncoth name of Mare she after termed was. The Centaure Chyron wept hereat: and piteously dismaide Did call on thée (although in vaine) thou Delphian God for ayde. For neyther lay it in thy hande to breake Ioues mighty hest,
And though it had, yet in thy state as then thou did not rest. In Elis did thou then abide and in Messene lande. It was the time when vnder shape of shepehierde with a wande Of Olyue and a pipe of réedes thou kept Admetus shéepe. Now in this time that (saue of Loue) thou tooke none other keepe, And madste thee merrie with thy pipe, the glistring Maias sonne By chaunce abrode the fields of Pyle spide certaine cattle runne Without a hierde, the which he stole and closely did them hide Among the woods. This pretie slight no earthly creature spide, Saue one old churle that Battus hight. This Battus had the charge Of welthie Neleus féeding groundes, and all his pastures large, And kept a race of goodly Mares. Of him he was afraide. And least by him his priuie theft should chaunce to be bewraide, He tooke a bribe to stop his mouth, and thus vnto him saide. My friend I pray thée if perchaunce that any man enquire This cattell say thou saw them not. And take thou for thy hire This faire yong Bullocke. Tother tooke the Bullocke at his hand, And shewing him a certaine stone that lay vpon the lande Sayd, go thy way: Assoone this stone thy doings shall bewray, As I shall doe. So Mercurie did séeme to go his way. Annon he commes me backe againe, and altred both in speche And outward shape, saide Countrieman Ich heartely bezeche, And if thou zawest any Kie come royling through this grounde, Or driuen away, tell what he was and where they may be vownde. And I chill gethée vor thy paine an Hecfar an hir match. The Carle perceyuing double gaine, and gréedy for to catch, Sayde: vnder yonsame hill they were, and vnder yonsame hill Cham zure they are, and with his hand he poynted therevntill. At that Mercurius laughing saide: false knaue: and doste bewray Me to my selfe? doste thou bewray me to my selfe I say? And with that word strayt to a stone he turnde his double heart, In which the slaunder yet remaines without the stones desart. The Bearer of the charmed Rod the suttle Mercurie This done arose with wauing wings and from that place did flie. And as he houered in the Ayre he viewde the fieldes bylow Of Atticke and the towne it selfe with all the trées that grow In Lycey where the learned Clarkes did wholsome preceptes show.
By chaunce the verie selfe same day the virgins of the towne Of olde and auncient custome bare in baskets on their crowne Beset with garlands fresh and gay and strowde with flowres swéete To Pallas towre such sacrifice as was of custome meete. The winged God beholding them returning in a troupe Continued not directly forth, but gan me downe to stoupe. And fetch a wyndlasse round about. And as the hungry Kite Beholding vnto sacrifice a Bullocke redie dight, Doth sore about his wished pray desirous for to snatche But that he dareth not for such as stand about and watch: So Mercurie with nimble wings doth kéepe a lower gate About Mineruas loftie towres in round and whéeling rate. As far as doth the Morning starre in cleare and streaming light Excell all other starres in heauen: as far also as bright Dame Phebe dimmes the Morning starre, so far did Herses face Staine all the Ladies of hir troupe: she was the verie grace And beautie of that solemne pompe, and all that traine so fayre. Ioues sonne was rauisht with the sight, and hanging in the ayre Began to swelt within himselfe, in case as when the poulder Hath driuen the Pellet from the Gunne, the Pellet ginnes to smoulder And in his flying waxe more hote. In smoking brest he shrowdes His flames not brought frō heauen aboue but caught beneath the clouds. He leaues his iorney toward heauen and takes another race Not minding any lenger time to hide his present case. So great a trust and confidence his beautie to him gaue Which though it séemed of it selfe sufficient force to haue. Yet was he curious for to make himselfe more fine and braue. He kembd his head and strokt his beard, and pried on euery side To sée that in his furniture no wrinkle might be spide. And forbicause his Cloke was fringde and garded brode with golde, He cast it on his shoulder vp most séemely to beholde. He takes in hand his charmed rod that bringeth things asléepe And wakes them when he list againe. And lastly taketh kéepe That on his faire welformed feete his golden shooes sit cléene, And that all other things thereto well correspondent béene. In Cecrops Court were Chambers three set far from all resort With yuorie beddes all furnished in far most royall sort.
Of which Aglauros had the left and Pandrose had the right, And Herse had the middlemost. She that Aglauros hight First markt the comming of the God, and asking him his name Demaunded him for what entent and cause he thither came. Pleiones Nephew Maias sonne did make hir aunswer thus. I am my fathers messenger his pleasure to discusse To mortall folke and hellish fiendes as list him to commaund. My father is the mightie Ioue. To that thou doste demaund I will not feyne a false excuse. I aske no more but graunt To keepe thy sisters counsell close, and for to be the Aunt Of such the issue as on hir my chaunce shalbe to get. Thy sister Herse is the cause that hath me hither fet. I pray thée beare thou with my loue that is so firmely set. Aglauros cast on Mercurie hir scornfull eyes aside, With which against Mineruas will hir secretes late she spide, Demaunding him in recompence a mighty masse of Golde: And would not let him enter in vntil the same were tolde. The warlike Goddesse cast on hir a sterne and cruell looke, And fetched such a cutting sigh that forcibly it shooke Both brest and brestplate, wherewithall it came vnto hir thought How that Aglauros late ago against hir will had wrought In looking on the Lemman childe contrarie to hir othe, The whiche she tooke hir in the chest. for which she waxed wrothe. Againe she saw hir cancred heart maliciously repine Against hir sister and the God. And furthermore in fine How that the golde which Mercurie had giuen hir for hir méede, Would make hir both in welth and pride all others to excéede. She goes me straight to Enuies house, a foule and irksome caue Replete with blacke and lothly filth and stinking like a graue. It standeth in a hollow dale where neyther light of Sunne Nor blast of any winde or Ayre may for the déepenesse come. A dreyrie sad and dolefull den ay full of slouthfull colde As which ay dimd with smoldring smoke doth neuer fire beholde, When Pallas that same manly Maide approched nere this plot, She staide without, for to the house in enter might she not. And with hir Iauelin point did giue a push against the doore. The doore flue open by and by and fell me in the floore.
There saw she Enuie sit within fast gnawing on the flesh Of Snakes and Todes the filthie foode that kéepes hir vices fresh. It lothde hir to beholde the sight. Anon the Elfe arose And left the gnawed Adders flesh, and slouthfully she goes With lumpish leysure like a Snayle, and when she saw the face Of Pallas and hir faire attire adournde with heauenly grace, She gaue a sigh a sorie sigh from bottome of hir heart. Hir lippes were pale, hir chéekes were wan, and all hir face was swart: Hir bodie leane as any Rake. She looked eke a skew. Hir téeth were furde with filth and drosse, hir gums were waryish blew, The working of hir festered gall had made hir stomacke gréene. And all bevenimde was hir tongue. No sléepe hir eyes had séene. Continuall Carke and cankred care did kéepe hir waking still: Of laughter (saue at others harmes) the Helhound can no skill. It is against hir will that men haue any good successe. And if they haue, she frettes and fumes within hir minde no lesse Than if hir selfe had taken harme. In séeking to annoy: And worke distresse to other folke, hir selfe she doth destroy. Thus is she torment to hir selfe. Though Pallas did hir hate, Yet spake she briefly these few wordes to hir without hir gate. Infect thou with thy venim one of Cecrops daughters thrée, It is Aglauros whome I meane, for so it néedes must bee, This said, she pight hir speare in ground, and tooke hir rise thereon. And winding from that wicked wight did take hir flight anon. The Caitife cast hir eye aside, and séeing Pallas gon, Began to mumble with hir selfe the Diuels Paternoster. And fretting at hir good successe, began to blow and bluster. She takes a crooked staffe in hand bewreathde with knubbed prickes, And couered with a coly cloude, where euer that she stickes Hir filthie féete, she tramples downe and seares both grasse and corne: That all the fresh and fragrant fieldes séeme vtterly forlorne. And with hir staffe she tippeth of the highest poppie heades. Such poyson also euery where vngraciously she sheades, That euery Cottage where she comes▪ nd euery Towne and Citie Doe take infection at hir breath. At length (the more is pitie) She found the faire Athenian towne that flowed freshly then In feastfull peace and ioyfull welth and learned witts of men.
And forbicause she nothing saw that might prouoke to wéepe, It was a corsie to hir heart hir hatefull teares to kéepe. Now when she came within the Court, she went without delay, Directly to the lodgings where King Cecrops daughters lay, There did she as Minerua bad. she laide hir scuruie fist besmerde with venim and with filth vpon Aglauros brist, The whiche she fillde with hooked thornes: and breathing on hir face Did shead the poyson in hir bones: which spred it selfe apace, As blacke as euer virgin pitch through Lungs and Lights and all. And to thintent that cause of griefe abundantly should fall, She placed ay before hir eyes hir sisters happie chaunce In being wedded to the God, and made the God to glaunce Continually in heauenly shape before hir wounded thought. And all these things she painted out. which in conclusion wrought Such corsies in Aglauros brest that sighing day and night She gnawde and fretted in hir selfe for very cancred spight. And like a wretche she wastes hir selfe with restlesse care and pine Like as the yse whereon the Sunne with glimering light doth shine. Hir sister Herses good successe doth make hir heart to yerne. In case as when that fire is put to gréenefeld wood or fearne Whych giueth neyther light nor heate, but smulders quite away: Sometime she minded to hir Sire hir sister to bewray. Who (well she knew) would yll abide so lewde a part to play. And oft she thought with wilfull hande to brust hir fatall threede, Bicause she woulde not sée the thing that made hir heart to bléede. At last she sate hir in the doore and leaned to a post. To let the God from entring in. To whome now hauing lost Much talke and gentle wordes in vayne, she said: Sir leaue I pray For hence I will not (be you sure) onlesse you go away. I take thée at thy word (quoth he) and therewithall he pusht His rod against the barred doore, and wide it open rusht. She making proffer for to rise, did féele so great a waight Through all hir limmes, that for hir life she could not stretch hir straight. She stroue to set hirself vpright: but striuing booted not. Hir hamstrings and hir knées were stiffe, a chilling colde had got In at hir nayles, through all hir limmes. and eke hir veynes began For want of bloud and liuely heate, to waxe both pale and wan.
And as the freting Fistula forgrowne and past all cure Runnes in the flesh from place to place, and makes the sound and pure As bad or worser than the rest, euen so the cold of death, Strake to hir heart, and closde hir veines, and lastly stopt hir breath: She made no profer for to speake, and though she had done so It had bene vaine. For way was none for language forth to go. Hir throte congealed into stone: hir mouth became hard stone, And like an image sate she still, hir bloud was clearely gone. The which the venim of hir heart so fowly did infect, That euer after all the stone with freckled spots was spect. When Mercurie had punisht thus Aglauros spightfull tung And cancred heart immediatly from Pallas towne he flung. And flying vp with flittering wings did pierce to heauen aboue. His father calde him straight aside (but shewing not his loue) Said: sonne, my trustie messenger and worker of my will Make no delay but out of hand flie downe in hast vntill The land that on the left side lookes vpon thy mothers light. Yonsame where standeth on the coast the towne that Sidon hight. The King hath there a heirde of Neate that on the Mountaines féede, Go take and driue them to the sea with all conuenient speede. He had no sooner said the word but that the heirde begun Driuen from the mountaine to the shore appointed for to run. Whereas the daughter of the King was wonted to resort With other Ladies of the Court there for to play and sport. Betwéene the state of Maiestie and loue is set such oddes, As that they can not dwell in one. The Sire and King of Goddes Whose hand is armd with triplefire, who only with his frowne Makes Sea and Land and Heauen to quake, doth lay his scepter downe With all the graue and stately port belonging therevnto: And putting on the shape of Bull (as other cattell doe) Goes lowing gently vp and downe among them in the field The fairest beast to looke vpon that euer man beheld. For why? his colour was as white as any winters snow Before that eyther trampling féete or Southerne winde it thow. His necke was brawnd with rolles of flesh, and from his chest before, A dangling dewlap hung me downe good halfe a foote and more. His hornes were small, but yet so fine as that ye would haue thought
They bad bene made by cunning hand or out of waxe bene wrought. More cleare they were a hundreth fold than is the Christall stone In all his forehead fearfull frowne or wrinkle there was none. No fierce, no grim, nor griefly looke as other cattle haue. But altogether so demure as friendship séemde to craue. Agenors daughter marueld much so tame a beast to sée, But yet to touche him at the first too bolde she durst not bée. Annon she reaches to his mouth hir hand with herbes and flowres. The louing beast was glad thereof and neither frownes nor lowres. But till the hoped ioy might come with glad and fauning cheare He lickes hir hands and scarce ah scarce the resdue he forbeare. Sometime he friskes and skippes about and showes hir sport at hand Annon he layes his snowie side against the golden sand. So feare by little driuen away, he offred eft his brest To stroke and coy, and eft his hornes with flowers to be drest. At last Europa knowing not (for so the Maide was calde) On whome she venturde for to ride, was nerawhit appalde To set hir selfe vpon his backe. Then by and by the God From maine drie land to maine moyst Sea gan leysurly to plod. At first he did but dip his féete within the outmost waue, And backe againe, then further in another plunge he gaue. And so still further till at the last he had his wished pray Amid the déepe where was no meanes to scape with life away. The Ladie quaking all for feare with rufull countnance cast, Ay toward shore from whence she came, held with hir righthand fast One of his hornes: and with the left did stay vpon his backe. The weather flaskt and whisked vp hir garments being slacke. Finis secundi Libri.
¶THE THIRD BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. THe God now hauing laide aside his borrowed shape of Bull, Had in his likenesse shewde himself: And with his pretie trull Tane landing in the Ile of Crete. When in that while hir Sire Not knowing where she was become, sent after to enquire Hir brother Cadmus, charging him his sister home to bring. Or neuer for to come againe: wherein he did a thing, For which he might both iustly kinde and cruell called bée. When Cadmus ouer all the world had sought, (for who is hée. That can detect the thefts of Ioue?) and no where could hir sée. Then as an outlaw (to auoyde his fathers wrongfull yre) He went to Phebus Oracle most humbly to desire His heauenly counsell, where he would assigne him place to dwell. An Hecfar all alone in field (quoth Phebus) marke hir well, which neuer bare the pinching yoke, nor drew the plough as yit, Shall méete thée. follow after hir, and where thou séest hir sit, There builde a towne, and let thereof Beotia be the name. Downe from Parnasus stately top scarce fully Cadmus came, When royling softly in the vale before the herde alone He saw an Hecfar on whose necke of seruage print was none. He followde after leysurly as hir that was his guide, And thanked Phebus in his heart that did so well prouide. Now had he past Cephifus forde, and eke the pleasant groundes, About the Citie Panope conteinde within those boundes. The Hecfar staide, and lifting vp hir forehead to the skie Full séemely for to looke vpon with hornes like braunches hie Did with hir lowing fill the Ayre: and casting backe hir eie Upon the rest that came aloofe, as softly as she could Knéelde downe and laide hir hairie side against the grassie mould. Then Cadmus gaue Apollo thankes, and falling flat bylow Did kisse the ground and haile the fields which yet he did not know. He was about to sacrifice to Ioue the Heauenly King, And bad his seruants goe and fetch him water of the spring. An olde forgrowne vnfelled wood stoode neare at hand thereby, And in the middes a queachie plot with Sedge and Oysiers hie.
Where courbde about with peble stone in likenesse of a bow There was a spring with siluer streames that forth thereof did low. Here lurked in his lowring den God Mars his griesly Snake With golden scales and firie eyes beswolne with poyson blake. Thrée spirting tongues, thrée rowes of téeth within his head did sticke. No sooner had the Tirian folke set foote within this thicke And queachie plot, and deped downe their bucket in the well, But that to buscle in his den began this Serpent fell. And péering with a marble head right horribly to hisse. The Tirians let their pitchers slip for sodaine feare of this. And waxing pale as any clay, like folke amazde and flaight, Stoode trembling like an Aspen leafe. The specled serpent straight Commes trailing out in wauing linkes, and knottie rolles of scales, And bending into bunchie boughts his bodie forth he hales. And lifting vp aboue the wast himselfe vnto the Skie, He ouerlooketh all the wood, as huge and big welnie As is the Snake that in the Heauen about the Nordren Pole Deuides the Beares. He makes no stay but deales his dreadfull dole Among the Tirians. Whether they did take them to their tooles, Or to their héeles, or that their feare did make them stand like fooles, And helpe themselues by none of both, he snapt vp some aliue, And swept in others with his taile, and some he did depriue Of life with rankenesse of his breath, and other some againe He stings and poysons vnto death till all at last were staine. Now when the Sunne was at his heigth and shadowes waxed short, And Cadmus saw his companie make tarience in that sort, He marueld what should be their let, and went to séeke them out. His harnesse was a Lions skin that wrapped him about. His weapons were a long strong speare with head of yron tride, And eke a light and piercing Dart. And therevnto beside Worth all the weapons in the world a stout and valiant hart. When Cadmus came within the wood and saw about that part His men lie slaine vpon the ground, and eke their cruell fo Of bodie huge stand ouer them, and licking with his blo And blasting tongue their sorie woundes, well trustie friendes (quoth he) I eyther of your piteous deathes will streight reuenger be, Or else will die my selfe therefore. With that he raughting fast
A mightie Milstone, at the Snake with all his might it cast. The stone with such exceding force and violence forth was driuen, As of a fort the bulwarkes strong and walles it would haue riuen. And yet it did the Snake no harme: his scales as hard and tough As if they had bene plates of mayle did fence him well inough, So that the stone rebounded backe against his freckled slough. But yet his hardnesse saude him not against the piercing dart. For hitting right betwéene the scales that yéelded in that part Whereas the ioynts doe knit the backe, it thirled through the skin, And pierced to his filthy mawe and gréedy guts within. He fierce with wrath wrings backe his head, and looking on the stripe The Iaueling steale that sticked out, betwene his téeth doth gripe. The which with wresting to and fro at length he forth did winde, Saue that he left the head thereof among his bones behinde. When of his courage through the wound more kindled was the ire, His throteboll swelde with puffed veines, his eyes gan sparkle fire. There stoode about his smeared chaps a lothly foming froth. His skaled brest ploughes vp the ground, the stinking breath that goth Out from his blacke and hellish mouth infectes the herbes full fowle. Sometime he windes himselfe in knots as round as any Bowle. Sometime he stretcheth out in length as straight as any beame. Anon againe with violent brunt he rusheth like a streame Encreast by rage of latefalne raine, and with his mightie sway Beares downe the wood before his breast that standeth in his way. Agenors sonne retiring backe doth with his Lions spoyle Defend him from his fierce assaults, and makes him to recoyle Aye holding at the weapons point. The Serpent waxing wood Doth crashe the stéele betwene his téeth, and bites it till the blood Dropt mixt with poyson from his mouth, did die the gréene grasse blacke But yet the wound was verie light bicause he writhed backe And puld his head still from the stroke: and made the stripe to die By giuing way, vntill that Cadmus following irefully The stroke, with all his powre and might did through y• throte him riue, And naylde him to an Oke behind the which he eke did cliue. The Serpents waight did make the trée to bend. It grieude the trée His bodie of the Serpents taile thus scourged for to bée.
While Cadmus wondred at the hugenesse of the vanquisht foe Upon the sodaine came a voyce: from whence he could not know. But sure he was he heard the voyce. Which said, Agenors sonne What gazest thus vpon this Snake? the time will one day come That thou thy selfe shalt be a Snake. He pale and wan for feare, Had lost his speach: and ruffled vp stiffe staring stood his heare. Behold (mans helper at his néede) Dame Pallas gliding through The vacant Ayre was straight at hand, and bade him take a plough And cast the Serpents téeth in ground, as of the which should spring Another people out of hand. He did in euery thing As Pallas bade, he tooke a plough, and earde a forrow low And sowde the Serpents téeth whereof the foresaid folke should grow. Anon (a wondrous thing to tell) the clods began to moue, And from the forrow first of all the pikes appearde aboue, Next rose vp helmes with fethered crests, and then the Poldrens bright, Successiuely the Curets whole, and all the armor right. Thus grew vp men like corne in field in rankes of battle ray With shields and weapons in their hands to feight the field that day. Euen so when stages are attirde against some solemne game, With clothes of Arras gorgeously, in drawing vp the same The faces of the ymages doe first of all them showe, And then by peecemeale all the rest in order séemes to grow, Untill at last they stand out full vpon their féete bylow. Afrighted at this new found foes gan Cadmus for to take Him to his weapons by and by resistance for to make. Stay, stay thy selfe (cride one of them that late before were bred Out of the ground) and meddle not with ciuill warres. This sed, One of the brothers of that brood with launcing sworde he slue. Another sent a dart at him, the which him ouerthrue. The third did straight as much for him and made him yéelde the breath, (The which he had receyude but now) by stroke of forced death. Likewise outraged all the rest vntill that one by one By mutuall stroke of ciuill warre dispatched euerychone, This broode of brothers all behewen and weltred in their blood, Lay sprawling on their mothers womb the ground where erst they stood, Saue only fiue that did remaine. Of whom Echion led By Pallas counsell, threw away the helmet from his head,
And with his brothers gan to treat attonement for to make. The which at length (by Pallas helpe) so good successe did take, That faithfull friendship was confirmd and hand in hand was plight. These afterward did well assist the noble Tyrian knight, In building of the famous towne that Phebus had behight. Now Thebes stoode in good estate, now Cadmus might thou say That when thy father banisht thée it was a luckie day. To ioyne aliance both with Mars and Venus was thy chaunce, Whose daughter thou hadst tane to wife, who did thée much aduaunce, Not only through hir high renowne, but through a noble race Of sonnes and daughters that she bare: whose children in like case It was thy fortune for to sée all men and women growne. But ay the ende of euery thing must marked be and knowne. For none the name of blessednesse deserueth for to haue Onlesse the tenor of his life last blessed to his graue. Among so many prosprous happes that flowde with good successe, Thine eldest Nephew was a cause of care and sore distresse. Whose head was armde with palmed hornes, whose own hoūds in y• wood Did pull their master to the ground and fill them with his bloud. But if you sift the matter well, ye shall not finde desart But cruell fortune to haue bene the cause of this his smart. For who could doe with ouersight? great slaughter had bene made Of sundrie sortes of sauage beastes one morning: and the shade Of things was waxed verie short. It was the time of day That mid betwéene the East and West the Sunne doth séeme to stay. When as the Thebane stripling thus bespake his companie, Still raunging in the waylesse woods some further game to spie. Our weapons and our toyles are moist and staind with bloud of Deare: This day hath done inough as by our quarrie may appeare. Assoone as with hir scarlet whéeles next morning bringeth light, We will about our worke againe. But now Hiperion bright Is in the middes of Heauen, and seares the fieldes with firie rayes. Take vp your toyles, and cease your worke, and let vs go our wayes. They did euen so, and ceast their worke. There was a valley thicke With Pinaple and Cipresse trées that armed be with pricke. Gargaphie hight this shadie plot, it was a sacred place To chast Diana and the Nymphes that wayted on hir grace.
Within the furthest end thereof there was a pleasant Bowre So vaulted with the leauie trées the Sunne had there no powre: Not made by hand nor mans deuise: and yet no man aliue, A trimmer piece of worke than that could for his life contriue. With flint and Pommy was it wallde by nature halfe about, And on the right side of the same full freshly flowed out A liuely spring with Christall streame: whereof the vpper brim Was gréene with grasse and matted herbes that smelled verie trim. When Phebe felt hir selfe waxe faint, of following of hir game, It was hir custome for to come and bath hir in the same. That day she hauing timely left hir hunting in the chace, Was entred with hir troupe of Nymphes within this pleasant place. She tooke hir quiuer and hir bow the which she had vnbent, And eke hir Iauelin to a Nymph that serued that intent. Another Nymph to take hir clothes among hir traine she chose, Two losde hir buskins from hir legges and pulled of hir hose. The Thebane Ladie Crocale more cunning than the rest Did trusse hir tresses handsomly which hung behind vndrest. And yet hir owne hung wauing still. Then Niphe nete and cléene, With Hiale glistring like the grash in beautie fresh and shéene, And Rhanis clearer of hir skin than are the rainie drops, And little bibling Phyale, and Pseke that pretie Mops, Powrde water into vessels large to washe their Ladie with. Now while she kéepes this wont, behold, by wandring in the frith He wist not whither (hauing staid his pastime till the morrow) Comes Cadmus Nephew to this thicke: and entring in with sorrow (Such was his cursed cruell fate) saw Phebe where she washt. The Damsels at the sight of man quite out of countnance dasht, (Bicause they euerichone were bare and naked to the quicke) Did beate their handes against their breasts, and cast out such a shricke, That all the wood did ring thereof: and clinging to their dame Did all they could to hide both hir and eke themselues fro shame. But Phebe was of personage so comly and so tall, That by the middle of hir necke she ouerpéerd them all. Such colour as appeares in Heauen by Phebus broken rayes Directly shining on the Cloudes, or such as is alwayes The colour of the Morning Cloudes before the Sunne doth show,
Such sanguine colour in the face of Phoebe gan to glowe There standing naked in his sight. Who though she had hir gard Of Nymphes about hir: yet she turnde hir bodie from him ward. And casting back an angrie looke, like as she would haue sent An arrow at him had she had hir bow there readie bent. So raught she water in hir hande and for to wreake the spight Besprinckled all the heade and face of this vnluckie Knight, And thus forespake the heauie lot that shoulde vpon him light. Now make thy vaunt among thy Mates, thou sawfte Diana bare. Tell if thou can: I giue thée leaue: tell heardly: doe not spare. This done she makes no further threates, but by and by doth spread A payre of liuely olde Harts hornes vpon his sprinckled head. She sharpes his eares, she makes his necke both slender, long and lanke▪ She turnes his fingers into féete, his armes to spindle shanke. She wrappes him in a hairie hyde beset with speckled spottes, And planteth in him fearefulnesse. And so away he trottes. Full greatly wondring to him selfe what made him in that cace To be so wight and swift of foote. But when he saw his face And horned temples in the brooke, he would haue cryde alas, But as for then no kinde of speach out of his lippes could passe. He sight and brayde: for that was then the speach that did remaine, And downe the eyes that were not his, his bitter teares did raine. No part remayned (saue his minde) of that he earst had béene. What should he doe? turne home againe to Cadmus and the Quéene? Or hyde himselfe among the Woods? Of this he was afrayd, And of the tother ill ashamde. While doubting thus he stayd. His houndes espyde him where he was, and Blacksoote first of all And Stalker speciall good of sent began aloud to call. This latter was a hounde of Crete, the other was of Spart. Then all the kenell fell in round, and euerie for his part, Dyd follow freshly in the chase more swifter than the winde, Spy, Eateal, Scalecliffe, thrée good houndes comne all of Arcas kinde. Strong Kilbucke, currish Sauage, Spring, and Hunter fresh of smell, And Lightfoote who to lead a chase did beare away the bell. Fierce Woodman hurte not long ago in hunting of a Bore, And Shepeheird woont to follow shéepe and neate to fielde afore. And Laund a fell and eger bitch that had a Wolfe to Syre:
Another brach callde Gréedigut with two hir Puppies by her. And Ladon gant as any Gréewnd a hownd in Sycion bred, Blab, Fléetewood, Patch whose flecked skin wt sundrie spots was spred: Wight, Bowman, Royster, beautie faire and white as winters snow, And Tawnie full of duskie haires that ouer all did grow, With lustie Ruffler passing all the resdue there in strength, And Tempest best of footemanshipe in holding out at length. And Cole and Swift, and little Woolfe, as wight as any other. Accompanide with a Ciprian hound that was his natiue brother, And Snatch amid whose forehead stoode a starre as white as snowe, The resdue being all as blacke and slicke as any Crowe. And shaggie Rugge with other twaine that had a Syre of Crete, And Dam of Sparta: Tone of them callde Iollyboy, a great And large flewd hound: the tother Chorle who euer gnoorring went, And Ringwood with a shyrle loude mouth the which he fréely spent. With diuers mo whose names to tell it were but losse of tyme. This fellowes ouer hill and dale in hope of pray doe clyme, Through thicke and thin and craggie cliffes where was no way to go, He flyes through groundes where oftentymes he chased had ere tho. Euen from his owne folke is he faine (alas) to flée away. He strayned oftentymes to speake, and was about to say. I am Acteon: know your Lorde and Mayster sirs I pray. But vse of wordes and speach did want to vtter forth his minde. Their crie did ring through all the Wood redoubled with the winde, First Slo did pinch him by the haunch, and next came Kildéere in, And Hylbred fastned on his shoulder, bote him through the skinne. These came forth later than the rest, but coasting thwart a hill, They did gainecope him as he came, and helde their Master still Untill that all the rest came in, and fastned on him to. No part of him was frée from wound. He could none other do But sigh, and in the shape of Hart with voyce as Hartes are woont, (For voyce of man was none now left to helpe him at the brunt) By braying shew his secret grief among the Mountaynes hie, And knéeling sadly on his knées with dréerie teares in eye, As one by humbling of himselfe that mercy séemde to craue, With piteous looke in stead of handes his head about to waue. Not knowing that it was their Lord, the huntsmen chéere their hounds
With wonted noyse and for Acteon looke about the grounds. They hallow who could lowdest crie still calling him by name, As though he were not there, and much his absence they do blame In that he came not to the fall, but slackt to sée the game. As often as they named him he sadly shooke his head, And faine he would haue béene away thence in some other stead. But there he was. And well he could haue found in heart to sée His dogges fell déedes, so that to féele in place he had not bée. They hem him in on euerie side, and in the shape of Stagge, With gréedie téeth and griping pawes their Lord in péeces dragge. So fierce was cruell Phoebes wrath, it could not be alayde, Till of his fault by bitter death the raunsome he had payde. Much muttring was vpō this fact. Some thought there was extēded A great deale more extremitie than neded. Some commended Dianas doing: saying that it was but worthely For safegarde of hir womanhod. Eche partie did applie Good reasons to defende their case. Alone the wife of Ioue, Of lyking or misliking it not all so greatly stroue, As secretly reioyst in heart that such a plague was light On Cadmus linage: turning all the malice and the spight Conceyued earst against the wench that Ioue had set fro Tyre, Upon the kinred of the wench, and for to fierce hir ire, Another thing cleane ouerthwart there commeth in the nicke: The Ladie Semell great with childe by Ioue as then was quicke. Hereat she gan to freat and fume, and for to ease hir heart, Which else would burst, she fell in hande with scolding out hir part. And what a goodyeare haue I woon by scolding erst? (she sed) It is that arrant queane hir selfe, against whose wicked hed I must assay to giue assault: and if (as men me call) I be that Iuno who in heauen beare greatest swing of all, If in my hande I worthie bée to holde the royall Mace, And if I be the Quéene of heauen and soueraigne of this place, Or wife and sister vnto Ioue, (his sister well I know: But as for wife that name is vayne, I serue but for a show, To couer other priuie skapes) I will confound that Whore. Now (with a mischiefe) is she bagd and beareth out before, Hir open shame to all the world? and shortly hopes to bée
The mother of a sonne by Ioue, the which hath hapt to mée. Not passing once in all my time, so sore she doth presume Upon hir beautie. But I trowe hir hope shall soone consume. For neuer let me counted be for Saturns daughter more, If by hir owne deare darling Ioue on whome she trustes so sore, I sende hir not to Styxes streame. This ended vp she rose And couered in golden cloud to Semelles house she goes. And ere she sent away the cloud, she takes an olde wyues shape With hoarie haire and riueled skinne, with slow and crooked gate. As though she had the Palsey had hir féeble limmes did shake, And eke she foltred in the mouth as often as she spake. She séemde olde Beldame Beroe of Epidaure to bée, This Ladie Semelles Nourse as right as though it had béene shée. So when that after mickle talke of purpose ministred Ioues name was vpned: by and by she gaue a sigh and sed, I wish with all my heart that Ioue bée cause to thée of this. But daughter deare I dreade the worst, I feare it be amisse. For manie Uarlets vnder name of Gods to serue their lust, Haue into vndefiled beddes themselues full often thrust. And though it bene the mightie Ioue yet doth not that suffize, Onlesse he also make the same apparant to our eyes. And if it be euen verie hée, I say it doth behoue, He proue it by some open signe and token of his loue. And therefore pray him for to graunt that looke in what degrée, What order, fashion, sort and state he vse to companie With mightie Iuno, in the same in euerie poynt and cace, To all intents and purposes he thée likewise embrace, And that he also bring with him his bright thréeforked Mace: With such instructions Iuno had enformed Cadmus Néece: And she poore sielie simple soule immediately on this Requested Ioue to graunt a boone the which she did not name. Aske what thou wilt swéete heart (quoth he) thou shalt not misse the same, And for to make thée sure hereof, the grisely Stygian Lake, Which is the feare and God of Gods beare witnesse for thy sake. She ioying in hir owne mischaunce, not hauing any powre To rule hir selfe, but making spéede to hast hir fatall howre, In which she through hir Louers helpe should worke hir owne decay,
Sayd: Such as Iuno findeth you when you and she doe play, The games of Venus, such I pray thée shew thy selfe to mée In euerie case. The God would faine haue stopt hir mouth. But shée Had made such hast that out it was. Which made him sigh full sore, For neyther she could then vnwish the thing she wisht before, Nor he reuoke his solemne oth. Wherefore with sorie heart And heaue countnance by and by to Heauen he doth depart. And makes to follow after him with looke full grim and toure The flakie clouds all grisy blacke, as when they threat a shoure. To which he added mixt with winde a fierce and flashing flame, With drie and dreadfull thunderclaps and lightning to the same Of deadly vnauoyded dynt. And yet as much as may He goes about his vehement force and fiercenesse to allay. He doth not arme him with the fire with which he did remoue The Giant with the hundreth handes Typhoëus from aboue: It was too cruell and too sore to vse against his Loue. The Cyclops made an other kinde of lightning farre more light, Wherein they put much lesse of fire, lesse fiercenesse, lesser might. It hight in Heauen the seconde Mace. Ioue armes himselfe with this And enters into Cadmus house where Semelles chamber is. She being mortall was too weake and féeble to withstande Such troublous tumultes of the Heauens: and therefore out of hande Was burned in hir Louers armes. But yet he tooke away His infant from the mothers wombe vnperfect as it lay, And (if a man may credit it) did in his thigh it sowe, Where byding out the mothers tyme it did to ripenesse growe. And when the time of birth was come his Aunt the Ladie Ine Did nourse him for a while by stealth and kept him trym and fine. The Nymphes of Nysa afterwarde did in their bowres him hide, And brought him vp with Milke till tyme he might abrode be spyde. Now while these things were done on earth, and that by fatal doome The twice borne Bacchus had a tyme to mannes estate to come, They say that Ioue disposde to myrth as he and Iuno sate A drinking Nectar after meate in sport and pleasant rate, Did fall a ieasting with his wife, and saide: a greater pleasure In Venus games ye women haue than men beyonde all measure.
She answerde no. To trie the truth, they both of them agrée The wise Tyresias in this case indifferent Iudge to bée, Who both the man and womans ioyes by tryall vnderstood. For finding once two mightie Snakes engendring in a Wood, He strake them ouerthwart the backs, by meanes whereof beholde (As straunge a thing to be of truth as euer yet was tolde) He being made a woman straight, seuen winter liued so. The eight he finding them againe did say vnto them tho: And if to strike ye haue such powre as for to turne their shape That are the giuers of the stripe, before you hence escape, One stripe now will I lende you more. He strake them as beforne And straight returnd his former shape in which he first was borne. Tyresias therefore being tane to iudge this iesting strife, Gaue sentence on the side of Ioue. The which the Quéene his wife Did take a great deale more to heart than néeded, and in spight To wreake hir téene vpon hir Iudge, bereft him of his sight. But Ioue (for to the Gods it is vnléefull to vndoe The things which other of the Gods by any meanes haue doe) Did giue him sight in things to come for losse of sight of eye, And so his grieuous punishment with honour did supplie. By meanes whereof within a while in Citie, fielde, and towne Through all the coast of Aöny was bruted his renowne. And folke to haue their fortunes read that dayly did resorte Were aunswerde so as none of them could giue him misreporte. The first that of his soothfast wordes had proufe in all the Realme Was freckled Lyriop, whom sometime surprised in his streame, The floud Cephisus did enforce. This Lady bare a sonne Whose beautie at his verie birth might iustly loue haue wonne. Narcissus did she call his name. Of whome the Prophet sage Demaunded if the childe should liue to many yeares of age. Made aunswere, yea full long, so that him selfe he doe not know. The Soothsayers wordes séemde long but vaine, vntill the end did show His saying to be true in déede by straungenesse of the rage, And straungenesse of the kinde of death that did abridge his age. For when yeares thrée times fiue and one he fully lyued had,
So that he séemde to stande béetwene the state of man and Lad, The hearts of dyuers trim yong men his beautie gan to moue And many a Ladie fresh and faire was taken in his loue. But in that grace of Natures gift such passing pride did raigne, That to be toucht of man or Mayde he wholy did disdaine. A babling Nymph that Echo hight: who hearing others talke, By no meanes can restraine hir tongue but that it néedes must walke, Nor of hir selfe hath powre to ginne to speake to any wight, Espyde him dryuing into toyles the fearefull stagges of flight. This Echo was a body then and not an onely voyce. Yet of hir speach she had that time no more than now the choyce. That is to say of many wordes the latter to repeate. The cause thereof was Iunos wrath. For when that with the feate She might haue often taken Ioue in daliance with his Dames, And that by stealth and vnbewares in middes of all his games. This elfe would with hir tatling talke deteine hir by the way, Untill that Ioue had wrought his will and they were fled away. The which when Iuno did perceyue, she said with wrathfull mood, This tongue that hath deluded me shall doe thée little good, For of thy speach but simple vse hereafter shalt thou haue. The déede it selfe did straight confirme the threatnings that she gaue. Yet Echo of the former talke doth double oft the ende And backe againe with iust report the wordes earst spoken sende. Now when she sawe Narcists stray about the Forrest wyde, She wared warme and step for step fast after him she hyde. The more she followed after him and néerer that she came, The whoter euer did she waxe as néerer to hir flame. Lyke as the liuely Brimstone doth which dipt about a match, And put but softly to the fire, the flame doth lightly catch. O Lord how often woulde she faine (if nature would haue let) Entreated him with gentle wordes some fauour for to get? But nature would not suffer hir nor giue hir leaue to ginne. Yet (so farre forth as she by graunt at natures hande could winne) Ay readie with attentiue eare she harkens for some sounde, Whereto she might replie hir wordes, from which she is not bounde.
By chaunce the stripling being strayde from all his companie, Sayde: is there any body nie? straight Echo answerde: I. Amazde he castes his eye aside, and looketh round about, And come (that all the Forrest roong) aloud he calleth out. And come (sayth she:) he looketh backe, and séeing no man followe, Why fliste, he cryeth once againe: and she the same doth hallowe, He still persistes and wondring much what kinde of thing it was From which that answering voyce by turne so duely séemde to passe, Said: let vs ioyne. She (by hir will desirous to haue said, In fayth with none more willingly at any time or stead) Said: let vs ioyne. And standing somewhat in hir owne conceit, Upon these wordes she left the Wood, and forth she yéedeth streit, To coll the louely necke for which she longed had so much, He runnes his way and will not be imbraced of no such. And sayth: I first will die ere thou shalt take of me thy pleasure. She aunswerde nothing else thereto, but take of me thy pleasure. Now when she saw hir selfe thus mockt, she gate hir to the Woods, And hid hir head for verie shame among the leaues and buddes. And euer sence she lyues alone in dennes and hollow Caues. Yet stacke hir loue still to hir heart, through which she dayly raues The more for sorrowe of repulse. Through restlesse carke and care Hir bodie pynes to skinne and bone, and waxeth wonderous bare. The bloud doth vanish into ayre from out of all hir veynes, And nought is left but voyce and bones: the voyce yet still remaynes: Hir bones they say were turnde to stones. From thence she lurking still In Woods, will neuer shewe hir head in field nor yet on hill. Yet is she heard of euery man: it is hir onely sound, And nothing else that doth remayne aliue aboue the ground. Thus had he mockt this wretched Nymph and many mo beside, That in the waters, Woods and groues, or Mountaynes did abyde Thus had he mocked many men. Of which one miscontent To sée himselfe deluded so, his handes to Heauen vp bent, And sayd: I pray to God he may once féele fierce Cupids fire As I doe now, and yet not ioy the things he doth desire. The Goddesse Ramnuse (who doth wreake on wicked people take) Assented to his iust request for ruth and pities sake.
There was a spring withouten mudde as siluer cleare and still, Which neyther shéepeheirds, nor the Goates that fed vpon the hill, Nor other cattell troubled had, nor sauage beast had styrd, Nor braunch nor sticke, nor leafe of trée, nor any foule nor byrd. The moysture fed and kept aye fresh the grasse that grew about, And with their leaues the trées did kéepe the heate of Phoebus out. The stripling wearie with the heate and hunting in the chace, And much delighted with the spring and coolenesse of the place, Did lay him downe vpon the brim: and as he stooped lowe To staunche his thurst, another thurst of worse effect did growe. For as he dranke, he chaunst to spie the Image of his face, The which he did immediately with feruent loue embrace. He féedes a hope without cause why. For like a foolishe noddie He thinkes the shadow that he sées, to be a liuely boddie. Astraughted like an ymage made of Marble stone he lyes, There gazing on his shadowe still with fixed staring eyes. Stretcht all along vpon the ground, it doth him good to sée His ardant eyes which like two starres full bright and shyning bée. And eke his fingars, fingars such as Bacchus might beséeme, And haire that one might worthely Apollos haire it déeme. His beardlesse chinne and yuorie necke, and eke the perfect grace Of white and red indifferently bepainted in his face. All these he woondreth to beholde, for which (as I doe gather) Himselfe was to be woondred at, or to be pitied rather. He is enamored of himselfe for want of taking héede. And where he lykes another thing, he lykes himselfe in déede. He is the partie whome he wooes, and suer that doth wooe, He is the flame that settes on fire, and thing that burneth tooe. O Lord how often did he kisse that false deceitfull thing? How often did he thrust his armes midway into the spring? To haue embraste the necke he saw and could not catch himselfe? He knowes not what it was he sawe. And yet the foolish elfe Doth burne in ardent loue thereof. The verie selfe same thing That doth bewitch and blinde his eyes, encreaseth all his sting. Thou fondling thou, why doest thou raught the fickle image so? The thing thou séekest is not there. And if a side thou go?
The thing thou louest straight is gone. It is none other matter That thou doest sée, than of thy selfe the shadow in the water. The thing is nothing of it selfe: with thée it doth abide, With thee it would departe if thou withdrew thy selfe aside. No care of meate could draw him thence, nor yet desire of rest. But lying flat against the ground, and leaing on his brest, With gréede eyes he gazeth still vppon the falced face, And through his sight is wrought his bane. Yet for a little space He turnes and settes himselfe vpright, and holding vp his hands With piteous voyce vnto the wood that round about him stands, Cryes out and ses: alas ye Woods, and was there euer any? That looude so cruelly as I? you know: for vnto many A place of harbrough haue you béene, and fort of refuge strong. Can you remember any one in all your tyme so long? That hath so pinde away as I? I sée and am full faine, Howbeit that I like and sée I can not yet attaine: So great a blindnesse in my heart through doting loue doth raigne. And for to spight me more withall, it is no iourney farre, No drenching Sea, no Mountaine hie, no wall, no locke, no barre, It is but euen a little droppe that kéepes vs two a sunder. He would be had. For looke how oft I kisse the water vnder, So oft againe with vpwarde mouth he riseth towarde mée. A man would thinke to touch at least I should yet able bée. It is a trifle in respect that lettes vs of our loue. What wight soeuer that thou art come hither vp aboue. O pierlesse piece, why dost thou mée thy louer thus delude? Or whither fliste thou of thy friende thus earnestly pursude? Iwis I neyther am so fowle nor yet so growne in yeares That in this wise thou shouldst me shoon. To haue me to their Féeres, The Nymphes themselues haue sude ere this. And yet (as should appéere) Thou dost pretende some kinde of hope of friendship by thy chéere. For when I stretch mine armes to thée, thou stretchest thine likewise. And if I smile thou smilest too: And when that from mine eyes The teares doe drop, I well perceyue the water stands in thine. Like gesture also dost thou make to euerie becke of mine. And as by mouing of thy swéete and louely lippes I wéene,
Thou speakest words although mine eares conceiue not what they béene It is my selfe I well perceyue, it is mine Image sure, That in this sort dluding me, this furie doth procure. I am mamored of my selfe, I doe both set on fire, And am the same that swelteth too, through impotent desire. What shall I doe? be woode or wo? whome shall I wo therefore? The thing I séeke is in my selfe, my plentie makes me poore. O would to God I for a while might from my bodie part. This wish is straunge to heare a Louer wrapped all in smart, To wish away the thing the which he loueth as his heart. My sorrowe takes away my strength. I haue not long to liue, But in the floure of youth must die. To die it doth not grieue. For that by death shall come the ende of all my griefe and paine I would this yongling whome I loue might lenger life obtaine: For in one soule shall now decay we stedfast Louers twaine. This saide in rage he turnes againe vnto the forsaide shade, And rores the water with the teares and sloubring that he made, That through his troubling of the Well his ymage gan to fade. Which when he sawe to vanish so, Oh whither dost thou flie? Abide I pray thée heartely, aloud he gan to crie. Forsake me not so cruelly that loueth thée so déere, But giue me leaue a little while my dazled eyes to chéere With sight of that which for to touch is vtterly denide, Thereby to féede my wretched rage and surie for a tide. As in this wise he made his mone, he stripped off his cote And with his fist outragiously his naked stomacke smote. A ruddie colour where he smote rose on his stomacke shéere, Lyke Apples which doe partly white and striped red appéere. Or as the clusters ere the grapes to ripenesse fully come: An Orient purple here and there beginnes to grow on some. Which things assoone as in the spring he did beholde againe, He could no longer beare it out. But fainting straight for paine, As lith and supple waxe doth melt against the burning flame, Or morning dewe against the Sunne that glareth on the same: Euen so by piecemale being spent and wasted through desire, Did he consume and melt away with Cupids secret fire.
His liuely hue of white and red, his chéerefulnesse and strength And all the things that lyked him did wanze away at length. So that in fine remayned not the bodie which of late The wretched Echo loued so. Who when she sawe his state, Although in heart she angrie were, and mindefull of his pride, Yet ruing his vnhappie case, as often as he cride Alas, she cride alas likewise with shirle redoubled sound. And when he beate his breast, or strake his féete against the ground, She made like noyse of clapping too. These are the woordes that last Out of his lippes beholding still his woonted ymage past. Alas swéete boy beloude in vaine, farewell. And by and by With sighing sound the selfe same wordes the Echo did reply. With that he layde his wearie head against the grassie place And death did cloze his gazing eyes that woondred at the grace And beautie which did late adorne their Masters heauenly face. And afterward when into Hell receyued was his spright He goes me to the Well of Styx, and there both day and night Standes tooting on his shadow still as fondely as before The water Nymphes his sisters wept and wayled for him sore And on his bodie strowde their haire clipt off and shorne therefore. The Woodnymphes also did lament. And Echo did rebound To euery sorowfull noyse of theirs with like lamenting sound. The fire was made to burne the corse, and waxen Tapers light. A Herce to lay the bodie on with solemne pompe was dight. But as for bodie none remaind: In stead thereof they found A yellow floure with milke white leaues new sprong vpon the ground. This matter all Achaia through did spreade the Prophets fame: That euery where of iust desert renowmed was his name. But Penthey olde Echions sonne (who proudely did disdaine Both God and man) did laughe to scorne the Prophets words as vaine, Upbrading him most spitefully with loosing of his sight, And with the fact for which he lost fruition of this light. The good olde father (for these wordes his pacience much did moue) Said O how happie shouldest thou be and blessed from aboue, If thou wert blinde as well as I, so that thou might not sée The sacred rytesof Bacchus band? For sure the time will bée,
And that full shortely (as I gesse) that hither shall resort Another Bacchus Semelles sonne, whome if thou not support With pompe and honour like a God, thy carcasse shall be tattred, And in a thousand places eke about the Woods be scattred. And for to reade thée what they are that shall perfourme the déede, It is thy mother and thine Auntes that thus shall make thée bléede. I know it shall so come to passe, for why thou shalt disdaine, To honour Bacchus as a God: and then thou shalt with paine Féele how that blinded as I am I sawe for thée too much. As olde Tiresias did pronounce these wordes and other such, Echions sonne did trouble him. His wordes proue true in déede, For as the Prophet did forespeake so fell it out with spéede. Anon this newefound Bacchus commes: the woods and fieldes rebound, With noyse of shouts and howling out, and such confused sound. The folke runne flocking out by heapes, men, Mayds and wiues togither The noble men and rascall sorte ran gadding also thither. The Orgies of this vnknowne God full fondely to performe, The which when Penthey did perceyue, he gan to rage and storme. And sayde vnto them. O ye ympes of Mars his snake by kinde What ayleth you? What fiend of hell doth thus enrage your minde? Hath tinking sound of pottes and pannes? hath noyse of crooked horne? Haue fonde illusions such a force? that them whome heretoforne No arming sworde? no bloudie trumpe? no men in battail ray Coulde cause to shrinke? no shéepish shriekes of simple women fray? And dronken woodnesse wrought by wine? & roughts of filthie freakes? And sound of toying timpanes dauntes? & quite their courage breakes? Shall I at you yée auncient men which from the towne of Tyre? To bring your housholde Gods by Sea, in safetie did aspyre? And setled them within this place the which ye nowe doe yéelde In bondage quite without all force and fighting in the fielde? Or woonder at you yonger sorte approching vnto mée More neare in courage and in yeares? whome méete it were to sée With speare and not with thirse in hande? with glittring helme on hed, And not with leaues? Now call to minde of whome ye all are bred, And take the stomackes of that Snake, which being one alone, Right stoutly in his owne defence confounded many one. He for his harbrough and his spring his lyfe did nobly spend.
Doe you no more but take a heart your Countie to defende. He put to death right valeant Knightes. Your battaile is with such As are but Meicocks in effect: and yet ye doe so much In conquering them, that by the déede the olde renowne ye saue, Which from your fathers by discent this present time ye haue. If fatall destnies doe forbid that Thebae long shall stande, Would God that men with Canon shot might raze it out of hande. Would God the noyse of fire and sworde did in our hearing sound. For then in this our wretchednesse there could no fault be found. Then might we iustly waile our case that all the world might sée Wée should not néede of sheading teares ashamed for to bée. But now our towne is taken by a naked beardelesse boy, Who doth not in the feates of armes nor horse nor armour ioy. But for to moyst his haire with Mirrhe, and put on garlands gay, And in soft Purple silke and golde his bodie to aray. But put to you your helping hand and straight without delay I will compell him poynt by poynt his lewdnesse to bewray, Both in vsurping Ioues high name in making him his sonne And forging of these Ceremonies lately now begonne. Hath King Atrisius heart inough this fondling for to hate? That makes himselfe to be a God? and for to shit the gate Of Argus at his comming there? and shall this rouer make King Penthey and the noble towne of Thebae thus to quake? Go quickly sirs (these wordes he spake vnto his seruaunts) go And bring the Captaine hither bound with spéede, why stay ye so? His Grandsire Cadmus, Athamas and others of his kinne Reproued him by gentle meanes but nothing could they winne: The more-intreatance that they made the fiercer was he still: The more his friendes did go about to breake him of his will. The more they did prouoke his wrath, and set his rage on fire: They made him worse in that they sought to bridle his desire. So haue I séene a brooke ere this, where nothing let the streame, Runne smooth with little noyse or none, but where as any beame Or cragged stones did let his course, and make him for to stay: It went more fiercely from the stoppe with omie wroth away. Beholde all bloudie come his men, and straight he them demaunded Where Bacchus was, and why they had not done as he commaunded?
Sir (aunswerde they) we saw him not, but this same fellow héere A chiefe companion in his traine and worker in this géere, Wée tooke by force: And therewithall presented to their Lord A certaine man of Tirrhene lande, his handes fast bound with cord, Whome they, frequenting Bacchus rites had found but late before. A grim and cruell looke which yre did make to séeme more sore, Did Penthey cast vpon the man. And though he scarcely stayd From putting him to tormentes strait. O wretched man (he sayde) Who by thy worthie death shalt be a sample vnto other, Declare to me the names of thée, thy father and thy mother. And in what Countrie thou wert borne, and what hath caused thée, Of these straunge rites and sacrifice, a follower for to bée. He voyd of feare made aunswere thus. Acetis is my name: Of Parentes but of lowe degrée in Lidy land I came. No ground for painfull Oxe to till, no shéepe to beare me wooll My father left me: no nor horse, nor Asse, nor Cow nor Booll. God wote he was but poore himselfe, With line and bayted hooke The frisking fishes in the pooles vpon his Réede he tooke His handes did serue in steade of landes, his substance was his craft. Nowe haue I made you true accompt of all that he me laft, As well of ryches as of trades, in which I was his heire And successour. For when that death bereft him vse of aire, Saue water he me nothing left. It is the thing alone Which for my lawfull heritage I clayme, and other none. Soone after I (bicause that loth I was to ay abide In that poore state) did learne a ship by cunning hande to guide, And for to know the raynie signe, that hight th' Olenien Gote Which with hir milke did nourish Ioue. And also I did note The Pliads and the Hiads moyst, and eke the siely Plough With all the dwellings of the winds that make the Seas so rough. And eke such Hauens as are méete to harbrough vessels in: With euerie starre and heauenly signe that guides to shipmen bin. Now as by chaunce I late ago did toward Dilos sayle, I came on coast of Scios Ile, and séeing day to fayle, Tooke harbrough there and went a lande. Assoone as that the night Was spent, and morning can to péere with ruddie glaring light, I rose and bad my companie fresh water fetch aboord.
And pointing them the way that led directly to the foorde, I went me to a little hill, and viewed round about To sée what weather we were lyke to haue eresetting out. Which done, I cald my watermen and all my Mates togither, And willde them all to go a boord my selfe first going thither. Loe here we are (Opheltes sayd) (he was the Maysters Mate) And (as he thought) a bootie found in desert fields a late, He dragd a boy vpon his hande that for his beautie shéene, A mayden rather than a boy appeared for to béene. This childe, as one forelade with wine, and dreint with drouse sléepe Did réele, as though he scarcely coulde himselfe from falling kéepe. I markt his countnance, wéede and pace, no inckling could I sée, By which I might coniecture him a mortall wight to bée. I thought, and to my fellowes sayd: what God I can not tell But in this bodie that we sée some Godhead sure doth dwell. What God so euer that thou art, thy fauour to vs showe, And in our labours vs assist, and pardone these also. Pray for thy selfe and not for vs (quoth Dictys by and by.) A nimbler fellow for to climbe vpon the Mast on hie And by the Cable downe to slide, there was not in our kéele. Swart Melanth patrone of the shippe did like his saying wéele. So also did Alcimedon: and so did Libys to, And blacke Epopeus eke whose charge it did belong vnto To sée the Rowers at their tymes their dueties duely do. And so did all the rest of them: so sore mennes eyes were blinded Where couetousenesse of filthie gaine is more than reason minded. Well sirs (quoth I) but by your leaue ye shall not haue it so, I will not suffer sacriledge within this shippe to go. For I haue here the most to doe. And with that worde I stept Uppon the Hatches, all the rest from entrance to haue kept. The rankest Ruffian of the rout that Lycab had to name, (Who for a murder being late driuen out of Tucane came To me for succor) waxed woode, and with his sturdie fist Did giue me such a churlish blow bycause I did resist, That ouer boord he had me sent, but that with much ado I caught the tackling in my hand and helde me fast thereto: The wicked Uarlets had a sport to sée me handled so.
Then Bacchus (for it Bacchus was) as though he had but th, Bene waked with their noyse from sléepe, and that his drouse braine Discharged of the wine, begon to gather sence againe) Said: what a doe? what noyse is this? how came I here I pray? Srs tell me whether you doe meane to carie me away. Feare not my boy (the Patrone sayd) no more but tell me where Thou doest desire to go a lande, and we will set thée there. To Naxus ward (quoth Bacchus tho) set ship vpon the ome. There would I haue harbrough take, for Naxus is my home. Like periurde Caitis by the Sea and all the Gods thereof, They falsly sware it should be so, and therewithall in scoffe They bade me hoyse vp saile and go. Upon the righter hand I cast about to fetch the winde, for so did Naxus stand. What meanst? art mad? Opheltes cride, and therewithall begun A feare of loosing of their pray through euery man to run. The greater part with head and hand a signe did to me make, And some did whisper in mine eare the left hand way to take. I was amazde and said take charge henceforth who will for me: For of your craft and wickednesse I will no furthrer be. Then fell they to reuiling me, and all the rout gan grudge: Of which Ethalion said in scorne: by like in you Sir snudg Consistes the sauegard of vs all▪ and wyth that word he takes My roume, and leauing Naxus quite to other countries makes. The God then dalying with these mates, as though he had at last Begon to smell their suttle craft, out of the foredecke cast His eye vpon the Sea: and then as though he séemde to wéepe, Sayd: sirs to bring me on this coast ye doe not promise kéepe. I sée that this is not the land the which I did request. For what occasion in this sort deserue I to be drest? What commendation can you win, or praise thereby receyue? If men a Lad, if many one ye compasse to deceyue? I wept and sobbed all this while, the wicked villaines laught, And rowed forth with might & maine, as though they had bene straught. Now euen by him (for sure than he in all the worlde so wide There is no God more neare at hand at euery time and tide.) I sweare vnto you that the things the which I shall declare, Like as they séeme incredible, euen so most true they are,
The ship stoode still amid the Sea as in a dustie docke. They wondring at this miracle, and making but a mocke, Persist in beating with their Ores, and on with all their sayles. To make their Galley to remoue, no Art nor labor fayles. But Iuie troubled so their Ores that forth they could not row: And both with Beries and with leaues their ailes did ouergrow And he himselfe with clustred grapes about his temples round, Did shake a Iaueling in his hand that round about was bound With leaues of Uines: and at his féete there séemed for to couch Of Tygers, Lynx, and Panthers shapes most ougly for to touch. I cannot tell you whether feare or woodnesse were the cause, But euery person leapth vp and from his labor drawes. And there one Medon first of all began to waxen blacke, And hauing lost his former shape did take a courbed backe. What Monster shall we haue of thée (quoth Licab) and with that This Licabs chappes did waxen wide, his nosethrils waxed flat, His skin waxt tough, and scales thereon began anon to grow. And Libis as he went about the Ores away to throw, Perceiued how his hands did shrinke and were become so short, That now for finnes and not for hands he might them well report. Another as he would haue claspt his arme about the corde: Had nere an arme, and so bemaimd in bodie, ouer boord He leapeth downe among the waues, and forked is his tayle As are the hornes of Phebes face when halfe hir light doth fayle. They leape about and sprinkle vp much water on the ship, One while they swim aboue, and downe againe anon they slip. They fetch their friskes as in a daunce, and wantonly they writhe Now here now there among the waues their bodies bane and lithe. And with their wide and hollow nose the water in they snuffe, And by their noses out againe as fast they doe it puffe. Of twentie persons (for our ship so many men did beare) I only did remaine nigh straught and trembling still for feare. The God could scarce recomfort me, and yet he said go too, Feare not but saile to Dia ward. His will I gladly doe. And so assoone as I came there with right deuou intent, His Chaplaine I became. And thus his Orgies I frequent. Thou makste a processe verie long (quoth Penthey) to thintent
That (choler being coolde by time) mine anger might relent. But Sirs (he spake it to his men) go take him by and by, With cruell torments out of hand goe cause him for to die. Immediatly they led away Acetes out of sight, And put him into prison strong from which there was no flight. But while the cruell instruments of death as sword and fire Were in preparing wherewithall t'accomplish Pentheys yre, It is reported that the doores did of their owne accorde Burst open and his chaines fall off. And yet this cruell Lorde Persisteth fiercer than before, not bidding others go But goes himselfe vnto the hill Cytheron, which as tho To Bacchus being consecrate did ring of chaunted songs, And other loud confused sounds of Bacchus drunken throngs. And euen as when the bloudie Trumpe doth to the battell sound, The lustie horse streight neying out bestirres him on the ground, And taketh courage therevpon t'assaile his emnie proud: Euen so when Penthey heard a farre the noyse and howling loud That Bacchus franticke folke did make, it set his heart on fire, And kindled fiercer than before the sparks of settled ire. There is a goodly plaine about the middle of the hill, Enuirond in with Woods, where men may view eche way at will. Here looking on these holie rites with lewde prophaned eyes King Pentheys mother first of all hir foresaid sonne espies, And like a Bedlem first of all she doth vpon him runne, And with hir Iaueling furiously she first doth wound hir sonne. Come hither sisters come she cries, here is that mighty Bore, Here is the Bore that stroyes our fieldes, him will I strike therefore. With that they fall vpon him all as though they had bene mad, And clustring all vpon a heape fast after him they gad. He quakes and shakes: his words are now become more méeke and colde: He now condemnes his owne default, and sayes he was too bolde. And wounded as he was he cries helpe Aunt Autonoë, Now for Acteons blessed soule some mercie show to me. She wist not who Acteon was, but rent without delay His right hand off: and Ino tare his tother hand away. To lift vnto his mother th the wretch had nere an arme: But shewing hir his maimed corse, and wounds yet bléeding warme,
O mother sée he sayes: with that Agauë howleth out: And writhed with hir necke awrie, and shooke hir haire about. And holding from his bodie torne his head in bloudie hands, She cries: O fellowes in this déede our noble conquest stands. No sooner could the winde haue blowen the rotten leaues fro trées, When Winters frost hath bitten them, then did the hands of these Most wicked women Pentheys limmes from one another teare. The Thebanes being now by this example brought in feare, Frequent this newfound sacrifice, and with swéete frankinsence God Bacchus Altars lode with gifts in euery place doe cense. Finis  Libri. ¶THE FOVRTH BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. YEt would not stout Alcitho Duke Mineus daughter bow The Orgies of this new found God in conscience to allow But still she stiffly doth denie that Bacchus is the sonne Of Ioue: and in this heresie hir  with hir runne. The Priest had bidden holiday, and that as well the Maide As Mistresse (for the time aside all other businesse layde) In Buckskin cotes, with tresses loose, and garlondes on their heare, Should in their hands the leauie speaes (surnamed Thyrsis) beare, Foreelling them that if they did the Goddes commaundement breake, He would with sore and grieuous plagues his wrath vpon them wreake. The women straight both yong and olde doe therevnto obay. Their yarne, their baskets, and their flax vnsponne aside they lay, And burne to Bacchus frankinsnce. Whome solemly they call By all the names and titles high that may to him befall.
As Bromius, and Lyeus eke, begotten of the flame, Twice borne, the sole and only childe that of two mothers came. Unshorne Thyoney, Niseus, Leneus, and the stter Of Uines, whose pleasant liquor makes all tables fare the better. Nyctileus and th'Elelean Sire, Iacchus, Euan eke, With diuers other glorious names that through the land of Greke To thee O Liber wonted are to attributed bée. Thy youthfull yeares can neuer wast: there dwelleth ay in thée A childhod tender, fresh and faire: In Heauen we doe thée sée Surmounting euery other thing in beautie and in grace And when thou standste without thy hornes thou hast a Maidens face. To thée obeyeth all the East as far as Ganges goes, Which doth the scorched land of Inde with tawnie folke enclose. Lycurgus with his twibill sharpe, and Penthey who of pride Thy Godhead and thy mightie power rebelliously denide, Thou right redowted didst confounde: Thou into Sea didst send The Tyrrhene shipmen. Thou with bittes the sturdy neckes doste bend Of spotted Lyxes: Throngs of Frowes and Satyres on thée tend, And that olde Hag that with a staffe his staggering limmes doth stay Scarce able on his Asse to sit for réeling euery way. Thou commest not in any place but that is hearde the noyse Of gagling womens tatling tongues and showting out of boyes. With sound of Timbrels, Tabors, Pipes, and Brazen pannes and pots Confusedly among the rout that in thine Orgies trots. The Thebane women for thy grace and fauour humbly sue, And (as the Priest did bid) frequent thy rites with reuerence due. Alonly Mineus daughters bent of wilfulnesse, with working Quite out of time to breake the feast, are in their houses lurking: And there doe fall to spinning yarne, or weauing in the frame, And kepe their maidens to their worke. Of which one pleasant dame As she with nimble hand did draw hir slender thréede and fine, Said: whyle that others idelly doe serue the God of wine, Let vs that serue a better Sainct Minerua, finde some talke To ease our labor while our handes about our profite walke. And for to make the time séeme shorte, let eche of vs recite, (As euery bodies turne shall come) some tale that may delight. Hir saying like the rest so well that all consent therein,
And therevpon they pray that first the eldest would begin. She had such store and choyce of tales she wist not which to tell▪ She doubted if she might declare the fortune that befell To Dircetes of Babilon whome now with scaly hide In altred shape the Philistine beleueth to abide In watrie Pooles: or rather how hir daughter taking wings In shape of Doue on toppes of towres in age now sadly sings: Or how a certaine water Nymph by witchraft and by charmes Conuerted into fishes dumbe, of yongmen many swarmes, Untill that of the selfe same sauce hir selfe did tast at last: Or how the trée that vsde to beare fruite white in ages past, Doth now beare fruite in maner blacke, by sprincling vp of blood. This tale (bicause it was not stale nor common) séemed good To hir to tell: and therevpon she in this wise begun. Hir sie hand still drawing out the flaxen threede she spun. Within the towne (of whose huge walles so monstrous high & thick The fame is giuen Semyramis for making them of bricke) Dwelt hard together two yong folke in houses ioynde so nere That vnder all one roofe well nie both twaine conueyed were. The name of him was Pyramus, and Thisbe calde was she. So faire a man in all the East was none aliue as he, Nor nere a woman maide nor wife in beautie like to hir. This neighbrod bred acquaintance first, this neyghbrod first did stirre The secret sparkes, this neighbrod first an entrance in did showe, For loue to come to that to which it afterward did growe. And if that right had taken place they had bene man and wife, But still their Parents went about to let whith (for their life) They could not let. For both their heartes with equall flame did burne. No man was priuie to their thoughts. And for to serue their turne In steade of talke they vsed signes, the closelier they supprest The fire of loue, the fiercer still it raged in their brest. The wall that parted house from house had riuen therein a crany Which shronke at making of the wall▪ this fault not markt of any Of many hundred yeares before (what doth not loue espie.) These louers first of all found out, and made a way whereby To talke togither secretly, and through the same did goe Their louing whisprings verie light and safely to and fro.
Now as a tonefide Pyramus and This be on the tother Stoode often drawing one of them the pleasant breath from other O thou enuious wall (they sayd) why letst thou louers thus? What matter were it if that thou permitted both of vs In armes eche other to embrace? Or if thou thinke that this Were ouermuch, yet mightest thou at least make roume to kisse. And yet thou shalt not finde vs churles: we thinke our selues in de For this same piece of courtesie, in vouching safe to let Our sayings to our friendly eares thus fréely come and goe, Thus hauing where they stoode in vaine complayned of their woe, When night drew nere, they bade adew and eche gaue kisses swéete Unto the parget on their side, the which did neuer méete. Next morning with hir cherefull light had driuen the starres aside And Phebus with his burning beames the dewse grasse had dride. These louers at their wonted place by foreappointment met. Where after much complaint and mone they couenanted to get Away from such as watched them, and in the Euening late To steale out of their fathers house and eke the Citie gate. And to thentent that in the fieldes they strayde not vp and downe They did agrée at Ninus Tumb to méete without the towne, And tarie vnderneath a trée that by the same did grow Which was a faire high Mulberie with fruite as white as snow, Hard by a coole and trickling spring. This bargaine pleasde them both And so daylight (which to their thought away but slowly goth) Did in the Ocean fall to rest, and night from thence doth rise. Assoone as darkenesse once was come, straight Thisbe did deuise A shift to wind hir out of doores, that none that were within Perceyued hir: And muffling hir with clothes about hir chin, That no man might discerne hir face, to Ninus Tumb she came Unto the trée, and sat hir downe there vnderneath the same. Loue made hir bold. But sée the chaūce, there comes bsmerde with blood, About the chappes a Lionesse all foming from the wood From slaughter lately made of Kine to staunch hir bloudie thurst With water of the foresaid spring. Whome Thisbe spying furst A farre by moonelight, therevpon with fearfull steppes gan flie, And in a darke and yrkesome caue did hide hirselfe thereby. And as she fled away for hast she let hir mantle fall
The whych for feare she left behind not looking backe at all. Now when the cruell Lionesse hir thurst had stanched well, In going to the Wood she found the slender wéede that fell From Thisbe, which with bloudie teeth in pieces she did teare The night was somewhat further spent ere Pyramus came there Who séeing in the suttle sande the print of Lions paw, Waxt pale for feare. But when also the bloudie cloke he saw All rent and torne, one night (he sayd) shall louers two confounde, Of which long life deserued she of all that liue on ground. My soule deserues of this mischaunce the perill for to beare. I wretch haue bene the death of thée, which to this place of feare Did cause thée in the night to come, and came not here before. My wicked limmes and wretched guttes with cruell téeth therfore Deuour ye O ye Lions all that in this rocke doe dwell. But Cowardes vse to wish for death. The slender wéede that fell From Thisbe vp he takes, and streight doth beare it to the trée, Which was appointed erst the place of méeting for to bée. And when he had bewept and kist the garment which he knew, Receyue thou my bloud too (quoth he.) and therewithall he drew His sworde, the which among his guttes he thrust, and by and by Did draw it from the bléeding wound beginning for to die, And cast himselfe vpon his backe, the bloud did spin on hie As when a Conduite pipe is crackt, the water bursting out Doth shote it selfe a great way off and pierce the Ayre about. The leaues that were vpon the trée besprincled with his blood Were died blacke. The roote also bestained as it stoode, A déepe darke purple colour straight vpon the Berries cast. Anon scarce ridded of hir feare with which she was agast, For doubt of disapointing him commes Thisbe forth in hast, And for hir louer lookes about, reioycing for to tell How hardly she had scapt that night the daunger that befell. And as she knew right well the place and facion of the trée (As whych she saw so late before): euen so when she did sée The colour of the Berries turnde, she was vncertaine whither It were the trée at which they both agréed to méete togither. While in this doubtfull stounde she stoode, she cast hir eye aside And there beweltred in his bloud hir louer she espide
Lie sprawling with his dying limmes: at which she started backe, And looked pale as any Box, a shuddring through hir stracke, Euen like the Sea which sodenly with whissing noyse doth moue, When with a little blast of winde it is but toucht aboue. But when approching nearer him she knew it was hir loue. She beate hir brest, she shricked out, she tare hir golden heares, And taking him betwéene hir armes did wash his wounds with teares, She meynt hir wéeping with his bloud, and kissing all his face (Which now became as colde as yse) she cride in wofull case Alas what chaunce my Pyramus hath parted thée and mée? Make aunswere O my Pyramus: It is thy Thisb, euen shée Whome thou doste loue most heartely that speaketh vnto thée. Giue eare and rayse thy heauie heade. He hearing Thisbes name, Lift vp his dying eyes and hauing séene hir closde the same. But when she knew hir mantle there and saw his scabberd lie Without the swoorde: Unhappy man thy loue hath made thée die: Thy loue (she said) hath made thée slea thy selfe. This hand of mine Is strong inough to doe the like. My loue no lesse than thine Shall giue me force to worke my wound. I will pursue the dead. And wretched woman as I am, it shall of me be sed That like as of thy death I was the only cause and blame, So am I thy companion eke and partner in the same, For death which only coulde alas a sunder part vs twaine, Shall neuer so disseuer vs but we will méete againe. And you the Parentes of vs both, most wretched folke alyue, Let this request that I shall make in both our names byliue Entreate you to permit that we whome chaste and stedfast loue And whome euen death hath ioynde in one, may as it doth behoue In one graue be together layd. And thou vnhappie trée Which shroudest now the corse of one, and shalt anon through mée Shroude two, of this same slaughter holde the sicker signes for ay Blacke be the colour of thy fruite and mourninglike alway, Such as the murder of vs twaine may euermore bewray. This said, she tooke the sword yet warme with slaughter of hir loue And setting it beneath hir brest, did to hir heart it shoue. Hir prayer with the Gods and with their Parentes tooke effect. For when the frute is throughly ripe, the Berrie is bespect
With colour tending to a blacke. And that which after fire Remained, rested in one Tumbe as Thisbe did desire. This tale thus tolde a little space of pawsing was betwist, And then began Leucotho thus, hir sisters being whist. This Sunne that with his streaming light al worldly things doth cheare Was tane in loue. of Phebus loues now list and you shall heare. It is reported that this God did first of all espie, (For euerie thing in Heauen and Earth is open to his eie) How Venus with the warlike Mars adoutrie did commit. It grieued him to sée the fact and so discouered it, He shewed his husband Iunos sonne th' aduoutrie and the place In which this priuie scape was done. Who was in such a case That heart and hand and all did faile in working for a space. Anon he featly forgde a net of Wire so fine and slight, That neyther knot nor nooze therein apparant was to sight. This piece of worke was much more fine than any handwarpe oofe Or that whereby the Spider hanges in sliding from the roofe. And furthermore the suttlenesse and slight thereof was such. It followed euery little pull and closde with euery touch, And so he set it handsomly about the haunted couch. Now when that Venus and hir mate were met in bed togither Hir husband by his newfound snare before conuayed thither Did snarle them both togither fast in middes of all theyr play And setting ope the Iorie doores, callde all the Gods streight way, To sée them: they with shame inough fast lockt togither lay, A certaine God among the rest disposed for to sport Did wish that he himselfe also were shamed in that sort. The resdue laught and so in heauen there was no talke a while, But of this Pageant how the Smith the louers did beguile. Dame Venus highly stomacking this great displeasure, thought To be reuenged on the part by whome the spight was wrought. And like as he hir secret loues and méetings had bewrayd. So she with wound of raging loue his guerdon to him payd. What now auayles (Hyperions sonne) thy forme and beautie bright? What now auayle thy glistring eyes with cleare and piercing sight? For thou that with thy gleames art wont all countries for to burne, Art burnt thy selfe with other gleames that serue not for thy turne.
And thou that oughtst thy cherefull looke on all things for to show Alonly on Leucothoë doste now the same bestow. Thou fastnest on that Maide alone the eyes that thou doste owe To all the worlde. Sometime more rathe thou risest in the East, Sometime againe thou makste it late before thou fall to reast. And for desire to looke on hir, thou often doste prolong Our winter nightes. And in thy light thou faylest eke among. The fancie of thy faultie minde infectes thy feeble sight, And so thou makste mens hearts afrayde by daunting of thy light, Thou looxte not pale bycause the globe of Phebe is betwéene The Earth and thée: but loue doth cause this colour to be séene. Thou louest this Leucothoë so far aboue all other, That neyther now for Clymen, for Rhodos, nor the mother Of Circé, nor for Clytië (who at that present tyde Reiected from thy companie did for thy loue abide Most grieuous torments in hir heart: thou séemest for to care. Thou mindest hir so much that all the rest forgotten are. Hir mother was Eurynome of all the fragrant clime Of Arabie estéemde the flowre of beautie in hir time. But when hir daughter came to age the daugher past the mother As far in beautie, as before the mother past all other. Hir father was king Orchamus and rulde the publike weale Of Persey, counted by descent the .vij. from auncient Bele. Far vnderneath the Westerne clyme of Hesperus doe runne The pastures of the firie stéedes that draw the golden Sunne. There are they fed with Ambrose in stead of grasse all night Which doth refresh their werie limmes and kéepeth them in plight To beare their dailie labor out: now while the stéedes there take Their heauenly foode and night by turne his timely course doth make, The God disguised in the shape of Quéene Eurynome Doth prease within the chamber doore of faire Leucothoë His louer, whome amid .xii. Maides he found by candlelight Yet spinning on hir little Rocke, and went me to hir right. And kissing hir as mothers vse to kisse their daughters deare, Saide Maydes withdraw your selues a while and sit not listning here. I haue a secret thing to talke. The Maides auoyde eche one. The God then being with his loue in chamber all alone,
Said: I am he that metes the yeare, that all things doe beholde, By whome the Earth doth all things sée, the Eye of all the worlde. Trust me I am in loue with thée. The Ladie was so nipt With sodaine feare that from hir hands both rocke and spindle slipt Hir feare became hir wondrous well. he made no mo delayes, But turned to his proper shape and tooke hys glistring rayes. The damsell being sore abasht at this so straunge a sight, And ouercome with sodaine feare to sée the God so bright, Did make no outcrie nor no noyse, but helde hir pacience still, And suffred him by forced powre his pleasure to fulfill. Hereat did Clytie sore repine. For she beyond all measure Was then enamoured of the Sunne: & stung with this displeasure That he another Leman had, for verie spight and yre She playes the blab, and doth defame Leucothoë to hir Syre. He cruell and vnmercifull would no excuse accept, But holding vp hir handes to heauen when tenderly she wept, And said it was the Sunne that did the déede against hir will: Yet like a sauage beast full bent his daughter for to spill, He put hir déepe in delued ground, and on hir bodie laide A huge great heape of heauie sand. The Sunne full yll appaide Did with his beames disperse the sand and made an open way To bring thy buried face to light, but such a weight there lay Upon thee, that thou couldst not raise thine hand aloft againe, And so a corse both voide of bloud and life thou didst remaine. There neuer chaunst since Phaetons fire a thing that grieude so sore The ruler of the winged stéedes as this did. And therfore He did attempt if by the force and vertue of his ray He might againe to liuely heate hir frozen limmes conuay. But forasmuch as destenie so great attempts denies, He sprincles both the corse it selfe and place wherein it lyes With fragrant Nectar. And therewith bewayling much his chaunce Sayd: yet aboue the starrie skie thou shalt thy selfe aduaunce. Anon the body in this heauenly liquor stéeped well Did melt, and moisted all the earth with swéete and pleasant smell. And by and by first taking roote among the cloddes within By little and by little did with growing top begin A pretie spirke of Frankinsence aboue the Tumbe to win.
Although that Clytie might excuse hir sorrow by hir loue And seeme that so to play the blab hir sorrow did hir moue, Yet would the Author of the light resort to hir no more But did withholde the pleasant sportes of Venus vsde before. The Nymph not able of hir selfe the franticke fume to stay. With restlesse care and pensiuenesse did pine hir selfe away. Bareheaded on the bare cold ground with flaring haire vnkempt She sate abrode both night and day: and clearly did exempt Hirselfe by space of thrise thrée dayes from sustnance and repast Saue only dewe and saue hir teares with which she brake hir fast. And in that while she neuer rose but stared on the Sunne And euer turnde hir face to his as he his corse did runne. Hir limmes stacke fast within the ground, and all hir vpper part Did to a pale ashcolourd herbe cleane voyde of bloud conuart. The floure whereof part red part white beshadowed with a blew Most like a Uiolet in the shape hir countnance ouergrew. And now (though fastned with a roote) she turnes hir to the Sunne And kéepes (in shape of herbe) the loue with which she first begunne. She made an ende: and at hir tale all wondred: some denide Hir saying to be possible: and other some replide That such as are in déede true Gods may all things worke at will: But Bacchus is not any such. Thys arguing once made still. To tell hir tale as others had Alcithoes turne was come. Who with hir shettle shooting through hir web within the Loome, Said: Of the shepeheird Daplynis loue of Ida whom erewhile A iealouse Nymph (bicause he did with Lemans hir beguile) For anger turned to a stone (such furie loue doth sende:) I will not speake: it is to knowe: ne yet I doe entende To tell how Scython variably digressing from his kinde, Was as sometime woman, sometime man, as liked best his minde. And Celmus also wyll I passe, who for bicause he cloong Most faithfully to Iupiter when Iupiter was yoong, Is now become an Adamant. So will I passe this howre To shew you how the Curets were engendred of a showre: Or how that Crocus and his loue faire Smylar turned were To little flowres. with pleasant newes your mindes now will I chere. Learne why the fountaine Salmacis diffamed is of yore,
Why with his waters ouerstrong it weakeneth men so sore That whoso bathes him there commes thence a perfect man no more. The operation of this Well is knowne to euery wight. But few can tell the cause thereof, the which I will recite. The waternymphes did nurce a sonne of Mercuries in Ide Begot on Venus, in whose face such beautie did abide, As well therein his father both and mother might be knowne, Of whome he also tooke his name. Assoone as he was growne To fiftene yeares of age, he left the Countrie where he dwelt And Ida that had fostered him. The pleasure that he felt To trauell Countries, and to sée straunge riuers with the state Of forren landes, all painfulnesse of trauell did abate. He trauelde through the lande of Lycie to Carie that doth bound Next vnto Lycia. There he saw a Poole which to the ground Was Christall cleare. No fennie sedge, no barren reeke, no réede Nor rush with pricking poynt was there, nor other moorish wéede. The water was so pure and shere a man might well haue seene And numbred all the grauell stones that in the bottome béene. The vtmost borders from the brim enuirond were with clowres Beclad with herbes ay fresh and gréene and pleasant smelling flowres. A Nymph did haunt this goodly Poole: but such a Nymph as neyther To hunt, to run, nor yet to shoote, had any kinde of pleasure. Of all the Waterfairies she alonly was vnknowne To swift Diana. As the brute of fame abrode hath blowne, Hir sisters oftentimes would say: take lightsome Dart or bow, And in some painefull exercise thine ydle time bestow. But neuer could they hir persuade to runne to shoote or hunt, Or any other exercise as Phebes knightes are wont. Sometime hir faire welformed limbes she batheth in hir spring: Sometime she downe hir golden haire with Boxen combe doth bring. And at the water as a glasse she taketh counsell ay How euery thing becommeth hir. Erewhile in fine aray On soft swéete hearbes or soft gréene leaues hir selfe she nicely layes: Erewhile againe a gathering flowres from place to place she strayes. And (as it chaunst) the selfe same time she was a sorting gayes. To make a Poisie, when she first the yongman did espie, And in beholding him desirde to haue his companie.
But though she thought she stoode on thornes vntill she went to him: Yet went she not before she had bedect hir neat and trim, And pride and péerd vpon hir clothes that nothing sat awrie. And framde hir countnance as might séeme most amrous to the eie. Which done she thus begon: O childe most worthie for to bée Estemde and taken for a God, if (as thou séemste to mée) Thou be a God, to Cupids name thy beautie doth agrée. Or if thou be a mortall wight, right happie folke are they, By whome thou camste into this worlde, right happy is (I say) Thy mother and thy sister too (if any bée:) good hap That woman had that was thy Nurce and gaue thy mouth hir pap. But farre aboue all other, far more blist than these is shée Whome thou vouchsafest for thy wife and bedfellow for to bée. Now if thou haue alredy one, let me by stelth obtaine That which shall pleasure both of vs. Or if thou doe remaine A Maiden frée from wedlocke bonde, let me then be thy spouse, And let vs in the bridelie bed our selues togither rouse. This sed, the Nymph did hold hir peace, and therewithall the boy Waxt red: he wist not what loue was: and sure it was a ioy To sée it how excéeding well his blushing him became. For in his face the colour fresh appeared like the same That is in Apples which doe hang vpon the Sunnie side: Or Iuorie shadowed with a red: or such as is espide Of white and scarlet colours mixt appearing in the Moone When folke in vaine with sounding brasse would ease vnto hir done. When at the last the Nymph desirde most instantly but this, As to his sister brotherly to giue hir there a kisse. And therewithall was clasping him about the Iuorie necke: Leaue of (quoth he) or I am gone and leaue thee at a becke With all thy trickes. Then Salmacis began to be afraide, And to your pleasure leaue I frée this place my friend she sayde. Wyth that she turnes hir backe as though she would haue gone hir way: But euermore she looketh backe, and (closely as she may) She hides hir in a bushie queach, where knéeling on hir knée She alwayes hath hir eye on him. He as a childe and frée, And thinking not that any wight had watched what he did Romes vp and downe the pleasant Mede: and by and by amid
The flattring waues he dippes his féete, no more but first the sole And to the ancles afterward both féete he plungeth whole. And for to make the matter short, he tooke so great delight In coolenesse of the pleasant spring, that streight he stripped quight His garments from his tender skin. When Salmacis behilde His naked beautie, such strong pangs so ardently hir hilde, That vtterly she was astraught. And euen as Phebus beames Against a myrrour pure and clere rebound with broken gleames: Euen so hir eys did sparcle fire. Scarce could she tarience make: Scarce could she any time delay hir pleasure for to take: She wolde haue run, and in hir armes embraced him streight way: She was so far beside hir selfe, that scarsly could she stay. He clapping with his hollow hands against his naked sides, Into the water lithe and baine with armes displayde glydes. And rowing with his hands and legges swimmes in the water cleare: Through which his bodie faire and white doth glistringly appeare, As if a man an Iuorie Image or a Lillie white Should ouerlay or close with glasse that were most pure and bright. The price is won (cride Salmacis aloud) he is mine owne. And therewithall in all post hast she hauing lightly throwne Hir garments off, flew to the Poole and cast hir thereinto And caught him fast betweene hir armes, for ought that he could doe: Yea maugre all his wrestling and his struggling to and fro, She held him still, and kissed him a hundred times and mo. And willde he nillde he with hir handes she toucht his naked brest: And now on this side now on that (for all he did resist And striue to wrest him from hir gripes) she clung vnto him fast: And wound about him like a Snake which snatched vp in hast, And being by the Prince of Birdes borne lightly vp aloft, Doth writhe hir selfe about his necke and griping talants oft: And cast hir aile about his wings displayed in the winde: Or like as Iuie runnes on trées about the vtter rinde: Or as the Crabfish hauing caught his enmy in the Seas, Doth claspe him in on euery side with all his crooked cleas. But Atlas Nephew still persistes, and vtterly denies The Nymph to haue hir hoped sport: she vrges him likewise. And pressing him with all hir weight, fast cleauing to him still,
Striue, struggle, wrest and writhe (she said) thou froward boy thy fill: Doe what thou canst thou shalt not scape. Ye Goddes of Heauen agrée That this same wilfull boy and I may neuer parted bée. The Gods were pliant to hir boone. The bodies of them twaine Were mixt and ioyned both in one. To both them did remaine One countnance: like as if a man should in one barke beholde Two twigges both growing into one and still togither holde. Euen so when through hir hugging and hir grasping of the tother The members of them mingled were and fastned both togither, They were not any lenger two: but (as it were) a toy Of double shape. Ye could not say it was a perfect boy, Nor perfect wench: it seemed both and none of both to béene Now when Hermaphroditus saw how in the water shéene To which he entred in a man, his limmes were weakened so That out fro thence but halfe a man he was compelde to go. He lifteth vp his hands and said (but not with manly réere) O noble father Mercurie, and Venus mother déere. This one petition graunt your son which both your names doth beare, That whoso commes within this Well may so be weakened there, That of a man but halfe a man he may fro thence retire. Both Parentes moued with the chaunce did stablish this desire The which their doubleshaped sonne had made: and therevpon Infected with an vnknowne strength the sacred spring anon. Their tales did ende and Mineus daughters still their businesse plie In spight of Bacchus whose high feast they breake contemptuously. When on the sodaine (seeing nought) they heard about them round Of rubbish Timbrels perfectly a hoarse and iarring sound. With shraming shalmes and gingling belles. and furthermore they felt A cent of Saffron and of Myrrhe that verie hotly smelt. And (which a man would ill beleue) the web they had begun Immediatly waxt fresh and gréene, the flaxe the which they spun Did flourish full of Iuie leaues. And part thereof did run Abrode in Uines. The thréede it selfe in braunches forth did spring. Yong burgeous full of clustred grapes their Distaues forth did bring. And as the web they wrought was dide a déepe darke purple hew, Euen so vpon the painted grapes the selfe same colour grew. The day was spent, and now was come the time which neyther night
Nor day, but euen the bound of both a man may terme of right. The house at sodaine séemde to shake, and all about it shine With burning lampes, and glittering fires to flash before their eyen. And likenesses of ougly beastes with gastfull noyses yeld. For feare whereof in smokie holes the sisters were compeld To hide their heades, one here and there another, for to shun The glistring light. And while they thus in corners blindly run, Upon their little pretie limmes a fine crispe filme there goes, And slender finnes in stead of handes their shortned armes enclose. But how they lost their former shape of certaintie to know The darknesse would not suffer them. No feathers on them grow, And yet with shere and velume wings they houer from the ground And when they goe about to speake they make but little sound, According as their bodies giue, bewayling their despight By chirping shirlly to themselues. In houses they delight And not in woods: detesting day they flitter towards night: Wherethrough they of the Euening late in Latin take their name, And we in English language Backes or Réermice call the same. Then Bacchus name was reuerenced through all the Theban coast. And Ino of hir Nephewes powre made euery where great boast. Of Cadmus daughters she alone no sorowes tasted had, Saue only that hir sisters haps perchaunce had made hir sad. Now Iuno nothing how she waxt both proud and full of scorne, As well by reason of the sonnes and daughters she had borne, As also that she was aduaunst by mariage in that towne To Ahamas King Aeolus sonne a Prince of great renowne, But chiefly that hir sisters sonne who nourced was by hir Was then exalted for a God: began thereat to stir, And freating at it in hirselfe said: coulde this harlots burd Transforme the Lydian watermen, and drowne thée in the foord? And make the mother teare the guttes in pieces of hir sonne? And Mineus al thrée daughters clad with wings, bicause they sponne Whiles others howling vp and down like frantick folke did ronne? And can I Iuno nothing else saue sundrie woes bewaile? Is that sufficient? can my powre no more than so auaile? He teaches me what way to worke. A man may take (I sée) Example at his enmies hand the wiser for to bée.
He shewes inough and ouermuch the force of furious wrath By Pentheys death: why should not Ine be taught to tread the path The which hir sisters heretofore and kinred troden hath? There is a stéepe and irksome way obscure with shadow fell Of balefull yewgh, all sad and still, that leadeth downe to hell. The foggie Styx doth breath vp mistes: and downe this way doe waue The ghostes of persons lately dead and buried in the graue. Continuall colde and gastly feare possesse this queachie plot On eyther side: the siely Ghost new parted knoweth not The way that doth directly leade him to the Stygian Citie Or where blacke Pluto kéepes his Court that neuer sheweth pitie. A thousand wayes, a thousand gates that alwayes open stand, This Citie hath: and as the Sea the streames of all the lande Doth swallow in his gredie gulfe, and yet is neuer full: Euen so that place deuoureth still and hideth in his gull The soules and ghostes of all the world: and though that nere so many Come thither, yet the place is voyd as if there were not any. The ghostes without flesh, bloud, or bones, there wander to and fro. Of which some haunt the iudgement place: and other come and go To Plutos Court: and some frequent the former trades and Artes The which they vsed in their life: and some abide the smartes And torments for their wickednesse and other yll desartes. So cruell hate and spightfull wrath did boyle in Iunos brest, That in the high and noble Court of Heauen she coulde not rest: But that she néedes must hither come: whose féete no sooner toucht The thresholde, but it ga to quake. And Cerberus erst coucht Start sternely vp with thrée fell heades which barked all togither. She callde the daughters of the night the cruell furies thither: They sate a kembing foule blacke Snakes from of their filthie heare Before the dungeon doore, the place where Caitiues punisht were, The which was made of Adamant. when in the darke in part They knew Quéene Iuno, by and by vpon their feete they start. There Titius stretched out (at least) nine acres full in length, Did with with his bowls feede a Grype that tare them out by strength. The water sted from Tantalus that toucht his neather lip, And Apples hanging ouer him did euer from him slip. There also labored Sisyphus that draue against the hill
A rolling stone that from the top came tumbling downeward still▪ Ixion on his restlesse whale to which his limmes were bound Did flie and follow both at once in turning euer round. And Danaus daughters forbicause they did their cousins kill, Drew water into running tubbes which euermore did spill. When Iuno with a louring looke had vwde them all throughout, And on Ixion specially before the other rout, She trnes from him to Sisyphus, and with an angry chéere Sayes: wherefore should this man endure continuall penance here? And Athamas his brother reigne in welth and pleasure free? Who through his pride hath ay disainde my husband Ioue and mée. And therewithall she poured out th'occasion of hirhate, And why she came and what she would. She would that Cadmus state Should with the ruine of his house be brought to swyft decay. And that to mischiefe Athamas the Fiendes should force some way, She biddes, she prayes, she promises, and all is with a breth. And moues the furies earnestly: and as these things she seth, The hatefull Hag Tisiphone with horie ruffled heare, Remouing from hir face the Snakes that loosely dangled there, Sayd thus: Madame there is no néede long circumstance to make. Suppose your will already done. This lothsome place forsake, And to the holsome Ayre of heauen your selfe agayne retire. Queene Iuno went right glad away with graunt of hir desire. And as she woulde haue entred heauen, the Ladie Iris came And purged hir with streaming drops. Anon vpon the same The furious Frende isiphone doth cloth hir out of and In garment streaming gorie bloud, and taketh in hir hand A burning Cresset steepte in bloud, and girdeth hir about with wreathed Snakes and so goes forth. And at hir going out, Feare, terror, griefe and pensiunesse for companie she tooke, And also madnesse with his saight, and gastly staring looke. Within the house of Athamas no sooner foote she set, But that the postes began to quake and doores looke blacke as Iet. The sonne withdrew him, Athamas and eke his wife were cast With ougly sighies in such a feare, that out of doores agast They would haue fled. There soode the Fiend, and stopt their passage out, And splaying forth hir filthie armes beknit with Snakes about,
Did tosse and waue hir hatefull head. The swarme of saled snakes Did make an irksome noyse to heare as she hir tresses shakes. About hir shoulders some did craule: some trayling downe hir brest Did hisse and spit out poyson gréene, and spirt with tongues infest. Then from amyd hir haire two snakes with venymd hand she drew Of which shée one at Athamas and one at Ino threw. The snakes did craule about their breasts, inspiring in their heart Most grieuous motions of the minde: the bodie had no smart Of any wound: it was the minde that felt the cruell stings. A poyson made in Syrup wise, shée also with hir brings. The filthie fame of Cerberus, the casting of the Snake Echidna, bred among the Fennes about the Stygian Lake: Desirde of gadding foorth abroad: forgetfulnesse of minde: Delight in mischiefe: woodnesse: teares: and purpose whole inclinde: To cruell murther: all the which shée did together grinde: And mingling them with new shed bloud had boyled them in brasse, And stird them with a Hemblock stalke, Now whyle that Athamas And Ino stood and quakte for feare, this poyson ranke and fell Shée tourned into both their breastes and made their heartes to swell. Then whisking often round about hir head hir balefull brand, Shée made it soone by gathering winde to kindle in hir hand. Thus as it were in triumph wise accomplishing hir hest, To Duskie Plutos emptie Realme shée gettes hir home to rest, And putteth of the snarled Snakes that girded in hir brest. Immediatly King Aeolus sonne stark madde comes crying out, Through all the court what meane yee Sirs? why go yée not about To pitch our toyles within this chach. I sawe euen nowe here ran A Lyon with hir two yong whelpes. And there withall he gan To chase his wyfe as if in déede shée had a Lyon béene And lyke a Bedlem boystouslie he snatcheth from betwéene The mothers armes his little babe Loearchus smyling on him And reaching foorth his preatie armes & floong him fiercely from him A twice or thrice as from a slyng: and dasht his tender head Against a hard and rugged stone vntill he sawe him dead. The wretched mother (whither griefe did moue hir therevnto Or that the poyson spred within did force hir so to doe) Hould out and frantikly with scattered haire about hir eares
And with hir little Melicert whome hastely shée heares In naked armes she cryeth out hoe Bacchus. At the name Of Bachus Iuno gan to laugh and scorning sayde in game, This guerden loe thy foster child requiteth for the same. There hangs a rocke about the Sea the foote whereof is eate So hollow with the saltish waues which on the same doe beate. That like a house it kéepeth off the moysting showers of rayne The toppe is rough and shootes his front amiddes the open mayne. Dame Ino (madnesse made hir strong) did climb this cliffe anon And healong downe (without regarde of hurt that hoong thereon) Did throwe hir burden and hir selfe, the water where shée dasht In sprincling vpwarde glisterd red. But Venus sore abasht At this hir Néeces great mischaunce without offence or fault, Hir Vncle gently thus bespake. O ruler of the hault And swelling Seas, O noble Neptune whose dominion large Extendeth to the Heauen, whereof the mightie Ioue hath charge, The thing is great for which I sew. But shewe thou sor my sake Some mercie on my wretched friends whome in thine endlesse lake Thou séeest tossed to and fro. Admit thou them among Thy Goddes. Of right euen here to mée some fauour doth belong At least wise if amid the Sea engendred erst I were Of Froth, as of the which yet still my pleasaunt name I beare. Neptunus graunted hir request, and by and by bereft them Of all that euer mortall was. In sted wherof he left them A hault and stately maiestie: and altring them in hew With shape and names most méete for Goddes he did them both endew. Leucothoë was the mothers name, Palemon was the sonne. The Thebane Ladies following hir as fast as they could runne, Did of hir féete perceiue the print vpon the vtter stone. And taking it for certaine signe that both were dead and gone, In making mone for Cadmus house, they wrang their hands and tare Their haire, and rent their clothes, and railde on Iuno out of square, As nothing iust, but more outragious farre than did behoue In so reuenging of his selfe vpon hir husbands loue. The Goddesse Iuno could not beare their railing. And in faith You also will I make to be as witnesses (she sayth) Of my outragious crueltie. And so shée did in déede.
For shée that loued Ino best was following hir with spéede Into the Sea. But as shée would hir selfe haue downeward cast. Shée could not stirre, but to the rock as nailed sticked fast. The second as shée knockt hir breast, did féele hir armes wax stiffe. Another as shée stretched out hir hands vpon the cliffe, Was made a stone, and there stoode still ay stretching forth hir hands Into the water as before. And as an other standes A tearing of hir ruffled lockes, hir fingers hardened were And fstned to hir frisled toppe still tearing of hir heare, And looke what gesture eche of them was taken in that tide, Euen in the same transformde to stones, they fastned did abide. And some were altered into birds which Cadmies called bée And in that goolfe with flittering wings still to and fro doe flée. Nought knoweth Cadmus that his daughter and hir little childe Admitted were among the Goddes that rule the surges wilde. Compellde with griefe and great mishappes that had ensewd togither, And straunge foretokens often séene since first his comming thither, He vtterly forsakes his towne the which he builded had, As though the fortune of the place so hardly him bestad, And not his owne. And fléeting long like pilgrims, at the last Upon the coast of Illirie his wife and he were cast. Where ny forpind with cares and yeares, while of the chaunces past Upon their house, and of their toyles and former trauails tane They sadly talkt betwéene themselues, was my speare head the bane Of that same ougly Snake of Mars ({quod} Cadmus) when I fled From Sidon? or did I his teeth in ploughed pasture spred? If for the death of him the Goddes so cruell vengeaunce take, Drawen out in length vpon my wombe then traile I like a snake. He had no sooner sayde the worde but that he gan to glide. Upon his belly like a Snake. And on his hardened side He felt the sales new budding out, the which was wholy fret With speccled droppes of blacke and gray as thicke as could be set. He falleth groueling on his breast, and both his shankes doe growe In one round spindle Bodkinwise with sharpned point below. His armes as yet remayned still: his armes that did remayne, He stretched out, and sayde with teares that plentuously did raine A downe his face, which yet did kéepe the natiue fashion sownd,
Come hither wyfe, come hither wight most wretched on the ground, And whyle that ought of mée remaynes vouchsafe to touche the same. Come take mée by the hand as long as hand may haue his name, Before this snakish shape doe whole my body ouer runne. He would haue spoken more when sodainely his tongue begunne To split in two and speache did fayle: and as he did attempt To make his mone, he hist: for nature now had cleane exempt All other speach. His wretched wyfe hir naked stomack béete: And cryde, what meaneth this? deare Cadmus where are now thy féete? Where are thy shoulders and thy handes? thy hew and manly face? With all the other things that did thy princely person grace? Which nowe I ouerpasse. But why yée Goddes doe you delay? My bodie into lyke misshape of Serpent to conuay? When this was spoken, Cadmus lickt his wyfe about the lippes: And (as a place with which he was acquaynted well) he slippes Into hir boosome, louingly embracing hir, and cast Himselfe about hir necke, as oft he had in tyme forepast. Such as were there (their folke were there) were flaighted at the ight, For by and by they sawe their neckes did glister slicke and bright. And on their snakish heades grew crests? and finally they both Were into verie Dragons tournd, and foorth together goth Lone trayling by the tothers side, vntill they gaynd a wood, The which direct against the place where as they were then stood. And now remembring what they were themselues in tymes forepast, They neyther shonne nor hurten men with stinging nor with blast. But yet a comfort to them both in this their altred hew Became that noble impe of theirs that Indie did subdew, Whom al Achaia worshipped with temples builded new. All only Acrise Abas sonne (though of the selfe same stocke) Remaind, who out of Argos walles vnkindly did him locke. And moued wilfull warre against his Godhead: thinking that There was not any race of Goddes for he beleued not That Persey was the sonne of Ioue: or that he was conceyued By Danae of golden shower through which shée was deceiued. But yet ere long (such present force hath truth) he doth repent As well his great impietie against God Bacchus meant, As also that he did disdiane his Nephew for to knowe.
But Bacchus now full gloriously himselfe in Heauen doth showe. And Persey bearing in his hand the monster Gorgons head, That famous spoyle which here and there with snakish haire was spread, Doth beat the ayre with wauyng wings. And as he ouerflew The Lybicke sandes, the droppes of bloud that from the head did sew Of Gorgon being new cut off, vpon the ground did fal. Which taking them (and as it were conceyuing therwithall,) Engendred sundrie Snakes and wormes: by meanes wherof that clyme Did swarme with Serpents euer since, euen to this present tyme. From thence he lyke a watrie cloud was caried with the weather, Through all the heauen, now here, now there as light as any feather. And from aloft he viewes the earth that vnderneath doth lie, And swiftly ouer all the worlde doth in conclusion flie, Thrée times the chilling beares, thrée times y• crabbes fel cleas he saw: Oft times to Weast, oftimes to East did driue him many a flaw. Now at such time as vnto rest the sonne began to drawe, Bicause he did not thinke it good to be abroad all night, Within King Atlas western Realme he ceased from his flight, Requesting that a little space of rest enioy he might, Untill such tyme as Lucifer should bring the morning gray, And morning bring the lightsome Sunne that guides the cherefull day. This Atlas Iapets Nephewe, was a man that did excell In stature euerie other wight that in the worlde did dwell. The vtmost coast of all the earth and all that Sea wherein The tyred stéedes and wearied Wayne of Phoebus diued bin, Were in subiection to this King. A thousande flockes of shéepe, A thousand heirdes of Rother beastes he in his fields did kéepe: And not a neighbor did anoy his ground by dwelling nie. To him the wandring Persey thus his language did applie. If high renowne of royall race thy noble heart may moue, I am the sonne of Ioue himselfe: or if thou more approue The valiant déedes and hault exploytes, thou shalt perceiue in mée Such doings as deserue with prayse extolled for to bée. I pray thée of thy courtesie receiue mée as thy guest, And let mée only for this night within thy palace rest. King Atlas called straight to minde an auncient prophesie Made by Parnassian Themys, which this sentence did implie.
The time shall one day Atlas come in which thy golden trée Shall of hir fayre and precious fruite dispoyld and robbed bée. And he shall be the sonne of Ioue that shall enioy the pray. For feare hereof he did enclose his Orchard euerie way. With mightie hilles, and put an ougly Dragon in the same To kéepe it. Further he forbad that any straunger came Within his Realme, and to this knight he sayde presumtuouslie: Auoyd my land, onlesse thou wilt by vtter perill trie That all thy glorious actes whereof thou doest so loudly lie And Ioue thy father be too farre to helpe thée at thy néede. To these his wordes he added force, add went about in déede To driue him out by strength of hand. To speake was losse of winde For neyther could intreating faire nor stoutnesse tourne his minde. Well then ({quod} Persey) sith thou doest mine honour set so light, Take here a present: and with that he turnes away his sight, And from his left side drewe mée out Medusas lothly head. As huge and big as Atlas was he tourned in that stead Into a mountaine: Into trées his beard and locks did passe: His hands and shoulders made the ridge: that part which lately was His head, became the highest top of all the hill: his bones Were turnd to stones: and therewithall he grew mée all at ones Beyond all measure vp in heigth (For so God thought it best) So farre that Heauen with all the starres did on his shoulders rest. In endlesse prison by that time had Aëolus lockt the wind And now the chéerely morning starre that putteth folke in mind To rise about their daylie worke shone brightly in the skie. Then Persey vnto both his féete did streight his feathers tie And girt his Woodknife to his side, and from the earth did stie. And leauing nations nomberlesse beneath him euerie way At last vpon King Cepheyes fields in Aethiop did he stay. Where cleane against all right and law by Ioues commaundement Andromad for hir mothers tongue did suffer punishment. Whome to a rocke by both the armes when fastned hée had séene, He would haue thought of Marble stone shée had some image béene, But that hir tresses to and fro the whisking winde did blowe, And trickling teares warme from hir eyes a downe hir chéeks did flow Unwares hereat gan secret sparkes within his breast to glow.
His wits were straught at sight thereof and rauisht in such wise, That how to houer with his wings he scarsly could deuise. Assoone as he had stayd himselfe, O Ladie faire ({quod} hée) Not worthie of such bands as these, but such wherewith wee sée Togither, knt in lawfull bed the earnest louers bée I pray thée tell mée what thy selfe and what this lande is named And wherefore thou dost weare these Chains? the Ladie ill ashamed Was at the sodaine striken domb: and lyke a fearfull maid Shée durst not speake vnto a man. Had not hir handes béene staid She would haue hid hir bashfull face. Howbeit as she might With great abundance of hir teares shée stopped vp hir sight But when that Persey oftentimes was earnestly in hand To learne the matter, for bicause shée woulde not séeme to stand In stubborne silence of hir faultes, shée tolde him what the land And what she hight: and how hir mother for hir beauties sake Through pride did vnaduisedly too much vpon hir take. And ere shée full had made an ende, the water ga to rore: An ougly monster from the déepe was making to the shore Which bare the Sea before his breast. The Uirgin shrieked out. Hir father and hir mother both stood mourning thereabout, In wretched ease both twaine, but not so wretched as the maid Who wrongly for hir mothers fault the bitter raunsome paid. They brought not with them any help: but (as the time and cace Required) they wept and wrang their hands, and streightly did embrace Hir bodie fastened to the rock. Then Persey them bespake, And sayde: the time may serue too long this sorrow for to make: But time of helpe must eyther now or neuer else be take Now if I Persey sonne of hir whome in hir fathers towre The mightie Ioue begat with childe in shape of golden showre, Who cut off ougly Gorgons head bespred with snakish heare, And in the ayre durst trust these winges my body for to beare, Perchaunce should saue your daughters life, I think ye should as then Accept mée for your sonne in lawe before all other men. To these great thewes (by the help of God) I purpose for to adde A iust desert in helping hir that is so hard bestadde. I couenaunt with you by my force and manhod for to saue hir, Conditionly that to my wife in recompence I haue hir.
Hir parents tooke his offer streight: for who would sticke thereat And praid him faire, and promisde him that for performing that They would endow him with the ryght of al their Realme béeside. Like as a Gally with hir nose doth cut the waters wide, Enforced by the sweating armes of Rowers wyth the tide Euen so the monster with his brest did beare the waues aside, And was now come as néere the rocke as well a man myght sing Amid the pure and vacant aire a pellet from a sing. When on the sodaine Persey pusht his foote against the ground, And stied vpward to the clouds his shadow did rebound Upon the sea: the beast ran fierce vpon the passing shade. And as an Egle when he sées a Dragon in a glade Lie beaking of his blewish backe against the sunnie rayes, Doth cease vpon him vnbeware, and with his talants layes Sure holde vpon his scalie necke least writhing back his head His cruell téeth might doe him harme: So Persey in that stead Discending downe the ayre a maine with all his force and might Did cease vpon the monsters backe: and vnderneath the right Finne hard vnto the verie hilt his hooked sworde did smight. The monster being wounded sore did sometime leape aloft, And sometime vnder water diue, bestirring him full oft As doth a chaufed Boare beset with barking Dogges about. But Persey with his lightsome wings still kéeping him without The monsters reach, with hooked sword doth sometime hew his back Where as the hollow scales giue way: and sometime he doth hacke The ribbes on both his maled sides: and sometime he doth wound His spindle tayle where into fish it growes most smal and round. The Whale at Persey from his mouth such waues of water cast, Bemixed with the purple bloud, that all bedreint at last His feathers verie heauie were: and doubting any more To trust his wings now waxing wet, he straight began to sore Up to a rocke which in the calme aboue the water stood: But in the tempest euermore was hidden with the flood. And leaning therevnto and with his left hand holding iust The top thereof a dozen times his weapon he did thrust Among his guttes. The ioyfull noyse and clapping of their hands The which were made for loosening of Andromad from hir bands,
Fillde all the coast and heauen it selfe. The parents of the Maide Cassiope and Cepheus were glad and well appayde: And calling him their sonne in law confessed him to bée The helpe and sauegarde of their house. Andromade the fée And cause of Perseys enterprise from bondes now beyng frée, He washed his victorious hands. And least the Snakie heade With lying on the grauell hard should catch some harme, he spred Soft leaues and certaine tender twigs that in the water grew, And laid Medusas head thereon: the twigs yet being new And quicke and full of iuicie pith full lightly to them drew The nature of this monstrous head. for both the leafe and bough Full straungely at the touch thereof became both hard and tough. The Seanymphes tride this wondrous fact in diuers other roddes And were full glad to sée the chaunge, bicause there was no oddes Of leaues or twigs or of the séedes new shaken from the coddes. For still like nature euer since is in our Corall founde: That looke how soone it toucheth Ayre it waxeth hard and sounde. And that which vnder water was a sticke, aboue is stone, Thrée altars to as many Gods he makes of Turfe anon. Upon the left hand Mercuries: Mineruas on the right: And in the middle Iupiters: to Pallas he did dight A Cow: a Calfe to Mercurie: a Bull to royall Ioue. Forthwith he tooke Andromade the price for which he stroue Endowed with hir fathers Realme. For now the God of Loue And Hymen vnto mariage his minde in hast did moue. Great fires were made of swéete perfumes, and eurious garlandes hung About the house, which euery where of mirthfull musicke rung The gladsome signe of merie mindes. The Pallace gates were set Wide open▪ none from comming in were by the Porters let. All Noblemen and Gentlemen that were of any port To this same great and royall feast of Cephey did resort. When hauing taken their repast as well of meate as wine Their hearts began to pleasant mirth by leysure to encline, The valiant Persey of the folke and acions of the land Began to be inquisitiue. One Lincide out of hand The rites and maners of the folke did doe him t'vnderstand. Which done he sayd: O worthie knight I pray thée tell vs by
What force or wile thou gost the head with haires of Adders slie. Then Persey tolde how vnderneath colde Atlas lay a plaine So fenced in on euery side with mountaines high, that vaine Were any force to win the same. In entrance of the which Two daughters of King Phorcis dwelt whose chaunce and hap was such That one eye serued both their turnes: whereof by wilie slight And stealth in putting forth his hand he did bereue them quight, As they from tone to tother were deliuering of the same. From whence by long blind crooked wayes vnhandsomly he came Through gastly groues by ragged cliffes vnto the drerie place Whereas the Gorgons dwelt: and there he saw (a wretched case) The shapes as well of men as beasts lie scattered euerie where In open fields and common wayes, the which transformed were From liuing things to stones at sight of foule Medusas heare But yet that he through brightnesse of his monstrous brazen shield The which he in his left hand bare, Medusas face beheld. And while that in a sound dead sléepe were all hir Snakes and she, He softly pared of hir head: and how that he did sée Swift Pegasus the winged horse and eke his brother grow Out of their mothers new shed bloud. Moreouer he did show A long discourse of all his happes and not so long as trew: As namely of what Seas and landes the coasts he ouerflew, And eke what starres with stying wings he in the while did vew. But yet his tale was at an ende ere any lookt therefore. Upon occasion by and by of wordes reherst before There was a certaine noble man demaunded him wherefore Shée only of the sisters thrée haire mixt with Adders bore. Sir (aunswerde Persey) sith you aske a matter worth report I graunt to tell you your demaunde. she both in comly port and beautie, euery other wight surmounted in such sort, That many suters vnto hir did earnestly resort. And though that whole from top to toe most bewtifull she were, In all hir bodie was no part more goodly than hir heare. I know some parties yet aliue, that say they did hir sée. It is reported how she should abusde by Neptune bée In Pallas Church: frō which fowle facte Ioues daughter turnde hir eye, And with hir Target hid hir face from such a villanie.
And least it should vnpunisht be, she turnde hir séemely heare To lothly Snakes: the which (the more to put hir foes in feare) Before hir brest continually she in hir shield doth beare. Finis quarti Libri. ¶THE FYFT BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. NOw while that Danaes noble sonne was telling of these things Amid a throng of Cepheys Lordes, through al the Pallace rings A noyse of people nothing like the sound of such as sing At wedding feastes, but like the rore of such as tidings bring Of cruell warre. This sodaine chaunge from feasting vnto fray Might well be likened to the Sea: whych standing at a stay The woodnesse of the windes makes rough by raising of the waue. King Cepheys brother Phyney was the man that rashly gaue The first occasion of this fray. Who shaking in hys hand A Dart of Ash with head of stéele, sayd loe: loe here I stand To chalenge thée that wrongfully my rauisht spouse doste holde. Thy wings nor yet thy forged Dad in shape of feyned golde Shall now not saue thée from my hands. As with that word he bent His arme aloft, the foresaid Dart at Persey to haue sent What doste thou brother (Cephey cride) what madnesse moues thy minde To doe so foule a déede? is this the friendship he shall finde Among vs for his good deserts? And wilt thou néedes requie
The sauing of thy Néeces life with such a foule despight? Whome Persey hath not from thée tane: but (if thou be aduisde) But Neptunes heauie wrath bicause his Seanymphes were despisde But horned Hammon: but the beast which from the Sea arriued On my deare bowels for to féede. That time wert thou depriued Of thy betroothed, when hir life vpon the losing stoode: Onlesse perchaunce to sée hir lost it woulde haue done thée good, And easde thy heart to sée me sad. And may it not suffice That thou didst sée hir to the rocke fast bound before thine eyes And didst not helpe hir beyng both hir husband and hir Eame? Onlesse thou grudge that any man should come within my Realme To saue hir life? and séeke to rob him of his iust rewarde? Which if thou thinke to be so great, thou shouldst haue had regarde Before, to fetch it from the rocke to which thou sawste it bound, I pray thée brother séeing that by him the meanes is found That in mine age without my childe I go not to the grounde, Permit him to enioy the price for which we did compounde, And which he hath by due desert of purchace déerely bought. For brother let it neuer sinke nor enter in thy thought That I set more by him than thée: but this may well be sed I rather had to giue hir him than sée my daughter dead. He gaue him not a worde againe: But looked eft on him, And eft on Persey irefully with countnance stoure and grim, Not knowing which were best to hit: And after little stay He shooke his Dart, and flung it forth with all the powre and sway That Anger gaue at Perseys head. But harme it did him none, It sticked in the Bedsteddes head that Persey sate vpon. Then Persey sternely starting vp and pullng out the Dart Did throw it at his foe agayne, and therewithall his hart Had cliuen a sunder, had he not behinde an Altar start. The Altar (more the pitie was) did saue the wicked wight. Yet threw he not the Dart in vaine: it hit one Rhetus right Amid the foreheade: who therewith sane downe, and when the stéele Was plucked out, he sprawlde about and spurned with his héele, And all berayd the boorde with bloud. Then all the other rout As ferce as fire flang Dartes: and some there were that cried out That Cephey with his sonne in lawe was worthy for to die.
But he had wound him out of doores protesting solemly As he was iust and faithfull Prince, and swearing eke by all The Gods of Hospitalitie, that thatsame broyle did fall Full sore against his will. At hand was warlie Pallas streight And shadowed Persey with hir shielde, and gaue him heart in feight. There was one Atys borne in Inde, (of faire Lymniace The Riuer Ganges daughter thought the issue for to be,) Of passing beautie which with rich aray he did augment. He ware that day a scarlet Cloke, about the which there went A garde of golde: a cheyne of golde he ware about his necke: And eke his haire perfumde with Myrrhe a costly crowne did decke. Full sixtene yeares he was of age: such cunning skill he coulde In darting, as to hit his marke farre distant when he would. Yet how to handle Bow and shaftes much better did he know. Now as he was about that time to bende his horned Bowe, A firebrand Persey raught that did vpon the Aultar smoke, And dasht him ouertwhart the face with such a violent stroke, That all bebattred was his head the bones a sunder broke. When Lycabas of Assur lande his moste assured friend And deare companion being no dissembler of his miend Which most entierly did him loue, behelde him on the ground Lie weltring with disfigurde face, and through that grieuous wound Now gasping out his parting ghost, his death he did lament, And taking hastly vp the Bow that Atys erst had bent, Encounter thou with me (he saide) thou shalt not long enioy Thy triumphing in brauerie thus, for killing of this boy, By which thou getst more spight than praise. All this was scarsly sed, But that the arrow from the string went streyned to the head. Howbeit Persey (as it hapt) so warely did it shunne, As that it in his coteplights hung. then to him did he runne With Harpe in his hand bestaind with grim Medusas blood, And thrust him through the brest therwith▪ he quothing as he stood Did looke about where Atys lay with dim and dazeling eyes, Now wauing vnder endlesse night: and downe by him he lies, And for to comfort him withall togither with him dies. Behold through gredie haste to feight one Phorbas Methions son A Svveuite: and of Lybie lande one callde Amphimedon
By fortune sliding in the blood with which the ground was we, Fell downe: and as they woulde haue rse, Perseus fauchon met With both of them, Amphimedon vpon the ribbes he smote, And with the like celeritie he cut me Phorbas throte. But vnto Erith Actors sonne that in his hand did holde A brode browne Bill, with his short sword he durst not be too bolde To make approch. With both his handes a great and massie cup Embost with cunning portrayture aloft he taketh vp, And sendes it at him. He spewes vp red bloud: and falling downe Upon his backe, against the ground doth knocke his dying crowne. Then downe he Polydemon throwes extract of royall race And Abaris the Scithian, and Clytus in like case. And Elice with his vnshorne lockes, and also Phlegias, And Lycet olde Spechefies sonne, with diuers other mo, That on the heapes of corses slaine he treades as he doth go. And Phyney daring not presume to méete his foe at hand, Did cast a Dart: which hapt to light on Idas who did stand Aloofe as neuter (though in vaine) not medling with the Fray. Who casting backe a frowning looke at Phyney, thus did say. Sith whether that I will or no compeld I am perforce To take a part, haue Phyney here him whome thou doste enforce To be thy oe, and with this wound my wrongfull wound requite. But as he from his body pullde the Dart, with all his might To throw it at his foe againe, his limmes so féebled were With losse of bloud, that downe he fell and could not after steare. There also lay Odites slaine the chiefe in all the land Next to King Cephey, put to death by force of Clymens hand. Protenor was by Hypsey killde, and Lyncide did as much For Hypsey. In the throng there was an auncient man and such a one as loued righteousnesse and greatly feared God: Emathion called was his name: whome sith his yeares forbod To put on armes, he feights with tongue, inueying earnestly Against that wicked war the which he banned bitterly. As on the Altar he himselfe with quiuering handes did stay, One Cromis tipped of his head: his head cut off streight way Upon the Altar fell, and there his tongue not fully dead, Did bable still the banning wordes the which it erst had sed,
And breathed forth his fainting ghost among the burning brandes. Then Brote & Hammon brothers, twins, stout chāpions of their hāds In wrestling Pierlesse (if so be that wrestling could sustaine The furious force of slicing swordes) were both by Phyney slaine. And so was Alphit Ceres Priest that ware vpon his crowne A stately Miter faire and white with Tables hanging downe. Thou also Iapets sonne for such affaires as these vnméete But méete to tune thine instrument with voyce and Ditie swéete The worke of peace, wert thither callde th'assemblie to reioyce And for to set the mariage forth with pleasant singing voyce. As with his Uiall in his hand he stoode a good way off, There commeth to him Petalus and sayes in way of scoffe: Go sing the resdue to the ghostes about the Stygian Lake, And in the left side of his heade his dagger poynt he strake. He sanke downe deade with fingers still yet warbling on the string And so mischaunce knit vp with wo the song that he did sing. But fierce Lycormas could not beare to sée him murdred so Without reuengement. Up he caught a mightie Leauer tho That wonted was to barre the doore a right side of the house And therewithall to Petalus he lendeth such a souse Full in the noddle of the necke, that like a snetched Oxe Streight tūbling downe, against the ground his groueling face he knox. And Pelates a Garamant attempted to haue caught The left doore barre: but as thereat with stretched hand he raught, One Coryt sonne of Marmarus did with a Iauelin stricke Him through the hand, that to the wood fast nayled did it sticke. As Pelates stoode fastned thus, one Abas goard his side: He could not fall, but hanging still vpon the poste there dide Fast nayled by the hand. And there was ouerthrowne a Knight Of Perseyes band callde Melaney, and one that Dorill hight A man of greatest landes in all the Realme of Nasamone. That occupide so large a grounde as Dorill was there none, Nor none that had such store of corne. there came a Dart a skew And lighted in his Coddes the place where present death doth sew. When Alcion of Barcey he that gaue this deadly wound Beheld him yesking forth his ghost and falling to the ground With warrie eyes the white turnde vp: content thy selfe he said
With that same litle plot of grounde whereon thy corse is layde, In steade of all the large fat fieldes which late thou didst possesse. And with that word he left him dead. Pereus to redresse This slaughter and this spightfull taunt, streight snatched out the Dart That sticked in the fresh warme wound, and with an angrie hart Did send it at the throwers head: the Dart did split his nose Euen in the middes, and at his necke againe the head out goes: So that it péered both the wayes. Whiles fortune doth support And further Persey thus, he killes (but yet in sundrie sort) Two brothers by the mother: tone callde Clytie tother Dane. For on a Dart through both his thighes did Clytie take his bane: And Danus with another Dart was striken in the mouth. There died also Celadon a Gypse of the South: And so did bastard Astrey too, whose mother was a Iew: And sage Ethion well foreséene in things that should ensew, But vtterly beguilde as then by Birdes that aukly flew. King Cepheyes harnessebearer callde Thoactes lost his life, And Agyrt whom for murdring late his father with a knife The worlde spake shame off. Nathelesse much more remainde behinde Than was dispatched of of hand: for all were full in minde To murder one. the wicked throng had sworne to spend their blood Against the right, and such a man as had deserued good. A totherside (although in vaine) of mere affection stood The father and the Motherinlaw, and eke the heauie bride, Who filled with their piteous playnt the Court on euerie side. But now the clattring of the swordes and harnesse at that de With grieuous grones and sighes of such as wounded were or dide, Did raise vp such a cruell rore that nothing could be heard. For fierce Bellona so renewde the battell afterward, That all the house did swim in blood. Duke Phyney with a rout Of moe than a thousand men enuirond round about The valiant Persey all alone. The Dartes of Phyneys bande Came thicker than the Winters hayle doth fall vpon the lande, By both his sides his eyes and eares. He warely therevpon Withdrawes, and leanes his backe against a huge great arche of stone: And being safe behind, he ettes his face against his foe Withstanding all their fierce assaultes. There did assaile him thoe
Upon the left side Molpheus a Prince of Choanie, And on the right Ethemon borne hard by in Arabie. Like as the Tyger when he heares the lowing out of Neate In sundrie Medes, enforced sore through abstinence from meate, Would faine be doing with them both, and can not tell at which Were best to giue aduenture first: So Persey who did itch To be at host with both of them, and doubtfull whether side To turne him on, the right or left, vpon aduantage spide Did wound me Molphey on the leg, and from him quight him draue. He was contented with his flight: for why Ethemon gaue No respite to him to pursue: but like a franticke man Through egernesse to wounde his necke, without regarding whan Or how to strike for haste, he burst his brittle sworde in twaine Against the Arche: the poynt whereof rebounding backe againe, Did hit himselfe vpon the throte. Howbeit that same wound Was vnsufficient for to sende Ethemon to the ground. He trembled holding vp his handes for mercie, but in vaine. For Persey thrust him through the heart with Hermes hooked skaine. But when he saw that valiantnesse no lenger could auayle, By reason of the multitude that did him still assayle, Sith you your selues me force to call mine enmie to mine ayde, I will do so: if any friend of mine be here (he sayd) Sirs turne your faces all away: and therewithall he drew Out Gorgons head. One Thessalus streight raging to him flew, And sayd: go séeke some other man whome thou mayst make abasht With these thy foolish iuggling toyes. And as he would haue dasht His Iaueling in him with that worde to kill him out of hand, With gesture throwing forth his Dart all Marble did he stand. His sworde through Lyncids noble heart had Amphix thought to shoue: His hand was stone, and neyther one nor other way could moue: But Niley who did vaunt himselfe to be the Riuers sonne That through the boundes of Aegypt land in channels .vij. doth runne, And in his shielde had grauen part of siluer, part of golde The said .vij. channels of the Nile, sayd: Persey here beholde From whence we fetch our piedegrée: it may reioyce thy hart To die of such a noble hand as mine▪ The latter part Of these his words could scarce be heard: the dint therof was drownde:
Ye would haue thought him speaking still with open mouth: but sound Did none forth passe: there was for speache no passage to be found. Rebuking them cries Eryx: Sirs it is not Gorgons face It is your owne faint heartes that make you stonie in this case. Come let vs on this fellow run and to the ground him beare That feightes by witchcraft: as with that his féete forth stepping were, They stacke still fastened to the floore: he could not moue a side, An armed image all of stone he speachlesse did abide. All these were iustly punished. But one there was a knight Of Perseys band, in whose defence as Acont stoode to feight, He waxed ouergrowne with stone at vgly Gorgons sight. Whome still as yet Astyages supposing for to liue, Did with a long sharpe arming sworde a washing blow him giue. The sword did clinke against the stone and out the sparcles driue. While all amazde Astyages stoode wondring at the thing, The selfe same nature on himselfe the Gorgons head did bring. And in his visage which was stone a countnance did remaine Of wondring still. A wearie worke it were to tell you plaine The names of all the common sort. Two hundred from that fray Did scape vnslaine: but none of them did go aliue away. The whole two hundred euery one at ight of Gorgons heare Were turned into stockes of stone. Then at the length for feare Did Phyney of his wrongfull war forthinke himselfe full sore. But now (alas) what remedie? he saw there stand before His face, his men like Images in sundrie shapes all stone. He knew them well, and by their names did call them eueryhone: Desiring them to succor him: and trusting not his sight He féeles the bodies that were next, and all were Marble quight. He turnes himselfe from Persey ward and humbly as he standes He wries his armes behind his backe: and holding vp his handes, O noble Persey thou hast got the vpper hand he sed. Put vp that monstruous shield of thine: put vp that Gorgons head That into stones transformeth men: put vp I thée desire. Not hatred, nor bicause to reigne as King I did aspire, Haue moued me to make this fray. The only force of loue In séeking my betrothed spouse, did herevnto me moue. The better title séemeth thine bicause of thy desert:
And mine by former promise made. It irkes me at the heart In that I did not giue the place. None other thing I craue O worthie knight, but that thou graunt this life of mine to saue. Let all things else beside be thine. As he thus humbly spake Not daring looke at him to whome he did entreatance make, The thing (quoth Persey) which to graunt both I can finde in heart, And is no little courtesie to shewe without desert Upon a Coward, I will graunt O fearfull Duke to thée. Set feare a side: thou shalt not hurt with any weapon bée. I will moreouer so prouide as that thou shalt remaine An euerlasting monument of this dayes toyle and paine. The pallace of my Fathrinlaw shall henceforth be thy shrine Where thou shalt stand continually before my spouses eyen. That of hir husband hauing ay the Image in hir sight, She may from time to time receyue some comfort and delight. He had no sooner sayd these wordes but that he turnde his shielde With Gorgons heade to that same part where Phyney with a mielde And fearfull countnance set his face. Then also as he wride His eyes away, his necke waxt stiffe, his teares to stone were dride. A countnance in the stonie stocke of feare did still appeare With humble looke and yéelding handes and gastly ruthfull cheare. With conquest and a noble wife doth Persey home repaire And in reuengement of the right against the wrongfull heyre, As in his Graundsires iust defence he falles in hand with Prete Who like no brother but a foe did late before defeate King Acrise of his townes by warre and of his royall seate. But neyther could his men of warre nor fortresse won by wrong Defend him from the griesly looke of grim Medusa long. And yet thée foolish Polydect of little Seriph King, Such rooted rancor inwardly continually did sting, That neyther Perseys prowesse tride in such a sort of broyles Nor yet the parils he endurde, nor all his troublous toyles Could cause thy stomacke to relent. Within thy stonie brest Workes such a kinde of festred hate as cannot be represt. Thy wrongfull malice hath none ende. Moreouer thou of spite Kepining at his worthy praise, his doings doste backbite: Upholding that Medusas death was but a forged lie:
So long till Persey for to shewe the truth apparantly, Desiring such as were his friendes to turne away their eye, Drue out Medusas ougly head. At sight whereof anon The hatefull Tyran Polydect was turned to a stone. The Goddesse Pallas all this while did kéepe continually Hir brother Persey companie, till now that she did stie From Seriph in a hollow cloud, and leauing on the right The Iles of Scyre and Gyaros, she made from thence hir flight Directly ouer that same Sea as neare as eye could ame To Thebe and Mount Helicon. and when she thither came, She stayde hir selfe, and thus bespake the learned sisters nine. A rumor of an vncouth spring did pierce these eares of mine The which the winged stéede should make by stamping with his hoofe. This is the cause of my repaire: I would for certaine proofe Be glad to sée the wondrous thing. For present there I stoode And saw the selfe same Pegasus spring of his mothers blood. Dame Vranie did entertaine and aunswere Pallas thus. What cause so euer moues your grace to come and visit vs, Most heartely you welcome are: and certaine is the fame Of this our Spring, that Pegasus was causer of the same. And with that worde she led hir forth to sée the sacred spring. Who musing greatly with hir selfe at straungenesse of the thing, Surueyde the Woodes and groues about of auncient stately port. And when she saw the Bowres to which the Muses did resort, And pleasant fields beclad with herbes of sundrie hew and sort, She said that for their studies sake they were in happie cace And also that to serue their turne they had so trim a place. Then one of them replied thus. O noble Ladie who (But that your vertue greater workes than these are calles you to) Should else haue bene of this our troupe, your saying is full true. To this our trade of life and place is commendation due. And sure we haue a luckie lot and if the world were such As that we might in safetie liue. but lewdnesse reignes so much That all things make vs Maides afraide: Me thinkes I yet do sée The wicked Tyran Pyren still: my heart is yet scarce free From that same feare with which it hapt vs flighted for to bée. This cruell Pyren was of Thrace and with his men of war
The land of Phocis had subdude, and from this place not far Within the Citie Davvlis reignde by force of wrongfull hand, One day to Phebus Temples warde that on Parnasus stand As we were going, in our way he met vs courteously, And by the name of Goddesses saluting reuerently Said: O ye Dames of Meonie (for why he knew vs well) I pray you stay and take my house vntill this storme (there fell That time a tempest and a showre) be past: the Gods aloft Haue entred smaller sheddes than mine full many a time and oft. The rainie weather and hys wordes so moued vs, that wée To go into an outer house of his did all agrée. As soone as that the showre was past and heauen was voyded clear Of all the Cloudes which late before did euery where appeare, Untill that Boreas had subdude the rainie Southerne winde. We woulde haue by and by bene gone. He shet the doores in minde To rauish vs: but we with wings escaped from his hands. He purposing to follow vs, vpon a Turret stands, And sayth he néedes will after vs the same way we did . And with that worde full frantickly he leapeth downe from hie, And pitching euelong on his face the bones a sunder crasht, And dying, all abrode the ground his wicked bloud bedasht. Now as the Muse was telling this, they heard a noyse of wings And from the leauie boughes aloft a sound of gréeting rings▪ Minerua looking vp thereat demaunded whnce the sounde Of tongues that so distinctly spake did come so plaine and rounde? She thought some woman or some man had gréeted hir that stounde. It was a flight of Birdes. Nyne Pies bewailing their mischaunce, In counterfetting euerie thing from bough to bough did daunce. As Pallas wondred at the sight, the Muse spake thus in summe. These also being late ago in chalenge ouercome, Made one kinde more of Birdes than was of auncient time beforne. In Macedone they were about the Citie Pella borne Of Pierus a great riche Chuffe and Euip, who by ayde Of strong Lucina trauelling ninetimes, nine times was laide Of daughters in hir childbed safe. This fond and foolish rou Of doltish sisters taking pride and waxing verie stout, Bicause they were in number nine came flocking all togither
Through all the townes of Thessalie and all Achaia hither, And vs with these or such like wordes to combate did prouoke. Cease off ye Thespian Goddesses to mocke the smple folke With fondnesse of your Melodie. And if ye thinke in déede Ye can doe ought, contend with vs and sée how you shall speede. I warrant you ye passe vs not in cunning nor in voyce. Ye are here nine, and so are we. We put you to the choyce, That eyther we will vanquish you and set you quight beside Your fountaine made by Pegasus which is your chiefest pride, And Aganippe too: or else confounde you vs, and we Of all the woods of Macedone will dispossessed be As farre as snowie Peonie: and let the Nymphes be Iudges. Now in good sooth it was a shame to cope with suchie Drudges, But yet more shame it was to yéeld. The chosen Nymphes did sweare By Styx, and sate them downe on seates of stone that growed there. Then streight without commission or election of the rest, The formost of them preasing forth vndecently, profest The chalenge to performe: and song the battels of the Goddes. She gaue the Giants▪ all the praise, the honor and the oddes, Abasing sore the worthie déedes of all the Gods. She telles How Typhon issuing from the earth and from the déepest helles, Made all the Gods aboue afraide, so greatly that they fled And neuer staide till Aegypt land and Nile whose streame is shed In channels seuen, receiued them forwearied all togither: And how the Helhound Typhon did pursue them also thither. By meanes wherof the Gods eche one were faine themselues to hide In forged shapes. She saide the Ioue the Prince of Gods was wride In shape of Ram: which is the cause that at this present tide Ioues ymage which the Lybian folke by name of Hammon serue, Is made with crooked welked hornes that inward still doe terue: That Phebus in a Rauen lurkt, and Bacchus in a Geate, And Phebus sister in a Cat, and Iuno in a Neate, And Venus in the shape of Fish, and how that last of all Mercurius hid him in a Bird which Ibis men doe call. This was the summe of all the tale which she with rolling tung And yelling throteboll to hir harpe before vs rudely sung. Our turne is also come to speake, but that perchaunce your grace
To giue the hearing to our song hath now no time nor space. Yes yes (quoth Pallas) tell on forth in order all your tale: And downe she sate among the trées which gaue a pleasant swale. The Muse made aunswere thus: To one Calliope here by name This chalenge we committed haue and ordring of the same. Then rose vp faire Calliope with goodly bush of heare Trim wreathed vp with yuie leaues, and with hir thumbe gan steare The quiuering strings, to trie them if they were in tune or no. Which done, she playde vpon hir Lute and song hir Ditie so. Dame Ceres first to breake the Earth with plough the maner found, She first made corne and stouer soft to grow vpon the ground, She first made lawes. For all these things we are to Cers bound. Of hir must I as now intreate: would God I could resound Hir worthie laude: she doubtlesse is a Goddesse worthie praise. Bicause the Giant Typhon gaue presumptuously assayes To conquer Heauen, the howgie Ile of Trinacris is layd Upon his limmes, by weight whereof perforce he downe is weyde. He striues and strugles for to rise full many a time and oft. But on his right hand toward Rome Pelorus standes aloft: Pachynnus standes vpon his left: his legs with Lilybie Are pressed downe: his monstrous head doth vnder Aetna lie. From whence he lying bolt vpright with wrathfull mouth doth spit Out flames of fire▪ he wrestleth oft and walloweth for to wit And if he can remoue the weight of all that mightie land Or tumble downe the townes and hilles that on his bodie stand. By meanes whereof it commes to passe that oft the Earth doth shake: And euen the King of Ghostes himselfe for verie feare doth quake, Misdoubting least the Earth should cliue so wide that light of day Might by the same pierce downe to Hell and there the Ghostes affray Forecasting this, the Prince of Fiendes forsooke his darksome hole, And in a Chariot drawen with Stéedes as blacke as any cole The whole foundation of the Ile of Sicill warely vewde. When throughly he had sercht eche place that harme had none ensewde, As carelessely he raungde abrode, he chaunced to be séene Of Venus sitting on hir hill: who taking streight betwéen hir armes hir winged Cupid, said: my sonne, mine only stay, My hand, mine honor and my might, go take without delay
Those ooles which all wightes do subdue, and strike them in the hart Of that same God that of the world enioyes the lowest part. The Gods of Heauen, and Ioue himselfe, the powre of Sea & Land And he that rules the powres on Earth obey thy mightie hand: And wherefore then should only Hell still nsubdued stand? Thy mothers Empire and thine own why doste thou not aduaunce. The third part of al the world now hangs in doubtful chaunce. And yet in heauen too now, their déedes thou séest me faine to beare. We are despisde: the strength of loue with me away doth weare. Séeste not the Darter Diane and dame Pallas haue already Exempted them from my behestes? and now of late so heady Is Ceres daughter too, that if we let hir haue hir will, She will continue all hir life a Maid vnwedded still. For that is all hir hope, and marke whereat she mindes to shoote. But thou (if ought this gracious turne our honor may promote, Or ought our Empire beautifie which ioyntly we doe holde,) This Damsell to hir vncle ioyne. No sooner had she tolde These wordes, but Cupid opening streight his quiuer chose therefr One arrow (as his mother bade) among a thousand mo. But such a one it was, as none more sharper was than it, Nor none went streighter from the Bow the amed marke to hit. He set his knée against his Bow and bent it out of hande, And made his forked arrowes steale in Plutos heart to stande. Neare Enna walles there standes a Lake Pergusa is the name. Cayster heareth not mo songs of Swannes than doth the same. A wood enuirons euerie side the water round about, And with his leaues as with a veyle doth kéepe the Sunne heate out. The boughes doe yéelde a coole fresh Ayre: the moystnesse of the grounde Yéeldes sundrie flowres: continuall spring is all the yeare there founde. While in this garden Proserpine was taking hir pastime, In gathering eyther Uiolets blew, or Lillies white as Lime, And while of Maidenly desire she fillde hir Maund and Lap, Endeuoring to outgather hir companions there. By hap Dis spide hir: loude hir: caught hir vp: and all at once well nere. So hastie, hote, and swift a thing is Loue as may appeare. The Ladie with a wailing voyce afright did often call Hir Mother and hir waiting Maides, but Mother most of all.
And as she from the vpper part hir garment would haue rent, By chaunce she let hir lap slip downe, and out hir flowres went. And such a sillie simplenesse hir childish age yet beares, That euen the verie losse of them did moue hir more to teares. The Catcher driues his Chariot forth, and calling euery horse By name, to make away apace he doth them still enforce: And shakes about their neckes and Manes their rustie bridle reynes And through the déepest of the Lake perforce he them constreynes. And through the Palik pooles. the which from broken ground doe boyle And smell of Brimstone verie ranke: and also by the soyle Where as the Bacchies folke of Corinth with the double Seas, Betwéene vnequall Hauons twaine did réere a towne for ease. Betwéene the fountaines of Cyane and Arethuse of Pise An arme of Sea that meetes enclosde with narrow hornes there lies. Of this the Poole callde Cyane which beareth greatest fame Among the Nymphes of Sicilie did Algates take the name. Who vauncing hir vnto the waste amid hir Poole did know Dame Proserpine, and said to Dis: ye shall no further go You cannot Ceres sonneinlawe be, will she so or no. You should haue sought hir courteously and not enforst hir so. And if I may with great estates my simple things compare, Anapus was in loue with me: but yet he did not fare As you doe now with Proserpine. He was content to woo And I vnforst and vnconstreind consented him vntoo. This said, she spreaded forth hir armes and stopt him of his way. His hastie wrath Saturnus sonne no lenger then could stay. But chearing vp his dreadfull Stéedes did smight his royall mace With violence in the bottome of the Poole in that same place. The ground streight yéelded to his stroke and made him way to Hell, And downe the open gap both horse and Chariot headlong fell. Dame Cyan taking sore to heart as well the rauishment Of Proserpine against hir will, as also the contempt Against hir fountaines priuiledge, did shrowde in secret hart An inward corsie comfortlesse, which neuer did depart Untill she melting into teares consumde away with smart. The selfe same waters of the which she was but late ago The mighty Goddesse, now she pines and wastes hirselfe into.
Ye might haue séene hir limmes wer lithe, ye might haue bent hir bones. Hir nayles wext soft: and first of all did melt the smallest ones: As haire and fingars, legges and féete: for these same slender parts Doe quickly into water turne. and afterward conuerts To water, shoulder, backe, brest, side: and finally in stead Of liuely bloud, within hir veynes corrupted there was spred Thinne water: so that nothing now remained wherevpon Ye might eake holde, to water all consumed was anon. The carefull mother in the while did séeke hir daughter deare Through all the world both Sea & Land, and yet was nere the neare. The Morning with hir deawy haire hir slugging neuer found, Nor yet the Euening star that brings the night vpon the ground. Two seasoned Pynetrées at the mount of Aetna did she light And bare them restlesse in hir handes through all the dankish night. Againe as soone as chierfull day did dim the starres, she sought Hir daughter still from East to West. And being ouerwrought She caught a thirst: no liquor yet had come within hir throte. By chaunce she spiëd nere at hand a pelting thatched Cote Wyth péeuish doores: she knockt thereat, and out there commes a trot. The Goddesse asked hir some drinke and she denide it not: But out she brought hir by and by a draught of merrie go downe And therewithall a Hotchpotch made of steeped Barlie browne And Flae and Coriander séede and other simples more The which she in an Earthen pot together sod before. While Ceres was a eating this, before hir gazing stood A hard faaste boy a shrewde pert wag that could no maners good: He laughed at hir and in scorne did call hir gréedie gut. The Goddesse being worth therewith, did on the Hotchpotch put The liquor ere that all was eate, and in his face it threw. Immediatly the skinne thereof became of speckled hew. And into legs his armes did turne: and in his altred hide A wrigling tayle streight to his limmes was added more beside. And to th'intent he should not haue much powre to worken scathe, His bodie in a little roume togither knit she hathe. For as with pretie Lucerts he in facion doth agrée: So than the Lucert somewhat lesse in euery poynt is he. The poore old woman was amazde: and bitterly she wept:
She durst not touche the vncouth worme, who into corners crept. And of the flecked spottes like starres that on his hide are set A name agréeing therevnto in Latine doth he get. It is our Svvift whose skinne with gray and yellow specks is fret. What Lands & Seas the Goddesse sought it were too lōg to saine. The worlde did want. And so she went to Sicill backe againe. And as in going euery where she serched busily, She also came to Cyane: who would assuredly Haue tolde hir all things, had she not transformed bene before. But mouth and tongue for vttrance now would serue hir turne no more. Howbeit a token manifest she gaue hir for to know What was become of Proserpine. Hir girdle she did show Still houering on hir holie poole, which slightly from hir fell As she that way did passe: and that hir mother knew too well. For when she saw it, by and by as though she had but than Bene new aduertisde of hir chaunce, she piteously began To rend hir ruffled haire, and beate hir handes against hir brest. As yet she knew not where she was. But yet with rage opprest. She curst all landes, and said they were vnthankfull euerychone Yea and vnworthy of the fruites bestowed them vpon. But bitterly aboue the rest she banned Sicilie, In which the mention of hir losse she plainely did espie. And therefore there with cruell hand the earing ploughes she brake, And man and beast that tilde the grounde to death in anger strake. She marrde the féede, and eke forbade the fieldes to yéelde their frute. The plenteousnesse of that same Ile of which there went suche brute Through all the world, lay dead: the corne was killed in the blade: Now too much drought, now too much wet did make it for to fade. The starres and blasting windes did hurt, the hungry soules did eate The corne in ground: the Tines and Briars did ouergow the Wheate. And other wicked wéedes the corne continually annoy, Which neyther tylth nor toyle of man was able to destroy. Then Arethuse floud Alpheys loue lifts from hir Elean waus Hir head, and shedding to hir eares hir deawy haire that waues About hir foreheade sayde: O thou that art the mother deare Both of the Maiden sought through all the world both far and neare, And eke of all the earthly fruites, forbeare thine endlesse toyle,
And be not wroth without a cause with this thy faithfull soyle, The Lande deserues no punishment. vnwillingly God woe She opened to the Rauisher that violently hir smote. It is not sure my natiue soyle for which I thus entreate. I am but here a soiourner, my natiue soyle and seate Is Pisa and from Ely towne I fetch my first discent. I dwell but as a straunger here. but sure to my intent This Countrie likes me better farre than any other land. Here now I Arethusa dwell: here am I setled: and I humbly you beseche extend your fauour to the same. A time will one day come when you to mirth may better frame, And haue your heart more frée from care, which better serue me may To tell you why I from my place so great a space doe stray. And vnto Ortygie am brought through so great Seas and waues. The ground doth giue me passage frée, and by the lowest caues Of all the Earth I make my way, and here I raise my heade, And looke vpon the starres agayne neare out of knowledge fled. Now while I vnderneath the Earth the Lake of Styx did passe, I saw your daughter Proserpine with these same eyes. She was Not merrie, neyther rid of feare as séemed by hir chéere. But yet a Quéene, but yet of great God Dis the stately Féere: But yet of that same droupie Realme the chiefe and souereigne Péere. Hir mother stoode as starke as stone, when she these newes did heare, And long she was like one that in another worlde had béene. But when hir great amazednesse by greatnesse of hir téene Was put aside, she gettes hir to hir Chariot by and by And vp to heauen in all post haste immediatly doth stie. And there besowbred all hir face: hir haire about hir eares, To royall Ioue in way of plaint this spightfull tale she beares. As well for thy bloud as for mine a suter vnto thée I hither come. if no regard may of the mother bée Yet let the childe hir father moue, and haue not lesser care Of hir (I pray) bicause that I hir in my bodie bare. Behold our daughter whome I sought so long is found at last: If finding you it terme, when of recouerie meanes is past. Or if you finding do it call to haue a knowledge where She is become. Hir rauishment we might consent to beare,
So restitution might be made. And though there were to me No interest in hir at all, yet forasmuche as she Is yours, it is vnméete she be bestowde vpon a théefe. Ioue aunswerde thus. My daughter is a Iewell deare and léefe: A collup of mine owne flesh cut as well as out of thine. But if we in our heartes can finde things rightly to define, This is not spight but loue. And yet Madame in faith I sée No cause of such a sonne in law ashamed for to bée, So you contented were therewith. For put the case that hée Were destitute of all things else, how greate a matter ist Ioues brother for to be? but sure in him is nothing mist. Nor he inferior is to me saue only that by lot The Heauens to me, the Helles to him the destnies did allot. But if you haue so sore desire your daughter to diuorce, Though she againe to Heauen repayre I doe not greatly force. But yet conditionly that she haue tasted there no foode: For so the destnies haue decréed. He ceaste: and Ceres stoode Full bent to fetch hir daughter out: but destnies hir withstoode, Bicause the Maide had broke hir fast. For as she hapt one day In Plutos Ortyard rechlessely from place to place to stray, She gathering from a bowing trée a ripe Pownegarnet, tooke Seuen kernels out and sucked them. None chaunst hereon to looke. Saue onely one Ascalaphus whome Orphne erst a Dame Among the other Elues of Hell not of the basest fame Bare to hir husbande Acheron within hir duskie den. He sawe it, and by blabbing it vngraciously as then, Did let hir from returning thence. A grieuous igh the Quéene Of Hell did fetch, and of that wight that had a witnesse béee Against hir made a cursed Birde. Upon his face she shead The water of the Phlegton: and by and by his head Was nothing else but Beake and Downe, and mightie glaring eyes. Quight altred from himselfe betwéene two yellow wings he flies. He groweth chiefly into head and hooked talants long And much a doe he hath to flaske his lazie wings among. The messenger of Morning was he made, a filthie fowle, A signe of mischiefe vnto men, the sluggish skreching Owle. This person for his lauas tongue and telling tales might séeme
To haue deserued punishment. But what should men estéeme To be the verie cause why you Acheloes daughters weare Both féete and feathers like to Birdes, considering that you beare The vpper partes of Maidens still? and commes it so to passe? Bicause when Ladie Proserpine a gathering flowers was, Ye Meremaides kept hir companie? whome after you had sought Through all the Earth in vaine, anon of purpose that your thought Might also to the Seas be knowen, ye wished that ye might Upon the waues with houering wings at pleasure rule your flight, And had the Goddes to your request so pliant, that ye found With yellow feathers out of hand your bodies clothed round? Yet least that pleasant tune of yours ordeyned to delight The hearing, and so high a gift of Musicke perish might For want of vttrance, humaine voyce to vtter things at will And countnance of virginitie remained to you still. But meane betwéene his brother and his heauie sister goth God Ioue, and parteth equally the yeare betwéene them both. And now the Goddesse Proserpine indifferently doth reigne Aboue and vnderneath the Earth, and so doth she remaine One halfe yeare with hir mother and the resdue with hir Féere Immediatly she altred is as well in outwarde chéere As inwarde minde. for where hir looke might late before appéere Sad euen to Dis, hir countnance now is full of mirth and grace Euen like as Phebus hauing put the watrie cloudes to chace, Doth shew himselfe a Conqueror with bright and shining face. Then fruitfull Ceres voide of care in that she did recouer Hir daughter, prayde thée Arechuse the storie to discouer What caused thée to fléete so farre and wherefore thou became A sacred spring? the waters whist. The Goddesse of the same Did from the bottome of the Well hir goodly head vp reare. And hauing driëd with hir hand hir faire gréene hanging heare, The Riuer Alpheys auncient loues she thus began to tell. I was (quoth she) a Nymph of them that in Achaia dwell. There was not one that earnester the Lawndes and forests sought Or pitcht hir toyles more handsomly. And though that of my thought It was no part, to séeke the fame of beautie: though I were All courage: yet the pricke and prise of beautie I did beare
My ouermuch commended face was vnto me a spigh. This gift of bodie in the which another would delight, I rudesbye was ashamed off: me thought is was a crime To be belikte. I beare it well in minde that on a time In comming wearie from the chase of Stymphalus, the heat Was feruent, and my trauelling had made it twice as great. I founde a water neyther déepe nor shallow which did glide Without all noyse, so calme that scarce the mouing might be spide. And throughly to the very ground it was so crispe and cleare, That euery little stone therein did plaine aloft appeare. The horie Sallowes and the Poplars growing on the bri Unset, vpon the shoring bankes did cast a shadow trim. I entred in, and first of all I déeped but my eete: And after to my knées. And not content to wade so fléete, I put off all my clothes, and hung them on a Sallow by And threw my selfe amid the streame▪ which as I allyingly Did beate and draw, and with my selfe a thousand maistries tre, In casting of mine armes abrode and swimming wantonly: I felt a bubling in the streame I wist not how nor what, And on the Riuers nearest brim I stept for feare. With that O Arethusa whither runs? and whither runst thou cride Floud Alphey from his waues againe with hollow voyce. I hide Away vnclothed as I was. For on the further side My clothes hung still. so much more hote and eger then was he, And for I naked was, I séemde the readier for to be. My running and his fierce pursuite was like as when ye se The sillie Doues with quiuering wings before the Gossehauke stie, The Gossehauke swéeping after them as fast as he can flie, To Orchomen, and Psophy land, and Cyllen I did holde Out well, and thence to Menalus and Erymanth the colde, And so to Ely. all this way no ground of me he wonne. But being not so strong as he, this restlesse race to runne I could not long endure, and he could hold it out at length. Yet ouer plaines and wooddie hilles (as long as lasted strength) And stones, and rockes, and desert groundes I still maintaind my race. The Sunne was full vpon my backe. I saw before my face A lazie shadow: were it not that feare did make me séete.
But certenly he feared me with trampling of his féete: And of his mouth the boystous breath vpon my hairlace blew. For wearied with the toyle of light: Helpe Diane, I thy tru And trustie Squire (I said) who oft haue caried after thée Thy bow and arrowes, now am like attached for to bée. The Goddesse moued, tooke a cloude of such as scattred were And cast vpon me. Hidden thus in mistie darkenesse there The Riuer poard vpon me still and hunted round about The hollow cloude, for feare perchaunce I should haue scaped out. And twice not knowing what to doe he stalk about the cloude Where Diane had me hid, and twice he called ou a loude Hoe Arethuse, hoe Arethuse▪ What heart had I poore wretch then? Euen such as hath the sillie Lambe that dares not stirre nor quetch when He heares the howling of the Wolfe about or neare the foldes. Or such as hath the squatted Hare that in hir foorme beholdes The hunting houndes on euery side, and dares not mone a whit. He would not thence, for why he saw no footing out as yit. And therefore watcht he narrowly the cloud and eke the place. A chill colde sweat my sieged limmes oppre, and downe a pace From all my bodie steaming drops did fall of watre hew. Which way so ere I stird my foote the place was like a stw. The deaw ran trickling from my haire. In halfe the while I then Was turnde to water, that I now haue tolde the tale agen. His loued waters Alphey knew, and putting off the shape Of man the which he tooke before bicause I should not scape, Returned to his proper shape of water by and by Of purpose for to ioyne with me and haue my companie. But Delia brake the ground, at which I sinking into blinde Bycorners, vp againe my selfe at Ortigie doe winde, Right deare to me bicause it doth Dianas surname beare, And for bicause to light againe I first was raysed there. Thus far did Arethusa speake: and then the fruitfull Dame Two Dragons to hir Chariot put, and reyning hard the same, Midway bewéene the Heauen and Earth she in the Ayr went, And vnto Prince Triptolemus hir lightsome Chariot sent To Pallas Citie lode with corne, commaunding him to sowe Some part thereof in ground new broken vp, and some thereof to strow
In ground long tillde before. Anon the yong man vp did stie And flying ouer Europe and the Realme of Asias hie, Alighted in the Scithian land. There reyned in that coast A King callde Lyncus, to whose house he entred for to host. And being there demaunded how and why he thither came, And also of his natiue soyle and of his proper name, I hight (quoth he) Triptolemus and borne was in the towne Of Athens in the land of Gréece, that place of high renowne I neyther came by Sea nor Lande, but through the open Aire I bring with me Dame Ceres giftes which being sowne in faire And fertile fields may fruitfull Haruests yeelde and finer fare. The sauage King had spight. and to thintent that of so rare And gracious gifts himselfe might séeme first founder for to be, He entertainde him in his house, and when a sléepe was he, He came vpon him with a sword. but as he would haue killde him, Dame Ceres turnde him to a Lynx, and waking tother willde him His sacred Téemeware through the Ayre to driue abrode agen. The chiefe of vs had ended this hir learned song. and then The Nymphes with one consent did iudge that we the Goddesses Of Helicon had wonne the day. But when I sawe that these Unnurtred Damsels ouercome began to fall a scolding, I sayd: so little sith to vs you thinke your selues beholding, For bearing with your malapertnesse in making chalenge, that Besides your former fault, ye eke doe fall to rayling flat, Abusing thus our gentlenesse: we will from hence procéede The punishment, and of our wrath the rightfull humor féede. Euippyes daughters grind and éerde and set our threatnings light. But as they were about to prate, and bent their fistes to smight Theyr wicked handes with hideous noyse, they saw the stumps of quilles New budding at their nayles, and how their armes soft feather hilles. Eche saw how others mouth did purse and harden into Bill, And so becomming vncouth Birdes to haunt the woods at will. For as they would haue clapt their handes their wings did vp thē heaue, And hanging in the Ayre the scoldes of woods did Pies them leaue. Now also being turnde to Birdes they are as eloquent As ere they were, as chattring still, as much to babling bent. Finis quinti Libri.
¶THE SIXT BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. TRitonia vnto all these wordes attentiue hearing bendes, And both the Muses learned song and rightfull wrath cōmendes. And therevpon within hir selfe this fancie did arise. It is no matter for to prayse: but let our selfe deuise Some thing to be commended for: and let vs not permit Our Maiestie to be despisde without reuenging it. And therewithall she purposed to put the Lydian Maide Arachne to hir neckeverse who (as had to hir bene saide) Presumed to prefer hir selfe before hir noble grace In making cloth. This Damsell was not famous for the place In which she dwelt, nor for hir stocke, but for hir Arte. Hir Sier Was Idmon one of Colophon a pelting Purple Dier. Hir mother was deceast: but she was of the baser sort, And egall to hir Make in birth, in liuing, and in port. But though this Maide were meanly borne, and dwelt but in a shed At little Hypep: yet hir trade hir fame abrode did spred Euen all the Lydian Cities through. To sée hir wondrous worke The Nymphes that vnderneath the Uines of shadie Tmolus lurke Their Uineyards oftentimes forsooke. So did the Nymphes also About Pactolus oftentimes their golden streames forgo. And euermore it did them good not only for to see Hir clothes already made, but while they eke a making bée Such grace was in hir workmanship. For were it so that shée The newshorne fléeces from the shéepe in bundels deftly makes, Or afterward doth kemb the same, and drawes it out in flakes Along like cloudes, or on the Rocke doth spinne the handwarpe woofe, Or else embroydreth, certenly ye might perceiue by proofe She was of Pallas bringing vp. which thing she nathelesse Denyeth, and disdaining such a Mistresse to confesse, Let hir contend with me she saide: and if she me amend I will refuse no punishment the which she shall extend. Minerua tooke an olde wiues shape and made hir haire séeme gray, And with a staffe hir febled limmes pretended for to stay. Which done, she thus began to speake. Not all that age doth bring
We ought to shonne. Experience doth of long continuance spring. Despise not mine admonishment. Séeke fame and chiefe report For making cloth, and Arras worke, among the mortall sort. But humbly giue the Goddesse place: and pardon of hir craue For these thine vnaduised wordes. I warrant thou shalt haue Forgiuenesse, if thou aske it hir▪ Arachne bent hir brewes And lowring on hir, left hir worke: and hardly she eschewes From flying in the Ladies face. Hir countnance did bewray Hir moodie minde: which bursting orth in words she thus did say. Thou commest like a doting foole: thy wit is spent with yeares: Thy life hath lasted ouer long as by thy talke appeares. And if thou any daughter haue, or any daughtrinlawe, I would she heard these wordes of mine: I am not such a Daw, But that without thy teaching I can well ynough aduise My selfe. And least thou shouldest thinke thy words in any wise Auaile, the selfe same minde I kéepe with which I first begonne. Why commes she not hirselfe I say? this matche why doth she shonne? Then said the Goddesse: here she is. And therewithall she cast Hir oldewiues riueled shape away, and shewde hir selfe at last Minerua like. The Nymphes did streight adore hir Maiestie. So did the yong newmaried wiues that were of Migdonie. The Maiden only vnabasht woulde nought at all relent. But yet she blusht and sodenly a ruddynesse besprent Hir chéekes which wanzd away againe, euen like as doth the Skie Looke sanguine at the breake of day, and turneth by and by To white at rising of the Sunne. As hote as any fire She sticketh to hir tackling still. And through a fond desire Of glorie, to hir owne decay all headlong forth she runnes. For Pallas now no lnger warnes, ne now no lenger shunnes Ne séekes the chalenge to delay. Immediatly they came And tooke their places seuerally, and in a seuerall frame Eche streynde a web, the warpe whereof was fine. The web was tide Upon a Beame. Betweene the warpe a slay of réede did slde. The woofe on sharpened pinnes was put betwixt the warp, and wrought With fingars. And as oft as they ad through the warpe it brought, They strake it with a Boen combe. Both twayne of them made has: And girding close for handsomnesse their garments to their wast
Bestirde their cunning handes apace. Their earnestnesse was such As made them neuer thinke of paine. They weaued verie much Fine Purple that was dide in Tyre, and colours set so trim That eche in shadowing other séemde the very same with him. Euen like as after showres of raine when Phebus broken beames Doe strike vpon the Cloudes, appeares a compast bow of gleames Which bendeth ouer all the Heauen: wherein although there shine A thousand sundry colours, yet the shadowing is so fine, That looke men nere so wistly, yet beguileth it their eyes: So like and euen the self same thing eche colour seemes to rise Whereas they méete, which further off doe differ more and more. Of glittring golde with silken thréede was weaued there good store, And stories put in portrayture of things done long afore. Minerua painted Athens towne and Marsis rocke therein, And all the strife betwéene hirselfe and Neptune, who should win The honor for to giue the name to that same noble towne. In loftie thrones on eyther side of Ioue were settled downe Six Péeres of Heauen with countnance graue and full of Maiestie, And euery of them by his face discerned well might be. The Image of the mightie Ioue was King like. She had made Neptunus standing striking with his long thréetyned blade Upon the ragged Rocke: and from the middle of the clift She portrayd issuing out a horse, which was the noble gift For which he chalengde to himselfe the naming of the towne. She picturde out hirselfe with shielde and Morion on hir crowne With Curet on hir brest, and Speare in hand with sharpened ende. She makes the Earth (the which hir Speare doth séeme to strike) to send An Olyf trée with fuite thereon: and that the Gods thereat Did wonder: and with victorie she finisht vp that plat. Yet to thintent examples olde might make it to be knowne To hir that for desire of praise so stoutly helde hir owne, What guerdon she shoulde hope to haue for hir attempt so madde, Foure like contentions in the foure last corners she did adde. The Thracians Hee and Rodope the formost corner hadde: Who being sometime mortall folke vsurpt to them the name Of Ioue and Iuno, and were turnde to mountaines for the same. A Pigmie womans piteous chaunce the second corner shewde,
Whome Iuno turned to a Crane (bicause she was so lewde As for to stand at strife with hir for beautie) charging hir Against hir natiue countriefolke continuall war to tir. The thirde had proude Antigone who durst of pride contende In beautie with the wife of Ioue: by whome she in the ende Was turned to a Storke, no whit auailed hir the towne Of Troy, or that Laomedon hir father ware a crowne, But that she clad in feathers white hir lazie wings must sap And with a bobbed Bill bewayle the cause of hir missehap. The last had chyldelesse Cinyras: who being turnde to stone, Was picturde prostrate on the grounde, and wéeping all alone, And culling fast betwéene his armes a Temples gréees fine To which his daughters bodies were transformde by wrath diuine. The vtmost borders had a wreath of Olyf round about, And this is all the worke the which Minerua portrayd out. For with the trée that she hirselfe had made but late afore She bounded in hir Arras cloth, and then did worke no more. The Lydian maiden in hir web did portray to the full How Europe was by royall Ioue beguilde in shape of Bull. A swimming Bull, a swelling Sea, so liuely had she wrought, That Bull and Sea in very déede ye might them well haue thought. The Ladie séemed looking backe to landwarde and to crie Upon hir women, and to feare the water sprinkling hie, And shrinking vp hir fearfull féete. She portrayd also there Asteriee struggling with an Erne which did away hir beare. And ouer Leda she had made a Swan his wings to splay. She added also how by Ioue in shape of Satyr gaye The faire Antiope with a paire of children was besped: And how he tooke Amphitrios shape when in Almenas bed He gate the worthie Hercules: and how he also came To Danae like a shoure of golde, to Aegine like a flame, A sheepeherd to Mnemosyne, and like a Serpent ly To Proserpine. She also made Neptus leaping by Upon a Maide of Aeolus race in likenesse of a Bull, And in the streame Enipeus shape begetting on a trull The Giants Othe and Ephialt, and in the shape of Ram Begetting one Theophane Bisalties ympe with Lam,
And in a lustie Stalions shape she made him houering there Dame Ceres with the yellow lockes, and hir whose golden heare Was turnde to crawling Snakes: on whome he gate the winged horse. She made him in a Dolphins shape Melantho to enforce. Of all these things she missed not their proper shapes, nor yit The full and iust resemblance of their places for to it. In likenesse of a Countrie cloyne was Phebus picturde there, And how he now ware Gossehaukes wings, and now a Lions heare. And how he in a shepeherdes shape was practising a wile The daughter of one Macarie dame Issa to beguile. And how the faire Erygone by chaunce did suffer rape By Bacchus who deceyued hir in likenesse of a grape. And how that Saturne in the shape of Genet did beget The double Chiron. Round about the vtmost Uerdge was set A narrow Traile of pretie floures with leaues of Iuie fret. Not Pallas, no nor spight it selfe could any quarrell picke To this hir worke: and that did touch Minerua to the quicke. Who therevpon did rende the cloth in pieces euery whit, Bicause the lewdnesse of the Gods was blased so in it. And with an Arras weauers combe of Box she fiercely smit Arachne on the forehead full a dosen times and more. The Maide impacient in hir heart, did stomacke this so sore, That by and by she hung hirselfe. Howbeit as she hing, Dame Pallas pitying hir estate, did stay hir in the string From death, and said lewde Callet liue: but hang thou still for mée. And least hereafter from this curse that time may set thée frée, I will that this same punishment enacted firmely bée, As well on thy posteritie for euer as on thée. And after when she should depart, with iuice of Hecats flowre She sprinkled hir: and by and by the poyson had such powre, That with the touch thereof hir hare, hir eares, and nose did fade: And verie small it both hir heade and all hir bodie made. In steade of legs, to both hir sides sticke fingars long and fine: The rest is bellie. From the which she nerethelesse doth twine A slender thréede, and practiseth in shape of Spider still The Spinners and the Websters crafts of which she erst had sll. All Lydia did repine hereat, and of this déede the fanie
Through Phrygie ran, & through the world was talking of the ame. Before hir mariage Niobe had knowen hir verie well, When yet a Maide inLydia. Meonie and Sipyle she did dwell. And yet Arachnes punishment at home before hir eyes, To vse discreter kinde of talke it could hir not aduise, Nor (as behoueth) to the Gods to yéelde in humble wise. For many things did make hir proud. But neyther did the towne The which hir husband builded had, nor houses of renowne Of which they both descended were, nor yet the puissance Of that great Realme wherein they reignde so much hir minde enhaūce (Although the liking of them all did greatly hir delight) As did the offspring of hir selfe. And certenly she might Haue bene of mothers counted well most happie, had she not So thought hir selfe. For she whome sage Tyresias had begot The Prophet Manto through instinct of heauenly powre, did say These kinde of wordes in open strete. Ye Thebanes go your way Apace, and vnto Lato and to Latons children pray, And offer godly Frankinsence, and wreath your haire with Bay. Latona by the mouth of me commaundes you so to do. The Thebae women by and by obeying therevnto, Deckt all their heades with Laurell leaues as Mato did require. And praying with deuout intent threw incense in the fire. Beholde out commeth Niobe enuironde with a garde Of seruaunts and a solemne traine that followed afterward. She was hirselfe in raiment made of costly cloth of golde Of Phrygia facion verie braue and gorgeous to beholde. And of hir selfe she was right faire and beautifull of face, But that hir wrathfull stomake then did somewhat staine hir grace. She mouing with hir portly heade hir haire the which as then Did hang on both hir shoulders loose, did pawse a while. and when Wyth loftie looke hir stately eyes she rolled had about, What madnesse is it (quoth she) to prefer the heauenly rout Of whome ye doe but heare, to such as daily are in sight? Or why should Laton honored be with Altars? Neuer wight To my most sacred Maiestie did offer incense. Yit My Father was that Tantalus whome only as most fit The Gods among them at their boordes admitted for to sit.
A sister of the Pleyades is my mother. Finally My Graundsire on the mothers side is that same Atlas hi That on his shoulders beareth vp the heauenly Axeltrée. Againe my other Graundfather is Ioue. and (as you sée) He also is my Fathrinlawe. wherin I glorie may. The Realme of Phrygia here at hand doth vnto me obay. In Cadmus pallace I thereof the Ladie doe remaine And ioyntly with my husbande I as péerlesse Princesse reigne Both ouer this same towne whose walles my husbands harpe did frame, And also ouer all the folke and people in the same. In what soeuer corner of my house I cast mine eye, A worlde of riches and of goods I eurywhere espie. Moreouer for the beautie, shape, and fauor growen in me, Right well I know I doe deserue a Goddesse for to be. Besides all this, seuen sonnes I haue and daughters seuen likewise, By whome shall shortly sonneinlawes and daughtrinlawes arise. Iudge you now if that I haue cause of statelynesse or no. How dareye then prefer to me Latona that same fro The Titan Ceus ympe, to whome then readie downe to lie The howgie Earth a little plot to childe on did denie? From Heauen, from Earth, & from the Sea your Goddesse banisht was, And as an outcast through the world from place to place did passe, Untill that Delos pitying hir, sayde thou dose fléete on land And I on Sea, and therevpon did lende hir out of hand A place vnstable. Of two twinnes there brought a bed was she: And this is but the seuenth part of the issue borne by me. Right happie am I. who can this denie? and shall so still Continu who doth doubt of that? abundance hath and will Preserue me. I am greater thau that frowarde fortune may Empeache me. For although she shoulde pull many things away, Yet should she laue me many more. My state is out of feare. Of thys my howge and populous race surmise you that it were Possible some of them should misse: yet can I neuer be So spoyled that no m than two shall aie styll with me. Leaue quickly thys lewde sacrifce, and put me off this Bay That on your heades is wreahed thus. They laide it streight away And left their holie rites vndone, and closely as they may
With secret whispring to themselues to Laton they dyd pray. How much from vtter barrennesse the Goddesse wa: so much Dideind she more: and in the top of Cythus framed such Complaint as this to both hir twinnes. Lo I your mother deare, Who in my bodie once you twaine with painefull trauell beare, Loe I whose courage is so stout as for to ylde to none Of all the other Goddesses except Ioues wife alone, Am lately doubted whether I a Goddesse be or no▪ And if you helpe not children mine, the case now standeth so That I the honor must from hence of Altars quight forg. But this is not mine only griefe. Besides hir wicked fact Most railing words hath Niobe to my defacing rackt. She durst prefer hir Barnes to you. And as for me, she naamde Me barren in respect of hir, and was no whit ashaamde To shewe hir fathers wicked tongue which she by birth doth take This said: Latona was about etreatance for to make. Cease off (quoth Phebus) long complaint is nothing but delay Of punishment. and the selfe same wordes did Phebe also say. And by and by they through the Ayre both gliding swiftly downe, On Cadmus palace hid in cloudes did light in Thebe towne. A fielde was vnderneath the wall oth leuell, large and wide, Betrampled euery day with horse tha men therein did ride, Where store of Carres and Horses houes the cloddes to dust had trode A couple of Amphions sonnes on lustie coursers rode In this same place. Their horses faire Coper isns did weare Of scarlet: and their bridles braue with golde bedecked were. Of whome as Niobs eldest sonne Ismenos hapt to bring His horse about, and reynde him in to make him kéepe the ring, He cride alas: and in his brest with that an arrow stacke And by and by hys dying hand did let the bridle slacke. And on the right side of the horse he slipped to the ground. The second brother Sipylus did chaunce to heare the sound Of Quiuers clattring in the Ayre, and giuing streight the reyne And spur togither to his horse, began to flie amayne: As doth the master of a ship: who when he sés a shoure Approching, by some mistie cloud that gins to gloume and loure Doth clap on all his sayles bicause no winde should scape him by
Though nere so small: Howbeit as he turned for to flie, He was not able for to scape the Arrow which did stricke Him through the necke. The nocke thereof did shaking vpward sticke▪ The head appeared at his throte. And as he forward gaue Himselfe in flying: so to ground he groueling also draue, And toppled by the horses mane and féete amid his race, And with his warme newshedded bloud berayëd all the place. But Phedimus, and Tantalus the her of the name Of Tantalus his Graundfather, who customably came From other dailie exercise to wrestling, had begun To close, and eache at other now with brest to brest to run, When Phebus Arrow being sent with force frm streyned string Did strike through both of them as they did fast togither cling. And so they sighed both at once, and both at once for paine Fell downe to ground, and both of them at once their eyes did streine To sée their latest light, and both at once their ghostes did yéelde. Alphenor this mischaunce of theirs with heauie heart behelde, And scratcht and beate his wofull brest: and therewith flying out To take them vp betwéene his armes, was as he went about This worke of kindly pitie, killde. For Phebus with a Dart of deadly dint did riue him through the Bulke and brake his hart. And when the steale was plucked out, a percell of his liuer Did hang vpon the hooked heade: and so he did deliuer His life and bloud into the Ayre departing both togither. But Damasicthon (on whose heade came neuer sizzer) felt Mo woundes than one. It was his chaunce to haue a griuous pelt Upon the verie place at which the leg is first begun And where the hamstrings by the ioynt with supple sinewes run And while to draw this arrow out he with his hand assaide, Another through his wezant went, and at the feathers staide. The bloud did driue out this againe, and spinning high did spout A great way off, and pierst the Ayre with sprinkling all about. The last of all Ilionie with streched handes, and speche Most humble (but in vaine) did say▪ O Gods I you beseche Of mercie all in generall. He wist not what he saide Ne how that vnto all of them he ought not to haue praide. The God that helde the Bow in hande was moued: but as then
The Arrow was alredie gone so farre, that backe agen He could not call it. Nerethelesse the wound was verie small Of which he dide, for why his heart it did but lightly gall. The rumor of the mischiefe selfe, and mone of people, and The wéeping of hir seruants gaue the mother t'vnderstand The sodaine stroke of this mischaunce. She wondred verie much And stormed also that the Gods were able to doe such A déede, or durst attempt it, yea she thought it more than right That any of them ouer hir should haue so mickle might. Amphion had fordone himselfe alreadie with a knife, And ended all his sorrowes quite togither with his life. Alas, alas how greatly doth this Niobe differ here From tother Niobe who a late disdaining any Pere Did from Latonas Altars driue hir folke, and through the towne With haultie looke and stately gate went pranking vp and downe, Then spighted at among hir owne, but piteous now to those: That heretofore for hir deserts had bene hir greatest foes. She falleth on the corses colde, and taking no regard, Bestowde hir kysses on hir sonnes as whome she afterwarde Did know she neuer more shoulde kisse. From whome she lifting the Hir blew and broosed armes to heauen sayd: O thou oruell foe Latona féede, yea féede thy selfe I say vpon my woe And ouergorge thy stomacke, yea and glut thy cruell hart With these my present painefull pangs of bitter griping smart. In corses seuen I seuen times deade am caried tomy graue. Reioyce thou foe and triumph now in that thou séemste to haue The vpper hande. What? vpper hand? no no it is not so. As wretched as my case doth séeme, yet haue I left me mo Than thou for all thy happinesse canst of thine owne account Euen after all these corses yet I still doe thée surmount. Upon the ende of these same wordes the twanging of the tring In letting of the Arrow flie was clearly heard: which thing Made euery one saue Niobe afraide. Hir heart was so With sorrowe hardned, that she grew more bolde. Hir daughters tho Were standing all with mourning wéede and hanging haire before Their brothers coffins. One of them in pulling from the sore An Arrow sticking in his heart, sanke downe vpon hir brother
With mouth to mouth, and so did yéelde hir fléeting ghost. Another In comforting the  and sorrow of hir mother Upon the sodaine helde hir peace. She stricken was within With double wound: which caused hi hir talking for to blin And shut hir mouth: But first hir ghost was gone. One all in vaine Attempting for to scape by flight was in hir flying slaine. Another on hir sisters corse doth tumble downe starke dead. This quakes and trembles piteously, and she doth hide hir head. And when that sixe with sundrye woundes dispatched were and gone▪ At last as yet remained one: and for to saue that one, Hir mother with hir bodie whole did cling about hir fast, And wrying hir did ouer hir hir garments wholy cast: And cried out: O leaue me one: this little one yet saue: Of many but this only one the least of all I craue. But while she prayd, for whome she prayd was kild. Then down she sate Bereft of all hir children quite, and drawing to hir fate, Among hir daughters and hir sonnes and husband newly dead. Hir chéekes waxt hard, the Ayre could stirre no haire vpon hir head. The colour of hir face was dim and clearly voide of blood, And sadly vnder open lids hir eyes vnmoued stood. In all hir bodie was no life. For euen hir verie tung And palat of hir mouth was hard, and eche to other clung. Hir Pulses ceased for to beae, hir necke did cease to bow, Hir armes to stir, hir féete to go, all powre forwent as now. And into stone hir verie wombe and bowels also bind. But yet she wept: and being hoyst by force of whirling wind Was caried into Phygie. There vpon a mountaines top She wéepeth still in stone. from stone the drerie teares do drop. Then all both men and women fearde▪ Latonaas open ire And far with greater  and earnestr desire Did wrship the great maestie of this their Goddesse who Did beare at once both Phebus and his sister Phebe to And through occasion of this chaunce, (as men are wont to do In cases like) the people fell to telling things of old Of whome a man among the rest this tale  told. The  folke that in the field  of  Lyia dwelt Du  also for their spight to this ame Goddesse felt.
The basenesse of the parties make the thing it selfe obscure. Yet is the matter wonderfull. My selfe I you assure Did presently beholde the Pond, and saw the very place In which this wondrous thing was done. My father then in case, Not able for to trauell well by reason of his age, To fetch home certaine Oxen thence made me to be his page, Appointing me a countryman of Lycia to my guide. With whome as I went plodding in the pasture groundes, I spide Amids a certaine Pond an olde square Aultar colourd blacke With cinder of the sacrifice that still vpon it stacke. About it round grew wauering Réedes. My guide anon did stay: And softly, O be good to me, he in himselfe did say. And I with like soft whispering did say be good to mée. And then I askt him whether that the Altar wée did sée Belonged to the Waternymphes, or Faunes or other God Peculiar to the place it selfe vpon the which we yod. He made me aunswere thus. My guest no God of countrie race Is in this Altar worshipped. That Goddesse claymes this place. From whome the wife of mightie Ioue did all the world forfend: When wandring restlesse here and there full hardly in the end Unsetled Delos did receyue then floting on the waue, As tide and weather to and fro the swimming Iland draue. There maugre Iuno (who with might and main against hir straue) Latona staying by a Date and Olyf trée that sted In trauell, of a paire of twinnes was safely brought a bed. And after hir deliurance folke report that she for feare Of Iunos wrath did flie from hence, and in hir armes did beare Hir babes which afterwarde became two Gods. In which hir trauell In Sommer when the scorching Sunne is wont to burne the grauell Of Lycie countrie where the fell Chymera hath his place, The Goddesse wearie with the long continuance of hir race, Waxt thirstie by the meanes of drought with going in the Sunne. Hir babes had also suckt hir brestes as long as milke wold runne. By chaunce she spide this little Pond of water here bylow. And coūtrie Carles were gathering there these Oysyer twigs that grow So thicke vpon a shrubbie stalke: and of these rushes gréene: And flags that in these moorish plots so rife of growing béene.
She comming hither knéeled downe the water vp to take To coole hir thirst. The churlish cloynes forfended hir the Lake. Then gently said the Goddesse: Sirs why doe you me forfend The water? Nature doth to all in common water send. For neither Sunne, nor Ayre, nor yet the Water priuate bée I séeke but that which natures gift hath made to all things frée. And yet I humbly craue of you to graunt it vnto mée. I did not go about to wash my werie limmes and skin, I would but only quench my thirst. My throte is scalt within For want of moysture: and my chappes and lippes are parching drie: And scarsly is there way for wordes to issue out thereby. A draught of water will to me be heauenly Nectar now. And sure I will confesse I haue receiued life of you. Yea in your giuing of a drop of water vnto mée, The case so standeth as you shall preserue the liues of thrée. Alas let these same sillie soules that in my bosome stretch Their little armes (by chaunce hir babes their pretie dolles did rech) To pitie moue you. What is he so hard that would not yéeld To this the gentle Goddesses entreatance méeke and méeld? Yet they for all the humble wordes she could deuise to say, Continued in their willfull moode of churlish saying nay, And threatned for to sende hir thence onlesse she went away, Reuiling hir most spightfully. And not contented so. With handes and feete the standing Poole they troubled to and fro, Until with trampling vp and downe maliciously, the soft And imie mud that lay beneath was raised vp aloft. With that the Goddesse was so wroth that thirst was quight forgot▪ And vnto such vnworthie Carles hirselfe she humbleth not: Ne speaketh meaner wordes than might beséeme a Goddesse well. But holing vp hir handes to heauen: for euer mought you dwell In this same Pond, she said: hir wish did take effect with spéede. For vnderneath the water they delight to be in déede. Now diue they to the bottome downe, now vp their heades they pop, Another whle with sprawling legs they swim vpon the top. And oftentes vpon the bankes they haue a minde to stond, And oftentes from thence againe to leape into the Pond. And there they now doe practise still their filthy tongues to scold.
And shamelessely (though vnderneath the water) they doe hold Their former wont of brawling still amid the water cold. Their voices stil are hoarse and harsh, their throtes haue puffed goawles, Their chappes with brawling widened are, their hāmer headed Ioawles Are ioyned to their shoulders iust, the neckes of them doe séeme cut off, the ridgebone of their backe stickes vp of colour greene. Their paunch which is the greatest part of all their trunch is gray, And so they vp and downe the Pond made newly Frogges doe play. When one of Lyce (I woe not who) had spoken in this sort, Another of a Satyr streight began to make report, Whome Phebus ouercomming on a pipe (made late ago By Pallas) put to punishment. Why fleaëst thou me so, Alas he cride it irketh me. Alas a sorie pipe Deserueth not so cruelly my skin from me to stripe. For all his crying ore his eares quight pulled was his skin. Nought else he was than one whole wounde. The griesly bloud did spin From euery part, the sinewes lay discouered to the eye, The quiuering veynes without a skin lay beating nakedly. The panting bowels in his bulke ye might haue numbred well, And in his brest the shere small strings a man might easly tell. The Countrie Faunes, the Gods of Woods, the Satyrs of his kin, The Mount Olympus whose renowne did ere that time begin, And all the Nymphes, and all that in those mountaines kept their shéepe, Or grazed cattell thereabouts, did for this Satyr wéepe. The utfull earth waxt moyst therewith, and moysed did receyue Their teares, and in hir bowels deepe did of the same conceyue. And when that she had turned them to water, by and by She sent them forth againe aloft to sée the open Skie. The Riuer that doth rise thereof beginning there his race, In verie déepe and shoring bankes to Seaward runnes a pace Through Phrygie, and according as the Satyr, so the streame Is called Marsias, of the brookes the clearest in that Realme. With such examples as these same the common folke returnde To present things, and euery man through all the Citie moornde For that Amphion was destroyde with all his issue so. But all the fault and blame was laide vpon the mother tho. For hir alonly Pelops mournde (as men report) and hée
In opening of his clothes did shewe that euerie man might see His shoulder on the left side bare of Iuorie for to bée. This shoulder at his birth was like his tother both in hue And flesh, vntill his fathers handes most wickedly him slue, And that the Gods when they his limmes againe togither drue, To ioyne them in their proper place and forme by nature due, Did finde out all the other partes, saue only that which grue Betwene the throteboll and the arme. which when they could not get This other made of Iuorie white in place thereof they set And by that meanes was Pelops made againe both whole and sound The neyghbor Princes thither came, and all the Cities round About besought their Kings to go and comfort Thebe: as Arge And Sparta, and Mycene which was vnder Pelops charge. And Calydon vnhated of the frowning Phebe yit, The welthie towne Orchomenos, and Corinth which in it Had famous men for workmanship in mettals: and the stout Messene which full twentie yeares did hold besiegers out. And Patre, and the lowly towne Cleona, Nelies Pyle, And Troyzen not surnamed yet Pittheia for a while. And all the other Borough townes and Cities which doe stand Within the narrow balke at which two Seas doe méete at hand, Or which do bound vpon the balke without in maine firme land. Alonly Athens (who would thinke?) did neither come nor send. Warre barred them from courtesie the which they did entend. The King of Pontus with an host of sauage people lay In siege before their famous walles and curstly did them fray. Untill that Tereus King of Thrace approching to their ayde, Did vanquish him, and with renowne was for his labor payde▪ And sith he was so puissant in men and ready coyne, And came of mightie Marsis race, Pandion sought to ioyne Aliance with him by and by, and gaue him to his Féere His daughter Progne. At this match (as after will appeare) Was neyther Iuno, President of mariage wont to bée, Nor Hymen, no nor any one of all the graces thrée. The Furies snatching Tapers vp that on some Herce did stande Did light them, and before the Bride did beare them in their hande. The Furies made the Bridegroomes bed. And on the house did rucke
A cursed Owle the messenger of yll successe and lucke. And all the night time while that they were lying in their beds, She sate vpon the bedsteds top right ouer both their heds. Such handsell Progne had the day that Tereus did hir wed. Such handsell had they when that she was brought of childe a bed. All Thracia did reioyce at them, and thankt their Gods, and wild That both the day of Prognes match with Tereus should be hild For feastfull, and the day likewise that Itys first was borne: So little know we what behoues. The Sunne had now outworne Fiue Haruests, and by course fiue times had run his yearly race, When Progne flattring Tereus saide: If any loue or grace Betweene vs be, send eyther me my sister for to sée, Or finde the meanes that hither she may come to visit mée. You may assure your Fathrinlaw she shall againe returne Within a while. Ye doe to me the highest great good turne That can be, if you bring to passe I may my sister sée. Immediatly the King commaundes his shippes a flote to bée. And shortly after, what with sayle and what with force of Ores, In Athes hauen he arriues and landes at Pyrey shores. Assoone as of his fathrinlaw the presence he obtainde, And had of him bene courteously and friendly entertainde, Unhappie handsell entred with their talking first togither. The errandes of his wife the cause of his then comming thither He had but new begon to tell, and promised that when She had hir sister séene, she should with spéede be sent agen: When (sée the chaunce) came Philomele in raiment very rich, And yet in beautie farre more rich, euen like the Fairies which Reported are the pleasant woods and water springs to haunt, So that the like apparell and attire to them you graunt. King Tereus at the sight of hir did burne in his desire, As if a man should chaunce to set a gulfe of corne on fire, Or burne a stacke of hay. Hir face in déede deserued loue. But as for him, to fleshly lust euen nature did him moue. For of those countries commonly the people are aboue All measure prone to lecherie. And therefore both by kinde His flame encreast, and by his owne default of vicious minde He purposde fully to corrupt hir seruants with reward:
Or for to bribe hir Nurce, that she should slenderly regarde Hir dutie to hir mistresseward. And rather than to fayle, The Ladie euen hirselfe with gifts he minded to assayle, And all his kingdome for to spend. or else by force of hand To take hir, and in maintenance thereof by sword to stand. There was not vnder heauen the thing but that he durst it proue, So far vnable was he now to stay his lawlesse loue. Delay was deadly. Backe againe with gréedie minde he came Of Prognes rrands for to talke: and vnderneath the same He workes his owne vngraciousnesse. Loue gaue him power to frame His talke at will. As oft as he demaunded out of square, Upon his wiues importunate desire himselfe he bare. He also wept: as though his wife had willed that likewise. O God, what blindnesse doth the heartes of mortall men disguise? By working mischiefe Tereus gets him credit for to séeme A louing man, and winneth praise by wickednesse extréeme. Yea and the foolish Philomele the selfe same thing desires. Who hanging on hir fathers necke with flattring armes, requires Against hir life and for hir life his licence for to go To see hir sister. Tereus beholdes hir wistly tho, And in beholding handles hir with heart. For when he saw Hir kisse hir father, and about his necke hir armes to draw, They all were spurres to pricke him forth, and wood to féede his fire, And foode of forcing nourishment to further his desire. As oft as she hir father did betwéene hir armes embrace, So often wished he himselfe hir father in that case. For nought at all should that in him haue wrought the greater grace. Hir father could not say them nay they lay at him so sore. Right glad thereof was Philomele and thanked him therefore. And wretched wench she thinkes she had obtained such a thing, As both to Progne and hir selfe should ioy and comfort bring, When both of them in verie déede should afterward it rew. To endward of his daily race and trauell Phebus drew, And on the shoring side of Heauen his horses downeward flew. A princely supper was prepaarde, and wine in golde was set: And after meate to take their rest the Princes did them get. But though the King of Thrace that while were absent from hir sight,
Yet swelted he: and in his minde reuoluing all the night Hir face, hir gesture, and hir hands, imaginde all the rest (The which as yet he had not séene) as likte his fancie best. He féedes his flames himselfe. No winke could come within his eyes, For thinking ay on hir. Assoone as day was in the skies, Pandion holding in his hand the hand of Tereus prest To go his way, and sheading teares betooke him thus his guest. Deare sonneinlaw I giue thee here (sith godly cause constraines) This Damsell. Bythe faith that in thy Princely heart remaines▪ And for our late aliance sake, and by the Gods aboue, I humbly thée beseche that as a Father thou doe loue And maintaine hir. and that as soone as may be (all delay Will vnto me séeme ouer long) thou let hir come away The comfort of my carefull age on whome my life doth stay. And thou my daughter Philomele (it is inough ywis That from hir father set so farre thy sister Progne is) If any sparke of nature doe within thy heart remayne, With all the haast and spéede thou canst returne to me againe. In giuing charge he kissed hir: and downe his chéekes did raine The tender teares. and as a pledge of faith he tooke the right Handes of them both, and ioyning them did eche to other plight. Desiring them to beare in minde his commendations to His daughter and hir little sonne. And then with much a doe For sobbing, at the last he bad adew as one dismaid. The foremisgiuing of his minde did make him sore afraid. Assoone as Tereus and the Maide togither were a boord, And that their ship from land with Ores was haled on the foord, The fielde is ours he cride aloude, I haue the thing I sought And vp he skipt, so barbrous and so beastly was his thought, That scarce euen there he could forbeare his pleasure to haue wrought His eye went neuer off of hir: as when the scarefull Erne With hooked talants trussing vp a Hare among the Ferne, Hath laid hir in his nest, from whence the prisoner can not scape, The rauening fowle with gréedie eyes vpon his pray doth gape. Now was their iourney come to ende: now were they gone a land In Thracia, when that Tereus tooke the Ladie by the hand, And led hir to a pelting graunge that peakishly did stand
In woods forgrowen. There waxing pale and trembling sore for feare, And dreading all things, and with teares demaunding sadly where Hir sister was, he shet hir vp: and therewithall bewraide His wicked lust, and so by force bicause she was a Maide And all alone he vanquisht hir, It booted nought at all That she on sister, or on Sire, or on the Gods did call. She quaketh like the wounded Lambe which frō the Wolues hore tth New shaken thinkes hir selfe not safe: or as the Doue that feéth Hir fethers with hir owne bloud staynde, who shuddring still doth feare The greedie Hauke that did hir late with griping talants teare. Anon when that this mazednesse was somewhat ouerpast, She rent hir haire, and beate hir brest, and vp to heauenward cast Hir hands in mourningwise, and said▪ O cankerd Carle, O fell And cruell Tyrant, neyther could the godly teares that fell A downe my fathers chéekes when he did giue thée charge of meé, Ne of my sister that regarde that ought to be in theé, Nor yet my chaast virginitie, nor conscience of the lawe Of wedlocke, from this villanie thy barbrous heart withdraw? Behold thou hast confounded all. My sister thorough mée Is made a Cucqueane: and thy selfe through this offence of thée Art made a husband to vs both, and vnto me a foe A iust deserued punishment for lewdly doing so. But to thintent O periurde wretch no mischiefe may remaine Unwrought by theé, why doest thou from murdring me refraine? Would God thou had it done before this wicked rape. From hence Then should my soule most blessedly haue gone without offence. But if the Gods doe sée this déede, and if the Gods I say Be ought, and in this wicked worlde beare any kinde of sway And if with me all other things decay not, sure the day Will come that for this wickednesse full dearly thou shalt pay. Yea I my selfe reiecting shame thy doings will bewray. And if I may haue power to come abrode, them blase I will In open face of all the world. or if thou kéepe me still As prisoner in these woods, my voye the verie woods shall fill, And make the stones to vnderstand. Let Heauen to this giue eare And all the Gods and powers therein if any God be there. The cruell tyrant being chaaft and also put in feare
With these and other such hir wordes, both causes so him stung, That drawing out his naked sworde that at his girdle hung, He tooke hir rudely by the haire, and wrung hir hands behind hir, Compelling hir to holde them there while he himselfe did bind hir. When Philomela sawe the sworde, she hoapt she should haue dide, And for the fame hir naked throte she gladly did prouide. But as she yirnde and called ay vpon hir fathers name, And striued to haue spoken still, the cruell tyrant came And with a paire of pinsons fast did catch hir by the tung, And with his sword did cut it off. The stumpe whereon it hung Did patter still. The tip fell downe and quiuering on the ground As though that it had murmured it made a certaine sound. And as an Adders tayle cut off doth skip a while: euen so The tip of Philomelaas tongue did wriggle to and fro, And nearer to hir mistresseward in dying still did go. And after this most cruell act, for certaine men report That he (I scarcely dare beleue) did oftentimes resort To maymed Philomela and abusde hir at his will: Yet after all this wickednesse he kéeping countnance still, Durst vnto Progne home repaire. And she immediatly Demaunded where hir sister was. He sighing feynedly Did tell hir falsly she was dead: and with his suttle teares He maketh all his tale to séeme of credit in hir eares. Hir garments glittring all with golde she from hir shoulders teares And puts on blacke, and setteth vp an emptie Herce, and kéepes A solemne obite for hir soule, and piteously she wéepes And waileth for hir sisters fate who was not in such wise As that was, for to be bewailde. The Sunne had in the Skies Past through the twelue celestiall signes, and finisht full a yeare. But what should Philomela doe? She watched was so neare That start she could not for hir life. the walles of that same graunge Were made so high of maine hard stone, that out she could not raunge. Againe hir tunglesse mouth did want the vtterance of the fact. Great is the wit of pensiuenesse, and when the head is ract With hard misfortune, sharpe forecast of practise entereth in. A warpe of white vpon a frame of Thracia she did pin, And weaued purple letters in betwéene it, which bewraide
The wicked déede of Tereus. And hauing done, she praide A certaine woman by hir signes to beare them to hir mistresse. She bare them and deliuered them not knowing nerethelesse What was in them. The Tyrants wife vnfolded all the clout, And of hir wretched fortune red the processe whole throughout. She held hir peace (a wondrous thing it is she should so doe) But sorrow tide hir tongue and wordes agréeable vnto Hir great displeasure were not at commaundment at that stound. And wéepe she could not. Ryght and wrong she reckeneth to confound, And on reuengement of the déede hir heart doth wholy ground. It was the time that wiues of Thrace were wont to celebrate The thrée yeare rites of Bacchus which were done a nighttimes late. A nighttimes soundeth Rhodope of tincling pannes and pots: A nighttimes giuing vp hir house abrode Quéene Progne trots Disguisde like Bacchus other froes and armed to the proofe With all the frenticke furniture that serues for that behoofe. Hir head was couered with a vine. About hir loose was tuckt A Reddéeres skin. a lightsome Launce vpon hir shoulder ruckt. In poast gaddes terrible Progne through the woods, and at hir héeles A flocke of froes. and where the sting of sorrow which she féeles Enforceth hir to furiousnesse, she feynes it to procéede Of Bacchus motion. At the length she finding out in déede The outset Graunge howlde out, and cride now well, and open brake The gates, and streight hir sister thence by force of hand did take, And veyling hir in like attire of Bacchus, hid hir head With Iuie leaues, and home to Court hir sore amazed led. Assoone as Philomela wist she set hir foote within That cursed house, the wretched soule to shudther did begin▪ And all hir face waxt pale. Anon hir sister getting place Did pull off Bacchus ad attire, and making bare hir face Embraced hir betwéene hir armes. But she considering that Quéene Progne was a Cucqueane made by meanes of hir, durst nat Once raise hir eyes: but on the ground fast fixed helde the same. And where she woulde haue taken God to witnesse that the shame And villanie was wrought to hir by violence, she was fayne To vse hir hand in stead of speache. Then Progne chaaft a maine. And was not able in hir selfe hir choler to restraine.
But blaming Philomela for hir wéeping, said these wordes. Thou must not deale in this behalfe with wéeping, but with swordes: Or with some thing of greater force than swords. For my part, I Am readie, yea and fully bent all mischiefe for to trie. This pallace will I eyther set on fire, and in the same Bestow the cursed Tereus the worker of our shame: Or pull away his tongue: or put out both his eyes: or cut Away those members which haue thée to such dishonor put: Or with a thousand woundes expulse that sinfull soule of his. The thing that I doe purpose on is great, what ere it is. I know not what it may be yet. While Progne herevnto Did set hir minde, came Itys in, who taught hir what to doe. She staring on him cruelly, said. Ah, how like thou art Thy wicked father, and without moe wordes a sorowfull part She purposed, such inward ire was boyling in hir heart. But notwithstanding when hir sonne approched to hir neare, And louingly had gréeted hir by name of mother deare, And with his pretie armes about the necke had hugde hir fast, And flattring wordes with childish toyes in kissing forth had cast, The mothers heart of hirs was then constreyned to relent, Asswaged wholy was the rage to which she erst was bent, And from hir eyes against hir will the teares enforced went. But when she saw how pitie did compell hir heart to yeelde, She turned to hir sisters face from Itys, and behelde Now tone, now tother earnestly and said. why tattles he And she sittes dumbe bereft of tongue? as well why calles not she Me sister, as this boy doth call me mother? Séest thou not Thou daughter of Pandion what a husband thou hast got? Thou growest wholy out of kinde. To such a husband as Is Tereus, pitie is a sinne. No more delay there was. She dragged Itys after hir, as when it happes in Inde A Tyger gets a little Calfe that suckes vpon a Hynde And drags him through the shadie woods. And when that they had found A place within the house far off and far aboue the ground, Then Progne strake him with a sword now plainly séeing whother He should, and holding vp his handes, and crying mother, mother, And flying to hir necke: euen where the brest and side doe bounde,
And neuer turnde away hir face. Inough had bene that wound Alone to bring him to his ende. The tother sister slit His throte. And while some life and soule was in his members yit, In gobbits they them rent: whereof were some in Pipkins boyld, And other some on hissing spits against the fire were broyld, And with the gellied bloud of him was all the chamber foyld. To this same banket Progne bade hir husband knowing nought Nor nought mistrusting of the harme and lewdnesse she had wrought. And feyning a solemnitie according to the guise Of Athens, at the which there might be none in any wise Besides hir husband and hir selfe, she banisht from the same Hir householde folke and soiourners, and such as guestwise came. King Tereus stting in the throne of his forefathers, fed And swallowed downe the selfe same flesh that of his bowels bred. And he (so blinded was his heart) fetch Itys hither, sed. No lenger hir most cruell ioy dissemble could the Quéene. But of hir murther coueting the messenger to béene, She said: the thing thou askest for, thou hast within. About He looked round, and asked where? To put him out of dout, As he was yet demaunding where, and calling for him: out Lept Philomele with scattred haire aflaight like one that fled Had from some fray where slaughter was, and threw the bloudy head Of Itys in his fathers face. And neuer more was shée Desirous to haue had hir speache, that able she might be Hir inward ioy with worthie wordes to witnesse franke and frée. The tyrant with a hideous noyse away the table shoues: And reeres y• fiends from Hell. One while with yauning mouth he proues To perbrake vp his meate againe, and cast his bowels out. Another while with wringing handes he wéeping goes about. And of his sonne he termes himselfe the wretched graue. Anon With naked sword and furious heart he followeth fierce vpon Pandions daughters. He that had bene present would haue déemd Their bodies to haue houered vp with fethers. As they séemde: So houered they with wings in déede. Of whome the one away To woodward flies, the other still about the house doth stay. And of their murther from their brestes not yet the token goth, For euen still yet are stainde with bloud the fethers of them both.
And he through sorrow and desire of vengeance waxing wight, Became a Bird vpon whose top a tuft of feathers light In likenesse of a Helmets crest doth trimly stand vpright. In stead of his long sword, his bill shootes out a passing space: A Lapwing named is this Bird, all armed séemes his face. The sorrow of this great mischaunce did stop Pandions breath Before his time, and long ere age determinde had his death. Erecthey reigning after him the gouernment did take: A Prince of such a worthinesse as no man well can make Resolution, if he more in armes or iustice did excell. Foure sonnes, and daughters foure he had Of which a couple well Did eche in beautie other match. The one of these whose name Was Procris vnto Cephalus King Aeolus sonne became A happie wife. The Thracians and King Tereus were a let To Boreas: so that long it was before the God could get His dearbeloued Orithy a, while trifling he did stand With faire entreatance rather than did vse the force of hand. But when he saw he no reliefe by gentle meanes could finde, Then turning vnto boystous wrath (which vnto that same winde Is too familiar and too much accustomed by kinde) He said I serued am but well: for why laid I a part My proper weapons, fiercenesse, force, and ire, and cruell hart? And fell to fauning like a foole, which did me but disgrace? For me is violence meete. Through this the pestred cloudes I chace. Through this I tosse the Seas. Through this I turne vp knottie Okes, And harden Snow, and beate the ground in hayle with sturdie strokes. When I my brothers chaunce to get in open Ayre and Skie. (For that is my fielde in the which my maisteries I doe trie) I charge vpon them with such brunt, that of our méeting smart The Heauen betwéene vs soundes, & from the hollow Cloudes doth start Enforced fire. And when I come in holes of hollow ground, And fiersly in those emptie caues doe rouse my backe vp round, I trouble euen the ghostes, and make the verie world to quake. This helpe in wooing of my wife (to spéede) I should haue take. Erecthey should not haue bene prayde my Fatherinlaw to be: He should haue bene compelde thereto by stout extremitie.
In speaking these or other wordes as sturdie, Boreas gan To flaske his wings. With wauing of the which he raysed than So great a gale, that all the earth was blasted therewithall, And troubled was the maine brode Sea. And as he traylde his pall Bedusted ouer highest tops of things, he swept the ground. And hauing now in smokie cloudes himselfe enclosed round, Betwéene his duskie wings he caught Orithya straught for feare, And like a louer, verie soft and easly did hir beare. And as he flew, the flames of loue enkindled more and more By meanes of stirring. Neither did he stay his flight before He came within the land and towne of Cicons with his pray. And there soone after being made his wife she hapt to lay Hir belly, and a paire of boyes she at a burthen brings, Who else in all resembled full their mother, saue in wings The which they of their father tooke. Howbeit (by report) They were not borne with wings vpon their bodies in this sort. While Calais and Zetes had no beard vpon their chin, They both were callow. But assoone as haire did once begin In likenesse of a yellow Downe vpon their cheekes to sprout, Then (euen as comes to passe in Birdes) the feathers budded out Togither on their pinyons too, and spreaded round about On both their sides. And finally when childhod once was spent And youth come on, togither they with other Minyes went To Colchos in the Galley that was first deuisde in Greece, Upon a sea as then vnknowen, to fetch the golden fléece. Finis sexti Libri.
¶THE SEVENTH BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. ANd now in ship of Pagasa the Mynies cut the seas. And leading vnder endlesse night his age in great disease Of scarcitie was Phiney séene. and Boreas sonnes had chaste Away the Maidenfaced foules that did his victels waste. And after suffring many things in noble Iasons band, In muddie Phasis gushing streame at last they went a land. There while they going to the King demaund the golden fléece Brought thither certaine yeares before by Phryxus out of Greece, And of their dreadfull labors wait an answere to receiue: Aeëtas daughter in hir heart doth mightie flames conceyue. And after strugling verie long, when reason could not win The vpper hand of rage: she thus did in hir selfe begin. In vaine Medea doste thou striue. some God what ere he is Against thée bendes his force. for what a wondrous thing is this? Is any thing like this which men doe terme by name of Loue? For why should I my fathers hestes estéeme so hard aboue All measure? sure in very déede they are too hard and sore. Why feare I least you straunger whome I neuer saw before Should perish? what should be the cause of this my feare so great? Unhappie wench (and if thou canst) suppresse this vncouth heat That burneth in thy tender brest. and if so be I coulde, A happie turne it were, and more at case then be I shoulde. But now an vncouth maladie perforce against my will Doth hale me. Loue persuades me one, another thing my skill. The best I sée and like: the worst I follow headlong still. Why being of the royall bloud so fondly doste thou raue, Upon a straunger thus to dote, desiring for to haue An husband of another world? at home thou mightest finde A louer méete for thine estate on whome to set thy minde. And yet it is but euen a chaunce if he shall liue or no: God graunt him for to liue. I may without offence pray so, Although I loude him not: for what hath Iason trespast me? Who woulde not pitie Iasons youth onlesse they cruell be? What creature is there but his birth and prowesse might him moue?
And setting all the rest asyde, who woulde not be in loue With Iasons goodlie personage? my heart assuredly Is toucht therewith. But if that I prouide not remedie, With burning breath of blasting Bulles néedes sindged must he bée. Of séedes that he himselfe must sow a haruest shall he sée Of armed men in battell ray vpon the ground vp grow Against the which it houeth him his manhode for to show. And as a pray he must be set against the Dragon fell. If I these things let come to passe, I may confesse right well That of a Tyger I was bred: and that within my brest A heart more harde than any stéele or stonie rocke doth rest. Why rather doe I not his death with wrathfull eyes beholde? And ioy with others séeing him to vtter perill solde? Why doe I not enforce the Bulles against him? why I say Exhort I not the cruell men which shall in battell ray Arise against him from the ground? and that same Dragon too Within whose eyes came neuer sléepe? God shield I so should doo. But prayer smally bootes, except I put to helping hand. And shall I like a Caytife then betray my fathers land? Shall I a straunger saue whome we nor none of ours doth know? That he by me preserued may without me homeward row? And take another to his wife, and leaue me wretched wight To torments? If I wist that he coulde worke me such a spight, Or could in any others loue than only mine delight, The Churle should die for me. But sure he beareth not the face Like one that wold doe so. His birth, his courage, and his grace Doe put me clearly out of doubt he will not me deceyue, No nor forget the great good turnes he shall by me receyue. Yet shall he to me first his faith for more assurance plight And solemly he shall be sworne to kéepe the couenant right. Why fearste thou now without a cause? step to it out of hand: And doe not any lenger time thus lingring fondly stand. For ay shall Iason thinke himselfe beholding vnto thée: And shall thée marrie solemly: yea honored shalt thou bée Of all the Mothers greate and small throughout the townes of Gréece For sauing of their sonnes that come to fetch the golden fléece. And shall I then leaue brother, sister, father, kith and kin?
And household Gods, and natiue soyle, and all that is therein? And saile I know not whither with a straunger? yea: why not? My father surely cruell is, my Countrie rude God wot: My brother yet a verie babe: my sister I dare say Contented is with all hir heart that I should go away: The greatest God is in my selfe: the things I doe forsake Are trifles in comparison of those that I shall take. For sauing of the Gréekish ship renoumed shall I bée. A better place I shall enioy with Cities riche and frée, Whose fame doth florish fresh euen here, and people that excell In ciuill life and all good Artes: and whome I would not sell For all the goods within the worlde Duke Aesons noble sonne. Whome had I to my lawfull Féere assuredly once wonne, Most happie yea and blest of God I might my selfe account, And with my head aboue the starres to heauen I should surmount. But men report that certaine rockes (I know not what) doe méete Amid the waues, and monstruously againe a sunder fléete: And how Charybdis vtter foe to ships that passe thereby Now sowpeth in now speweth out the Sea incessantly: And rauening Scylla being hemde with cruell dogs about, Amids the gulfe of Sicilie doth make a barking out. What skilleth that? As long as I enioy the thing I loue, And hang about my Iasons necke, it shall no whit me moue To saile the daungerous Seas: as long as him I may embrace I cannot surely be afraide in any kinde of case. Or if I chaunce to be afraide, my feare shall only tende But for my husband. Callste thou him thy husband? doste pretende Gay titles to thy foule offence Medea? nay not so: But rather looke about how great a lewdnesse thou doste go. And shun the mischiefe while thou mayst. She had no sooner said These wordes, but right and godlinesse and shamefastnesse were staid Before hir eyes, and frantick loue did flie away dismaid. She went me to an Altar that was dedicate of olde To Perseys daughter Hecate (of whome the witches holde As of their Goddesse) standing in a thicke and secrete wood So close it coulde not well be spide: and now the raging mood Of furious loue was well alaide and clearely put to flight:
When spying Aesons sonne, the flame that séemed quenched quight Did kindle out of hand againe. Hir chéekes began to glowe, And flushing ouer all hir face the scarlet bloud did flowe. And euen as when a little sparke that was in ashes hid, Uncouered with the whisking windes is from the ashes rid, Efsoones it taketh nourishment and kindleth in such wise, That to his former strength againe and flaming it doth rise: Euen so hir quailed loue which late ye would haue thought had quight Bene vanisht out of minde, as soone as Iason came in sight Did kindle to his former force in vewing of the grace With which he did auaunce himselfe then comming there in place. And (as it chaunced) farre more faire and beautifull of face She thought him then than euer erst. but sure it doth behoue Hir iudgement should be borne withall bicause she was in loue. She gapte and gased in his face with fixed staring eyen As though she neuer had him séene before that instant time. So farre she was beside hir selfe he thought it should not bée The face of any worldly wight the which she then did sée. She was not able for hir life to turne hir eyes away. But when he tooke hir by the hand and speaking gan to pray Hir softly for to succor him, and promisde faithfully To take hir to his wedded wife, she falling by and by A wéeping, said. Sir, what I doe I sée apparantly. Not want of knowledge of the truth, but loue shall me deceiue. You shalbe saued by my meanes. And now I must receiue A faithfull promise at your hand for sauing of your life. He made a solemne vow, and sware to take hir to his wife, By triple Hecates holie rites, and by what other power So euer else had residence within that secret bower. And by the Sire of him that should his Fathrinlaw become Who all things doth behold, and as he hopte to ouercome The dreadfull daungers which he had soone after to assay. Duke Iason being credited receiude of hir streight way Enchaunted herbes: and hauing learnde the vsage of the same, Departed thence with merrie heart, and to his lodging came. Next Morne had chast y• streaming stars: & folke by heapes did flocke To Marsis sacred field, and there stoode thronging in a shocke,
To sée the straunge pastimes. The King most stately to beholde With yuorie Mace aboue them all did sit in throne of golde. Anon the brazenhoued Bulles from stonie nosethrils cast Out flakes of fire: their scalding breath the growing grasse did blast. And looke what noise a chimney full of burning fewell makes, Or Flint in softning in the Kell when first the fire it takes By sprincling water therevpon: such noyse their boyling brests Turmoyling with the firie flames enclosed in their chests, Such noise their scorched throtebolles make. yet stoutly Iason went To méete them. They their dreadfull eyes against him grimly bent, And eke their hornes with yron tipt: and strake the dust about In stamping with their clouen clees: and with their belowing out Set all the fielde vpon a smoke. The Myneis séeing that Were past their wits with sodaine feare. but Iason féeled nat So much as any breath of theirs: such strength hath sorcerie. Their dangling Dewlaps with his hand he coyd vnfearfully. And putting yokes vpon their neckes he forced them to draw The heauie burthen of the plough which erst they neuer saw, And for to breake the fielde which erst had neuer felt the share. The men of Colchos séeing this, like men amazed fare. The Mynies with their shouting out their mazednesse augment. And vnto Iason therewithall giue more encouragement. Then in a souldiers cap of stéele a Uipers téeth he takes, And sowes them in the new plowde fielde. the ground thē soking makes The séede forestéepte in poyson strong, both supple lithe and soft, And of these téeth a right straunge graine there growes anon aloft. For euen as in the mothers wombe an infant doth begin To take the liuely shape of man, and formed is within To due proportion piece by piece in euery limme, and when Full ripe he is, he takes the vse of Aire with other men: So when that of the Uipers téeth the perfect shape of man Within the bowels of the earth was formed, they began To rise togither orderly vpon the fruitefull fielde: And (which a greater wonder is) immediatly they wielde Their weapons growing vp with them. whō when the Gréekes behilde Preparing for to push their Pikes (which sharply headed were) In Iasons face, downe went their heades, their heartes did faint for feare:
And also she that made him safe began abasht to bée. For when against one naked man so huge an armie shée Beheld of armed enmies bent, hir colour did abate And sodainly both voyd of bloud and liuelie heate she sate. And least the chaunted wéedes the which she had him giuen before Should faile at néede, a helping charme she whispred ouermore, And practisde other secret Artes the which she kept in store. He casting streight a mightie stone amid his thickest foes, Doth voyde the battell from him selfe and turnes it vnto those. These earthbred brothers by and by did one another wound And neuer ceased till that all lay dead vpon the ground. The Gréekes were glad, & in their armes did clasp their Champion stout, And clinging to him earnestly embraced him about. And thou O fond Medea too couldst well haue found in hart The Champion for to haue embraste, but that withheld thou wart By shamefastnee. and yet thou hadst embraced him, if dread Of stayning of thine honor had not staid thee in that stead. But yet as far forth as thou maist, thou doste in heart reioyce, And secretly (although without expressing it in voyce) Doste thanke thy charmes and eke the Gods as Authors of the same. Now was remaining as the last conclusion of this game, By force of chaunted herbes to make the wachfull Dragon sléepe Within whose eyes came neuer winke: who had in charge to kéepe The goodly trée vpon the which the golden fléeces hung. With crested head, and hooked pawes, and triple spirting tung. Right ougly was he to beholde. When Iason had besprent Him with the iuice of certaine herbes from Lethey Riuer sent, And thrice had mumbled certaine wordes which are of force to cast So sound a sléepe on things that euen as dead a time they last, Which make the raging surges calme and flowing Riuers stay. The dreadfull Dragon by and by (whose eyes before that day Wist neuer erst what sléeping ment) did fall so fast a sleepe That Iason safely tooke the fléece of golde that he did kéepe. Of which his bootie being proud, he led with him away The Author of his good sucesse another fairer pray: And so with conquest and a wife he loosde from Colchos strond, And in Larissa auen safe did go againe a lond.
The auncient men of Thessalie togither with their wiues To Church with offrings gone for sauing of their childrens liues. Great heapes of fuming frankincense were fryed in the flame And vowed Bulles to sacrifice with hornes faire gilded came. But from this great solemnitie Duke Aeson was away, Now at deathes doore and spent with yeares. Then Iason thus gan say. O wife to whome I doe confesse I owe my life in déede, Though al things thou to me hast giuen, and thy deserts excéede Beleife: yet if enchauntment can, (for what so hard appeares Which strong enchauntment can not doe?) abate thou from my yeares, And adde them to my fathers life. As he these wordes did speake, The teares were standing in his eyes. His godly sute did breake Medeas heart: who therewithall be thought hir of hir Sire In leauing whome she had exprest a far vnlike desire. But yet bewraying not hir thoughts, she said: O Husband fie, What wickednesse hath scapt your mouth? suppose you then that I Am able of your life the terme where I will to bestow? Let Hecat neuer suffer that. Your sute (as well you know) Against all right and reason is. But I will put in proofe A greater gift than you require and more for your behoofe. I will assay your fathers life by cunning to prolong, And not with your yeares for to make him yong againe and strong: So our thréeformed Goddesse graunt with present helpe to stand A furthrer of the great attempt the which I take in hand. Before the Moone should circlewise close both hir hornes in one Three nightes were yet as then to come. Assoone as that she shone Most full of light, and did behold the earth with fulsome face, Medea with hir haire not trust so much as in a lace, But flaring on hir shoulders twaine, and barefoote, with hir gowne Ungirded, gate hir out of doores and wandred vp and downe Alone the dead time of the night. both Man, and Beast, and Bird Were fast a sléepe: the Serpents slie in trayling forward stird So softly as ye would haue thought they still a sléepe had bene. The moysting Ayre was whist. no leafe ye could haue mouing sene. The starres alonly faire and bright did in the welkin shine To which she lifting vp hir handes did thrise hirselfe encline: And thrice with water of the brooke hir haire besprincled shée:
And gasping thrise she opte hir mouth: and bowing downe hir knée Upon the bare hard ground, she said: O trusie time of night Most faithfull vnto priuities, O golden starres whose light Doth iointly with the Moone succéede the beames that blaze by day And thou thrée headed Hecàté who knowest best the way To compasse this our great attempt and art our chiefest stay: Ye Charmes & Witchcrafts, & thou Earth which both with herbe & wéed Of mightie working furnishst the Wizardes at their néede: Ye Ayres and windes: ye Elues of Hilles, of Brookes, of Woods alone, Of standing Lakes, and of the Night approche ye euerychone. Through helpe of whom (the crooked bankes much wondring at the thing) I haue compelled streames to run cleane backward to their spring. By charmes I make the calme Seas rough, & make ye rough Seas plaine▪ And couer all the Skie with Cloudes and chase them thence againe. By charmes I rasse and lay the windes, and burst the Uipers law. And from the bowels of the Earth both stones and trées doe draw. Whole woods and Forestes I remoue: I make the Mountaines shake, And euen the Earth it selfe to grone and fearfully to quake. I call vp dead men from their graues: and thée O light some Moone I darken oft, though beaten brasse abate thy perill soone. Our Sorcerie dimmes the Morning faire, and darkes ye Sun at Noone. The flaming breath of firie Bulles ye quenched for my sake And caused their vnwieldie neckes the bended yoke to take. Among the Earthbred brothers you a mortall war did set And brought a sléepe the Dragon fell whose eyes were neuer shet. By meanes whereof deceiuing him that had the golden fléece In charge to kéepe, you sent it thence by Iason into Greece. Now haue I néede of herbes that can by vertue of their iuice To flowring prime of lustie youth old withred age reduce. I am assurde ye will it graunt. For not in vaine haue shone These twinling starres, ne yet in vaine this Chariot all alone By draught of Dragons hither comes. With that was fro the Skie A Chariot softly glaunced downe, and stayed hard thereby. Assoone as she had gotten vp, and with hir hand had coyd The Dragons reined neckes, and with their bridles somewhat toyd, They mounted with hir in the Ayre, whence looking downe she saw The pleasant Temp of Thessalie, and made hir Dragons draw
To places further from resort: and there she tooke the view What herbes on high mount Pelion, and what on Ossa grew. And what on mountaine Othris and on Pyndus growing were, And what Olympus (greater than mount Pyndus far) did beare. Such herbes of them as liked hir she pullde vp roote and rinde Or cropt them with a hooked knife. And many she did finde Upon the bankes of Apidane agréeing to hir minde: And many at Amphrisus foords: and thou Enipeus eke Didst yeelde hir many pretie wéedes of which she well did like. Peneus and Sperchius streames contributarie were, And so were Boebes rushie bankes of such as growed there. About Anthedon which against the Ile Euboea standes, A certaine kind of liuely grasse she gatherd with hir handes, The name whereof was scarsly knowen or what the herbe could doe Untill that Glauus afterward was chaunged thereinto. Nine dayes with winged Dragons drawen, nine nights in Chariot swift She searching euerie field and frith from place to place did shift. She was no sooner home returnde but that the Dragons fell Which lightly of hir gathered herbes had taken but the smell, Did cast their sloughes and with their sloughes their riueled age forgo. She would none other house than heauen to hide hir head as tho: But kept hir still without the doores: and as for man was none That once might touch hir. Altars twayne of Turfe she builded: one Upon hir lefthand vnto Youth, another on the right To Heat. Both the which assoone as she had dight With Ueruin and with other shrubbes that on the fieldes doe rise, Not farre from thence she digde two pits: and making sacrifice Did cut a couple of blacke Rams throtes and filled with their blood The open pits, on which she pourde of warme milke pure and good A boll full, and another boll of honie clarifide. And babling to hir selfe therewith full bitterly she cride On Pluto and his rauisht wife the souereigne states of Hell, And all the Elues and Gods that on or in the Earth doe dwell, To spare olde Aesons life a while, and not in hast depriue His limmes of that same aged soule which kept them yet aliue. Whome when she had sufficiently with mumbling long besought, She bade that Aesons éebled corse should out of doores be brought
Before the Altars. Then with charmes she cast him in so déepe A slumber, that vpon the herbes he lay for dead a sléepe. Which done she willed Iason thence a great way off to go And likewise all the Ministers that serued hir as tho: And not presume those secretes with vnhallowed eyes to sée. They did as she commaunded them. When all were voyded, shée With scattred haire about hir eares like one of Bacchus froes Deuoutly by and by about the burning Altars goes: And dipping in the pits of bloud a sort of clifed brandes Upon the Altars kindled them that were on both hir handes. And thrise with brimstone, thrise with fire, and thrise with water pure She purged Aesons aged corse that slept and slumbred sure. The medicine séething all the while a wallop in a pan Of brasse, to spirt and leape a loft and gather froth began. There boyled she the rootes, séeds, flowres, leaues, stalkes & iuice togither Which from the fieldes of Thessalie she late had gathered thither. She cast in also precious stones fetcht from the furthest East And which the ebbing Ocean washt fine grauell from the West. She put thereto the deaw that fell vpon a Monday night: And flesh and feathers of a Witch a cursed odious wight Which in the likenesse of an Owle abrode a nightes did flie, And Infants in their cradels chaunge or sucke them that they die. The singles also of aA Ware wolfe. Wolfe which when he list could take The shape of man, and when he list the same againe forsake. And from the Riuer Cyniphis which is in Lybie lande She had the fine shéere scaled filmes of water snayles at hand. And of an endlesseliued heart the liuer had she got. To which she added of a Crowe that then had liued not So little as nine hundred yeares the head and Bill also. Now when Medea had with these and with a thousand mo Such other kinde of namelesse things bestead hir purpose through For lengthning of the old mans life, she tooke a withered bough Cut lately from an Olyf trée, and iumbling all togither Did raise the bottome to the brim: and as she stirred hither And thither with the withered sticke, behold it waxed gréene. Anon the leaues came budding out: and sodenly were séene As many berries dangling downe as well the bough could beare.
And where the fire had from the pan the scumming cast, or where The scalding drops did fall, the ground did springlike florish there, And flowres with fodder fine and soft immediatly arose. Which when Medea did behold, with naked knife she goes And cuttes the olde mans throte: and letting all his old bloud go Supplies it with the boyled iuice: the which when Aeson tho Had at his mouth or at his wounde receyued in, his heare As well of head as beard from gray to coleblacke turned were. His leane, pale, hore, and withered corse grew fulsome, faire and fresh: His furrowed wrincles were fulfilde with yong and lustie flesh. His limmes waxt frolicke, baine and lithe: at which he wondring much, Remembred that at fortie yeares he was the same or such. And as from dull vnwieldsome age to youth he backward drew: Euen so a liuely youthfull spright did in his heart renew. The wonder of this monstruous act had Bacchus séene from hie. And finding that to youthfull yeares his Nurses might thereby Restored bée, did at hir hand receiue it as a gift. And least deceitfull guile should cease, Medea found a shift To feyne that Iason and hir selfe were falne at oddes in wroth: And therevpon in humble wise to Pelias Court she goth. Whre forbicause the King himselfe was féebled sore with age, His daughters entertainde hir whome Medea being sage, Within a while through false pretence of feyned friendship brought To take hir baite. For as she tolde what pleasures she had wrought For Iason, and among the rest as greatest sadly tolde How she had made his father yong that withred was and olde, And taried long vpon that point: they hoped glad and faine That their olde father might likewise his youthful yeares regaine. And this they crauing instantly did proffer for hir paine What recompence she would desire. She helde hir peace a while As though she doubted what to doe: and with hir suttle guile Of counterfetted grauitie more eger did them make. Assone as she had promisde them to doe it for their sake, For more assurance of my graunt, your selues (quoth she) shall sée The oldest Ram in all your flocke a Lambe streight made to bée By force of my confections strong. Immediatly a Ram So olde that no man thereabouts remembred him a Lam▪
Was thither by his warped hornes which turned inward to To his hollow Temples, drawne: whose withred throte she slit in two. And when she cleane had drayned out that little bloud that was Upon the fire with herbes of strength she set a pan of brasse, And cast his carcasse thereinto. The Medcine did abate The largenesse of his limmes and seard his dossers from his pate, And with his hornes abridgde his yeares. Anon was plainly heard The bleating of a new yead Lambe from mid the Ketleward. And as they wondred for to heare the bleating, streight the Lam Leapt out, and frisking ran to séeke the vdder of some Dam. King Pelias daughters were amazde and when they did beholde Hir promise come to such effect, they were a thousand folde More earnest at hir than before. Thrise Phoebus hauing pluckt The Collars from his horses neckes, in Iber had them duckt. And now in Heauen the streaming starres the fourth night shined cleare: When false Medea on the fire had hanged water shere. With herbes that had no powre at all. The King and all his garde Which had the charge that night about his person for to warde Were through hir nightspels and hir charmes in deadly sléepe all cast. And Pelias daughters with the Witch which eggde them forward, past Into his chamber by the watch, and compast in his bed. Then: wherefore stand ye doubting thus like fooles Medea sed. On: draw your swordes: and let ye out his old bloud, that I may Fill vp his emptie veynes againe with youthfull bloud streight way. Your fathers life is in your handes: it lieth now in you To haue him olde and withred still or yong and lustie. Now If any nature in ye be, and that ye doe not féede A fruitelesse hope, your dutie to your father doe with spéede. Expulse his age by sword, and let the filthy matter out. Through these persuasions which of them so euer went about To shewe hirselfe most naturall, became the first that wrought Against all nature: and for feare she should be wicked thought, She executes the wickednesse which most to shun she sought. Yet was not any one of them so bolde that durst abide To looke vpon their father when she strake, but wride aside Hir eyes: and so their cruell handes not marking where they hit With faces turnde another way at all auenture .
He all beweltred in his bloud awaked with the smart, And maimde and mangled as he was did giue a sodeyne start Endeuoring to haue risen vp. but when he did beholde Himselfe among so many swordes, he lifting vp his olde Pale warysh armes, said: daughters mine what doe ye? who hath put These wicked weapons in your hands your fathers throte to cut? With that their heartes and handes did faint. And as he talked yet, Medea breaking of his wordes, his windpipe quickly slit, And in the scalding liquor torne did drowne him by and by. But had she not with winged wormes streight mounted in the skie She had not scaped punishment. but stying vp on hie She ouer shadie Pelion flew where Chyron erst did dwell, And ouer Othrys and the grounds renowinde for that befell To auncient Ceramb: who such time as old Deucalions flood Upon the face of all the Earth like one maine water stood, By helpe of Nymphes with fethered wings was in the Ayer lift, And so escaped from the floud vndrowned by the shift. She left Aeolian Pytanie vpon hir left hand: and The Serpent that became a stone vpon the Lesbian sand. And Ida woods where Bacchus hid a Bullocke (as is sayd) In shape of Stag the which his sonne had théeuishly conuayde. And where the Sire of Corytus lies buried in the dust. The fieldes which Meras (when he first did into barking brust) Affraide with straungenesse of the noyse. And eke Eurypils towne In which the wiues of Cos had hornes like Oxen on their crowne Such time as Hercles with his hoste departed from the Ile. And Rhodes to Phoebus consecrate: and Ialyse where ere while The Telchines with their noysome sight did euery thing bewitch. At which their hainous wickednesse Ioue taking rightfull pritch, Did drowne them in his brothers waues. Moreouer she did passe By Ceos and olde Carthey walles where Sir Alcidamas Did wonder how his daughter should be turned to a Doue. The Swannie Temp and Hyries Poole she viewed from aboue, The which a sodeine Swan did haunt. For Phyllie there for loue Of Hyries sonne did at his bidding Birdes and Lions tame, And being willde to breake a Bull performed streight the same: Till wrothfull that his loue so oft so streightly should him vse,
When for his last reward he askt the Bull, he did refuse To giue it him. The boy displeasde, said: well: thou wilt anon Repent thou gaue it not: and leapt downe headlong from a stone. They all supposde he had bene falne: but being made a Swan With snowie feathers in the Ayre to flacker he began. His mother Hyrie knowing not he was preserued so, Resolued into melting teares for pensiuenesse and wo, And made the Poole that beares hir name. Not far from hence doth stand The Citie Brauron, where sometime by mounting from the land With wauing pinions Ophyes ympe dame Combe did eschue Hir children which with naked swordes to slea hir did pursue. Anon she kend Calaurie fieldes which did sometime pertaine To chast Diana where a King and eke his wife both twaine Were turnde to Birdes. Cyllene hill vpon hir right hand stood, In which Menephron like a beast of wilde and sauage moode To force his mother did attempt. Far thence she spide where sad Cephisus mourned for his Neece whome Phebus turned had To vgly shape of swelling Seale: and Eumelles pallace faire Lamenting for his sonnes mischaunce with whewling in the Aire. At Corinth with hir winged Snakes at length she did arriue. Here men (so auncient fathers said that were as then aliue) Did bréede of deawie Mushrommes. But after that hir téene With burning of hir husbāds bride by witchcraft wreakt had béene And that King Creons pallace she on blasing fire had séene, And in hir owne deare childrens bloud had bathde hir wicked knife Not like a mother but a beast bereuing them of life: Least Iason should haue punisht hir she tooke hir winged Snakes, And flying thence againe in haste to Pallas Citie makes, Which saw the auncient Periphas and rightuous Phiney to Togither flying, and the Néece of Polypemon who Was fastened to a paire of wings as well as tother two. Aegeus enterteinde hir wherein he was too blame Although he had no further gone but staid vpon the same, He thought it not to be inough to vse hir as his guest Onlesse he tooke hir too his wife. And now was Thesey prest, Unknowne vnto his father yet, who by his knightly force Had set from robbers cleare the balke that makes the streight diuorce
Betwéene the seas Iönian and Aegean. To haue killde This worthie knight, Medea had a Goblet readie fillde With iuice of Flintwoort venemous the which she long ago Had out of Scythie with hir brought. The common brute is so That of the téeth of Cerberus this Flintwoort first did grow. There is a caue that gapeth wide with darksome entrie low, There goes a way slope downe by which with triple cheyne made new Of strong and sturdie Adamant the valiant Herle drew The currish Helhounde Cerberus: who dragging arsward still And writhing backe his scowling eyes bicause he had no skill To sée the Sunne and open day, for verie moodie wroth Thrée barkings yelled out at once, and spit his slauering froth Upon the gréenish grasse. This froth (as men suppose) tooke roote And thriuing in the batling soyle in burgeous forth did shoote, To bane and mischiefe men withall: and forbicause the same Did grow vpon the bare hard Flints, folke gaue the foresaid name Of Flintwoort therevnto. The King by egging of his Quéene Did reach his soone this bane as if he had his enmie béene. And Thesey f this treason wrought not knowing ought had tane The Goblet at his fathers had which helde his deadly bane: When sodenly by the Iuore his that were vpon his sword Aegeus knew he was his sonne: and rising from the borde Did strike the mischiee from his mouth. Medea with a charme Did cast a mist and so scapte death deserued for the harme Entended. Now albeit that Aegeus were right glad That in the sauing of his sonne so happy chaunce he had, Yet grieued it his heart full sore that such a wicked wight With treason wrought against his sonne should scape so cleare & quight. Then fell he vnto kindling fire on Altars euerie where And glutted all the Gods with gifts. The thicke neckt Oxen were With garlands wreathd about their hornes knockt downe for sacrifice. A day of more solemnitie than this did neuer rise Before on Athens (by report.) The auncients of the Towne Made feastes: so did the meaner sort, and euery common clowne. And as the wine did sharpe their wits, they sung this song. O knight Of péerlesse prowesse Theseus, thy manhod and thy might Through all the coast of Marathon with worthie honor soundes,
For killing of the Cretish Bull that wasted those same groundes. The folke of Cremyon thinke themselues beholden vnto thée. For that without disquietting their fieldes may tilled be. By thée the land of Epidaure behelde the clubbish sonne Of Vulcane dead. By thée likewise the countrie that doth runne Along Cephisus bankes behelde the fell Procrustes slaine. The dwelling place of Ceres our Eleusis glad and faine Beheld the death of Cercyon. That orpid Sinis who Abused his strength in bending trées and tying folke thereto, Their limmes a sunder for to teare when loosened from the stops The trées vnto their proper place did trice their streyned tops, Was kilde by thée. Thou made the way that leadeth to the towne Alcathoe in Beotia cleare by putting Scyron downe. To this same outlawes scattred bones the land denied rest, And likewise did the Sea refuse to harbrough such a guest: Till after floting to and fro long while as men doe say At length they hardened into stones: and at this present day The stones are called Scyrons cliffes. Now if we should account Thy déedes togither with thy yeares, thy déedes would far surmount Thy yeares. For thée most valiant Prince these publike vowes we kéepe For thée with cherefull heartes we quaffe these bolles of wine so déepe. The Pallace also of the noyse and shouting did resounde The which the people made for ioy. There was not to be founde In all the Citie any place of sadnesse. Nathelesse (So hard it is of perfect ioy to find so great excesse, But that some sorrow therewithall is medled more or lesse,) Aegeus had not in his sonnes recouerie such delight, But that there followed in the necke a piece of fortunes spight. King Minos was preparing war. who though he had great store Of ships and souldiers yet the wrath the which he had before Conceyued in his fathers brest for murthring of his sonne Androgeus made him farre more strong and fiercer for to ronne To rightfull battell to reuenge the great displeasure donne. Howbeit he thought it best ere he his warfare did begin To finde the meanes of forreine aides some friendship for to win. And therevpon with flying fléete where passage did permit He went to visit all the Iles that in those seas doe fit.
Anon the Iles Astypaley and Anaphey both twaine The first constreynde for feare of war the last in hope of gaine Tooke part with him. Low Myconey did also with him hold So did the chalkie Cymoley, and Syphney which of olde Was verie riche with veynes of golde, and Scyros full of bolde And valiant men, and Seryphey the smooth or rather fell, And Parey which for Marblestone doth beare away the bell. And Sythney which a wicked wench callde Arne did betray For mony: who vpon receit thereof without delay Was turned to a birde which yet of golde is gripple still, And is as blacke as any cole, both fethers, féete and bill. A Cadowe is the name of hir. But yet Olyarey, And Didymey, and Andrey eke, and Tene, and Gyarey, And Pepareth where Oliue trees most plenteously doe grow, In no wise would agrée their helpe on Minos to bestow. Then Minos turning lefthandwise did sayle to Oenope Where reignde that time King Aeacus. This Ile had called be Of old by name of Oenope: but Aeacus turnde the name And after of his mothers name Aegina callde the same. The common folke ran out by heapes desirous for to sée A man of such renowne as Minos bruted was to bée. The Kings three sonnes Duke Telamon Duke Peley, and the yong Duke Phocus went to méete with him. Old Aeacus also clung With age, came after leysurely, and asked him the cause Of his repaire. The ruler of the hundred Shires gan pause: And musing on the inward griefe that nipt him at the hart, Did shape him aunswere thus. O Prince vouchsafe to take my part In this same godly warre of mine: assist me in the iust Reuengement of my murthred sonne that sléepeth in the dust. I craue your comfort for his death. Aeginas sonne replide: Thy suite is vaine: and of my Realme perforce must be denide. For vnto Athens is no lande more sure than this alide: Such leagues betwéene vs are which shall infringde for me abide. Away went Minos sad: and said: full dearly shalt thou bie Thy leagues. He thought it for to be a better pollicie To threaten war than war to make, and there to spend his store And strength which in his other needes might much auaile him more.
As yet might from Oenopia walles the Cretish fléete be kend. When thitherward with puffed sayles and wind at will did tend A ship from Athens, which anon arriuing at the strand Set Cephal with Ambassade from his Countrimen a land. The Kings thrée sonnes though long it were since last they had him séene: Yet knew they him. And after olde acquaintance eft had béene Renewde by shaking hands, to Court they did him streight conuay This Prince which did allure the eyes of all men by the way, As in whose stately person still remained to be séene The markes of beautie which in flowre of former yeares had béene Went holding out on Olife braunch that grew in Atticke lande And for the reuerence of his age there went on eyther hand A Nobleman of yonger yeares. Sir Clytus on the right And Butes on the left, the sonnes of one that Pallas hght. When gréeting first had past betweene these Nobles and the King, Then Cephal setting streight a broche the message he did bring, Desired aide: and shewde what leagues stoode then in sorce betwéene His countrie and the Aeginites, and also what had béene Decréed betwixt their aunceters, concluding in the ende That vnder colour of this war which Minos did pretende To only Athens, he in déede the conquest did intende Of all Achaia. When he thus by helpe of learned skill His countrie message furthred had, King Aeacus leaning still His left hand on his scepter, saide. My Lordes, I would not haue Your state of Athens séeme so straunge as succor here to craue. I pray commaund. For be ye sure that what this Ile can make Is yours. Yea all that ere I haue shall hazard for your sake. I want no strength. I haue such store of souldiers, that I may Both vex my foes and also kéepe my Realme in quiet stay. And now I thinke me blest of God that time doth serue to showe Without excuse the great good will that I to Athens owe. God holde it sir ({quod} Cephalus) God make the number grow Of people in this towne of yours: it did me good a late When such a goodly sort of youth of all one age and rate Did méete me in the stréete. but yet me thinkes that many misse Which at my former being here I haue beheld ere this.
At that the King did igh, and thus with plaintfull voice did say. A sad beginning aftrward in better lucke did stay. I would I plainly could the same before your faces lay. Howbeit I will disorderly repeate it as I may. And least I séeme to wearie you with ouerlong delay, The men that you so mindefully enquire for lie in ground And nought of them saue bones and dust remayneth to be found. But as it hapt what losse thereby did vnto me redound? A cruell plague through Iunos wrath who dreadfully did hate This Land that of hir husbands Loue did take the name of late, Upon my people fell: as long as that the maladie None other séemde than such as haunts mans nature vsually, And of so great mortalitie the hurtfull cause was hid, We stroue by Phisicke of the same the Pacients for to rid. The mischief ouermaistred Art: yea Phisick was to séeke To doe it selfe good. First the Aire with fogge stinking réeke Did daily ouerdréepe the earth: and close culme Clouds did make The wether faint: and while the Moone foure time hir light did take And fillde hir emptie hornes therewith, and did as often slake: The warme South windes with deadly heate continually did blow. Infected were the Springs, and Ponds, and streames that ebbe & flow. And swarmes of Serpents crawld about the fieldes that lay vntillde Which with their poison euen the brookes and running waters fillde. In sodaine dropping downe of Dogs, of Horses, Shéepe and Kine, Of Birds & Beasts both wild & tame as Oxen, Wolues, & Swine, The mischiefe of this secret sore first outwardly appéeres. The wretched Plowman was amazde to sée his sturdie Stéeres Amid the orrow sinking downe ere halfe his worke was donne. Whole flocks of shéepe did faintly bleate, and therewithall begonne Their fléeces for to fall away and leaue the naked skin, And all their bodies with the rot attainted were within. The lustie Horse that erst was fierce in field renowne to win Against his kinde grew cowardly: and now forgetting quight The auncient honor which he prast so oft to get in fight, Stoode sighing sadly at the Racke as wayting for to yéelde His wearie life without renowne of combat in the fielde. The Boare to chafe, the Hinde to runne, the cruell Beare to fall
Upon the herdes of Rother beastes had now no lust at all. A languishing was falne on all. In wayes, in woods, in plaines, The filthie carios lay, whose stinche, the Ayre it selfe distaines. (A wondrous thing to tell) not Dogges, not rauening Foules, nor yit Horected Wolues would once attempt to tast of them a bit. Looke where they fell, there rotted they: and with their sauor bred More harme, and further still abrode the foule infection spred. With losse that touched yet more nere, on Husbandmen it crept, And ragingly within the walles of this great Citie ept. It tooke men first with swelting heate that scalt their guts within: The signes whereof were steaming breath and firie colourde skin The tongue was harsh & swolne, the mouth through drought of burning veines Lay gaping vp to hale in breath, and as the pacient streines, To draw it in, he suckes therewith corrupted Aire beside. No bed, no clothes though nere so thinne the pacients could abide. But laide thir hardened stomackes flat against the bare colde ground Yet no abatement of the heate therein their bodies found: But ht the earth, and as for Leache was none that helpe could hight The Surgians and Phisitions too were in the selfe same plight. Their curlsse cunning hurt themselues. The nerer any man Approcheth his diseased friend, and doth the best he can To succor him most faithfully, the sooner did he catch His bane. All hope of health was gone. No easment nor dispatch Of this disease except in death and buriall did they finde. Looke wherevnto that eche mans minde and fancie was enclinde, That followed he. he neuer past what was for his behoofe. For why? that nought could doe them good was felt too much by proofe. In euerie place without respect of shame or honestie At Wels, at brookes, at ponds, at pits, by swarmes they thronging lie: But sooner might they quench their life than staūch their thirst thereby. And therewithall so heauie and vnwieldie they become, That wanting power to rise againe, they died there. Yet some The selfe same waters guzled still without regard of feare, So weary of their lothsome beds the wretched people were, That out they lept: or if to stand their féeble force denide, They wallowed downe and out of doores immediatly them hide: It was a death to euery man his owne house to abide.
And for they did not know the cause whereof the sicknesse came, The place (bicause they did it know) was blamed for the same. Ye should haue séene some halfe sordad go plundring here and there By highways sides while that their legges were able them to beare. And some lie weeping on the ground or rolling piteously Their wearie eyes which afterwards should neuer sée the Skie: Or stretching out their lmes to Heauen that ouerhangs on hie, Some here, some there, and yonder some, in what so euer coste Death finding them enforced them to yéelde their fainting Ghoste. What heart had I suppose you then, or ought I then to haue? In faith I might haue lothde my life, and wisht me in my graue As other of my people were. I could not cast mine eie In any place, but that dead folke there strowed I did spie Euen like as from a shaken twig when rotten Apples drop, Or Mast from Beches, Holmes or Okes whē Poales doe scare their top. Yo stately Church with gréeces long against our Court you sée: It is the shrine of Iupiter. What Wight was he or shee That on those Altars burned not their frankincense in vaine? How oft, yea euen with Frankincense that partly did remaine Still vnconsumed in their hands, did die both man and wife? As ech of them with mutuall care did pray for others life? How often dide the mother there in sewing for hir sonne, Unheard vpon the Altarstone, hir prayer scarce begonne? How often at the Temple doore euen while the Priest did bid His Beades, and poure pure wine betwene their hornes, at sodaine slid The Oxen downe without stroke giuen? Yea once when I had thought My selfe by offring sacrifice Ioues fauor to haue sought, For me, my Realme, and these thrée ymps, the Oxe with grieuous grone Upon the sodaine sunke me downe: and little bloud or none Did issue scarce to staine the knife with which they slit his throte. The sickly inwardes eke had lost the signes whereby we note What things the Gods for certaintie would warne vs of before: For euen the verie bowels were attainted with the sore. Before the holie Temple doores, and (that the death might bée The more dispitefull) euen before the Altars did I sée The stinking corses scattred. Some with haltars slopt their winde, By death expulsing feare of death: and of a wilfull minde
Did haste their ende, which of it selfe was coming on a pace. The bodies which the plague had slaine were (O most wretched case) Not caried forth to buriall now. For why such store there was That scarce the gates were wyde inough for Coffins forth to passe. So eyther lothly on the ground vnburied did they lie, Or else without solemnitie were burnt in bonfires hie No reuerence nor regard was had. Men fell togither by The eares for firing. In the fire that was prepared for one Another straungers corse was burnt. And lastly few or none Were left to mourne. The fillie soules of Mothers with their small And tender babes, and age with youth as Fortune did befall Went wandring gastly vp and downe vnmourned for at all. In fine so farre outrageously this helpelesse Murren raues, There was not wood inough for fire, nor ground inough for graues. Astnoied at the stourenesse of so stout a storme of ills I said O father Iupiter whose mightie power fulfills Both Heauen and Earth, if flying fame report thée not amisse In vouching that thou didst embrace in way of Loue ere this The Riuer Asops daughter faire Aegina euen by name, And that to take me for thy sonne thou count it not a shame: Restore thou me my folke againe, or kill thou me likewise. He gaue a signe by sodaine flash of lightning from the Skies, And double peale of Thundercracks. I take this same ({quod} I) And as I take it for a true and certaine signe whereby Thou doest confirme me for thy sonne: so also let it be A hansell of some happie lucke thou mindest vnto me. Hard by vs as it hapt that time, there was an Oken trée With spreaded armes as bare of boughes as lightly one shall sée. This tre (as all the rest of Okes) was sacred vnto Ioue And sprouted of an Acorne which was fet from Dodon groue. Here markt we how the pretie Ants the gatherers vp of graine One following other all along in order of a traine, Great burthens in their little mouthes did painfully sustaine▪ And nimbly vp the rugged barke their beaten path maintaine. As wondring at the swarme I stoode, I said, O father déere As many people giue thou me, as Ants are créeping héere. And fill mine empty walles againe. Anon the Oke did quake,
And vnconstreynde of any blast, his loftie braunches shake, The which did yéeld a certaine sound. With that for dreadfull feare A huddring through my bodie strake and vp stoode stiffe my heare. But yet I kissed reuerently the ground and eke the trée. Howbeit I durst not be so bolde of hope acknowne to bée. Yet hoped I: and in my heart did shroude my secret hope. Anon came night: and sléepe vpon my carefull carcasse crope. Me thought I saw the selfe same Oke with all his boughes and twigs, And all the Pismeres créeping still vpon his tawnts and sprigs. Which trembling with a sodaine brayd these Haruest folke of threw And shed them on the ground about, who on the sodaine grew In bignesse more and more. and from the earth themselues did lift: And stoode vpright against the trée: and therewithall did shift Their meygernesse, and coleblacke hue, and number of their féete: And clad their limmes with shape of man. Away my sléepe did fléete. And when I wooke, misliking of my dreame I made my mone That in the Gods I did perceiue but slender helpe or none. But straight much trampling vp and downe and shuffling did I heare And (which to me that present time did verie straunge appeare) Of people talking in my house me thought I heard the reare. Now while I musing on the same supposde it to haue béen Some fancie of the foolish dreame which lately I had séen, Behold, in comes me Telamon in hast, and thrusting ope My Chamber doore, said: Sir, a sight of things surmounting hope And credit shall you haue: come forth. Forth came I by and by And euen such men for all the world there standing did I spie As in my sléepe I dreamed of, and knew them for the same. They comming to me gréeted me their souereigne Lord by name. And I (my vowes to Ioue performde) my Citie did deuide Among my new inhabiters: and gaue them land beside Which by decease of such as were late owners of the same Lay wast. And in remembrance of the race whereof they came, The name of Emets I them gaue. Their persons you haue séen: Their disposition is the same that erst in them hath béen. They are a sparing kinde of folke, on labor wholy set, A gatherer, and an hoorder vp of such as they doe get. These fellowes being like in yeares and courage of the minde,
Shall go a warfare wy assone as that the Easterne winde Which brought you hither luckely, (the Easterne winde was it That brought them thither) turning, to the Southerne coast doe . With this and other such like talke they brought the day to ende. The Euen in feasting, and the night in sléeping they did spende. The Sunne next Morrow in the heauen with golden beames did burne, And still the Easterne winde did blow and hold them from returne. Sir Pallas sonnes to Cephal came (for he their elder was) And he and they to Aeacus Court togither forth did passe. The King as yet was fast a sléepe. Duke Phocus at the gate Did méete them, and receyued them according to their state. For Telamon and Peleus alreadie forth were gone, To muster Souldiers for the warres. So Phocus all alone Did leade them to an inner roume, where goodly Parlours were, And caused them to sit them downe. As he was also there Now sitting with them, he beheld a Dart in Cephals hand With golden head, the steale whereof he well might vnderstand Was of some straūge and vnknowne trée. when certaine talke had past A while of other matters there, I am (quoth he) at last A man that hath delight in woods and loues to follow game And yet I am not able sure by any meanes to ame What wood your Iaueling steale is of. Of Ash it can not bée. For then the colour should be browne. and if of Cornell trée, It would be full of knubbed knots. I know not what it is: But sure mine ees did neuer sée a fairer Dart than this. The one of those same brethren twaine replying to him said: Nay then the speciall propertie will make you more dismaid, Than doth the beautie of this Dart. It hitteth whatsoeuer He throwes it at. The stroke thereof by Chaunce is ruled neuer. For huing done his feate, it flies all bloudie backe agen Without the helpe of any hand. The Prince was earnest then To know the truth of all: as whence so riche a present came, Who gaue it him, and wherepon the partie gaue the same. Duke Cephal answerde his dmaund in all points (one except) The which (as knowne apparantly) for shame he ouerlept: is beautie namely, for the which he did receiue the Dart. And or the losse of his deare wife right pensiue at the hart.
He thus began with wéeping eies. This Dart O Goddesse sonne (Ye ill would thinke it) makes me yirne, & long shall make me donne, If long the Gods doe giue me life. This weapon hath vndonne My deare beloued wife and me. O would to God this same Had neuer vnto me bene giuen. There was a noble Dame That Procris hight (but you perchaunce haue oftner heard the name Of great Orythia whose renowne was brued so by fame, That blustring Boreas rauisht hir.) To this Orythia shée Was sister. If a bodie should compare in ech degrée The face and natures of them both, he could none other déeme But Procris worthier of the twaine of rauishment should séeme. Hir father and our mutuall loue did make vs man and wife. Men said I had (and so I had in déede) a happie life. Howbeit Gods will was otherwise. for had it pleased him Of all this while, and euen still yet in pleasure should I swim. The second Month that she and I by band of lawfull bed Had ioynde togither bene, as I my masking Toyles did spred, To ouerthrow the horned Stags, the early Morning gray Then newly hauing chased night and gun to breake the day, From Mount Hymettus highest tops that freshly flourish ay, Espide me, and against my will conueyde me quight away. I trust the Goddesse will not be offended that I say The troth of hir. Although it would delight one to beholde Hir ruddie chéekes: although of day and night the bounds she holde: Although on iuice of Ambrosie continually she feede: Yet Procris was the only Wight that I did loue in déede. On Procris only was my heart: none other word had I But Procris only in my mouth: still Procris did I crie. It vpned what a holy thing was wedlocke: and how late It was ago since she and I were coupled in that state. Which band (and specially so soone) it were a shame to breake. The Goddesse being moued at the words that I did speake, Said: cease thy plaint thou Carle, and kéepe thy Procris still for me. But (if my minde deceyue me not) the time will shortly be That wish thou wilt thou had hir not. And so in anger she To Procris sent me backe againe. in going homeward as Upon the Goddesse sayings with my selfe I musing was,
I gan to dreade bad measures least my wife had made some scape. Hir youthfull yeares begarnished with beautie, grace and shape, In maner made me to beleue the déede already done. Againe hir maners did forbid mistrusting ouer soone. But I had bne away: but euen the same from whom I come A shrewde example gaue how lightly wiues doe run in blame: But we poore Louers are afraide of al things. Herevpon I thought to practise feates: which thing repented me anon: And shall repent me while I liue. The purpose of my drifts Was for tassault hir honestie with great rewards and gifts. The Morning fooding this my feare, to further my deuice, My shape (which thing me thought I felt) had altered with a trice. By meanes whereof anon vnknowne to Pallas towne I came, And entred so my house: the house was clearely voide of blame: And shewed signes of chastitie in mourning euer sith Their maister had bene rapt away. A thousand meanes wherewith To come to Procris speach had I deuisde: and scarce at last Obteinde I it. Assoone as I mine eie vpon hir cast, My wits were rauisht in such wise that nigh I had forgot The purposde triall of hir troth. right much a doe God wo I had to holde mine owne that I the truth bewrayed not. To kéepe my selfe from kissing hir full much a doe I had As reason was I should haue done. She looked verie sad. And yet as sadly as she lookte, no Wight aliue can show A better countenance than did she. Hir heart did inward glow In longing for hir absent spouse. How beautifull a face Thinke you Sir Phocus was in hir whome sorrow so did grace? What should I make report how oft hir chast behauiour straue And ouercame most constantly the great assaults I gaue? Or tell how oft she shet me vp with these same words? To one (Where ere he is) I kéepe my selfe, and none but he alone Shall sure enioy the vse of me. What creature hauing his Wits perfect would not be content with such a proofe as this Of hir most stedfast chastitie? I could not be content: But still to purchase to my selfe more wo I further went. At last by profering endlesse welth, and heaping gifts on gifts, In ouerlading hir with wordes I draue hir to hir shifts.
Then cride I out: Thine euill heart my selfe I tardie take. Where of a straunge aduouterer the countenance I did make, I am in déede thy husband. O vnfaithfull woman thou, Euen I my selfe can testifie thy lewde behauior now. She made none answere to my words, but being stricken dum And with the sorrow of hir heart alonly ouercum, Forsaketh hir entangling house, and naughtie husband quight: And hating all the sort of men by reason of the spight That I had wrought hir, straide abrode among the Mountaines hie, And exercisde Dianas feates. Then kindled by and by A fiercer fire within my bones than euer was before, When she had thus forsaken me by whome I set such store. I prayde hir she woulde pardon me, and did confesse my fault. Affirming that my selfe likewise with such a great assault Of richesse might right well haue bene enforst to yeelde to blame, The rather if performance had ensewed of the same. When I had this submission made, and she sufficiently Reuengde hir wronged chastitie, she then immediatly Was reconcilde: and afterward we liued many a yeare In ioy and neuer any iarre betwéene vs did appeare. Besides all this (as though hir loue had bene to small a gift) She gaue me eke a goodly Grewnd which was of foote so swift, That when Diana gaue him hir, she said he should out go. All others. and with this same Grewnd she gaue this Dart also The which you sée I hold in hand. Perchaunce ye faine would know What fortune to the Grewnd befell. I will vnto you show A wondrous case. The straungenesse of the matter will you moue. The krinkes of certaine Prophesies surmounting farre aboue The reach of auncient wits to read, the Brookenymphes did expoūd: And mindlesse of hir owne darke doubts Dame Themis being found, Was as a rechelesse Prophetisse throwne flat against the ground. For which presumptuous déede of theirs she tooke iust punishment. To Thebes in Baeotia streight a cruell beast she sent, Which wrought the bane of many a Wight. The coūtryfolk did féed Him with their cattell and themselues, vntill (as was agréed) That all we youthfull Gentlemen that dwelled there about Assembling pitcht our corded toyles the champion fields throughout.
But Net ne toyle was none so hie that could his wightnesse stop, He mounted ouer at his ease the highest of the top. Then euerie man let slip their Grewnds, but he them all outstript And euen as nimbly as a birde in daliance from them whipt. Then all the field desired me to let my Laelaps go: (The Grewnd that Procris vnto me did giue was named so) Who strugling for to wrest his necke already from the band Did stretch his collar. Scarsly had we let him of of hand But that where Laelaps was become we could not vnderstand. The print remained of his féete vpon the parched sand, But he was clearly out of sight. Was neuer Dart I trow, Nor Pellet from enforced Sling, nor shaft from Cretish bow, That flew more swift than he did runne. There was not farre fro thence About the middle of the Laund a rising ground, from whence A man might ouerlooke the fieldes. I gate me to the knap Of this same hill, and there beheld of this straunge course the hap In which the beast seemes one while caught, and ere a man would think, Doth quickly giue the Grewnd the slip, and from his bighting shrink: And like a wilie Foxe he runnes not forth directly out, Nor makes a windlasse ouer all the champion fieldes about, But doubling and indenting still auoydes his enmies lips, And turning short, as swift about as spinning whéele he whips, To disapoint the snatch. The Grewnd pursuing at an inch Doth cote him, neuer losing ground: but likely still to pinch Is at the sodaine shifted of. continually he snatches In vaine: for nothing in his mouth saue only Aire he latches. Then thought I for to trie what helpe my Dart at néede could show. Which as I charged in my hand by leuell aime to throw, And set my fingars to the thongs, I lifting from bylow Mine eies, did looke right forth againe, and straight amids the field (A wondrous thing) two Images of Marble I beheld: Of which ye would haue thought the tone had fled on still a pace And that with open barking mouth the tother did him chase. In faith it was the will of God (at least if any Goddes Had care of them) that in their pace there should be found none oddes. Thus farre: and then he held his peace. But tell vs ere we part (Quoth Phocus) what offence or fault committed hath your Dart?
His Darts offence he thus declarde. My Lorde the ground of all My griefe was ioy. those ioyes of mine remember first I shall. It doth me good euen yet to thinke vpon that blissfull time (I meane the fresh and lustie yeares of pleasant youthfull Prime) When I a happie man enioyde so faire and good a wife, And she with such a louing Make did lead a happie life. The care was like of both of vs, the mutuall loue all one. She would not to haue line with Ioue my presence haue forgone. Ne was there any Wight that could of me haue wonne the loue, No though Dame Venus had hir selfe descended from aboue. The glowing brands of loue did burne in both our brests alike. Such time as first with crased beames the Sunne is wont to strike The tops of Towres and mountaines high, according to the wont Of youthfull men, in woodie Parkes I went abrode to hunt. But neither horse nor Hounds to make pursuit vpon the sent. Nor Seruingman, nor knottie toyle before or after went. For I was safe with this same Dart. when wearie waxt mine arme With striking Déere, and that the day did make me somewhat warme▪ Withdrawing for to coole my selfe I sought among the shades For Aire that from the valleyes colde came breathing in at glades. The more excessiue was my heate the more for Aire I sought. I waited for the gentle Aire: the Aire was that that brought Refreshing to my wearie limmes. And (well I beart in thought) Come Aire I wonted was to sing. come ease the paine of me Within my bosom lodge thy selfe most welcome vnto me, And as thou heretofore art wont abate my burning heate. By chaunce (such was my destinie) proceeding to repeate▪ Mo words of daliance like to these, I vsed for to say Great pleasure doe I take in thée: for thou from day to day Doste both refresh and nourish me. Thou makest me delight In woods and solitarie grounds. Now would to God I might Receiue continuall at my mouth this pleasant breath of thine. Some man (I wote not who) did heare these doubtfull words of mine, And taking them amisse supposde that this same name of Aire The which I callde so oft vpon, had bene some Ladie faire: He thought that I had looude some Nymph. And therevpon streight way He runnes me like a Harebrainde blab to Procris, t bewray
This fault as he surmised it: and there with lauas tung. Reported all the wanton words that he had heard me sung. A thing of light beliefe is loue. She (as I since haue harde) For sodeine sorrow swounded downe: and when long afterwarde She came againe vnto hir selfe, she said she was accurst And borne to cruell destinie: and me she blamed wurst For breaking faith: and treating at a vaine surmised shame She dreaded that which nothing was: she fearde a headlesse name. She wist not what to say or thinke. The wretch did greatly feare Deceit: yet could she not beleue the tales that talked were. Onlesse she saw hir husbands fault apparant to hir eie, She thought she would not him condemne of any villanie. Next day as soone as Morning light had driuen the night away, I went abrode to hunt againe: and spéeding, as I lay Upon the grasse, I said come Aire and ease my painfull heate. And on the sodaine as I spake there séemed for to beate A certaine sighing in mine eares of what I could not gesse. But ceasing not for that I still procéeded nathelesse: And said O come most pleasant Aire. with that I heard a sound Of russling softly in the leaues that lay vpon the ground. And thinking it had bene some beast I threw my flying Dart. It was my wife. who being now sore wounded at the hart, Cride out alas. Assoone as I perceyued by the shrieke It was my faithfull spouse, I ran me to the voiceward lieke A madman that had lost his wits. There found I hir halfe dead Hir scattred garments staining in the bloud that she had bled, And (wretched creature as I am) yet drawing from the wound The gift that she hir selfe had giuen. Then softly from the ground I lifted vp that bodie of hirs of which I was more chare Than of mine owne. and from hir brest hir clothes in hast I tare. And binding vp hir cruell wound I striued for to stay The bloud, and prayd she would not thus by passing so away Forsake me as a murtherer: she waxing weake at length And drawing to hir death a pace, enforced all hir strength To vtter these few wordes at last. I pray thée humbly by Our bond of wedlocke, by the Gods as well aboue the Skie As those to whome I now must passe, as euer I haue ought
Deserued well by thée, and by Loue which hauing brought Me to my death doth euen in death vnfaded still remaine To nestle in thy bed and mine let neuer Aire obtaine. This sed, she held hir peace, and I receyued the same And tolde hir also how she was beguiled in the name. But what auayled telling then? she quoathde: and with hir bloud Hir little strength did fade. Howbeit as long as that she coud Sée ought, she stared in my face and gasping still on me Euen in my mouth she breathed forth hir wretched ghost. But she Did séeme with better cheare to die for that hir conscience was Discharged quight and cleare of doubtes. Now in conclusion as Duke Cephal wéeping told this tale to Phocus and the rest Whose eyes were also moyst with teares to heare the pitious gest, Behold King Aeacus and with him his eldest sonnes both twaine Did enter in and after them there followed in a traine Of well appointed men of warre new leuied: which the King Deliuered vnto Cephalus to Athens towne to bring. Finis septimi Libri.
¶THE EIGHT BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. THe day starre now beginning to disclose the Morning bright And for to clense the droupie Skie from darkenesse of the night. The Easterne wind went downe & flakes of foggie Clouds gan show, And from the South a merrie gale on Cephals sayles did blow. The which did hold so fresh and large, that he and all his men Before that he was looked for arriued safe agen In wished Hauen. In that while King Minos with his fléete Did wast the cost of Megara. And first he thought it méete To make a triall of the force and courage of his men Against the towne Alcathoe where Nisus reigned then. Among whose honorable haire that was of colour gray, One scarlet haire did grow vpon his crowne, whereon the stay Of all his Kingdome did depende. Sixe times did Phoebe fill Hir hornes with borrowed light, and yet the warre hung wauering still In fickle fortunes doubtfull scoales: and long with fléeting wings Betwene them both flew victorie. A Turret of the Kings Stood hard adioyning to the Wall which being touched rings For Phoebus (so men say) did lay his golden Uiall there, And so the stones the sound thereof did euer after beare. King Nisus daughter oftentimes resorted to this Wall And strake it with a little stone to raise the sound withall, In time of peace. And in the warre she many a time and oft Behelde the sturdie stormes of Mars from that same place aloft. And by continuance of the siege the Captaines names she knew Their armes, horse, armor and aray in euerie band and crew. But specially aboue the rest she noted Minos face. She knew inough and more than was inough as stoode the case. For were it that he hid his head in Helme with fethered crest, To hir opinion in his Helme he stayned all the rest. Or were it that he tooke in hand of stéele his target bright, She thought in wéelding of his shielde he was a comly Knight. Or were it that he raisde his arme to throw the piercing Dart, The Ladie did commend his force and manhode ioynde with Art. Or drew he with his arrow nockt his bended Bow in hand
She sware that so in all respectes was Phoebus wont to stand. But when he shewde his visage bare his Helmet laid aside, And on a Milke white Stéede braue trapt, in Purple Robe did ride, She scarce was Mistresse of hir selfe hir wits were almost straught. A happie Dart she thought it was that he in fingars caught, And happie called she those reynes that he in hand had raught And if she might haue had hir will, she could haue founde in hart, Among the enmies to haue gone. she could haue found in hart, From downe the highest Turret there hir bodie to haue throwne, Among the thickest of the Tents of Gnossus to haue flowne. Or for to ope the brazen gates and let the enmie in, Or whatsoeuer else she thought might Minos fauor win. And as she sate beholding still the King of Candies tent, She said: I doubt me whether that I rather may lament Or of this wofull warre be glad. It grieues me at the hart That thou O Minos vnto me thy Louer enmie art. But had not this same warfare bene, I neuer had him knowne. Yet might he leaue this cruell warre, and take me as his owne. A wife, a féere, a pledge for peace he might receiue of me. O flowre of beautie, O thou Prince most pearlesse: if that she That bare thée in hir wombe were like in beautie vnto thée, A right good cause had Ioue on hir enamored for to bée. Oh happie were I if with wings I through the Aire might glide And safely to King Minos Tent from this same Turret slide. Then would I vtter who I am, and how the firie flame Of Cupid burned in my brest, desiring him to name What dowrie he would aske with me in loän of his loue, Saue only of my Fathers Realme no question he should take place, Adue desire of hoped Loue. Yet oftentimes such grace Hath from the gentle Conqueror procéeded erst, that they Which tooke the foyle haue found the same their profit and their stay. Assuredly the warre is iust that Minos takes in hand, As in reuengement of his sonne late murthered in this land. And as his quarrell séemeth iust, euen so it cannot faile, But rightfull warre against the wrong must (I beleue) preuaile. Now if this Citie in the ende must needes be taken, why
Should his owne sworde and not my Loue be meanes to win it by? It were yet better he should spéede by gentle meanes without The slaughter of his people, yea and (as it may fall out) With spending of his owne bloud too. For sure I haue a care O Minos least some Souldier wound thée ere he be aware. For who is he in all the world that hath so hard a hart That wittingly against thy head would aime his creull Dart▪ I like well this deuise. and on this purpose will I stand: To yéelde my selfe endowed with this Citie to the hand Of Minos: and in doing so to bring this warre to ende. But smally it auaileth me the matter to intende. The gates and yssues of this towne are kept with watch and warde, And of the Keyes continually my Father hath the garde. My Father only is the man of whome I stand in dréede, My Father only hindreth me of my desired spéede. Would God that I were Fatherlesse. Tush euerie Wight may bée A God as in their owne behalfe, and if their hearts be frée From fearefulnesse. For fortune works against the fond desire Of such as through faint heartednesse attempt not to aspire. Some other féeling in hir heart such flames of Cupids fire. Already would haue put in proofe some practise to destroy What thing so euer of hir Loue the furtherance might anoy And why should any woma haue a bolder heart than I? Throw fire and sword I boldly durst aduenture for to flie. And yet in this behalfe at all there néedes no sword nor fire, There néedeth but my fathers haire to accomplish my desire. That Purple haire of his to me more precious were than golde: That Purple haire of his would make me blet a thousand folde: That haire would compasse my desire and set my heart at rest. Night (chiefest Nurce of thoughts to such as are with care opprest.) Approched while she spake these words, and darknesse did encrease Hir boldnesse. At such time as folke are wont to finde release Of cares that all the day before were working in their heds, By sléepe which falleth first of all vpon them in their beds, Hir fathers chamber secretly she entered: where (alasse That euer Maiden should so farre the bounds of Nature passe) She robde hir Father of the haire vpon the which the fate
Depended both of life and death and of his royall state. And ioying in hir wicked pray, she beares it with hir so As if it were some lawfull spoyle acquired of the fo. And passing through a posterne gate she marched through the mid Of all hir enmies (such a trust she had in that she did) Untill she came before the King▪ whom troubled with the sight She thus bespake. Enforst O King by loue against all right I Scylla Nisus daughter doe present vnto thée héere My natiue soyle, my household Gods, and all that else is déere For this my gift none other thing in recompence I craue Tha of thy person which I loue, fruition for to haue. And in assurance of my loue receyue thou here of mée My fathers Purple haire: and thinke I giue not vnto thée A haire but euen my fathers head. And as these words she spake. The cursed gift with wicked hand she profered him to take. But Minos did abhorre hir gift: and troubled in his minde With straungenesse of the heynous act so sore against hir kinde, He aunswerde. O thou slaunder of our age the Gods expell Thée out of all this world of theirs and let thée no where dwell. Let rest on neither Sea nor Land be graunted vnto thée. Assure thy selfe that as for me I neuer will agrée That Candie Ioues owne foster place (as long as I there raigne) Shall vnto such a monstruous Wight a Harbrow place remaine. This said, he like a righteous Iudge among his vanquisht foes Set order vnder paine of death. Which done he willed those That serued him to go a boorde and Anchors vp to wey. When Scylla saw the Candian fléete a flote to go away, And that the Captaine yéelded not so good reward as shée Had for hir lewdnesse looked for: and when in fine she sée That no entreatance could preuaile, then bursting out in ire With stretched hands and scattred haire, as furious as the fire She shraming cryëd out aloud. And whither doste thou flie Reiecting me the only meanes that thou hast conquerde by? O cankerde Churle preferde before my natiue soyle, preferd Before my father, whither flyste O Carle of heart most hard? Whose conquest as it is my sinne, so doth it well deserue Reward of thée, for that my fault so well thy turne did serue.
Doth neither thée the gift I gaue, nor yet my faithfull loue, Nor yet that all my hope on thée alonly rested, moue? For whither shall I now resort forsaken thus of thée? To Megara the wretched soyle of my natiuitie? Behold it lieth vanquished and troden vnder foote. But put the case it flourisht still: yet could it nothing boote. I haue foreclosde it to my selfe through treason when I gaue My fathers head to thée. Whereby my countriefolke I draue To hate me iustly for my crime. And all the Realmes about My lewde example doe abhorre. Thus haue I shet me out Of all the world that only Crete might take me in▪ which if Thou like a Churle denie, and cast me vp without relief, The Ladie Europ surely was not mother vnto thée: But one of Affricke Sirts where none but Serpents fostred bée But euen some cruell Tiger bred in Armen or in Inde, Or else the Gulfe Charybdis raisde with rage of Southerne winde Thou wert not got by Ioue: ne yet thy mother was beguilde In shape of Bull: of this thy birth the tale is false compilde. But rather some vnwielde Bull euen altogither wilde That neuer lowed after Cow was out of doubt thy Sire. O father Nisus put thou me to penance for my hire. Reioyce thou in my punishment thou towne by me betrayd. I haue deserued (I confesse) most iustly to be payd With death. But let some one of thē that through my lewdnesse smart▪ Destroy me, why doste thou that by my crime a gainer art, Commit like crime thy selfe? Admit this wicked act of me As to my land and Fatherward in deede most hainous be. Yet oughtest thou to take it as a friendship vnto thée. But she was méete to be thy wife, that in a Cow of trée Could play the Harlot with a Bull, and in hir wombe could beare A Barne, in whome the shapes of man and beasts confounded were. How sayst thou Carle? cōpell not these my words thine eares to glow? Or doe the windes that driue thy shyps, in vaine my sayings blow? In faith it is no wonder though thy wife Pasiphaë Preferrde a Bull to thée for thou more cruell wert than he. Now wo is me. To make more hast it standeth me in hand. The water sounds with Ores, and hales from me and from my land.
In vaine thou striuest O thou Churle forgetfull quight of my Desertes: for euen in spight of thee pursue thée still will I. Upon thy courbed Keele will I take holde: and hanging so Be drawen along the Sea with thée where euer thou do go. She scarce had said these words, but that she leaped on the waue And getting to the ships by force of strength that Loue hir gaue Upon the King of Candies Kéele in spight of him she claue. Whome when hir father spide (for now he houered in the aire, And being made a Hobby Hauke did soare betwéene a paire Of nimble wings of yron Mayle) he soused downe a maine To seaze vpon hir as she hung, and would haue torne hir faine With bowing Beake. But she or feare did let the Caricke go: And as she was about to fall, the lightsome Aire did so Uphold hir that she could not touch the Sea as séemed tho. Anon all ethers she became, and forth away did flie Transformed to a pretie Bird that eth to the Skie. And for bicause like clipped haire hir head doth beare a marke, The Gréekes it , and we doe name the same a Larke. Assone as Mnos came a land in Crete, he by and by Performde his vowes  Iupiter in causing for to die A hundred Bulles for sacrifice. And then he did adorne His Palace with the enmies spoyles by conquest wonne beforne. The slaunder of his house encreast: and now appeared more The mothers filthie whoredome by the monster that she bore Of double shape, an vgly thing. This shamefull infamie, This monster borne him by his wife he mindes by pollicie To put away, and in a house with many nookes and krinks From all mens sights and speach of folke to shet it vp he thinks. Immediatly one Daedalus renowned in that lande For fine deuise and workmanship in building, went in hand To make it. He confounds his worke with sodaine stops and stayes, And with the great vncertaintie of sundrie winding wayes Leades in and out, and to and fro, at diuers doores astray. And as with trickling streame the Brooke Maeander séemes to play In Phrygia, and with doubtfull race runnes counter to and fro, And méeting with himselfe doth looke if all his streame or no Come after, and retiring eft cleane backward to his spring
And marching eft to open Sea as streight as any string, Indenteth with reuersed streame: euen so of winding wayes Unnumerable Daedalus within his worke conuayes. Yea scarce himselfe could find the meanes to winde himselfe well out: So busie and so intricate the house was all about. Within this Maze did Minos shet the Monster that did beare The shape of man and Bull. And when he twise had fed him there With bloud of Atticke Princes sonnes that giuen for tribute were, The third time at the ninth yeares end the lot did chaunce to light On Theseus King Aegaeus sonne: who like a valiant Knight Did ouercome the Minotaur: and by the pollicie Of Minos eldest daughter (who had taught him for to tie A clew of  at the doore to guide himselfe thereby) As busie as the turnings were, his way he out did finde, Which neuer man had done before. And streight he hauing winde, With Minos daughter sailde away to Dia: where And cruell creature that he was) he left hir post alone vnkinde Upon the shore. Thus desolate and making dolefull mone God Bacchus did both comfort hir and take hir to his bed. And with an euerlasting starre the more hir fame to spred, He tooke the Chaplet from hir head, and vp to Heauen it threw. The Chaplet thirled through the Aire: and as it gliding flew, The precious stones were turnd to starres which blased cleare & bright, And tooke their place (continuing like a Chaplet still to sight) Amid betwéene the knéeler downe and him that gripes the Snake. Now in this while gan Daedalus a wearinesse to take Of liuing like a banisht man and prisoner such a time In Crete, and longed in his heart to sée his natiue Clime. But Seas enclosed him as if he had in prison be. Then thought he: though both Sea and Land King Minos stop fro me. I am assurde he cannot stop the Aire and open Skie. To make my passage that way then my cunning will I trie. Although that Minos like a Lord held all the world beside: Yet doth the Aire from Minos yoke for all men frée abide. This sed: to vncoth Arts he bent the force of all his wits To alter natures course by craft. And orderly he knits A rowe of fethers one by one, beginning with the short,
And ouermatching still eche quill with one of longer sort, That on the shoring of a hill a man would thinke them grow. Euen so the countrie Organpipes of Oten réedes in row Ech higher than another rise. Then fastned he with Flax The middle quilles, and ioyned in the lowest sort with Wax. And when he thus had finisht them, a little he them bent In compasse, that the verie Birdes they full might represent. There stoode me by him Icarus his sonne a pretie Lad. Who knowing not that he in handes his owne destruction had. With similing mouth did one while blow the fethers to and fro Which in the Aire on wings of Birds did flask not long ago: And with his thumbes another while he chafes the yelow Wax And lets his faters wondrous worke with childish oyes and knax. Assone as that the worke was done, the workman by and by Did peyse his bodie on his wings, and in the Aire on hie Hung wauering: and did teach his sonne how he should also flie. I warne thée (quoth he) Icarus a middle race to kéepe. For if thou hold to low a gate, the dankenesse of the déepe Will ouer ade thy wings with wet. And if thou mount to hie, The Sunne will indge them. Therfore sée betwéene thē both thou flie. I bid thée not behold the Starre Boötes in the Skie. Nor looke vpon the bigger Beare to make thy course thereby, Nor yet on Orions naked sword. But euer haue an eie To kéepe the race that I doe kéepe, and I will guide thée right. In giuing counsell to his sonne to order well his flight, He fastned to his shoulders twaine a paire of vncoth wings. And as he was in doing it and warning him of things, His aged chéekes were wet, his hands did quake, in fine he gaue His sonne a kisse the last that he aliue should euer haue. And then he mounting vp aloft before him tooke his way Right fearfull for his followers sake: as is the Bird the day That first she tolleth from hir nest among the braunches hie Hir tender yong ones in the Aire to teach them for to flie▪ So heartens he his little sonne to follow teaching him A hurtfull Art. His owne two wings he waueth verie trim, And looketh backward still vpon his sonnes. The fishermen Then standing angling by the Sea, and shepeherdes leaning then
On shéepehookes, and the Ploughmen on the handles of their Plough, Beholding them, amazed were: and thought that they that through The Aire could flie were Gods. And now did on their left side stand The Iles of Paros and of Dele and Samos Iunos land: And on their right, Lebinthos and the faire Calydna fraught With store of home: when the Boy a frolicke courage caught To flie at randon. Wherevpon forsaking quight his guide, Of fond desire to flie to Heauen, aboue his boundes he stide. And there the nerenesse of the Sunne which burnd more hote alot, Did make the Wax (with which his wings were glewed) lithe and soft. Assoone as that the Wax was molt, his naked armes he shakes, And wanting wherewithall to waue no helpe of Aire he takes. But calling on his father loud he drowned in the waue: And by this chaunce of his those Seas his name for euer haue. His wretched Father (but as then no father) cride in feare O Icarus O Icarus where art thou? tell me where That I may finde thée Icarus. He saw the fethers swim Upon the waues, and curst his Art that so had spighted him. At last he tooke his bodie vp and laid it in a graue, And to the Ile the name of him then buried in it gaue. And as he of his wretched sonne the corse in ground did hide, The cackling Partrich from a thicke and leauie thorne him spide. And clapping with his wings for ioy aloud to call began. There was of that same kinde of Birde no mo but he as than. In times forepast had none bene séene. It was but late anew Since he was made a bird: and that thou Daedalus mayst rew: For whyle the world doth last thy shame shall therevpon ensew. For why thy sister ignorant of that which after hapt, Did put him to thée to be taught full twelue yeares old and apt To take instruction. He did marke the middle bone that goes Through fishes, and according to the paterne tane of those He filed teeth vpon a piece of yron one by one And so deuised first the Saw where erst was neuer none. Moreouer he two yron shankes so ioynde in one round head, That opening an indifferent space, the one point downe shall tread, And tother draw a circle round. The finding of these things, The spightfull heart of Daedalus with such a malice stings,
That headlong from the holy towre of Pallas downe he thrue His Nephew feyning him to fall by chaunce. which was not true. But Pallas (who doth fauour wits) did stay him in his fall And chaunging him into a Bird did clad him ouer all With fethers soft amid the Aire. The quicknesse of his wit (Which erst was swift) did shed it selfe among his wings and féete. And as he Partrich hight before, so hights he Partrich still. Yet mounteth not this Bird aloft ne séemes to haue a will To build hir nest in tops of trées among the boughes on hie But flecketh nere the ground and layes hir egges in hedges drie. And forbicause hir former fall she ay in minde doth beare. She euer since all lofty things doth warely shun for feare. And now forwearied Daedalus alighted in the land Within the which the burning hilles of firie Aetna stand. To saue whose life King Cocalus did weapon take in hand, For which men thought him merciful. And now with high renowne Had Theseus ceast the wofull pay of tribute in the towne Of Athens. Temples decked were with garlands euery where, And supplications made to Ioue and warlicke Pallas were. And all the other Gods. To whome more honor for to show, Gifts, blud of beasts, and frankincense the people did bestow As in performance of their vowes. The right redoubted name Of Theseus through the lande of Gréece was spred by flying fame. And now the folke that in the land of rich Achaia dwelt, Praid him of succor in the harmes and perils that they felt. Although the land of Calydon had then Meleager: Yet was it faine in humble wise to Theseus to prefer A supplication for the aide of him. The cause wherfore They made such humble suit to him was this. There was a Bore The which Diana for to wreake hir wrath conceyude before Had thither as hir seruant sent the countrie for to waast. For men report that Oenie when he had in storehouse plaast The full encrease of former yeare, to Ceres did assigne The firstlings of his corne and fruits: to Bacchus, of the Uine: And vnto Pallas Olife oyle. This honoring of the Gods Of graine and fruits who put their help to oyling in the clods, Ambitiously to all, euen those that dwell in heauen did clime.
Diannas Altars (as it hapt) alonly at that time Without reward of Frankincense were ouerskipt (they say) Euen Gods are subiect vnto wrath. He shall not scape away Unpunisht. Though vnworshipped he passed me wyth spight: He shall not make his vaunt he scapt me vnreuenged quight, Quoth Phoebe. And anon she sent a Bore to Oenies ground Of such a hugenesse as no Bull could euer yet be found, In Epyre: But in Sicilie are Bulles much lesse than hée His ees did glister blud and fire: right dreadfull was to sée His brawned necke, right dredfull was his haire which grew as thicke With pricking points as one of them could well by other icke. And like a front of armed Pikes set close in battell ray The sturdie bristles on his back stoode staring vp alway. The scalding ome with gnashing hoarse which he did cast aside, Upon his large and brawned shield did white as Curdes abide. Among the greatest Oliphants in all the land of Inde, A greater tush than had this Boare, ye shall not lightly finde. Such lightning flashed from his chappes, as seared vp the grasse. Now trampled he the spindling corne to ground where he did passe Now ramping vp their riped hope he made the Plowmen weepe. And chankt the kernell in the eare. In vaine their floores they swéepe: In vaine their Barnes for Haruest long, the likely store they kéepe. The spreaded Uines with clustred Grapes to ground he rudely sent, And full of Berries loden boughes from Olife trées he rent. On cattell also did he rage. The shepeherd nor his dog, Nor et the Bulles could saue the herdes from outrage of this Hog. The folke themselues were faine to flie. And yet they thought thē not In safetie when they had themselues within the Citie got. Untill their Prince Meleager, and with their Prince a knot O Lords and lustie gentlemen of hand and courage stout, With chosen fellowes for the non of all the Lands about, Inflamed were to win renowne. The chiefe that thither came Were bothCastor & . the twinnes of Tyndarus of great renowne and fame, The one in all actiuitie of manhode, strength and force, The other for his cunning skill in handling of a horse. And Iason he that first of all the Gallie did inuent: And Theseus with Pirithous betwene which two there wont
A happie leage of amitie: AndPlexippus & Toxeus. two of Thesties race: And Lynce the sonne of Apharie and Idas swift of pace. And fierce Leucyppus and the braue Acastus with his Dart In handling of the which he had the perfect skill and Art. And Caeny who by birth a wench, the shape of man had wonne And Drias and Hippothous: and Phoenix eke the sonne Of olde Amyntor: andEurytus & Ceatus a paire of Actors ympes: and Phyle Who came from Elis. Telamon was also there that while: And so was also Peleus the great Achilles Sire: AndAdmetus. Pherets sonne: and Iölay the Thebane who with fire Helpt Hercules the monstruous heades of Hydra of to eare. The liuely Lad Eurytion and Echion who did beare The pricke and prise for footemanship, were present also there. And Lelex of Narytium to. And Panopie beside: And Hyle: and cruell Hippasus: and Naestor who tht tide Was in the Prime of lustie youth: Moreouer thither went Enesimus, Alcn, & Dexippus. Thrée children of Hippocoön from old Amicle sent. AndLartes. he that of Penelope the fathrinlaw became. And eke the sonne of Parrhasus Ancaeus cald by name. There wasMopsus. the sonne of Ampycus of great forecasting wit: AndAmphi∣araus. Oeclies sonne who of his wife was vnbetrayed yit. And from the Citie Tegea there came the Paragone Of Lycey forrest, Atalant, a goodly Ladie, one Of Schoenyes daughters, then a Maide. The garment she did weare A brayded button fastned at hir gorget. All hir heare Untrimmed in one only knot was trussed. From hir left Side hanging on hir shoulder was an Iuorie quiuer deft: Which being full of arrowes, made a clattring as she went. And in hir right hand she did beare a Bow already bent. Hir furniture was such as this. Hir countnance and hir grace Was such as in a Boy might well be cald a Wenches face, And in a Wench be cald a Boyes. The Prince of Calydon No sooner cast his ee on hir, but being caught anon In loue, he wisht hir to his wife. but vnto this desire God Cupid gaue not his consent. The secret flames of fire He haling inward still did say: O happy man is he Whom this same Ladie shall vouchsaue hir Husband for to be.
The shortnesse of the time and shame would giue him leaue to say No more: a worke of greater weight did draw him then away. A wood thick growen with trées which stoode vnfelled to that day Beginning from a plaine, had thence a large prospect throughout The falling grounds that euery way did muster round about. Assone as that the men came there, some pitched vp the toyles, Some tooke the couples from the Dogs, and some pursude the foyles In places where the Swine had tract: desiring for to spie Their owne destruction. Now there was a hollow bottom by, To which the watershots of raine from all the high grounds drew. Within the compasse of this pond great store of Oysyers grew: And Sallowes lithe, and flackring Flags, and moorish Rushes eke, And lazie Réedes on little shankes, and other baggage like. From hence the Bore was rowzed out, and fiersly forth he flies Among the thickest of his foes like thunder from the Skies, When Clouds in meeting force the fire to burst by violence out. He beares the trées before him downe, and all the wood about Doth sound of crashing. All the youth with hideous noyse and shout Against him bend their Boarspeare points with hand & courage stout. He rushes forth among the Dogs that held him at a bay, And now on this side now on that, as any come in way, He rippes their skinnes and splitteth them, and chaseth thē away, Echion first of all the rout a Dart at him did throw, Which mist and in a Maple trée did giue a little blow The next (if he that threw the same had vsed lesser might,) The backe at which he aimed it was likely for to smight. It ouerflew him. Iason was the man that cast the Dart. With that the sonne of Ampycus sayd:Mopsus. Phoebus (if with hart I haue and still doe worship thée) now graunt me for to hit The thing that I doe leuell at. Apollo graunts him it As much as lay in him to graunt. He hit the Swine in déede. But neyther entred he his hide nor caused him to bléede. For why Diana (as the Dart was flying) tooke away The head of it: and so the Dart could headlesse beare no sway. But yet the moodie beast thereby was set the more on fire And chaing like the lightning swift he vttreth forth his ire. The fire did sparkle from his eyes: and from his boyling brest
He breathed flaming flakes of fire conceyued in his chest. And looke with what a violent brunt a mightie Bullet goes From engines bent against a wall, or bulwarks full of foes: With euen such violence rusht the Swine among the Hunts a mayne, And ouerthrew Eupalamon and Pelagon both twaine That in the right wing placed were. Their followes stepping to And drawing them away, did saue their liues with much a do. But as for poore Enesimus Hippocoons sonne had not The lucke to scape the deadly dint. He would away haue got, And trembling turnde his backe for feare. The Swine him ouertooke, And cut his hamstrings, so that streight his going him forsooke. And Naestor to haue lost his life was like by fortune ere The siege of Troie, but that he tooke his rist vpon his speare: And leaping quickly vp vpon a trée that stoode hard by, Did safely from the place behold his foe whome he did flie. The Boare then whetting sharpe his tuskes against the Oken wood To mischiefe did prepare himselfe with fierce and cruell mood. And trusting to his weapons which he sharpened had a new, In great Orithyas thigh a wound with hooked groyne he drew. The valiant brothers those same twinnes of Tyndarus (not yet Celestiall signes) did both of them on coursers sit As white as snow:Castor & Pollux. and ech of them had shaking in his fist A lightsome Dart with head of steele to throw it where he lyst. And for to wound the bristled Bore they surely had not mist But that he still recouered so the couerts of the wood, That neyther horse could follow him, nor Dart doe any good. Still after followed Telamon, whom taking to his féete No héede at all for egernesse, a Maple roote did méete, Which tripped vp his héeles, and flat against the ground him laid And while his brother Peleus relieued him, the Maid Of Tegea tooke an arrow swift, and shot it from hir bow. The arrow lighting vnderneath the hauers eare bylow, And somewhat rasing of the skin, did make the bloud to show. The Maid hirselfe not gladder was to sée that luckie blow, Than was the Prince Meleager. He was the first that saw, And first that shewed to his Mates the blud that she did draw: And said for this thy valiant act due honor shalt thou haue.
The men did blush, and chearing vp ech other courage gaue. With shouting, and disorderly their Darts by beaps they threw. The number of them hindred them, not suffring to ensew That any lighted on the marke at which they all did ame. Behold, enragde against his ende the hardie Knight that came From Arcadie, rusht rashly with a Pollar in his fist And said you yonglings learne of me what difference is betwist A wenches weapons and a mans: and all of you giue place To my redoubted force. For though Diana in this chase Should with hir owne shield him defend, yet should this hand of mine Euen magre Dame Dianaas heart confound this orped Swine. Such boasting words as these through pride presumptuously he crakes: And streyning out himselfe vpon his iptoes streight he takes His Pollar vp with both his hands. But as this bragger ment To fetch his blow, the cruell beast his malice did preuent: And in his coddes (the spding place of death) his tusshes puts, And rippeth vp his paunche. Downe falles Ancaeus and his guts Come tumbling out besmearde with bloud, and foyled all the plot. Pirithous lxions sonne at that abashed not: But shaking in his valiant hand his hunting staffe did goe Still stoutly forward face to face t'encounter with his foe To whome Duke Theseus cride a farre. O dearer vnto mée Than is my selfe, my soule I say, stay: lawfull we it sée For valiant men to kéepe aloofe. The ouer hardie hart In rash aduentring of him selfe hath made Ancaeus smart. This sed, he threw a weightie Dart of Cornell with a head Of brasse: which being leueld well was likely to haue sped, But that a bough of Chestnut trée thick leaued by the way Did latch it, and by meanes therof the dint of it did stay. Another Dart that Iason threw, by fortune mist the Bore, And light betwene a Mastifes chaps, and through his guts did gore, And naild him to the earth. The hand of Prince Meleager Plaid hittymissie. Of two Darts his first did flie to far, And lighted in the ground: the next amid his backe stickt fast. And while the Bore did play the fiend and turned round agast, And grunting flang his fome about togither mixt mh blood The giuer of the wound (the more to stirre his enmies mood,)
Stept in, and vnderneath the shield did thrust his Boarspeare through. Then all the Hunters shouting out demeaned ioy inough. And glad was he that first might come to take him by the hand. About the vgly beast they all with gladnesse gazing stand And wondring what a field of ground his carcasse did possesse, There durst not any be so bolde to touch him. Nerethelesse, They euery of them with his bloud their hunting staues made red. Then stepped forth Meleager, and treading on his hed Said thus: O Ladie Atalant, receiue thou here my fée, And of my glorie vouch thou safe partaker for to bée. Immediatly the vgly head with both the tusshes braue And eke the skin with bristles stur right griesly, he hir gaue. The Ladie for the giuers sake, was in hir heart as glad As for the gift. The rest repinde that she such honor had. Through all the rout was murmuring. Of whom with roring reare And armes displayd that all the field might easily sée and heare, The Thesties cried Dame come of and lay vs downe this geare. And thou a woman offer not vs men so great a shame, As we to toyle and thou to take the honor of our game. Ne let that faire smooth face of thine beguile thée, least that hée That being doted in thy loue did giue thée this our fée, Be ouer farre to rescow thée. And with that word they tooke The gift from hir, and right of gift from him. He could not brooke This wrong: but gnashing with his téeth for anger that did boyle Within, said fiersly: learne ye you that other folkes dispoyle Of honor giuen, what diffrence is betwéene your threats, and déedes, And therewithall Plexippus brest (who no such matter dréedes) With wicked weapon he did pierce. As Toxey doubting stood What way to take, desiring both t'aduenge his brothers blood, And fearing to be murthered as his brother was before, Meleager (to dispatch all doubts of musing any more) Did heate his sword for companie in bloud of him againe, Before Plexippus blud was cold that did thereon remaine. Althaea going toward Church with presents for to yild Due thankes and worship to the Gods that for hir sonne had kild The Boare, beheld hir brothers brought home dead: and by and by She beate hir brest, and filde the towne with shrieking piteously,
And shifting all hir rich aray, did put on mourning wéede But when she vnderstoode what man was doer of the déede, She left all mourning, and from teares to vengeance did procéede. There was a certaine firebrand which when Oenies wife did lie In childebed of Meleager, she chaunced to espie The Destnies putting in the fire: and in the putting in, She heard them speake these words, as they his fatall thréede did spin O lately borne, like time we giue to thée and to this brand. And when they so had spoken, they depared out of hand. Immediatly the mother caught the blazing bough away, And quenched it. This bough she kept full charely many a day: And in the kéeping of the same she kept hir sonne aliue. But now intending of his life him clearly to depriue, She brought it forth, and causing all the coales and shiuers to Be layëd by, she like a foe did kindle fire thereto. Fowre times she was about to cast the firebrand in the flame: Fowre times she pulled backe hir hand from doing of the same. As mother and as sister both she stroue what way to go: The diuers names drew diuersly hir stomacke to and fro. Hir face waxt often pale for feare of mischiefe to ensue: And often red about the eies through heate of ire she grew. One while hir looke resembled one that threatned cruelnesse: Another while ye would haue thought she minded pitiousnesse. And though the cruell burning of hir heart did drie hir teares, Yet burst out some. And as a Boate which tide contrarie beares Against the winde, féeles double force, and is compeld to yéelde To both. So Thesties daughter now vnable for to wéelde Hir doubtfull passions, diuersly is caried of and on, And chaungeably she waxes calme, and stormes againe anon. But better sister ginneth she than mother for to be: And to thintent hir brothers ghostes with bloud to honor, she In meaning to be one way kinde, doth worke another way Against kinde. When the plagie fire waxt strong she thus did say Let this same fire my bowels burne. And as in cursed hands The fatall wood she holding at the Hellish Altar stands: She said ye triple Goddesses of wreake, ye Hlhounds thrée Beholde ye all this furious fact and sacrifice of mee.
I wreake, and do against all right: with death must death be payde: On mischiefe mischiefe must be heapt: on corse must corse be laide. Confounded let this wicked house with heaped sorrowes bée Shall Oenie ioy his happy sonne in honor for to sée And Thestie mourne bereft of his? Nay: better yet it were, That eche with other companie in mourning you should beare. Ye brothers Ghostes and soules new dead I wish no more, but you To féele the solemne obsequies which I prepare as now: And that mine offring you accept, which dearly I haue bought The yssue of my wretched wombe. Alas, alas what thought I for to doe? O brothers I besech you beare with me. I am his mother: so to doe my hands vnable be His trespasse I confesse deserues the stopping of his breath: But yet I doe not like that I be Author of his death. And shall he then with life and limme, and honor to, scape frée? And vaunting in his good successe the King of Calidon bée? And you deare soules  raked vp but in a little dust? I will not surely suffer it. But let the villaine trust That he shall die, and draw with him to ruine and decay His Kingdome, Countrie and his Sire that doth vpon him stay. Why where is now the mothers heart and pitie that should raigne In Parents? and the ten Monthes paines that once I did sustaine? O would to God thou burned had a babie in this brand, And that I had not tane it out and quencht it with my hand. That all this while thou liued hast, my goodnesse is the cause. And now most iustly vnto death thine owne desert thée drawes. Receiue the gueron of thy déede: and render thou agen Thy twice giuen life, by bearing first, and secondarly when I caught this firebrand from the flame: or else come deale with me As with my brothers, and with them let me entumbed be. I would, and cannot. What then shall I stand to in this case? One while my brothers corses seeme to prease before my face With liuely Image of their deaths. Another while my minde Doth yéelde to pitie, and the name of mother doth me blinde No wo is me. To let you haue the vpper hand is sinne: But neethelesse the vpper hand O brothers doe you win▪ Condcioly that when that I to comfort you withall.
Haue wrought this feate, my selfe to you resort in person shall. This sed, she turnde away hir face, and with a trembling hand Did cast the deathfull brand amid the burning fire. The brand Did eyther sigh, or séeme to sigh in burning in the flame, Which sorie and vnwilling was to fasten on the same. Meleager being absent and not knowing ought at all Was burned with this flame: and felt his bowels to appall With secret fire. He bare out long the paine with courage stout. But yet it grieued him to die so cowardly without The shedding of his bloud. He thought Anceus for to be A happie man that dide of wound. With sighing called he Upon his aged father, and his sisters, and his brother, And lastly on his wife to, and by chaunce vpon his mother. His paine encreased with the fire, and fell therewith againe: And at the selfe same instant quight extinguisht were both twaine. And as the ashes soft and hore by leysure ouergrew The glowing coales: so leysurely his spirit from him drew. The drouped stately Calydon. Both yong and olde did mourne The Lords and Commons did lament. and maried wiues with torne And tattred haire did crie alas. His father did beray His horie head and face with dust, and on the earth flat lay, Lamenting that he liued had to sée that wofull day For now his mothers giltie hand had for that cursed crime Done execution on hir selfe by sword before hir time. If God to me a hundred mouthes with sounding tongues should send, And reason able to conceyue, and therevnto should lend Me all the grace of eloquence that ere the Muses had, I could not shew the wo wherewith his sisters were bestad. Unmindfull of their high estate, their naked brests they smit, Untill they made them blacke and blew. And while his bodie yit Remained, they did cherish it, and cherish it againe. They kist his bodie: yea they kist the chist that did containe His corse. And after that the corse was burnt to ashes, they Did presse his ashes with their brests: and downe along they lay Upon his tumb, and there embraste his name vpon the stone, And fillde the letters of the same with teares that from them gone. At length Diana satisfide with slaughter brought vpon
The house of Oenie, lifts them vp with fthers euerichone, (Saue Gorgee and the daughtriulaw of noble Almene) and Makes wings to stretch along their sides, and horned nebs to stand. Upon their mouthes. And finally she altring quight their faire And natiue shape, in shape of Birds dooth send them through the Aire. The noble Theseus in this while with others hauing donne His part in killing of the Boare, too Athens ward begonne Too take his way. But Acheloy then being swolne with raine Did stay him of his iourney, and from passage him restraine. Of Athens valiant knight (quoth he) come vnderneath my roofe, And for to passe my raging streame as yet attempt no proofe. This brooke is wont whole trées too beare and euelong stones too carry With hideous roring down his streame. I oft haue séene him harry Whole Shepcotes standing nere his banks, with flocks of shéepe therin. Nought booted buls their strēgth: nought stéedes by swiftnes there could win, Yea many lustie men this brooke hath swallowed, when y• snow From mountaines molten, caused him his banks too ouerflow. The best is for you for too rest vntill the Riuer fall Within his boundes: and runne ageine within his chanell small. Content (quoth Theseus): Acheloy, I will not sure refuse Thy counsell nor thy house. And so he both of them did vse. Of Pommy hollowed diuersly and ragged Pebble stone The walles were made. The floore with Mosse was soft to tread vpon. The roofe thereof was checkerwise with shelles of Purple wrought And Perle. The Sunne then full two parts of day to end had brought, And Theseus downe to table sate with such as late before Had friendly borne him companie at killing of the Bore. A tone side sate Ixions sonne, and on the other sate The Prince of Troyzen Lelex with a thin hearde horie pate. And then such other as the brooke of Acarnania did Uouchsafe the honor to his boord and table for to bid, Who was right glad of such a guest. Immediatly there came Barefooted Nymphes who brought in meate. And when that of the same The Lords had taken their repast, the meate away they tooke, And set downe wine in precious stones. Then Theseus who did looke Upon the Sea that vnderneath did lie within their sight, Said: tell vs what is yonsame place, (and with his fingar right
Hée poynted therevnto) I pray, and what that Iland hight, Although it séemeth mo than one. The Riuer answerd thus, It is not one mayne land alone that kenned is of vs. There are vppon a fyue of them. The distaunce of the place, Dooth hinder too discerne betwéene eche Ile the perfect space. And that the lesse yée woonder may at Phoebees act a late, To such as had neglected her vppon contempt or hate, Theis Iles were sumtyme Waternimphes: who hauing killed Neate, Twyce fyue, and called too theyr feast the Country Gods too eate, Forgetting mee kept frolicke cheere. At that gan I too swell, And ran more large than euer erst, and being ouer fell Istomacke and in streame, I rent the wood from wood, and féeld Frō féeld, & with the ground the Nymphes as then with stomacks méeld Remembring mée, I tumbled to the Sea. The waues of mée And of the sea the ground that erst all whole was woont too bée Did rend a sunder into all the Iles you yonder sée, And made a way for waters now too passe betwéene them frée. They now of Vrchins haue theyr name. But of theis Ilands, one A great way of (behold yée) stands a great way of alone, As you may sée. The Mariners doo call it Perimell. With her (shée was as then a Nymph) so farre in loue I fell, That of her maydenhod I her spoyld: which thing displeasd so sore Her father Sir Hippodamas, that from the craggy shore He threw her headlong downe to drowne her in the sea. But I Did latch her streight, and bearing her a flote did lowd thus crie. O Neptune with thy thréetynde Mace who hast by lot the charge Of all the waters wylde that bound vppon the earth at large, To whom wée holy streames doo runne, in whome wée take our end, Draw néere, and gently to my boone effectually attend. This Ladie whom I beare a flote myselfe hath hurt. Bée méeke And vpright. If Hippodamas perchaunce were fatherleeke, Or if that he extremitie through outrage did not séeke, He oughted too haue pitied her and for too beare with mée. Now help vs Neptune I thée pray, and condescend that shée Whom from the land her fathers wrath and cruelnesse dooth chace Who through her fathers cruelnesse is drownd: may find the grace To haue a place: or rather let hirselfe become a place.
And I will still embrace the same. The King of Seas did moue His head, and as a token that he did my sute approue, He made his surges all too shake, The Nymph was sore afrayd. Howbéet shée swam, and as shée swam, my hand I softly layd Upon her brest which quiuered still. And whyle I toucht the same, I sensibly did féele how all her body hard became: And how the earth did ouergrow her bulk. And as I spake, New earth enclosde hir swimming limbes, which by and by did take Another shape, and grew intoo a mighty Ile. With that The Riuer ceast and all men there did woonder much thereat. Pirithous being ouer hault of mynde and such a one As did despyse bothe God and man, did laugh them euerychone Too scorne for giuing credit, and sayd thus. The woords thou spaakst Are feyned fancies Acheloy: and ouerstrong thou maakst The Gods: to say that they can giue and take way shapes. This scoffe Did make the héeres all amazde, for none did like thereof. And Lelex of them all the man most rype in yéeres and wit, Sayd thus. Unmeasurable is the powre of heauen, and it Can haue none end. And looke what God dooth mynd too bring about, Must take effect. And in this case too put yée out of dout, Upon the hilles of Phrygie néere of Teyle there stands a trée Of Oke enclosed with a wall. Myself the place did sée. For Pithey vnto Pelops féelds did send mée where his father Did sumtyme reigne. not farre fro thence there is a poole which rather Had bene dry ground inhabited. But now it is a meare And Moorecocks, Cootes, and Cormorants doo bréede and nestle there. The mightie Ioue and Mercurie his sonne in shape of men Resorted thither on a tyme. A thousand houses when For roome too lodge in they had sought, a thousand houses bard Theyr doores against them. Nerethelesse one Cotage afterward Receyued them, and that was but a pelting one in déede. The roofe therof was thatched all with straw and fennish réede. Howbéet twoo honest auncient folke, (of whom shee Baucis hight And he Philemon) in that Cote theyr fayth in youth had plight: And in that Cote had spent theyr age. And for they paciently Did beare theyr simple pouertie, they made it light thereby, And shewed it no thing to bée repyned at atall.
It skilles not whether there for Hyndes or Maister you doo call. For all the houshold were but two: and both of them obeyde, And both commaunded. When the Gods at this same Cotage staid, And ducking downe their heads, within the low made Wicket came, Philemon bringing ech a stoole, bade rest vpon the same Their limmes: and busie Baucis brought them quishons homely géere. Which done, the embers on the harth she gan abrode to stéere, And laid the coales togither that were raak vp ouer night, And with the brands and dried leaues did make them gather might, And with the blowing of hir mouth did make them kindle bright. Then from an inner house she fetcht seare sticks and clifted brands, And put them broken vnderneath a Skillet with hir hands. Hir Husband from their Gardenplot fetcht Coleworts. Of the which She shreaded small the leaues, and with a Forke tooke downe a flitch Of restie Bacon from the Balke made blacke with smoke, and cut A péece thereof, and in the pan to boyling did it put. And while this meate a séething was, the time in talke they spent, By meanes whereof away without much tedousnesse it went. There hung a Boawle of Béeche vpon a spirget by a ring. The same with warmed water filld the twoo old folke did bring Too bathe their guests foule féete therein. Amid the house there stood A Couch whose bottom sides and féete were all of Sallow wood, And on the same a Mat of Sedge. They cast vpon this bed A couering which was neuer wont vpon it too be spred Except it were at solemne feastes: and yet the same was olde And of the coursest, with a bed of sallow méete too holde. The Gods sate downe. The aged wife right chare and busie as A Bée, st out a table. of the which the thirde foote was A little shorter than the rest. A tyleshrd made it euen And tooke away the shormgnesse: and when they had it driuen To stand vp leuell, with gréene Mintes they by and by it wipte. Then set they on itOlyss. Pallas fruite with double colour stripte. And Cornels kept in pickle moyst, and Endiue, and a roote Of Radish, and a iolly lump of Butter fresh and oote, And Egges reare rosted. All these Eates in earthen dishes came. Then set they downe a grauen cup made also of the same Selfe kinde of Plate, and Mazers made of Béech whose inner syde
Was rubd with yellow wax. And when they pawsed had a tyde, Whote meate came pyping from the fyre. And shortly therevpon A cup of gréene hedg wyne was brought. This tane away, anon Came in the latter course, which was of Nuts, Dates, dryed figges Swéete smelling Apples in a Mawnd made flat of Oysyer twigges, And Prunes and Plums and Purple grapes cut newly from the trée, And in the middes a honnycomb new taken from the Bée. Besydes all this there did ensew good countnance ouermore, With will not poore nor nigardly. Now all the whyle before, As ofen as Philemon and Dame Baucis did perceyue The emptie Cup to fill alone, and wyne too still receyue, Amazed at the straungenesse of the thing, they gan streyght way With fearfull harts and hands hilld vp too frame themselues too pray. Desyring for theyr slendr chéere and fare too pardoned bée. They had but one  Goose which kept theyr little Tennantrée, And this too offer too the Gods theyr guestes they did intend. The Gander wyght of wing did make the slow old folke too spend Theyr paynes in vayne, and mokt them long. At length he séemd too flye For succor too the Gods themselues, who bade he should not dye. For wée bée Gods (quoth they) and all this wicked towneship shall Abye their gylt. On you alone this mischeef shall not fall. No more but giue you vp your house, and follow vp this hill Toogither, and vpon the top thereof abyde our will. They bothe obeyd. And as the Gods did lead the way before, They lagged slowly after with theyr staues, and labored sore Ageinst the rysing of the hill. They were not mickle more Than full a flyghtshot from the top, when looking backe they saw How all the towne was drowned saue their lyttle shed of straw. And as they woondred at the thing and did bewayle the case Of those that had theyr neyghbours béene, the old poore Cote so base Whereof they had béene owners erst, became a Church. The proppes Were turned into pillars howge. The straw vppon the toppes Was yellow, so that all the roof did séeme of burnisht gold: The floore with Marble paued was. The doores on eyther fold Were grauen. At the sight hereof Philemon and his make Began too pray in feare. Then Ioue thus gently them bespake. Declare thou ryghtuowse man, and thou O woman meete too haue
A ryghtuowse howsband what yée would most chéefly wish or craue. Philemon taking conference a little with his wyfe, Declared bothe theyr méenings thus. We couet during lyfe, Your Chapleynes for too bée too kéepe your Temple. And bycause Our yéeres in concord wée haue spent, I pray when death néere drawes, Let bothe of vs toogither leaue our liues: that neyther I Behold my wyues deceace, nor shée sée myne when I doo dye. Theyr wish had sequele to theyr will. As long as lyfe did last, They kept the Church. And béeing spent with age of yeares forepast, By chaunce as standing on a tyme without the Temple doore They told the fortune of the place, Philemon old and poore Saw Baucis floorish gréene with leaues, & Baucis saw likewyse Philemon braunching out in boughes and twigs before hir eyes. And as the Bark did ouergrow the heades of bothe, eche spake Too other whyle they myght. At last they eche of them did take Theyr leaue of other bothe at once, and therewithall the bark Did hyde theyr faces both at once. The Phrygians in that park Doo at this present day still shew the trées that shaped were Of theyr twoo bodies, growing yit togither ioyntly there. Theis things did auncient men report of credit verie good. For why there was no cause why they should lye. As I there stood I saw the garlands hanging on the boghes, and adding new I sayd let them whom God dooth loue be Gods. and honor dew Bée giuen to such as honor him with feare and ruerence trew. He lld his peace, and bothe the thing and he that did it tell Did moue them all, but Theseus most. Whom being mynded well To héere of woondrous things, the brooke of Calydon thus bespake. There are O valiant knyght sum folke that had the powre too take Straunge shape for once, and all their lyues continewed in the same. And othersum too sundrie shapes haue power themselues to frame. As thou O Protevv dwelling in the sea that cléepes the land. For now a yoonker, now a boare, anon a Lyon, and Streyght way thou didst become a Snake, and by and by a Bull That people were afrayd of thée too sée thy horned skull. And oftentymes thou séemde a stone, and now and then a trée, And counterfetting water shéere thou seemedst ott to bée A Riuer: and another whyle contrarie therevntoo
Thou wart a fyre. No lesse power than also thus too doo Had Erisicthons daughter whom Avvtolychus tooke too wyfe. Her father was a person that despysed all his lyfe The powre of Gods, and neuer did vouchsauf them sacrifyse. He also is reported too haue heawen in wicked wyse The groue of Ceres, and to fell her holy woods which ay Had vndiminisht and vnhackt continewed to that day There stood in it a warrie Oke which was a wood alone. Uppon it round hung fillets, crownes, and tables, many one, The vowes of such as had obteynd theyr hearts desyre. Full oft The Woodnymphes vnderneath this trée did fetch theyr frisks aloft And oftentymes with hand in hand they daunced in a round About the Trunk, whose bignesse was of timber good and sound Full fiftéene fadom. All the trées within the wood besyde, Were vntoo this, as wéedes to them: so farre it did them hyde. Yit could not this moue Triops sonne his axe therefro too hold, But bade his seruants cut it downe. And when he did behold Them stunting at his hest, he snatcht an axe with furious mood From one of them, and wickedly sayd thus. Although thys wood Not only were the derling of the Goddesse, but also The Goddesse euen herself: yet would I make it ere I go Too kisse the clowers with her top that pranks with braunches so. This spoken, as he sweakt his axe asyde to fetch his blow, The manast Oke did quake and sygh, the Acornes that did grow Thereon toogither with the leaues too wex full pale began, And shrinking in for feare the boughes and braunches looked wan. Assone as that his cursed hand had wounded once the trée, The blood came spinning from the carf, as freshly as yee see It issue from a Bullocks necke whose throte is newly cut Before the Altar, when his flesh to sacrifyse is put. They were amazed eueryhone. And one among them all Too let the wicked act, durst from the trée his hatchet call. The lewd Thessalian facing him sayd: Take thou héere too thée The guerdon of thy godlynesse. and turning from the trée, He chopped of the fellowes head. Which done, he went agen And heawed on the Oke. streight from amid the trée as then There issued such a sound as this. Within this trée dwell I
A Nymph too Ceres very déere, who now before I dye In comfort of my death doo giue thée warning thou shalt bye Thy dooing déere within a whyle. he goeth wilfully Still thorough with his wickednesse, vntill at length the Oke Pulld partly by the force of ropes, and cut with axis stroke, Did fall, and with his weyght bare downe of vnder wood great store. The Woodnymphes with the losses of the woods and theyrs ryght sore Amazed, gathered on a knot, and all in mourning wéede Went sad too Ceres, praying her too wreake that wicked déede Of Erisicthons. Ceres was content it should bee so. And with the mouing of her head in nodding too and fro, Shée shooke the féeldes which laden were with frutefull Haruest tho. And therewithall a punishment most piteous shée procéedes Too put in practyse: were it not that his most heynous deedes, No pitie did deserue too haue at any bodies hand. With helpelesse hungar him too pyne, in purpose shée did stand▪ And forasmuch as shée herselfe and famin myght not méete. (For fate forbiddeth famin too abyde within the leete Where plentie is) shée thus bespake a fayrie of the hill. There lyeth in the vtmost bounds of Tartarie the chill A Dréerie place, a wretched soyle, a barreine plot: no grayne, No frute, no trée, is growing there: but there dooth ay remayne Unwéeldsome cold, with trembling feare, and palenesse white as clowt, And foodlesse famin. Will thou her immediatly withowt Delay too shed herself intoo the stomacke of the wretch, And let no plentie staunch her force. but let her working stretch Aboue the powre of mée. And least the longnesse of the way May make thée wearie, take thou héere my charyot: take I say My draggons for to beare thée through the aire. In saying so She gaue hir them. The Nymph mounts vp, and flying thence as the Alyghts in Scythy land, and vp the cragged top of hye Mount Caucasus did cause hir Snakes with much a doe too stye. Where séeking long for famin, shée the gaptoothd elfe did spye Amid a barreine stony féeld a ramping vp the grasse With ougly nayles, and chanking it. Her face pale colourd was. Hir heare was harsh and shirle, her eyes were sunken in her head. Her lyppes were hore with filth, her tth were fud and rusty read.
Her skinne was starched, and so shéere a man myght well espye The verie bowels in her bulk how euery one did lye. And eke aboue her courbed loynes her withered hippes were séene. In stead of belly was a space where belly should haue béene. Her brest did hang so sagging downe as that a man would wéene That scarcely to her ridgebone had hir ribbes béene fastened well. Her leannesse made her ioynts bolne big, and knéepannes for too swell. And with exceeding mighty knubs her héeles behynd boynd out. Now when the Nymph behild this elfe a farre, (she was in dout Too come too néere her:) shée declarde her Ladies message. And In that same little whyle although the Nymph aloof did stand, And though shée were but newly come, yit séemed shée too féele The force of famin. Whervppon shée turning backe her whéele Did reyne her dragons vp aloft: who streyght with courage frée Conueyd her into Thessaly. Although that famin bée Ay contrarye too Ceres woork, yit did shée then agrée Too doo her will. and glyding through the Ayre supported by The wynd, she found thappoynted house: and entring by and by The caytifs chamber where he slept (it was in tyme of nyght) Shée hugged him betwéene her armes there snortng bolt vpryght. And breathing her into him, blew vppon his face and brest, That hungar in his emptie veynes myght woorke as hée did rest. And when she had accomplished her charge, shee then forsooke The frutefull Clymates of the world, and home ageine betooke Herself vntoo her frutelesse féeldes and former dwelling place. The gentle sléepe did all this whyle with fethers soft embrace The wretched Erisicthons corse. Who dreaming streight of meate Did stirre his hungry iawes in vayne as though he had too eate And chanking tooth on tooth a pace he gryndes them in his head, And occupies his emptie throte with swallowing, and in stead Of food deuoures the lither ayre. But when that léepe with nyght Was shaken of, immediatly a furious appetite Of féeding gan too rage in him, which in his gréedy gummes And in his meatlesse maw dooth reigne vnstauncht. Anon there cummes Before him whatsoeuer liues on sea, in aire or land: And yit he crieth still for more. And though the platters stand Before his face full furnished, yit dooth he still complayne
Of hungar, crauing meate at meale. The food that would susteine Whole householdes, Towneships, Shyres and Realmes suffyce not him alone The more his pampred paūch consumes, ye more it maketh mone And as the sea receyues the brookes of all the worldly Realmes, And yit is neuer satisfyde for all the forreine streames. And as the fell and rauening fyre refuseth neuer wood, But burneth faggots numberlesse, and with a furious mood The more it hath, the more it still desyreth euermore, Encreacing in deuouring through encreasement of the store: So wicked Erisicthons mouth in swallowing of his meate Was euer hungry more and more, and longed ay to eate. Meate tolld in meate: and as he ate the place was empty still. The hungar of his brinklesse Maw the gulf that nowght might fill Had brought his fathers good too nowght. But yit continewed ay: His cursed hungar vnappeasd: and nothing could alay The flaming of his starued throte. At length when all was spent, And intoo his vnfilled Maw bothe goods and lands were sent, An only daughter did remayne vnworthy too haue had So lewd a father. Hir he sold, so hard he was bestad. But shée of gentle courage could no bondage well abyde. And therfore stretching out her hands too seaward there besyde, Now saue mée quoth shée from the yoke of bondage I thée pray, O thou that my virginitie enioyest as a pray. Neptunus had it. Who too this her prayer did consent. And though her maister looking backe (for after him shée went) Had newly séene her: yit he turnd hir shape and made hir man, And gaue her looke of fisherman. Her mayster looking than Upon her, sayd. Good fellow thou that on the shore doost stand With angling rod and bayted hooke and hanging lyne in hand, I pray thée as thou doost desyre the Sea ay calme too thée, And fishes for to byght thy bayt, and striken still too bée, Tell where the frizzle topped wench in course and sluttish géere That stoode right now vppon this shore (for well I wote that héere I saw her standing) is become. For further than this place No footestep is appeering. Shée perceyuing by the cace That Neptunes gift made well with her, and béeing glad too sée Herself enquyrd for of herself, sayd thus: who ere you bée
I pray you for too pardon mée. I turned not myne eye A tonesyde ne a toother from this place, but did apply My labor hard. And that you may the lesser stand in dowt, So Neptune further still the Art and craft I go abowt, As now a whyle no liuing Wyght vppon this leuell sand (Myself excepted) neyther man nor woman héere did stand. Her maister did beléeue her words: and turning backward went His way beguyld: and streight too her her natiue shape was sent. But when her father did perceyue his daughter for too haue A bodye so transformable, he oftentymes her gaue For monny. but the damzell still escaped now a Mare And now a Cow, and now a Bird, a Hart, a Hynd, or Hare, And euer fed her hungry Syre with vndeserued fare. But after that the maladie had wasted all the meates As well of store as that which shée had purchast by her feates: Most cused keytife as he was with bighting hée did rend His flesh, and by diminishing his bodye did intend Too seede his bodye, till that death did spéede his fatall end. But what méene I too busye mée in forreine matters thus? Too alter shapes within precinct is lawfull euen too vs My Lords. For sumtime I am such as you doo now mée sée Sumtyme I wynd mée in a Snake: and oft I séeme too bée A Capteine of the herd with hornes. For taking hornes on mée I lost a tyne which héeretoofore did arme mée as the print Dooth playnly shew. with that same word he syghed and did stin. Finis octaui Libri.
¶THE NINTH BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. WHat ayleth thée (quoth Theseus) too sygh so sore? and how Befell it thée too get this mayme that is vppon thy brow? The noble streame of Calydon made answer, who did weare A Garland made of réedes and flags vpon his sedgie heare. A gréeuous pennance you enioyne. for who would gladly show The combats in the which himself did take the ouerthrow? Yit will I make a iust report in order of the same. For why? too haue the woorser hand was not so great a shame, As was the honor such a match too vndertake. And much It comforts mée that he who did mée ouercome, was such A valiant champion. If perchaunce you erst haue heard the name Of Deyanyre the fayrest Mayd that euer God did frame Shée was in myne opinion. And the hope too win her loue Did mickle enuy and debate among hir wooers moue. With whome I entring too the house of him that should haue bée My fathrilaw, Parthaons sonne (I sayd) accept thou mée Thy Sonnylaw. And Hercules in self same sort did woo. And all the other suters streight gaue place vntoo vs twoo. He vaunted of his father Ioue, and of his famous déedes, And how ageinst his stepdames spyght his prowesse still procéedes. And I ageine a toother syde sayd thus It is a shame That God should yéeld too man. (this stryfe was long ere he became A God). Thou séeist mée a Lord of waters in thy Realme Where I in wyde and wynding banks doo beare my flowing streame. No straunger shalt thou haue of mée sent farre from forreine land: But one of household, or at least a neyghbour héere at hand. Alonly let it bée too mée no hindrance that the wyfe Of Ioue abhorres mée not, ne that vpon the paine of lyfe Shée sets mée not too task. For where thou bostest thée too bée Almenas sonne, Ioue eyther is not father vnto thée: Or if he bée it is by sin. In making Ioue thy father, Thou maakst thy mother but a whoore. now choose thée whither rather Thou had too graunt this tale of Ioue surmised for too bée, Or else thy selfe begot in shame and borne in bastardée.
At that he grimly bendes his browes, and much a doo he hath Too hold his hands. so sore his hart inflamed is with wrath. He said no more but thus. My hand dooth serue mée better than My toong. Content I am (so I in feighting vanquish can) That thou shalt ouercome in wordes. And therewithall he gan Mée feercely to assaile. Mée thought it was a shame for mée That had euen now so stoutly talkt, in dooings faint too bée. I casting of my gréenish cloke thrust stifly out at length Mine armes and streynd my pawing armes too hold him out by strēgth, And framed euery limme too cope. With both his hollow hands He caught vp dust and sprincked mée: and I likewise with sands. Made him all yelow too. One whyle hée at my necke dooth snatch Another whyle my cléere crisp legges he striueth for too catch, Or trippes at mée: and euerywhere the vauntage he dooth watch. My weightinesse defended mée, and cléerly did disfeate His stoute assaults as when a waue with hideous noyse dooth beate Against a Rocke, the Rocke dooth still both sauf and sound abyde By reason of his massinesse. Wée drew a whyle a syde. And then incountring fresh ageine, wée kept our places stowt Full minded not too yéeld an inch, but for too hold it owt. Now were wée stonding foote too foote. And I with all my brest Was leaning forward, and with head ageinst his head did rest, And with my gryping fingars I ageinst his fingars thrust. So haue I séene twoo myghtie Bulles togither féercely iust In seeking as their pryse to haue the fayrest Cow in all The féeld too bée their make, and all the herd bothe greate and small Stand gazing on them fearfully not knowing vntoo which The conquest of so greate a gayne shall fall. Thrée tymes a twich Gaue Hercules and could not wrinch my leaning brest him fro But at the fourth he shooke mée of and made mée too let go My hold: and with a push (I will tell truthe) he had a knacke Too turne me of, and heauily he hung vpon my backe. And if I may beléeued bée (as sure I méene not I To vaunt my selfe vayngloriusly by telling of a lye,) Mée thought a mountaine whelmed me. But yit with much a doo I wrested in my sweating armes, and hardly did vndoo His griping hands. He following still his vauntage, suffred not
Mée once too breath or gather strength. but by and by he got Mée by the necke. Then was I fayne too sinke with knée too ground, And kisse the dust. Now when in strength too weake myself I found, I tooke mée too my slights, and slipt in shape of Snake away Of woondrous length. And when that I of purpose him too fray Did bend myself in swelling rolles, and made a hideous noyse Of hissing with my forked toong, he smyling at my toyes, And laughing them too scorne sayd thus. It is my Cradle game To vanquish Snakes O Acheloy. Admit thou ouercame All other Snakes, yet what art thou compared too the Snake Of Lerna, who by cutting of did still encreasement take? For of a hundred heades not one so soone was paarde away, But that vppon the stump therof there budded other tway This sprouting Snake whose braunching heads by slaughter did reuiue And grow by cropping, I subdewd, and made it could not thryue. And thinkest thou (who being none wouldst séeme a Snake) too scape? Who doost with foorged weapons feyght and vnder borowed shape? This sayd, his fingars of my necke he fastned in the nape Mée thought he graand my throte as though he did with pinsons nip I struggled from his churlish thumbes my pinched chappes too slip But doo the best and worst I could he ouercame mée so. Then thirdly did remayne the shape of Bull. and quickly tho I turning too the shape of Bull rebelld ageinst my o. He stepping too my left syde cloce, did fold his armes about My wattled necke, and following mée then running maynely out Did brag mée backe, and made mee pitch my hornes against the ground, And in the déepest of the sand he ouerthrew mée round. And yit not so content, such hold his cruell hand did take Uppon my welked horne, that he a sunder quight it brake, And pulld it from my maymed brew. The waterfayries came And filling it with frute and flowres did consecrate the same, And so my horne the Tresory of plenteousnesse became. Assoone as Acheloy had told this tale a wayting Mayd With flaring heare that lay on both hir shoulders and arayd Like one of Dame Dianas Nymphes with solemne grace forth came And brought that rich and precious horne, and heaped in the same All kynd of frutes that Haruest sendes, and specially such frute
As serues for latter course at meales of euery sort and sute. Assoone as daylight came ageine, and that the Sunny rayes Did shyne vpon the tops of things, the Princes went their wayes. They would not tarry till the floud were altogither falne And that the Riuer in his banks ran low ageine and calme. Then Acheloy amid his waues his Crabtrée face did hyde And head disarmed of a horne. And though he did abyde In all parts else bothe sauf and sound, yit this deformitye Did cut his comb: and for too hyde this blemish from the eye. He hydes his hurt with Sallow leaues, or else with sedge and réede. But of the selfsame Mayd the loue killd thée feerce Nesse in déede, When percing swiftly through thy back an arrow made thée bléede. For as Ioues issue with his wyfe was onward on his way In going too his countryward, enforst he was too stay At swift Euenus bank, bycause the streame was risen sore Aboue his bounds through rage of rayne that fell but late before Agein so full of whoorlpooles and of gulles the channell was, That scarce a man could any where fynd place of passage. As Not caring for himself but for his wyfe he there did stand, This Nessus came vnto him (who was strong of body and Knew well the foordes,) and sayd vse thou thy strength O Hercules In swimming. I will fynd the meanes this Ladie shall with ease Bée set vppon the further bank. So Hercules betooke His wyfe too Nessus. Shée for feare of him and of the brooke Lookte pale. Her husband as he had his quiuer by his syde Of arrowes full, and on his backe his heauy Lyons hyde, (For too the further bank he erst his club and bow had cast) Said. sith I haue begonne, this brooke bothe must and shalbée past, He neuer casteth further doubts, nor séekes the calmest place, But through the roughest of the streame he cuts his way a pace. Now as he on the furthersyde was taking vp his bow, He heard his wedlocke shréeking out, and did hir calling know: And cryde to Nesse (who went about to deale vnfaythfully In running with his charge away) Hoawe whither doost thou fly Thou Royster thou, vppon a vaine hope by swiftnesse too escape My hands? I say giue eare thou Nesse for all thy double shape, And meddle not with that thats myne. Though no regard of mée
Might moue thée too refrayne from rape, thy father yit might bée A warning, who for offring shame too Iuno now dooth féele Continuall torment in his limbes by turning on a whéele. For all that thou hast horses féete which doo so bolde thée make, Yit shalt thou not escape my hands. I will thee ouertake With wound and not with féete. He did according as he spake. For with an arrow as he fled he strake him through the backe, And out before his brist ageine the hooked iron stacke. And when the same was pulled out, the blood a mayne ensewd At both the holes with poyson foule of Lerna Snake embrewd: This blood did Nessus take, and said within himselfe: well: fith I needes must dye, yet will I not dye vnreuendgd. And with The same he staynd a shirt, and gaue it vnto Dyanyre, Assuring hir it had the powre too kindle Cupids fyre. A greate whyle after when the déedes of worthy Hercules Were such as filled all the world, and also did appease The hatred of his stepmother, As he vppon a day With conquest from Oechalia came, and was abowt to pay His vowes to Ioue vppon the Mount of Cenye, tatling fame (Who in reporting things of truth delyghts too sauce the same With tales, and of a thing of nowght dooth euer greater grow Through false and newly forged lyes that shée hirself dooth sow) Told Dyanyre that Hercules did cast a liking too A Ladie called Iölee▪ And Dyanyra (whoo Was iealous ouer Hercules,) gaue credit too the same. And when that of a Leman first the tidings too hir came, She being striken too the hart, did fall too teares alone, And in a lamentable wise did make most wofull mone. Anon she said: what méene theis teares thus gushing frō myne eyen? My husbands Leman will reioyce at theis same teares of myne. Nay, sith she is too come, the best it were too shonne delay, And for too woork sum new deuyce and practyse whyle I may, Béefore that in my bed her limbes the filthy strumpet lay. And shall I then complayne? or shall I hold my toong with skill? Shall I returne too Calydon? or shall I tarry still? Or shall I get me out of doores, and let them haue their will?
What if that I (Meleager) remembring mée too bée Thy suster, too attempt sum act notorious did agrée? And in a harlots death did shew (that all the world myght sée) What greef can cause the womankynd too enterpryse among? And specially when therevntoo they forced are by wrong. With wauering thoughts ryght violētly her mynd was tossed lōg. At last shée did preferre before all others, for too send The shirt bestayned with the blood of Nessus too the end Too quicken vp the quayling loue. And so not knowing what She gaue, she gaue her owne remorse and gréef too ychas that Did know as little as herself: and wretched woman, shee Desyrd him gently too her Lord presented it too sée. The noble Prince receyuing it without mistrust therein, Did weare the poyson of the Snake of Lerna next his skin. Too offer incense and too pray too Ioue he did begin, And on the Marble Altar he full boawles of wyne did shed, When as the poyson with the heate resoluing, largely spred Through all the limbes of Hercules. As long as ere he could, The stoutnesse of his hat was such, that sygh no whit he would. But when the mischeef grew so great all pacience too surmount, He thrust the altar from him streight, and filled all the mount Of Oeta with his roring out. He went about too teare The deathfull garment from his backe, but where he pulled, there He pulld away the skin: and (which is lothsum too report) It eyther cleaued too his limbes and members in such sort As that he could not pull it o, or else it tare away The flesh, that bare his myghty bones and grisly sinewes lay. The scalding venim boyling in his blood, did make it hisse, As when a gad of stéele red whot in water quenched is. There was no measure of his paine. The frying venim hent His inwards, and a purple swet from all his body went. His findged sinewes shrinking crakt, and with a secret strength The poyson euen within his bones the Marée melts at length. And holding vp his hands too heauen he sayd with hideous réere. O Saturnes daughter féede thy selfe on my distresses héere. Yea féede. and cruell wyght this plage behold thou from aboue And glut thy sauage hart therewith. Or if thy fo may moue
Thée vntoo pitie, (for too thée I am an vtter so) Beréeue mée of my hatefull soule distrest with helplesse wo, And borne too endlesse toyle. For death shall vntoo mee bee swéete, And for a cruell stepmother is death a gift most méete. And is it I that did destroy Busiris who did foyle His temple floores with straungers blood? Ist I that did dispoyle Antaeus of his moothers help? Ist I that could not bée Abashed at the Spanyard who in one had bodies thrée? Nor at the trypleheaded shape O Cerberus of thée? Are you the hands that by the hornes the Bull of Candie drew? Did you king Augies stable clenze whom afterward yée slew? Are you the same by whom the fowles were saard from Stymphaly? Caught you the Stag in Maydenwood which did not runne but fly? Are you the hands whose puissance receyued for your pay The golden belt of Thermodon? Did you conuey away The Apples from the Dragon fell that waked nyght and day? Ageinst the force of mée, defence the Centaures could not make, Nor yit the Boare of Arcadie: nor yit the ougly Snake Of Lerna, who by losse did grow and dooble force still take. What? is it I that did behold the pampred Iades of Thrace With Maungers full of flesh of men on which they fed a pace? Ist I that downe at syght thereof theyr greazy Maungers threw, And bothe the fatted Iades themselues and ke their mayster slew? The Nemean Lyon by theis armes lyes dead vppon the ground. Theis armes the monstrous Giant Cake by Tyber did confound. Uppon theis shoulders haue I borne the weyght of all the skie. Ioues cruell wyfe is wéerye of commaunding mée. Yit I Unwéerie am of dooing still. But now on mee is lyght, An vncoth plage, which neyther force of hand, nor vertues myght, Nor Arte is able too resist. Like wasting fyre it spréedes Among myne inwards, and through out on all my body féedes. But all this whyle Eurysthye liues in health. And sum men may Beeleue there bée sum Goddes in déede. Thus much did Hercule say. And wounded ouer Oeta hygh, he stalking gan too stray, As when a Bull in maymed bulk, a deadly Dart dooth beare, And that▪ the dooer of the déede is shrunke asyde for feare. Oft syghing myght you him haue séene, oft trembling, oft about
Too teare the  with his hands from top too to throughot. And throwing downe the myghtye trées, and chaufing with the hilles, Or casting vp his handes too heauen where Ioue his father dwelles. Behold as Lychas trembling in a hollow rock did lurk, He spyed him. And as his gréef did all in furie woork, He sayd. Art thou syr Lychas he that broughtest vntoo mée This plagye present? of my death must thou the woorker bée? Hée quaakt and shaakt, and looked pale, and fearfully gan make Excuse. But as with humbled hands hee knéeling too him spake, The furios Hercule caught him vp, and swindging him about His head a halfe a doozen tymes or more, he floong him out Into th'Euboyan sea with force surmounting any sling. He hardened intoo peble stone as in the ayre he hing. And euen as rayne conieald by wynd is sayd too turne too snowe, And of the snow round rolled vp a thicker masse too growe, Which falleth downe in hayle: so men in auncient tyme report, That Lychas béeing swindgd about by violence in that sort, (His blood then béeing drayned out, and hauing left at all No moysture,) intoo peble stone was turned in his fall. Now also in th'Euboyan sea appéeres a hygh short rocke In shape of man ageinst the which the shipmen shun too knocke, As though it could them faéele▪ and they doo call it by the name Of Lychas still. But thou Ioues imp of great renowme and fame, Didst fell the trées of Oeta high, and making of the same A pyle, didst giue tooPhiloctet. Poeans sonne thy quiuer and thy bow, And arrowes which should help agein Troy towne too ouerthrow. He put too fyre, and as the same was kindling in the pyle, Thy selfe didst spred thy Lyons skin vpon the wood the whyle, And leaning with thy head ageinst thy Club, thou laydst thée downe As chéerfully, as if with flowres and garlonds on thy crowne Thou hadst beene set a banquetting among full cups of wyne. Anon on euery syde about those carelesse limbes of thyne The fyre began too gather strength, and crackling noyse did make, Assayling him whose noble hart or daliance did it take. The Goddes for this defender of the earth were sore afrayd Too whom with chéerefull countnance Ioue perceyuing it thus sayd. This feare of yours is my delyght, and gladly euen with all
My hart I doo reioyce O Gods that mortall folk mée call Their king and father, thinking mée ay myndfull of their weale, And that myne ofspring should doo well your selues doo show such zeale. For though that you doo attribute your fauor too desert, Considring his most woondrous acts: yit I too for my part Am bound vntoo you. Nerethelesse, for that I would not haue Your faythfull harts without iust cause in fearfull passions waue, I would not haue you of the flames in Oeta make account. For as he hath all other things, so shall he them surmount. Saue only on that part that he hath taken of his mother, The fyre shall haue no power at all. Eternall is the tother, The which he takes of mée, and cannot dye, ne yéeld too fyre. When this is rid from earthly drosse, then will I lift it hygher, And take it intoo heauen: and I beléeue this déede of myne Will gladsome bée too all the Gods. If any doo repyne, If any doo repyne I say that Hercule should become A God, repyne he still for mée, and looke he sowre and glum. But let him know that Hercules deserueth this reward, And that he shall ageinst his will alow it afterward. The Gods assented eueryhone. And Iuno séemd too make No euill countnance too the rest, vntill hir husband spake The last. for then her looke was such as well they might perceyue, Shée did her husbands noting her in euill part conceyue. Whyle Ioue was talking with the Gods, as much as fyre could waste So much had fyre consumde. And now O Hercules thou haste No carkesse for too know thee by. That part is quyght bereft Which of thy mother thou didst take. Alonly now is left The likenesse that thou tookst of Ioue. And as the Serpent slye In casting of his withered slough, renewes his yéeres thereby, And wexeth lustyer than before, and looketh crisp and bryght With scoured scales: so Hercules as soone as that his spryght Had left his mortall limbes, gan in his better part too thryue, And for too séeme a greater thing than when he was alyue, And with a stately maiestie ryght reuerend too appéere. His myghty father tooke him vp aboue the cloudy sphéere, And in a charyot placed him among the streaming starres. Howge Atlas felt the weyght thereof. But nothing this disbarres
Eurysthyes malice. Cruelly he prosecutes the hate Uppon the ofspring, which he bare ageinst the father late. But yit too make her mone vntoo and wayle her miscrie And tell her sonnes great woorkes, which all the world could testifie, Old Alcmen had Dame Iölee. By Hercules last will In wedlocke and in hartie loue shée ioyned was too Hill, By whome shée then was big with chyld: when thus Alcmena sayd▪ The Gods at least bée mercifull and send thée then theyr ayd, And short thy labor, when the frute the which thou goste withall Now béeing rype enorceth thee wyth fearfull voyce too call Uppon Ilithya president of chyldbirthes, whom the ire Of Iuno at my trauelling made deaf too my desire. For when the Sun through twyce fyue signes his course had fully run, And that the paynfull day of birth approched of my sonne, My burthen strayned out my wombe, and that that I did beare Became so greate, that of so howge a masse yée well myght sweare That Ioue was father. Neyther was I able too endure The trauell any lenger tyme. Euen now I you assure In telling it a shuddring cold through all my limbes dooth strike, And partly it renewes my peynes too thinke vppon the like. I beeing in most cruell throwes nyghts seuen and dayes eke seuen, And tyred with continuall pangs, did lift my hands too heauen, And crying out aloud did call Lucina too myne ayd, Too loose the burthen from my wombe. Shée came as I had prayd: But so corrupted long before by Iuno my most fo, That for too martir mée too death with peyne she purposde tho. For when shee heard my piteous plaints and gronings, downe shée sate On you same altar which you sée there standing at my gate. Upon her left knée shée had pitcht her right ham, and besyde Shée stayd the birth with fingars one within another tyde In lattiswyse. And secretly she whisperde witching spells Which hindred my deliuerance more than all her dooings ells. I labord still: and forst by payne and torments of my fitts, I rayld on Ioue (although in vayne) as one besyde her witts. And ay I wished for too dye. The woords that I did speake, Were such as euen the hardest stones of very flint myght breake. The wyues of Thebee béeing there, for sauf deliuerance prayd
And giuing chéerfull woords, did bid I should not bée dismayd. Among the other women there that too my labor came, There was an honest yeomans wyfe, Galantis was her name. Her heare was yellow as the gold, she was a iolly Dame, And stoutly serued mée, and I did loue her for the same. This wyfe (I know not how) did smell some packing gone about On Iunos part. And as she oft was passing in and out, Shée spyde Lucina set vppon the altar holding fast Her armes toogither on her knées, and with her fingars cast Within ech other on a knot, and sayd vntoo her thus. I pray you who so ere you bee, reioyce you now with vs, My Lady Alcmen hath her wish, and sauf is brought a bed. Lucina leaped vp amazde at that that shée had sed. And let her ands a sunder slip. And I immediatly With loosening of the knot, had sauf deliuerance by and by. They say that in deceyuing Dame Lucina Galant laught. And therfore by the yellow locks the Goddesse wroth hir caught, And dragged her. And as she would haue risen from the ground, Shée kept her downe, and into legges her armes shée did confound. Her former stoutnesse still remaynes: her backe dooth kéepe the hew That rst was in her heare: her shape is only altered new. And for with lying mouth shée helpt a woman laboring, shée Dooth kindle also at her mouth. And now she haunteth frée Our houes as shée did before, a Wease as wée sée. With that shée syghes too think vppon her seruants hap, and then Her daughtrinlaw immediatly replied thus agen. But mother, shee whose altred shape dooth moue your hart so sore, Was neyther kithnor kin too you. What will you say therefore, If of myne owne déere suster I the woondrous fortune show? Although my sorrow and the teares that from myne eyes doo flow, Doo hinder mee, and stop my spéeche. Her mother (you must know My father by another wyfe had mée) bare neuer mo But this same Ladie Dryopee, the fayrest Ladye tho In all the land of Oechalye Whom béeing then no mayd (For why the. God of Delos and of Delphos had her frayd) Andraemon taketh too hys wyfe, and thinkes him well apayd. There is a certaine leaning Lake whose bowing banks doo show
A likenesse of the salt sea shore. Uppon the brim doo grow All round about it Mirtletrées. My suster thither goes Unwares what was her destinie, and (which you may suppose Was more too bée disdyned at) the cause of comming there Was too the fayries of the Lake fresh garlonds for too beare. And in her armes a babye her sweete burthen shée did hold. Who sucking on her brest was yit not full a tweluemoonth old. Not farre from this same pond did grow a Lote trée florisht gay With purple flowres and beries swéete, and leaues as gréene as Bay. Of theis same flowres too please her boy my suster gathered sum, And I had thought too doo so too, for I was thither cum. I saw how from the sliuered flowres red drops of blood did fall, And how that shuddring horribly the braunches quaakt withall, You must perceyue that (as too late the Countryfolk declare) A Nymph cald Lotos flying from fowle Pryaps filthy ware, Was turned intoo this same trée reseruing still her name. My suster did not know so much. who when shée backward came Afrayd at that that shée had séene, and hauing sadly prayd The Nymphes of pardon, too haue gone her way agen assayd: Her féete were fastned downe with rootes. Shee stryued all she myght Too plucke them vp. but they so sure within the earth were pyght, That nothing saue her vpper partes shée could that present moue. A tender barke growes from beneath vp leysurly aboue, And softly ouerspreddes her loynes. which when shée saw, shée went About too teare her heare, and full of leaues her hand shée hent. Her head was ouergrowen with leaues. And little Amphise (so Had Eurytus his Graundsyre naamd her sonne not long ago) Did féele his mothers dugges wex hard. And as he still them drew In sucking, not a whit of milke nor moysture did nsw. I standing by thée did behold thy cruell chaunce: but nought I could reléeue thée suster myne. yit too my powre I wrought Too stay the growing of thy trunk and of thy braunches by Embracing thée. Yea I protest I would ryght willingly Haue in the selfe same barke with thee bene closed vp. Behold, Her husband good Andraemon and her wretched father old Sir Eurytus came thither and enquyrd for Dryopee. And as they askt for Dryopee, I shewd them Lote the tree.
They kist the wood which yit was warme, and falling downe bylow, Did hug the rootes of that their trée. My suster now could show No part which was not wood except her face. A deawe of teares Did stand vppon the wretched leaues late formed of her heares. And whyle she might, and whyle her mouth did giue her way too speake, With such complaynt as this, her mynd shée last of all did breake. If credit may bee giuen too such as are in wretchednesse, I sweare by God I neuer yit deserued this distresse. I suffer peyne without desert. My lyfe hath guiltlesse béene. And if I lye, I would theis boughes of mine which now are gréene, Myght withered bée, and I heawen downe and burned in the fyre. This infant from his mothers wombe remoue you I desyre: And put him forth too nurce, and cause him vnderneath my trée Oft tymes too sucke, and oftentymes too play. And when that hée Is able for too speake I pray you let him gréete mée héere, And sadly say in this same trunk is hid my mother déere. But lerne him for too shun all ponds and pulling flowres from trées, And let him in his heart beléeue that all the shrubs he sees, Are bodyes of the Goddesses. Adew déere husband now, Adew déere father, and adew déere suster. And in yow If any loue of mée remayne, defend my boughes I pray From wound of cutting hooke and ax, and bit of beast for ay. And for I cannot stoope too you, rayse you yourselues too mée, And come and kisse mée whyle I may yit toucht and kissed bee. And lift mée vp my little boy. I can no lenger talke, For now about my lillye necke as if it were a stalke The tender rynd beginnes too créepe, and ouergrowes my top. Remoue your fingars from my face▪ the spreading barke dooth stop My dying eyes without your help. Shee had no sooner left Her talking, but her lyfe therewith toogither was bereft. But yit a good whyle after that her natiue shape did fade, Her newmade boughes continewed warme. Now whyle that Iöle made Report of this same woondrous tale, and whyle Alcmena (who Did wéepe) was drying vp the teares of Iöle wéeping too, By putting too her thomb: there hapt a sodeine thing so straunge. That vntoo mirth from heauinesse theyr harts it streight did chaunge. For at the doore in maner euen a very boy as then
With short soft Downe about his chin, reuoked backe agen Too youthfull yeares, stood Iölay with countnance smooth and trim. Dame Hebee Iunos daughter had bestowde this gift on him, Entreated at his earnest sute. Whom mynding fully there The giuing of like gift ageine too any too forsweare, Dame Themis would not suffer. For (quoth shée) this present howre Is cruell warre in Thebee towne, and none but Ioue hath powre Too vanquish stately Canapey. The brothers shall a like Wound eyther other. And alyue a Prophet shall go séeke His owne quicke ghoste among the dead, the earth him swallowing in. The sonne by taking vengeance for his fathers death shall win The name of kynd and wicked man, in one and self same cace. And flayght with mischéefes, from his wits and from his natiue place The furies and his mothers ghoste shall restlessely him chace, Untill his wye demaund of him the fatall gold for meede, And that his cousin Phegies swoord doo make his sydes too bléede. Then shall the fayre Callirrhoee Achelous daughter pray The myghty Ioue in humble wyse too graunt her children may Retyre ageine too youthfull yéeres, and that he will not sée The death of him that did reuenge vnvenged for too bée. Ioue moued at her sute shall cause his daughtrinlaw too giue Like gift, and backe from age too youth Callirrhoës children driue. When Themis through foresyght had spoke theis woords of prophesie, The Gods began among themselues vayne talke too multiplie, They mooyld why others myght not giue like gift as well as shée. First Pallants daughter grudged that her husband old should bée. The gentle Ceres murmurde that her Iasions heare was hore. And Vulcane would haue calld ageine the yéeres long spent befor By Ericthonius. And the nyce Dame Venus hauing care Of tyme too come, the making yong of old Anchises sware. So euery God had ne too whom he speciall fauor bare. And through this partiall loue of theyrs seditiously increast A hurlyburly, till the time that Ioue among them preast, And sayd. So smally doo you stand in awe of mee this howre, As thus too rage? Thinkes any of you himself too haue such powre, As for too alter destinye? I tell you Iölay Recouered hath by destinye his yéeres erst past away.
Callirrhoës children must returne too youth by destiny, And not by force of armes, or sute susteynd ambitiously. And too th'entent with méelder myndes yée may this matter beare, Euen I myself by destinyes am rulde. which if I were Of power too alter, thinke you that our Aeacus should stoope By reason of his féeble age? or Radamanth should droope? Or Minos, who by reason of his age is now disdeynd, And liues not in so sure a state as heretoofore he reygnd? The woords of Ioue so movd the Gods that none of them complaynd, Sith Radamanth and Aeacus were both with age constreynd: And Minos also: who (as long as lusty youth did last,) Did euen with terror of his name make myghty Realmes agast. But then was Minos weakened sore, and greatly stood in feare Of Milet one of Deyons race: who proudly did him beare Uppon his father Phoebus and the stoutnesse of his youth. And though he feard he would rebell: yit durst he not his mouth Once open for too banish him his Realme: vntill at last Departing of his owne accord, Miletus swiftly past The Gotesa and did build a towne vppon the Asian ground, Which still reteynes the name of him that first the same did found. And there the daughter of the brooke Maeander which dooth go So often backward, Cyane a Nymph of body so Excéeding comly as the lyke was seldome heard of, as Shée by her fathers wynding bankes for pleasure walking was, Was knowen by Milet: vnto whom a payre of twinnes shée brought, And of the twinnes the names were Caune and Byblis▪ Byblis ought Too bée a mirror vntoo Maydes in lawfull wyse too loue. This Byblis cast a mynd too Caune. but not as did behoue A suster too her brotherward. When first of all the fyre Did kindle, shée perceyvd it not. Shée thought in her desyre Of kissing him so oftentymes no sin, ne yit no harme In cléeping him about the necke so often with her arme. The glittering glosse of godlynesse beguyld her long. Her loue Began from euill vntoo woorse by little too remoue. Shée commes too sée her brother deckt in braue and trim attyre, And for too séeme excéeding fayre it was her whole desyre. And if that any fayrer were in all the locke than shee,
It spyghts her. In what case she was as yit shée did not sée. Her heate excéeded not so farre as for too vow: and yit Shée suffred in her troubled brist full many a burning fit. Now calleth shée him mayster, now shée vtter hateth all The names of kin. Shée rather had he should her Byblis call Than suster. yit no filthy hope shée durst permit too créepe Within her mynd awake. But as shée lay in quiet sléepe, Shée oft behild her loue: and oft she thought her brother came And lay with her, and (though a sléepe) shée blushed at the same. When sléepe was gone, she long lay dumb still musing on the syght, And said with wauering mynd. Now wo is mée most wretched wyght. What méenes the image of this dreame that I haue séene this nyght? I would not wish it should bée trew, Why dreamed I then so? Sure hée is fayre although hée should bée iudged by his fo. Hée likes mée well▪ and were he not my brother, I myght set My loue on him, and he were mée ryght woorthy for too get, But vnto this same match the name of kinred is a let. Well. So that I wake doo still mee vndefyled keepe, Let come as often as they will such dreamings in my sléepe. In sléepe there is no witnesse by▪ In sléepe yit may I take As greate a pleasure (in a sort) as if I were awake. Oh Venus and thy tender sonne Sir Cupid, what delyght, How present féeling of your sport hath touched mée this nyght? How lay I as it were resolvd both marée, flesh, and bone? How gladdes it mée too thinke thereon? Alas too soone was gone That pleasure, and too hastye and despyghtfull was the nyght In breaking of my ioyes. O Lord if name of kinred myght Betweene vs twoo remoued mée, how well it would agrée O Caune that of thy father I the daughtrinlaw should bee? How fitly myght my father haue a sonneinlaw of thée? Would God that all saue auncesters were common too vs twayne I would thou were of nobler stocke than I▪ I cannot sayne O perle of beautie what shée is whom thou shalt make a mother. Alas how ill befalles it mée that I could haue none other Than those same parents which are ? So only sill my brother And not my husband mayst thou bée. The thing that hurts vs bothe Is one, and that betwéene vs ay inseparably gothe.
what méene my dreames th? what effect haue dreames? & may there bée Effect in dreames? The Gods are farre in better case than wée. For why? the Gods haue matched with theyr susters as wée sée. So Saturne did alie with Ops the néerest of his blood. So ethys with Oceanus: So Ioue did think it good Too take his suster Iuno too his wyfe▪ What then? the Goddes Haue lawes and charters by themselues. And sith there is such oddes Betwéene the state of vs and them, why should I sample take, Our worldly matters equall with the heauenly things too make? This wicked loue shall eyther from my hart he driuen away, Or if it can not bée expulst, God graunt I perish may. And that my brother kisse me layd on Herce oo go too graue. But my desyre the full consent of both of vs dooth craue. Admit the matter liketh me. He will for sin it take. But yit the sonnes of Aeolus no scruplousnesse did make In going too theyr susters beds. And how come I too know The feates of them? Too what intent theis samples doo I show? Ah whither am I headlong driuen? auaunt foule filthy fyre: And let mée not in otherwyse than susterlyke desyre My brothers loue. Yit if that he were first in loue with mée, His fondnesse too inclyne vntoo perchaune I could agrée. Shall I therefore who would not haue reiected him if hée Had sude too mée, go sue too him? and canst thou speake in déede? And canst thou vtter forth thy mynd? and tell him of thy néede? My loue will make mée speake. I can. Or if that shame doo stay My toong, a sealed letter shall my secret loue bewray. This likes her best. vppon this poynt now restes her doubtful mynd So raysing vp herself vppon her leftsyde shée enclynd, And leaning on her elbow sayd. Let him aduyse him what Too doo, for I my franticke loue will vtter playne and flat. Alas too what vngraciousnesse intend I for too fall? What furie raging in my hart my senses dooth appall? In thinking so, with trembling hand shée framed her too wryght The matter that her troubled mynd in musing did indyght. Her ryght hand holdes the pen, her left dooth hold the empty wax. Shée ginnes. Shée doutes, shée wryghtes: shée in the tables findeth lacks. Shée notes, she blurres, dislikes, and likes: and chaungeth this for that.
Shée layes away the booke, and takes it vp. Shée wotes not what She would herself. What euer thing shée myndeth for too doo Misliketh her. A shamefastnesse with boldenesse mixt theretoo Was in her countnance. Shee had once writ Suster: Out agen The name of Suster for too raze shée thought it best. And then Shee snatcht the ables vp, and did theis following woords ingraue. The health which if thou giue her not shée is not like too haue Thy louer wisheth vntoo thée. I dare not ah for shame I dare not tell thée who I am, nor let thée heare my name. And if thou doo demaund of mée what thing I doo desyre, Would God that namelesse I myght pleade the matter I requyre, Ad that I were vnknowen too thee by name of Byblis, till Assurance of my sute were wrought according too my will. As tokens of my wounded hart myght theis too thee appeere: My colour pale, my body leane, my heauy mirthlesse chéere, My watry eyes, my sighes without apparant causes why, My oft embracing of thée: and such kisses (if perdye Thou marked them) as very well thou might haue felt and found Not for too haue béene Susterlike. But though with gréeuous wound I then were striken too the hart. although the raging flame Did burne within: yit take I God too witnesse of the same, I did as much as lay in mée this outrage for too tame. And long I stryued (wretched wench) too scape the violent Dart Of Cupid. More I haue endurde of hardnesse & of smart, Than any wench (a man would think) were able too abyde. Force forceth mée too shew my case which faine I still would hyde, And mercy at thy gentle hand in fearfull wyse too craue. Thou only mayst the lyfe of mée thy louer spill or saue. Choose which thou wilt. No enmy craues this thing: but such a one As thouh shée bée alyde so sure as surer can bée none, Yit couets shée more surely yit alyed for too bée, And with a néerer kynd of band too link her selfe too thée. Let aged folkes haue skill in law: too age it dooth belong Too kéepe the rigor of the lawes and search out ryght from wrong. Such youthfull yéeres as ors are yit rash▪ olly dooth beseme. We know not what is lawfull . And therefore wée may▪ That all is lawfull that  list: ensewing in the same
The dooings of the myghtye Goddes. Not dread of worldly sham Nor yit our fathers roughnesse, no nor fearfulnesse should let Our purpose. Only let all feare asyde be wholy set. Wée vnderneath the name of kin our pleasant scapes may hyde. Thou knowest I haue libertie too talke with thée a syde. And openly wée kysse and ull. And what is all the rest That wants? Haue mercy on mée now, who playnly haue exprest My case: which thing I had not done, but that the vtter rage Of loue constreynes mée therevntoo the which I cannot swage. Deserue not on my tumb thy name subscribed for too haue, That thou art he whose cruelnesse did bring mée too my graue. Thus much shée wrate in vayne, and wax did want her too indyght, And in the margent she was fayne the latter verse too wryght. Immediatly too seale her shame shee takes a precious stone, The which shée moystes with teares: frō tung the moysture quight was gone. Shée calld a seruant shamefastly, and after certaine fayre And gentle woords, my trusty man I pray thée beare this payre Of tables (quoth shée) too my (and a great whyle afterward Shée added) brother. Now through chaunce or want of good regard The table slipped downe too ground in reaching too him ward The handsell troubled sore her mynd. But yit shée sent them. And Her seruant spying tyme did put them intoo Caunyes hand. Maeanders nephew sodeinly in anger floong away The tables ere he half had red, (scarce able for too stay His fistocke from the seruants face who quaakt) and thus did say. Auaunt thou baudye ribawd whyle thou mayst. For were it not For shame I should haue killed thée. Away afrayd he got, And told his mistresse of the féerce and cruell answer made By Caunye. By and by the hew of Byblis gan too fade, And all her body was benumd with Icie colde for feare Too héere of this repulse. Assoone as that her senses were Returnd ageine, her furious flames returned with her witts. And thus shée sayd so oft that scarce hir toong the ayer hitts And woorthely. For why was I so rash as too discouer By hasty wryghting this my wound which most I ought to couer. I shou with dowtfull glauncing woords haue felt his humor furst, And made a trayne too trye him if pursue or no he durst.
I should haue vewed first the coast, too sée the weather cléere, And then I myght haue launched sauf and boldly from the péere. But now I hoyst vp all my sayles before I tryde the wynd: And therfore am I driuen vppon the rockes ageinst my mynd, And all the sea dooth ouerwhelme mée. Neyther may I fynd The meanes too get too harbrough, or from daunger too retyre. Why did not open tokens warne too bridle my desyre, Then when the tables falling in deliuering them declaard My hope was vaine? And ought not I then eyther too haue spaard From sending them as that day? or haue chaunged whole my mynd? Nay rather shifted of the day? For had I not béene blynd Euen God himself by soothfast signes the sequele séemd too hit. Yea rather than too wryghting thus my secrets too commit, I should haue gone and spoke myself, and presently haue showde My feruent loue. He should haue seene how teares had from mée flowde. Hée should haue séene my piteous looke ryght louerlike. I could Haue spoken more than intoo those my tables enter would. About his necke against his will, myne armes I myght haue wound And had he shaakt me of, I myght haue séemed for too swound. I humbly myght haue kist his feete, and knéeling on the ground Besought him for too saue my lyfe. All theis I myght haue proued, Wherof although no one alone his stomacke could haue moued. Yit all toogiter myght haue made his hardened hart relent. Perchaunce there was some fault in him that was of message sent. He stept vntoo him bluntly (I beléeue) and did not watch Conuenient tyme, in merrie kew at leysure him too catch. Theis are the things that hindred mée. For certeinly I knowe No sturdy stone nor massy stéele dooth in his stomacke grow. He is not made of Adamant. He is no Tygers whelp. He neuer sucked Lyonesse. He myght with little help Bée vanquisht. Let vs giue fresh charge vppon him. Whyle I liue Without obteyning victorie I will not ouer giue. For firstly (i it lay in mée my dooings too reoke) I should not haue begonne at all. But séeing that the stroke Is giuen, the second poynt is now too giue the push too win. For neyther he (although that I myne enterpryse should blin) Can euer whyle he lies forget my déede. And sith I shrink,
My loue was lyght, or else I meant too trap him, he shall think. Or at the least he may suppose that this my rage of loue Which broyleth so within my brest, procéedes not from aboue By Cupids stroke, but of some foule and filthy lust. In fyne I cannot but too wickednesse now more and more inclyne. By wryghting is my sute commenst: my méening dooth appéere: And though I cease: yit can I not accounted bée for cléere. Now that that dooth remayne behynd is much as in respect My fond desyre too satisfy: and little in effect Too aggrauate my fault withall. Thus much shée sayd. And so Unconstant was her wauering mynd still floting too and fro, That though it irkt her for too haue attempted, yit pocéedes Shée in the self same purpose attempting, and excéedes All measure. and vnhapy wench shée takes from day too day Repulse vpon repulse, and yit shée hath not grace too stay. Soone after when her brother saw there was with her no end, He fled his countrie forbycause he would not so offend, And in a forreine land did buyld a Citie. Then men say That Byblis through despayre and thought all wholy did dismay. Shée tare her garments from her brest, and furiously shée wroong, Her hands, and béete her armes, and like a bedlem with her toong Confessed her vnlawfull loue. But béeing of the same Dispoynted, shée forsooke her land and hatefull house for shame, And followed after flying Caune. And as the Froes of Thrace In dooing of the thrée yéere rites of Bacchus: in lyke cace The maryed wyues of Babasie saw Byblis howling out Through all theyr champion féeldes The which shée leauing, ran about In Caria too the Lelegs who are men in battell slout, And so too Lycia. Shée had past Crag, Limyre, and the brooke Of Xanthus, and the countrie where Chymaera that same pooke Hath Goatish body, Lions head and brist, and Dragons tayle, When woods did want: and Byblis now beginning for too quayle Through wéerynesse in following Caune, sank down and sayd her hed Ageinst the ground, and kist the leaues that wynd from rées had shed. The Nymphes of Caria went about in tender armes too take Her often vp. They oftentymes perswaded her too stake Her loue. And woords of comfort too her deafe card mynd they spake.
Shée still lay dumbe: and with her nayles the gréenish herbes shée hild, And moysted with a streame of teares the grasse vpon the féeld. The waternymphes (so folk report) put vnder her a spring, Whych neuer myght be dryde: and could they giue a greater thing? Immediatly euen like as when yée wound a pitchtrée rynd, The gum dooth issue out in droppes: or as the westerne wynd With gentle blast toogither with the warmth of Sunne, vnbynd The yce: or as the clammy kynd of cement which they call Bitumen issueth from the ground full fraughted therewithall: So Phoebus néece Dame Byblis then consuming with her teares, Was turnd too a fountaine, which in those same vallyes beares The tytle of the founder still, and gusheth freshly out From vnderneath a Sugarchest as if it were a spowt. The fame of this same wondrous thing perhappes had filled all The hundred Townes of Candye had a greater not befall More néerer home by Iphys meanes transformed late before. For in the shyre of Phestos hard by Gnossus dwelt of yore A yeoman of the meaner sort that Lyctus had too name. His stocke was simple, and his welth according too the same. Howbéet his lyfe so vpryght was, as noman could it blame. He came vntoo his wyfe then big and ready downe too lye, And sayd: twoo things I wish thée. Tone, that when thou out shalt crye, Thou mayst dispatch with little payne: the other that thou haue A Boay. For Gyrles too bring them vp a greater cost doo craue. And I haue no abilitie. And therefore if thou bring A wench (it goes ageinst my heart too thinke vppon the thing) Although ageinst my will, I charge it streyght destroyed bée. The bond of nature néedes must beare in this behalf with mée. This sed, both wept excéedingly, as well the husband who Did giue commaundement, as the wyfe that was commaunded too. Yit Telethusa earnestly at Lyct her husband lay, (Although in vayne) too haue good hope, and of himselfe more stay. But he was full determined. Within a whyle, the day Approched that the frute was rype, and shée did looke too lay Her belly euery mynute: when at midnyght in her rest Stood by her (or did séeme too stand) the Goddesse Isis, drst And trayned with the solemne pomp of all her rytes. Twoo hornes
Uppon her forehead lyke the mooe, with eares of rypened cornes Stood glistring as the burnisht gold. Moreouer shée did weare A rich and stately diadee. Attendant on her were The barking bug Anubis, and the saint of Bubast, and The pydecote Apis, and the God that giues too vnderstand By fingar holden too his lippes that men should silence kéepe, And Lybian wormes whose stinging dooth enforce continuall sléepe, And thou Osyris whom the folk of Aegypt euer séeke, And neuer can haue sought inough, and Rittlerattles eke. Then euen as though that Telethuse had fully béene awake, And séene theis things with open eyes, thus Isis too her spake. My seruant Telethusa, cease this care, and breake the charge Of Lyct. And when Lucina shall haue let thy frute at large, Bring vp the same what ere it bée I am a Goddesse who Delyghts in helping folke at néede. I hither come too doo Thée good. thou shalt not haue a cause hereafter too complayne Of seruing of a Goddesse that is thanklesse for thy payne. When Isis had this comfort giuen, shée went her way agayne. A ioyfull wyght rose Telethuse, and lifting too the sky Her hardened hands, did pray hir dreame myght woorke effectually. Her throwes increast, and forth alone anon the burthen came, A wench was borne too Lyctus who knew nothing of the same. The mother making him beléeue it was a boay, did bring It vp, and none but shée and nurce were priuie too the thing. The father thanking God did giue the chyld the Graundsyres name, The which was Iphys. Ioyfull was the moother of the same, Bycause the name did serue alike too man and woman bothe, And so the lye through godly guile forth vnperceyued gothe. The garments of it were a boayes. The face of it was such As eyther in a boay or gyrle of beawtie vttered much. When Iphys was of thirtéene yéeres, her father did insure The browne Iänthee vntoo her, a wench of looke demure, Commended for her fauor and her person more than all The Maydes of Phestos: Telest, men her fathers name did call. He dwelt in Dyctis. They were bothe of age and fauor léeke, And vner both one schoolemayster they did for nurture séeke. And herevpon the hartes of both, the dart of Loue did stréeke.
And wounded both of them aléeke. But vnlike was theyr hope. Both longed for the wedding day toogither for too cope. For whom Iänthee thinkes too bée a man, shée hopes too sée Her husband. Iphys loues whereof shée thinkes shée may not bée Partaker, and the selfe same thing augmenteth still her flame. Herself a Mayden with a Mayd (ryght straunge) in loue became. Shée scarce could stay her teares. What end remaynes for mée ({quod} shée) How straunge a loue? how vncoth? how prodigious reygnes in mée? If that the Gods did fauor mée, they should destroy mée quyght. Or if they would not mée destroy, at least wyse yit they myght Haue giuen mée such a maladie as myght with nature stond, Or nature were acquainted with. A Cow is neuer fond Uppon a Cow, nor Mare on Mare. The Ram delyghts the Eawe, The Stag the Hynde, the Cocke the Hen. But neuer man could shew, That female yit was ane in loue with female kynd. O would Too God I neuer had béene borne. Yit least that Candy should Not bring foorth all that monstruous were, the daughter of the Sonne Did loue a Bull. Howbéet there was a Male too dote vppon. My loue is furioser than hers, if truthe confessed bée. For shée was fond of such a lust as myght bée compast. Shée Was serued by a Bull beguyld by Art in Cow of trée. And one there was for her with whom aduowtrie to commit. If all the conning in the worlde and slyghts of suttle wit Were héere, or if that Daedalus himselfe with vncowth wing Of Wax should hither fly againe, what comfort should he bring? Could he with all his conning crafts now make a boay of mée? Or could he O Iänthee chaunge the natiue shape of thée? Nay rather Iphys settle thou thy mynd and call thy witts Abowt thee: shake thou of theis flames that foolishly by fitts With out all reason reigne. Thou séest what Nature hathe thée made (Onlesse thow wilt deceyue thy selfe.) So farre foorth wysely wade, As ryght and reason may support, and loue as women ought Hope is the thing that bréedes desyre, hope féedes the amorous thought. This hope thy sex denieth thée. Not watching doth restreyne Thée from embracing of the thing wherof thou art so fayne. Nor yit the Husbands iealowsie, nor rowghnesse of her Syre, Nor yit the coynesse of the Wench dooth hinder thy desyre.
And yit thou canst not her enioy. No though that God and man Should labor too their vttermost and doo the best they can In they behalfe, they could not make a happy wyght of thée. I cannot wish the thing but that I haue it. Frank and frée The Goddes haue giuen mée what they could. As I will, so will hée That must become my fathrinlaw. so willes my father too. But nature stronger than them all consenteth not theretoo. This hindreth mée, and nothing else. Behold the blisfull yme, The day of Mariage is at hand. Iänthee shalbée myne, And yit I shall not her enioy. Amid the water wée Shall thirst. O Iuno president of mariage, why with thée Comes Hymen too this wedding where no brydegroome you shall sée, But bothe are Brydes that must that day toogither coupled bée? This spoken, shée did hold hir peace. And now the toother mayd Did burne as whote in loue as shée. And earnestly shee prayd The brydale day myght come with spéede. The thing for which shée longd Dame Telethusa fearing sore, from day too day prolongd The tyme, oft feyning siknesse, oft pretending shée had séene Ill tokens of successe. at length all shifts consumed béene. The wedding day so oft delayd was now at hand. The day Before it, taking from her head the kerchéef quyght away, And from her daughters head likewyse, with scattred heare she layd Her handes vpon the Altar, and with humble voyce thus prayd. O Isis who doost haunt the towne of Paretonie, and The féeldes by Maraeotis lake, and Pharos which dooth stand By Alexandria, and the Nyle diuided intoo seuen Great channels, comfort thou my feare, and send mée help from heauen, Thyself O Goddesse, euen thyself, and theis thy relikes I Did once behold and knew them all: as well thy company As eke thy sounding rattles, and thy ressets burning by, And myndfully I marked what commaundement thou didst giue. That I escape vnpunished, that this same wench dooth liue, Thy counsell and thy hest it is. Haue mercy now on twayne, And help vs. With that word the teares ran downe her chéekes amayne. The Goddesse séemed for too moue her Altar: and in déede She moued it. The temple doores did tremble like a réede. And hornes in likenesse too the Moone about the Church did shyne.
And Rattles made a raughtish noyse. At this same luckie signe, Although not wholy carelesse, yit ryght glad shée went away. And Iphys followed after her with larger pace than ay Shée was accustomd. And her face continued not so whyght. Her strength encreased, and her looke more sharper was too syght. Her heare grew shorter, and shée had a much more liuely spryght, Than when shée was a wench. For thou O Iphys who ryght now A modther wert, art now a boay. With offrings both of yow Too Church retyre, and there reioyce with fayth vnfearfull. They With offrings went too Church ageine, and there theyr vowes did pay. They also set a table vp, which this bréef méeter had. The vovves that Iphys vovvd a vvench he hath performd a Lad. Next morrow ouer all the world did shine with lightsome flame, When Iuno, and Dame Venus, and Sir Hymen ioyntly came Too Iphys mariage, who as then transformed too a boay Did take Iänthee too his wyfe, and so her loue enioy Finis noni Libri.
¶THE TENTH BOOKE of Ouids Metamorphosis. FRom thence in saffron colourd robe flew Hymen through ye ayre, And into Thracia béeing calld by Orphy did repayre. He came in dde at Orphyes call: bu neyther did he sing The woordes of that solemnitie, nor merry countnance bring, Nor any handell of good lucke. His torch with drizling smoke Was dim: the same too burne out cleere, no stirrrng could prouoke. The end was woorser than the signe. For as the ryde did rome Abrode accompanyde with a trayne of Nymphes too bring her home, A serpent lurking in the grasse did  her in the ancle: Whereof shée dyde incontinent, so swift the  did ancle. Whom when the Thracian Poet had bewayl sufficiently On earth, the Ghostes departed hence he minding for too trie, Downe at the gate of Taenarus did go too Limbo lake. And thence by gastly folk and soules late buried he did take His iourney too Persephone and too the king of Ghosts That like a Lordly tyran reignes in those veasant coasts. And playing on his tuned harp he thus began too sound. O you the Souereines of the world set vnderneath the ground, Too whome wée all (what euer thing is made of mortall kynd) Repayre, if y your leaue I now may fréely speake my mynd, I come not hither as a spye Nor yet the foule thrée headed Eurre whose heares all Adders bée Too tye in cheynes. The cause of this my vyage is my wyfe Whose foote a Uiper stinging did abridge her youthfull lyfe. I would haue bore it paiently: and so too doo I straue. But Loue surmouned powre. This God is knowen great force too haue Aboue on earth. And whether he reigne héere or no I dow. But I beleeue hée reignes héere too. If fae that flies abowt Of former rape report not wrong, Loue coupled also yow. By theis same places full of feare: by this howge Chaos now, And by the stlnesse of this waste and emptye Kingdome, I Beséech yée of Eurydicee véele the destinye That was so swiftly reeled vp All things too you belong. And though wée lingring for a whyle our pageants doo prolong,
Yit soone or late wée all too one abyding place doo rome: Wée haste vs hither all: this place becomes our latest home: And you doo ouer humaine kynd reigne longest tyme. Now when This woman shall haue liued full her tyme, shée shall agen Become your owne. The vse of her but for a whyle I craue. And if the Destnyes for my wyfe denye mée for too haue Releace, I fully am resolvd for euer héere too dwell. Reioyce you in the death of both. As he this tale did tell, And played on his instrument, the bloodlesse ghostes shed teares: Too tyre on Titius growing hart the gréedy Grype forbeares: The shunning water Tantalus endeuereth not too drink: And Danaus daughters ceast too fill theyr tubbes that haue no brink: Ixions whéele stood still: and downe sate Sisyphus vppon His rolling stone. Then first of all (so fame for truth hath gone) The Furies béeing striken there with pitie at his song Did wéepe. And neyther Pluto nor his Ladie were so strong And hard of stomacke too withhold his iust petition long. They called foorth Eurydicee who was as yit among The newcome Ghosts. and limped of her wound. Her husband tooke Her with condicion that he should not backe vppon her looke, Untill the tyme that hée were past the bounds of Limbo quyght: Or else too lose his gyft. They tooke a path that steepe vpryght Rose darke and full of foggye mist. And now they were within A kenning of the vpper earth, when Orphye did begin Too dowt him least shée followed not, and through an eager loue Desyrous for too see her he his eyes did backward moue. Immediatly shée slipped backe. He reching out his hands. Desyrous too bée caught and for too ketch her grasping stands. But nothing saue the slippry aire (vnhappy man) he caught. Shée dyng now the second tyme compland of Orphye naught. For why what had shée too complayne, onlesse it were of loue? Which made her husband backe agen his eyes vppon her moue? Her last farewell shée spake so oft, that scarce he heard the sound, And then reuolted too the place in which he had her found. This double dying of his wyfe set Orphye in a stound, No lesse than him who at the syght of Plutos dreadfull Hound That on the middle necke of three dooth beare an iron cheyne,
Was striken in a sodein feare and could it not restreyne, Untill the tyme his former shape and nature béeing gone, His body quyght was ouergrowne, and turned intoo stone. Or than the foolish Olenus, who on himself did take Anothers fault, and giltlesse néedes himself would giltie make, Toogither with his wretched wyfe Lethaea, for whose pryde They both becomming stones, doo stand euen yit on watry Ide. He would haue gone too Hell ageine, and arnest sute did make: But Charon would not suffer him too passe the Stygian lake. Seuen dayes he sate forlorne vppon the bank and neuer ate A bit of bread. Care, teares, and thought, and sorrow were his meate And crying out vppon the Gods of Hell as cruell, hée Withdrew too lofty Rhodopee and Heme which beaten bée With Northern wynds. Thrée tymes the Sunne had passed through the shéere And watry signe of Pisces and had finisht full the yéere. And Orphye (were it that his ill successe hée still did rew, Or that he vowed so too doo) did vtterly eschew The womankynd. Yit many a one desyrous were too match With him, but he thm with repulse did all alike dispatch. He also taught the Thracian folke a stwes of Males too make And of the flowring pryme of boayes the pleasure for too take. There was a hyll, and on the hyll a verie leuell plot. Fayre gréene with grasse. But as for shade or couert was there not. Assoone as that this Pot borne of Goddes, in that same place Sate downe and toucht his tuned strings, a shadow came a pace. There wanted neyther Chaons trée, nor yit the trees too which Fresh Phaetons susters turned were, nor Béeche, nor Holme, nor Wich Nor gentle Asp, nor wyuelesse Bay, nor lofty Chestnuttrée. Nor Hazle spalt, nor Ash wherof the shafts of speares made bée. Nor knotlesse Firre, nor chéerfull Plane, nor Maple lecked grayne. Nor Lote, nor Sallow which delights by waters too remayne. Nor slender twigged Tamarisk▪ nor Bor ay gréene of hew. Nor Figtrées loden with theyr frute of colours browne and blew. Nor double colourd Myrtletrées. Moreouer thither came The wrything Iuye, and the Uyne that runnes vppon a frame. Elmes clad with Uynes, and Ashes wyld, and Pitchtrées blacke as cole, And full of trées with goodly frute red stryped, Ortyards whole.
And Palmetrées lythe which in reward of conquest men doo beare, And Pynapple with tufted top and harsh and prickling heare, The trée too Cybele mother of the Goddes most déere. For why? Her minion Atys putting of the shape of man, did dye, And hardened intoo this same trée. Among this companée Was present with a pyked top the Cypresse, now a trée, Sumtime a boay beloued of the God that with a string Dooth arme his bow, and with a string in tune his Uiall bring. For, hallowed too the Nymphes that in the féeldes of Carthye were There was a goodly myghty Stag whose hornes such bredth did beare, As that they shadowed all his head. His hornes of gold did shyne, And downe his brest hung from his necke, a chyne with iewels fyne. Amid his frut with prettie strings a tablet béeing tyde, Did wauer as he went: and from his cares on eyther syde Hung perles of all one growth about his hollow temples bryght. This goodly Spitter béeing voyd of dread, as hauing quyght Forgot his natiue fearefulnesse, did haunt mens houses, and Would suffer folk (yea though vnknowen) too coy him with theyr hand. But more than vntoo all folke else he déerer was too thée O Cyparisse the fayrest Wyght that euer man did sée In Coea. Thou too pastures, thou too water springs him led, Thou wreathedst sundry flowres betwéene his hornes vppon his hed. Sumtyme a horsman thou his backe for pleasure didst bestryde, And haltring him with silken bit from place too place didst ryde. In summer tyme about hygh noone when Titan with his heate Did make the hollow crabbed cleas of Cancer for too sweate, Unwéeting Cyparissus with a Dart did strike this Hart Quyght through. And when that of the wound he saw he must depart, He purposd for too die himself. What woords of comfort spake Not Phoebus too him? willing him the matter lyght too take And not more sorrow for it than was requisite too make. But still the Lad did sygh and sob, and as his last request Desyred God he myght thenceforth from moorning neuer rest. Anon through wéeping ouermuch his blood was drayned quyght: His limbes wert gréene: his heare which hung vpō his forehead whyght Began too bée a bristled bush: and taking by and by A stiffnesse, with sharpened top did face the starrie skye
The God did sigh, and sadly sayd. Myselfe shall moorne for thée, And thou for others: and ay one in moorning thou shalt bée. Such wood as this had Orphye drawen about him as among The herdes of beasts, and flocks of Birds he sate amyds the throng. And when his thumbe sufficiently had tryed euery string, And found that though they seuerally in sundry sounds did ring, Yit made they all one Harmonie. He thus began too sing. O Muse my mother frame my song of Ioue. for euery thing Is subiect vntoo royall Ioue. Of Ioue the heauenly King I oft haue shewed the glorious power. I erst in grauer verse The Gyants slayne in Phlaegra féeldes with thunder, did reherse, But now I néede a méelder style too tell of prettie boyes That were the derlings of the Gods: and of vnlawfull ioyes That burned in the brests of Girles, who for theyr wicked lust According as they did deserue, receyued penance iust. The King of Goddes did burne erewhyle in loue of Ganymed The Phrygian and the thing was found which Iupiter that sted Had rather bée than that he was. Yit could e not betéeme The shape of any other Bird than Aegle for too séeme And so he soring in the ayre with borrowed wings trust vp The Troiane boay who still in heauen euen yit dooth beare his cup, And brings him Nectar though against Dame Iunos will it bée. And thou Amyclys sonne (had not they heauy destinée Abridged thée before thy tyme) hadst also placed béene By Phoebus in the firmament. How bée it (as is séene) Thou art eternall so farre forth as may bée. For as oft As warrie Piscis giueth place too Aries that the soft And gentle springtyde dooth succéede the winter sharp and stowre: So often thou renewest thyself, and on the fayre gréene clowre Doost shoote out flowres. My father bare a speciall loue too thee Aboue all others. So that whyle the God went oft too sée Eurotas and vnwalled Spart, he left his noble towne Of Delphos (which a mid the world is situate in renowne) Without a souereigne▪ Neyther Harp nor Bow regarded were. Unmyndfull of his Godhead he refused not too beare The nets, nor for too hold the hounds, nor as a peynfull mate Too trauell ouer cragged hilles, through which continuall gate
His flames augmented more and more. And now the sunne did stand Well néere midway betwéene the nyghts last past and next at hand. They stript themselues and noynted them with oyle of Olyfe fat. And fell to throwing of a Sledge that was ryght howge and flat. Fyrst Phoebus peysing it did throw it from him with such strength, As that the weyght draue downe the clouds in flying. And at length It fell vpon substantiall ground, where plainly it did show As well the cunning as the force of him that did it throw. Immediatly vpon desyre himself the sport too trie, The Spartane lad made haste too take vp vnaduisedly The Sledge before it still did lye. But as he was in hand Too catch it, it rebounding vp ageinst the hardened land, Did hit him full vpon the face. The God himselfe did looke As pale as did the lad, and vp his swounding body tooke. Now culles he him, now wypes he from the wound the blood away, Anotherwhyle his fading lyfe he stryues with herbes too stay. Nought booted Léechcraft. Helplesse was the wound. And like as one Broosd violet stalkes or Poppie stalkes or Lillies growing on Browne spindles, streight they withering droope with heauy heads & are Not able for too hold them vp, but with their tops doo stare Uppon the ground. So Hyacinth in yéelding of his breath Chopt downe his head. His necke bereft of strength by meanes of death Was euen a burthen too itself, and downe did loosely wrythe On both his shoulders, now a tone and now a toother lythe. Thou faadst away my Hyacinth defrauded of the pryme Of youth (quoth Phoebus) and I sée thy wound my heynous cryme. Thou art my sorrow and my fault: this hand of mye hath wrought Thy death: I like a murtherer haue too thy graue thée brought. But what haue I offended thow? onlesse that too haue playd, Or if that too haue loued, an offence it may be sayd. Would God I render myght my lyfe with and in stead of thée. Too which syth fatall destinée denyeth too agrée, Both in my mynd and in my mouth thou euermore shalt bée. My Uall striken with my hand, my songs shall sound of thée, And in a newmade flowre thou shalt with letters represent Our syghings▪ And the tyme shall come ere many yéeres bée spent, That in thy flowre a valeant Prince shall ioyne himself with thée,
And leae his name vppon the leaues for men too réede and sée. Whyle Phoebus thus did prophesie, behold the blood of him Which dyde the grasse, ceast blood too bée, and vp there sprang a trim And goodly flowre, more orient than the Purple cloth ingrayne, In shape a Lillye, were it not that Lillyes doo remayne Of syluer colour, whereas theis of purple hew are séene. Although that Phoebus had the cause of this greate honor béene, Yit thought he not the same ynough. And therfore did he wryght His syghes vppon the leaues thereof: and so in colour bryght The flowre hath  writ theron, which letters are of gréef. So small the Spartanes thought the birth of Hyacinth reprée Unto them, that they woorship him from that day vntoo this. And as their fathers did before, so they doe neuer misse With solemne pomp too celebrate his feast from yéere too yéere. But if perchaunce that Amathus the rich in mettals, wéere Demaunded if it would haue bred the Propets it would sweare, Yea euen as gladly as the folke whose brewes sumtyme did beare, A payre of welked hornes: whereof they Cerastes named are. Before theyr doore an Altar stood of Ioue that takes the care. Of alyents and of trauellers, which lothsome was too sée, For lewdnesse wrought theron. If one that had a straunger bée Had lookt thereon, he would haue thought there had on it béene killd Sum sucking calues or lambes. The blood of straūgers there was spilld. Dame Venus sore offended at this wicked sacrifyse, Too leaue her Cities and the land of Cyprus did deuyse. But then bethinking her, shée sayd. What hath my pleasant ground What haue my Cities trespassed? what fault in them is found? Nay rather let this wicked race by exyle punnisht béene, Or death, or by sum other thing that is a meane betwéene Both death and exyle. what is that? saue only for too chaunge Theyr shape. In musing with herself what figure were most straunge, Shée cast her eye vppon a horne. And therewithall shée thought The same too bée a shape ryght méete vppon them too bée brought: And so shée from theyr myghty limbes theyr natiue figure tooke, And turnd them intoo boystous Bulles with grim and cruell looke Yit durst the filthy Propets stand in stiffe opinion that Dame Venus was no Goddesse till shée béeing wroth thereat,
Too make theyr bodies common first compelld them euerychone And after chaungd theyr former kynd. For when that shame was gone, And that they wexed brazen faast, shée turned them too stone, In which betwéene their former shape was diffrence small or none. Whom forbycause Pygmalion saw too leade theyr lyfe in sin Offended with the vice whereof greate store is packt within The nature of the womankynd, he led a single lyfe. And long it was ere he could fynd in hart too take a wyfe. Now in the whyle by wondrous Art an image he did graue Of such proportion, shape, and grace as nature neuer gaue Nor can too any woman giue. In this his worke he tooke A certaine loue. The looke of it was ryght a Maydens looke, And such a one as that yée would beléeue had lyfe, and that Would moued bée, if womanhod and reuerence letted not: So artificiall was the work. He woondreth at his Art And of his counterfetted corse conceyueth loue in hart. He often toucht it, féeling if the woork that he had made Were verie flesh or Iuorye still. Yit could he not perswade Himself too think it Iuory. For he oftentymes it kist And thought it kissed him ageine. He hild it by the fist, And talked too it. He beléeued his fingars made a dint Uppon her flesh, and feared least sum blacke or broosed print Should come by touching ouer hard. Sumtyme with pleasant boords And wanton toyes he dalyingly dooth cast foorth amorous woords. Sumtime (the giftes wherein yong Maydes are wonted too delyght) He brought her owches, fyne round stones, and Lillyes fayre & whygh▪ And pretie singing birds, and flowres of thousand sorts and hew, And peynted balls, and Amber from the trée distilled new. In gorgeous garments furthermore he did her also decke, And on her fingars put me rings, and cheynes about her necke. Riche perles were hanging at her eares, and tablets at her brest. All kynd of things became her well. And when she was vndrest, Shée semed not lesse beawtifull. He layd her in a bed The which with scarle dyde in Tyre was richly ouerspred, And terming her  bedfellow, he couched downe hir head Uppon a  though shée could haue felt the same. The feas  Venus hallowed through the Ile of Cyprus, cam
And Bullocks whyght with gilden hornes were slayne for sacrifyse, And vp too heauen of frankincence the smoky fume did ryse. When as Pygmalion hauing dooe his dutye that same day, Béefore the altar standing, thus with fearefull hart did say. If that you Goddes can all things giue, then let my wife (I pray) (He durst not say bée yoonsame wench of Iuory, but) bée léeke My wench of Iuory. Venus (who was nought at all to séeke What such a wish as that did méene) then present at her feast, For handsell of her fréendly helpe did cause thrée tymes at least The fyre to kindle and to spyre thryse vpward in the ayre. Assoone as he came home, streyght way Pygmalion did repayre Unto the Image of his wench, and leaning on the bed, Did kisse hir. In her body streyght a warmenesse séemd too spred. He put his mouth againe to hers, and on her brest did lay His hand. The Iuory wexed soft: and putting quyght away All hardnesse, yéelded vnderneathe his fingars, as wée sée A péece of wax made soft ageinst the Sunne, or drawen too bée In diuers shapes by chaufing it betwéene ones handes, and so To serue to vses. He amazde stood wauering too and fro Twéene ioy, and feare too bée béeguyld, ageine he burnt in loue, Ageine with féeling he began his wisshed hope too proue. He felt it verrye flesh in déede. By laying on his thumb, He felt her pulses beating. Then he stood no longer dumb But thanked Venus with his hart. and at the length he layd His mouth to hers who was as then become a perfect mayd. Shee felt the kisse, and blusht therat: and lifting fearefully Hir eyelidds vp, hir Louer and the light at once did spye. The mariage that her selfe had made the Goddesse blessed so, That when the Moone with fulsum lyght nyne tymes her course had go, This Ladye was deliuered of a Sun that Paphus hyght, Of whom the Iland takes that name. Of him was borne a knyght Calld Cinyras who (had he had none issue) surely myght Of all men vnderneathe the sun béene thought the happyest wyght. Of wicked and most cursed things to speake I now commence. Yée daughters and yée parents all go get yée farre from hence. Or if yée mynded bée to héere my tale, beleeue mée nought In this béehalfe: ne think that such a thing was euer wrought.
Or if yée will béeléeue the déede, beléeue the vengeance too Which lyghted on the partye that the wicked act did doo. But if that it be possible that any wyght so much From nature should degenerate, as for to fall to such A heynous cryme as this is, I am glad for Thracia, I Am glad for this same world of ours, yea glad excéedingly I am for this my natiue soyle, for that there is such space Betwéene it and the land that bred a chyld so voyd of grace. I would the land Panchaya should of Amomie be rich, And Cinnamom, and Costus swéete, and Incence also which Dooth issue largely out of trees, and other flowers straunge, As long as that it beareth Myrrhe: not woorth it was the chaunge, Newe trées to haue of such a pryce. The God of loue denyes His weapons too haue hurted thée, O Myrrha, and he tryes Himselfe vngiltie by thy fault. One of the Furies three With poysonde Snakes and hellish brands hath rather blasted thée To hate ones father is a cryme as heynous as may bee. But yit more wicked is this loue of thine than any hate. The youthfull Lordes of all the East and Péeres of chéef estate Desyre to haue thée too their wyfe, and earnest sute doo make. Of all (excepting onely one) thy choyce O Myrrha take. Shee féeles her filthye loue, and stryues ageinst it, and within Herself sayd. whither roonnes my mynd? what thinke I to begin? Yée Gods (I pray) and godlynesse, yée holy rites and awe Of parents, from this heynous cryme my vicious mynd withdrawe, And disappoynt my wickednesse. At leastwyse if it bée A wickednesse that I intend. As farre as I can sée, This loue infrindgeth not the bondes of godlynesse a whit. For euery other liuing wyght dame nature dooth permit Too match without offence of sin. The Hecfer thinkes no shame Too beare her father on her backe: The Horse béestrydes the same Of whom he is the syre: The Gote dooth bucke the Kid that hée Himself begate: and birdes doo tread the self same birdes wée sée Of whom they hatched were before. In happye cace they are That may doo so without offence. But mans malicious care Hath made a brydle for it self, and spyghtfull lawes restreyne The things that nature setteth free. yit are their Realmes (men sayne)
In which the moother with the sonne, and daughter with the father Doo match, where through of godlynesse the bond augments the rather With doubled loue. Now wo is mée it had not béene my lot In that same countrie too bée borne. And that this lucklesse plot Should hinder mée. Why thinke I thus? Auaunt vnlawfull loue. I ought too loue him I confesse: but so as dooth behoue His daughter: were not Cinyras my father then, Iwis I myght obtaine too lye with him. But now bycause he is Myne owne, he cannot bée myne owne. The néerenesse of our kin Dooth hurt me. Were I further of perchauce I more myght win. And if I wist that I therby this wickednesse myght shunne, I would forsake my natiue soyle and farre from Cyprus runne. This euill heae dooth hold mée backe, that béeing present still I may but talke with Cinyras and looke on him my fill, And touch, and kisse him, if no more may further graunted bée. Why wicked wench? and canst thou hope for further? doost not sée How by thy fault thou doost confound the ryghts of name and kin? And wilt thou make thy mother bee a Cucqueane by thy sin? Wilt thou thy fathers leman bee? wilt thou bée both the moother And suster of thy chyld? shall he bée both thy sonne and brother? And standst thou not in feare at all of those same susters thrée Whose heads with crawling snakes in stead of heare bematted bée? Which pushing with theyr cruell bronds folks eyes and mouthes, doo sée Theyr sinfull harts? but thou now whyle thy body yit is frée, Let neuer such a wickednesse once enter in thy mynd. Defyle not myghtye natures hest by lust ageinst thy kynd. What though thy will were fully bent? yit euen the very thing Is such as will not suffer thée the same too end too bring. For why he béeing well disposde and godly, myndeth ay So much his dewtye that from ryght and truth he will not stray. Would God lyke furie were in him as is in mee this day. This sayd, her father Cinyras (who dowted what too doo By reason of the worthy store of suters which did woo His daughter,) bringing all theyr names did will her for too show On which of them shée had herself most fancie too bestow. At first shée hild her peace a whyle, and looking wistly on
Her fathers face, did boyle within: and scalding teares anon Ran downe her visage. Cyniras, (who thought them too procéede Of tender harted shamefastnesse) did say there was no néede Of teares, and dryed her chéekes, and kist her. Myrrha tooke of it Excéeding pleasure in her selfe: and when that he did wit What husband shée did wish too haue, shée sayd: one like too yow. He vnderstanding not hir thought, did well her woordes allow. And sayd: in this thy godly mynd continew. At the name Of godlynesse, shée cast mée downe her looke for very shame. For why her giltie hart did knowe shée well deserued blame. Hygh mydnight came, and sléepe bothe care and carkesses opprest. But Myrrha lying brode awake could neyther sléepe nor rest. Shée fryes in Cupids flames, and woorkes continewally vppon Her furious loue. One while shée sinkes in déepe despayre. Anon Shée fully myndes to giue attempt, but shame doth hold her in. Shée wishes and shée wotes not what too doo, nor how too gin. And like as when a mightye trée with axes heawed rownd, Now reedye with a strype or twaine to lye vppon the grownd, Uncerteine is which way to fall and tottreth euery way: Euen so her mynd with dowtfull wound efféebled then did stray Now héere now there vncerteinely, and tooke of bothe encreace. No measure of her loue was found, no rest, nor yit releace, Saue onely death. death likes her best. Shée ryseth, full in mynd To hang herself. About a post her girdle she doth bynd. And sayd farewell déere Cinyras, and vnderstand the cause Of this my death. And with that woord about her necke shée drawes The nooze. Her trustye nurce that in another Chamber lay By fortune heard the whispring sound of theis her woordes (folk say.) The aged woman rysing vp vnboltes the doore. And whan Shée saw her in that plyght of death, shée shréeking out began Too smyght her self, and scratcht her brest, and quickly too her ran And rent the girdle from her necke. Then wéeping bitterly And holding her betwéene her armes, shée askt the question why Shée went about too hang her self so vnaduisedly. The Lady hilld her peace as dumb, and looking on the ground Unmouably, was sorye in her hart for béeing found Before shée had dispatcht herself. Hernurce still at her lay,
And shewing her her emptie dugges and naked head all gray, Besought her for the paynes shee tooke with her both night and day In rocking and in féeding her, shée would vouchsafe to say What ere it were that gréeued her. The Ladye turnd away Displeasde and fetcht a sygh. The nurce was fully bent in mynd Too bowlt the matter out: for which not onely shée did bynd Her fayth, in secret things to kéepe: but also sayd, put mée In trust too fynd a remedye. I am not (thou shalt sée) Yit altoogither dulld by age. If furiousenesse it bée, I haue bothe charmes and chaunted herbes to help. If any wyght Bewitcheth thée, by witchcraft I will purge and set thée quyght. Or if it bée the wrath of God, we shall with sacrifyse Appease the wrath of God right well. What may I more surmyse? No théeues haue broken in vppon this house and spoyld the welth. Thy mother and thy father bothe are liuing and in helth. When Myrrha heard her father naamd, a gréeuous sygh she fet Euen from the bottom of her hart. Howbeet the nurce as yet Misdéemd not any wickednesse. But nerethelesse shée gest There was some loue: and standing in one purpose made request Too breake her mynd vntoo her, And shée set her tenderly Uppon her lappe. The Ladye wept and sobbed bitterly. Then culling her in feeble armes, shée sayd I well espye Thou art in loue. My diligence in this behalf I sweare Shall seruisable too the bée. Thou shalt not néede too feare That ere thy father shall it knowe. At that same woord shee lept From nurces lappe like one that had béene past her witts, and stept With fury to her bed. at which shée leaning downe hir face Sayd, hence I pray thee: force mée not to shewe my shamefull cace. And when the nurce did vrge her still, shée answered eyther get The hence, or ceace too aske mée why myself I thus doo fret. The thing that thou desyrste too knowe is wickednesse. The old Poore nurce gan quake, and trembling both for age and feare did hold Her handes to her. And knéeling downe right humbly at her féete, One whyle shee fayre intreated her with gentle woordes and swéete. Another whyle (onlesse shée made her priuie of her sorrow) Shée threatned her, and put her in a feare shée would next morrow Bewray her how shée went about to hang herself. But if
Shée told her, shée did plyght her fayth and help too her reléef. Shée lifted vp her head, and then with teares fast gusshing out Béesloobered all her nurces brest: and going oft about Too speake, shée often stayd: and with her garments hid her face For shame, and lastly sayd: O happye is my moothers cace That such a husband hath. with that a gréeuous sygh shée gaue, And hilld her peace. Theis woordes of hers a trembling chlnesse draue In nurcis limbes, which perst her bones: (for now shée vnderstood The cace) and all her horye heare vp stiffy staring stood And many things she talkt to put away her cursed loue, If that it had béene possible the madnesse to remoue. The Mayd herself to be full trew the councell dooth espye: Yit if shée may not haue her loue shée fully myndes to dye. Liue still ({quod} nurce) thou shalt obteine (shée durst not say thy father, But stayd at that.) And forbycause that Myrrha should the rather Beléeue her, shée confirmd her woordes by othe. The yéerely feast Of gentle Ceres came, in which the wyues bothe moste and least Appareld all in whyght are wont the firstlings of the féeld Fyne garlonds made of eares of corne too Ceres for to yéeld. And for the space of thryce thrée nyghts they counted it a sin To haue the vse of any man, or once too towche his sin. Among theis women did the Quéene fréequent the secret rites. Now whyle that of his lawfull wyfe his bed was voyd a nightes, The nurce was dooble diligent: and fynding Cinyras Well washt with wyne, shée did surmyse there was a pretye lasse In loue with him. And hyghly shée her beawty setteth out. And béeing asked of her yéeres, she sayd shée was about The age of Myrrha. well ({quod} he) then bring her too my bed. Returning home shée sayd: bée glad my nurcechilde: we haue sped. Not all so wholly in her hart was wretched Myrrha glad, But that her fore misgiuing mynd did also make her sad. Howbéete shée also did reioyce as in a certaine kynd, Such discord of affections was within her combred mynd. It was the tyme that all things rest. And now Boötes bryght The driuer of the Oxen seuen about the northpole pyght. Had sumwhat turnd his wayne asyde, when wicked Myrrha sped About her buysnesse. Out of heauen the golden Phoebee fled.
With clowds more black than any pitch the starres did hyde their hed. The nyght béecommeth vtter voyd of all her woonted lyght. And first before all other hid their faces out of syght Good Icar and Erigonee his daughter, who for loue Most vertuous too her fatherward, was take vp aboue And made a starre in heauen. Three tymes had Myrrha warning giuen By stumbling, to retyre. Thrée tymes the deathfull Owle that éeuen With doolefull noyse prognosticates vnhappie lucke. Yet came Shée forward still: the darknesse of the nyght abated shame. Her left hand held her nurce, her right the darke blynd way did grope. Anon shée too the chamber came: anon the doore was ope: Anon shée entred in. with that her foltring hammes did quake: Her colour dyde: her blood and hart did cleerly her forsake. The néerer shee approched too her wickednesse, the more Shée trembled: Of her enterpryse it irked her full sore: And fayn shée would shée might vnknownē haue turned back. Nurce led Her pawsing forward by the hand: and putting her too bed, Héere take this Damzell Cinyras, shée is thine owne shée sed. And so shée layd them brest too brest. The wicked father takes His bowelles intoo filthy bed, and there with wordes asslakes The maydens feare, and chéeres her vp. And least this cryme of theyres Myght want the ryghtfull termes, by chaunce as in respect of yéeres He daughter did hir call, and shée him father. Béeing sped With cursed séede in wicked womb, shée left her fathers bed, Of which soone after shee became greate bagged with her shame. Next night the lewdnesse doubled. And no end was of the same, Untill at length that Cinyras desyrous for to knowe His louer that so many nyghts vppon him did bestowe, Did fetch a light: by which he sawe his owne most heynous cryme, And éeke his daughter. nathelesse, his sorrow at that time Represt his speeche. Then hanging by he drew a Rapier bryght. Away ran Myrrha, and by meanes of darknesse of the nyght Shée was deliuered from the death: and straying in the broade Datebearing féeldes of Arabye, shée through Panchaya yode, And wandring full nyne moonethes at length shée rested béeing tyrde In Saba land. And when the tyme was néere at hand expyrde, And that vneath the burthen of her womb she well could beare,
Not knowing what she might desyre, distrest betwéene the feare Of death, and tediousnesse of lyfe, this prayer shée did make. O Goddes, if of repentant folk you any mercye take, Sharpe vengeance I confesse I haue deserued, and content I am to take it paciently. How bée it too thentent That neyther with my lyfe the quick, nor with my death the dead Anoyed bée, from both of them exempt mée this same sted. And altring mée, deny too mée both lyfe and death. we sée Too such as doo confesse theyr faults sum mercy shewd oo bée. The Goddes did graunt her this request, the last that  make. The ground did ouergrow hir féete, and ancles as shée spake. And from her bursten toes went rootes, which wrything heere and there Did fasten so the trunk within the ground shée could not steare. Her bones did intoo timber turne, whereof the marie was The pith, and into watrish sappe the blood of her did passe. Her armes were turnd too greater boughes, her fingars into twig, Her skin was hardned into bark. And now her belly big The eatching trée had ouergrowen, and ouertane her brest, And hasted for to win her neck, and hyde it with the rest. Shée made no taryence nor delay, but met the comming trée, And shroonk her face within the barke therof. Although that shée Toogither with her former shape her senses all did loose, Yit wéepeth shée, and from her trée warme droppes doo softly woose. The which her teares are had in pryce and honour. And the Myrrhe That issueth from her gummy bark dooth beare the name of her, And shall doo whyle the world dooth last. The misbegotten chyld Grew still within the trée, and from his mothers womb defyld Sought meanes too bée delyuered. Her burthened womb did swell Amid the trée, and stretcht her out. But woordes wherwith to tell And vtter foorth her gréef did want, She had no vse of spéech With which Lucina in her throwes shée might of help beséech. Yit like a woman labring was the trée, and bowwing downe Gaue oftē sighes, & shed foorth teares as though shée there should drowne. Lucina to this wofull trée came gently downe, and layd Her hand theron, and speaking woordes of ease the midwife playd. The trée did cranye, and the barke deuiding made away, And yéelded out the chyld alyue, which cryde and wayld streyght way.
The waternymphes vppon the soft swéete hearbes the chyld did lay, And bathde him with his mothers teares. His face was such as spyght Must needes haue praysd. For such he was in all condicions right, As are the naked Cupids that in tables picturde bée. But too thentent he may with them in euery poynt agrée, Let eyther him bée furnisshed with wings and quiuer light, Or from the Cupids take theyr wings and bowes and arrowes quight. Away slippes fléeting tyme vnspyde and mocks vs too our face, And nothing may compare with yeares in swiftnesse of theyr pace▪ That wretche  whom wickedly his graundfather begate, And whom his cursed suster bare, who hidden was alate Within the trée, and lately borne, became immediatly The beawtyfullyst babe on whom man euer set his eye. Anon a stripling hée became, and by and by a man, And euery day more beawtfull than other he becam. That in the end Dame Venus fell in loue with him: wherby He did reuenge the outrage of his mothers villanye. For as the armed Cupid kist Dame Venus, vnbeware An arrow sticking out did raze hir brest vppon the bare. The Goddesse being wounded, hrust away her sonne. The wound Apyeered not too bée so déepe as afterward was found. It did deceyue her at the first. The beawty of the lad Inflaamd her. Too Cythera Ile no mynd at all shée had. Nor vntoo Paphos where the sea beats round about the shore, Nor  Gnyde, nor Amathus that hath of metalls store. Yea uen from heauen shee did absteyne. Shée lovd Adonis more Than heauen▪ To him shée clinged ay, and bare him companye. And in the shadowe woont shée was too rest continually, And for too set her beawtye out most séemely too the eye By trimly decking of her self. Through ushy grounds and groues, And ouer Hlls and Dales, and Lawns and stony rocks shée roues, Bare knéed with garment tucked vp according too the woont Of Phebe, and shée chéerd the hounds with hallowing like a hunt, Pursewing game of hurtlesse sort, as Hares made lowe before. Or stagges with loftye heades, or bucks. But with the sturdy Boare And raening woolf, and Bearewhelpes armd with vgly pawes, and éeke The cruell Lyons which delyght in blood, and slaughter séeke,
Shée meddled not. And of theis same shée warned also thée Adonis for too shoonne them, if thou wooldst haue warned bée. Bée bold on cowards (Venus sayd) for whoso dooth aduaunce Himselfe against the bold, may hap too méete with sum mischaunce. Wherfore I pray thée my swéete boy forbeare too bold too bée. For feare thy rashnesse hurt thy self and woork the wo of mée Encounter not the kynd of beastes whom nature armed hath, For dowt thou buy thy prayse too déere procuring thée sum scath. Thy tender youth, thy beawty bryght, thy countnance fayre and braue Although they had the force too win the hart of Venus, haue No powre ageinst the Lyons, nor ageinst the brist led swyne. The eyes and harts of sauage beasts doo nought too theis mlyne. The cruell Boares beare thunder in theyr hooked tushes, and Excéeding force and féercenesse is in Lyons too withstand. And sure I hate them at my hart. Too him demaunding why? A monstrous chaunce ({quod} Venus) I will tell thée by and by, That hapned for a fault. But now vnwoonted toyle hath made Mée wéerye: and beholde, in tyme this Poplar with his shade Allureth, and the ground for cowch dooth serue too rest vppon. I prey thée let vs rest héere. They sate them downe anon. And lying vpward with her head vppon his lappe along, Shée thus began: and in her tale shée bussed him among. Perchaunce thou hast or this tyme hard of one that ouercame The swiftest men in footemanshippe. no fable was that fame. She ouercame them out of dowt. And hard it is to tell Thée whither she did in footemanshippe or beawty more excell. Uppon a season as she askt of Phebus, what he was That should her husband bée, he sayd. For husband doo not passe O Atalanta, thou at all of husband hast no néede Shonne husbanding. But yit thou canst not shonne it I thée réede. Alyue thou shalt not be thy self. Shée being sore afrayd Of this Apollos Oracle, did kéepe herself a mayd, And liued in the shady woodes. When wooers to her came, And were of her importunate, shée draue away the same With boystous woordes, and with sore condition of the game. I am not too be had ({quod} shée) onlesse yée able be In ronning for too vanquish mée. Yée must contend with mée
In footemanshippe. And who so winnes the wager, I agrée Too bée his wife. But if that he bée found too slowe, then hee Shall lose his head. This of your game the verrye law shall bée. Shée was in déede vnmercifull. But such is beawties powre, That though the sayd condition were extreme and ouer sowre, Yit many suters were so rash too vndertake the same. Hippomenes as a looker on of this vncurteous game, Sate by, and sayd. Is any man so mad to séeke a wyfe With such apparant perill and the hazard of his lyfe? And vtterly he did condemne the yongmens loue. But when He saw her face and bodye bare, (for why the Lady then Did strippe her too her naked skin) the which was like too myne, Or rather (if that thou wert made a woman) like too thyne: He was amazde. And holding vp his hands too heauen, he sayth: Forgiue mée you with whom I found such fault euen now: In fayth I did not know the wager that yée ran for. As hée prayseth The beawty of her, in him selfe the fyre of loue he rayseth. And through an enuy fearing least shée should a way be woonne, He wisht that nere a one of them so swift as shée might roonne. And wherfore ({quod} hée) put not I myself in preace too trye The fortune of this wager? God himself continually Dooth help the bold and hardye sort. now whyle Hippomenes Debates theis things within himselfe and other like to these, The Damzell ronnes as if her feete were wings. And though that shée Did fly as swift as arrow from a Turkye bowe: yit hée More woondred at her beawtye than at swiftnesse of her pace Her ronning greatly did augment her beawtye and her grace. The wynd ay whisking from her féete the labells of her socks Uppon her back as whyght as snowe did tosse her golden locks, And eeke thembroydred garters that were tyde beneathe her ham. A rednesse mixt with whyght vppon her tender bodye cam, As when a scarlet curtaine streynd ageinst a playstred wall Dooth cast like shadowe, making it seeme ruddye therwithall. Now whyle the straunger noted this, the race was fully ronne, And Atalant (as shee that had the wager cléerely wonne) Was crowned with a garlond braue. The vanquisht sighing sore, Did lose theyr lyues according too agréement made before.
Howbéeit nought at all dismayd with theis mennes lucklesse cace He stepped foorth, and looking full vppon the maydens face, Sayd: wherfore doost thou séeke renowne in vanquisshing of such As were but dastards? cope with mée. If fortune bée so much My fréend too giue mee victorie, thou néedest not hold scorne Too yéeld too such a noble man as I am. I am borne The sonne of noble Megaree Onchestyes sonne, and hée Was sonne to Neptune. Thus am I great graundchyld by degrée In ryght descent, of him that rules the waters. Neyther doo I out of kynd degenerate from vertue méete thertoo. Or if my fortune bée so hard as vanquisht for too bée, Thou shalt obteine a famous name by ouercomming mée. In saying thus, Atlanta cast a gentle looke on him And dowting whither shée rather had too lose the day or win, Sayd thus. What God an enmy to the beawtyfull, is bent Too bring this person to his end, and therfore hath him sent Too seeke a wyfe with hazard of his lyfe? If I should bée Myselfe the iudge in this behalfe, there is not sure in mée That dooth deserue so déerely too bée earned. neyther dooth His beawty mooue my hart at all. yit is it such in sooth As well might mooue mée. But bycause as yit a chyld he is, His person mooues mée not so much as dooth his age Iwis. Béesydes that manhod is in him, and mynd vnfrayd of death: Béesydes that of the watrye race from Neptune as he seth He is the fowrth: béesydes that he dooth loue mée, and dooth make So great accompt too win mée too his wyfe, that for my sake He is contented for too dye, if fortune bée so sore Ageinst him too denye him mée. Thou straunger hence therfore. Away I say now whyle thou mayst, and shonne my bloody bed. My mariage cruell is, and craues the losing of thy hed. There is no wench but that would such a husband gladly catch. And shée that wyse were myght desyre too méete with such a match. But why now after heading of so many, doo I care For thée? Looke thou too that. For sith so many men as are Alreadye put too slawghter can not warne thée too béeware, But that thou wilt bée wéerye of thy lyfe, dye: doo not spare. And shall he perrish then bycause he sought to liue with mee?
And for his loue vnwoorthely with death rewarded bée? All men of such a victory will speake too foule a shame. But all the world can testifye that I am not too blame. Would God thou wouldst desist. Or else bycause thou are so mad, I would too God a litle more thy féete of swiftnesse had. Ah what a maydens countenance is in this chyldish face? Ah foolish boy Hippomenes, how wretched is thy cace? I would thou neuer hadst mée séene. Thou woorthy art of lyfe. And if so bée I happy were, and that too bée a wyfe The cruell destnyes had not mée forbidden, sure thou art The onely wyght with whom I would bée matcht with all my hart. This spoken: shée yit rawe, and but new striken with the dart Of Cupid, béeing ignorant, did loue and knew it nat Anon her father and the folk assembled, willed that They should begin theyr woonted race. Then Neptunes issue prayd With carefull hart and voyce too mée, and thus duoutly sayd. O Venus, fauour myne attempt, and send mée downe thyne ayd Too compasse my desyred loue which thou hast on mée layd. His prayer movd mée (I confesse,) and long I not delayd Before I helpt him. Now there is a certaine féeld the which The Cyprian folk call Damasene, most fertile and most rich Of all the Cyprian féelds: the same was consecrate too mée In auncient tyme, and of my Church the glebland woont too bée. Amid this féeld, with golden leaues there growes a goodly trée The crackling boughes whereof are all of yellow gold. I came And gathered golden Apples thrée: and bearing thence the same Within my hand, immediatly too Hippomen I gat Inuisible too all wyghts else saue him and taught him what Too doo with them. The Trumpets blew: and girding forward, both Set foorth, and on the houering dust with nimble féete eche goth. A man would think they able were vppon the Sea too go And neuer wet theyr féete, and on the ayles of corne also That still is growing in the féeld, and neuer downe them tread. The man tooke courage at the showt and woordes of them that sed, Now now is tyme Hippomenes too ply it, hye a pace: Enforce thyself with all thy strength: lag not in any cace: Thou shalt obteine. It is a thing ryght dowtfull whither hée
At theis well willing woordes of theyrs reioysed more, or shée. O Lord how often when shée might outstrippe him did shée stay, And gazed long vppon his face, right loth too go her way? A wéerye breath proceeded from theyr parched lippes, and farre They had too ronne. Then Neptunes imp her swiftnesse too disbarre, Trolld downe a toneside of the way an Apple of the thrée. Amazde therat, and couetous of the goodly Apple, shée Did step asyde and snatched vp the rolling frute of gold. With that Hippomenes coted her. The folke that did behold, Made noyse with clapping of theyr hands. She recompenst her slothe And losse of▪ tyme with footemanshippe: and streight ageine outgothe Hippomenes, leauing him behind, and béeing stayd agen With taking vp the second, shée him ouertooke. And when The race was almost at an end: He sayd: O Goddesse, thou That art the author of this gift, assist mée fréendly now, And therwithall, of purpose that she might the longer bée In comming, hée with all his might did bowle the last of thrée A skew a toneside of the féelde. The Lady séemde too make A dowt in taking of it vp. I forced her too take It vp, and too the Apple I did put a heauy weyght, And made it of such massinesse shée could not lift it streight. And least that I in telling of my tale may longer bée, Than they in ronning of their race, outstripped quight was shée. And he that wan her, marying her enioyd her for his fée. Thinkst thou I was not woorthy thanks, Adonis thinks thow I earned not that he too mée should frankincence allow? But he forgetfull neyther thanks nor frankincence did giue. By meanes wherof too sooden wrath he iustly did me driue. For béeing gréeued with the spyght, bycause I would not bée Despysd of such as were too come, I thought it best for mée Too take such vengeance of them both as others might take héede By them. And so ageinst them both in anger I procéede. A temple of the mother of the Goddes that vowwed was And buylded by Echion in a darksome groue, they passe There through my might Hippomenes was toucht and stirred so, That néedes he would too Uenerie though out of season go. Not farre from this same temple was with little light aden
With pommye vawlted naturally, long consecrate ere then For old religion, not vnlike a caue: wher priests of yore Bestowed had of Images of wooden Goddes good store. Hippomenes entring herintoo defyld the holy place. With his vnlawfull lust: from which the Idolls turnd theyr face. And Cybell with the towred toppes disdeyning, dowted whither Shée in the lake of Styx might drowne the wicked folk toogither. The pennance seemed ouer lyght. and therefore shée did cawse Thinne yellow manes to growe vppon theyr necks: and hooked pawes In stead of fingars too succéede. Theyr shoulders were the same They were before: with woondrous force déepe brested they béecame. Theyr looke béecame féerce, cruell, grim, and sowre: a tufted tayle Stretcht out in length farre after them vpon the ground dooth trayle. In stead of spéech they rore: in stead of bed they haunt the wood: And dreadfull vnto others they for all theyr cruell moode With tamed téeth chank Cybells bitts in shape of Lyons. Shonne Theis beastes déere hart: and not from theis alonely sée thou ronne, But also from eche other beast that turnes not backe too flight But offreth with his boystows brest too try the chaunce of fyght: Anemis least thy valeantnesse bée hurtfull to vs both. This warning giuen, wt yoked swannes away through aire she goth. But manhod by admonishment restreyned could not bée. By chaunce his hounds in following of the tracke, a Boare did sée, And rowsed him. And as the swyne was comming from the wood, Adonis hit him with a dart a skew, and drew the blood. The Boare streyght with his hooked groyne ye huntingstaffe out drew Bestayned with his blood, and on Adonis did pursew Who trembling and retyring back, too place of refuge drew. And hyding in his codds his tuskes as farre as he could thrust He layd him all along for dead vppon the yellow dust. Dame Venus in her chariot drawen with swannes was scarce arriued At Cyprus, when shée knew a farre the sygh of him depryued Of lyfe. Shée turnd her Cygnets backe. and when shée from the skye Béehilld him dead, and in his blood beweltred for to lye: Shée leaped downe, and tare at once hir garments from her brist, And rent her heare, and beate vppon her stomack with her fist,
And blaming sore the destnyes, sayd. Yit shall they not obteine Their will in all things. Of my gréefe remembrance shall remayne. (Adonis) whyle the world doth last. From yéere too yéere shall growe A thing that of my heauinesse and of thy death shall showe The liuely likenesse. In a flowre thy blood I will bestowe. Hadst thou the powre Persephonee rank sented Mints too make Of womens limbes? and may not I lyke powre vpon mée take Without disdeine and spyght, too turne Adonis too a flowre? This sed, shée sprinckled Nectar on the blood, which through the powre Therof did swell like bubbles shéere that ryse in weather cléere On water. And before that full an howre expyred wéere, Of all one colour with the blood a flowre she there did fynd Euen like the flowre of that same trée whose frute in tender rynde Haue pleasant graynes inclosd. Howbéet the vse of them is short. For why the leaues doo hang so looce through lightnesse in such sort, As that the windes that all things perce, with euery little blast Doo shake them of and shed them so as that they cannot last. Finis decimi Libri.
¶THE .XI. BOOKE OF Ouids Metamorphosis. NOw whyle the Thracian Poet with this song delyghts y• mynds Of sauage beastes, & drawes both stones and trées ageynst their kynds, Behold the wyues of Ciconie wt reddéerskinnes about Their furious brists as in the feeld they gadded on a rout, Espyde him from a hillocks toppe still singing too his harp. Of whom one shooke her head at him, and thus began to carp. Behold (sayes shee) behold yoonsame is he that doth disdeine Us women. And with that same woord shée sent her lawnce amayne At Orphyes singing mouth. The Lawnce armd round about wt leaues, Did hit him, and without a wound a marke behynd it leaues. Another threw a stone at him, which vanquisht with his swéete And most melodius harmonye, fell humbly at his féete As sorye for the furious act it purposed. But rash And heady ryot out of frame all reason now did dash, And frantik outrage reigned. Yit had the swéetenesse of his song Appeasd all weapons, sauing that the noyse now growing strong With blowing shalmes, and beating drummes, & bedlem howling out, And clapping hands on euery syde by Bacchus drunken rout, Did drowne the sownd of Orphyes harp Then first of all stones were Made ruddy with the prophets blood, and could not giue him eare. And first the flocke of Bacchus froes by violence brake the ring Of Serpents, birds, and sauage beastes that for to héere him sing Sate gazing round about him there. And then with bluddy hands They ran vppon the prophet who among them singing stands. They flockt about him like as when a sort of birds haue found, An Owle a day tymes in a tod: and hem him in full round, As when a Stag by hungrye hownds is in a morning found, The which forestall him round about and pull him to the ground. Euen so the prophet they assayle, and throwe their Thyrses gréene At him, which for another vse than that inuented béene. Sum cast mée clods, sum boughes of trées, & sum threw stones. And least That weapon wherwithall too wreake theyr woodnesse which increast Should want, it chaunst that Oxen by were tilling of the ground And labring men with brawned armes not farre fro thence were found
A digging of the hardned earth, and earning of theyr food, With sweating browes. They séeing this same rout, no longer stood, But ran away and left theyr tooles behynd them. Euery where Through all the féeld theyr mattocks, rakes, and shouells scattred were. Which when the cruell féends had caught, and had a sunder rent The horned Oxen, backe ageine to Orphy ward they went, And (wicked wights) they murthred him, who neuer till that howre Did vtter woordes in vaine, nor sing without effectuall powre. And through that mouth of his (oh lord) which euen the stones had heard, And vnto which the witlesse beastes had often giuen regard, His ghost then breathing intoo aire, departed. Euen the fowles Were sad for Orphye, and the beast with sorye syghing howles: The rugged stones did moorne for him, the woods which many a tyme Had followed him too héere him sing, bewayled this same cryme. Yea euen the trées lamenting him did cast theyr leauy heare The riuers also with theyr teares (men say) encreased were. Yea and the Nymphes of brookes & woods vppon theyr streames did sayle With scattred heare about theyr eares, in boats with sable sayle. His members lay in sundrie steds. His head and harp both cam To Hebrus. and (a woondrous thing) as downe the streame they swam, His Harp did yéeld a moorning sound: his liuelesse oong did make A certeine lamentable noyse as though it still yit spake, And bothe the banks in moorning wyse made answer too the same. At length a downe theyr country streame too open sea they came, And lyghted on Methymnye shore in Lesbos land. There No sooner on the forreine coast now cast a land they were, But that a cruell naturde Snake did streyght vppon them fly, And licking on his ruffled heare the which was dropping drye, Did gape too tyre vppon those lippes that had béene woont to sing Most heauenly hymnes. But Phebus streyght preuenting y• same thing, Dispoynts the Serpent of his bit, and turnes him into stone With gaping chappes▪ Already was the Ghost of Orphye gone To Plutos realme, and there he all the places ft béehilld The which he heretoofore had séene. And as he sought the féeld Of fayre Elysion (where the oules of godly folk doo woonne,) He ound his wyfe Eury dicee, to whom he streyght did roonne
And hilld her in imbracing armes. There now he one while walks Toogither with hir chéeke by chéeke: another while he stalks Before her. and another whyle he followeth her. And now Without all kinde of forfeyture he saufly myght aow His looking bakward at his wyfe. But Bacchus gréeued at The murther of the Chapleine of his Orgies, suffred not The mischéef vnreuengd too bée. For by and by he bound, The Thracian women by the féete with writhen roote in ground, As many as consenting too this wicked act were found. And looke how much that eche of them the prophet did pursew, So much he sharpening of their toes, within the ground them drew. And as the bird that fynds her leg besnarled in the net The which the fowlers suttlelye hathe clocely for her set, And féeles shée cannot get away, stands flickering with her wings, And with her fearefull leaping vp drawes clocer still the strings: So eche of theis when in the ground they fastned were, assayd Aflayghted for to fly away. But euery one was stayd With winding roote which hilld her downe. her frisking could not boote. And whyle she lookte what was become of To, of nayle, and foote, Shée sawe her leggs growe round in one, and turning intoo woode. And as her thyghes with violent hand shée sadly striking stoode, Shée felt them trée: her brest was trée: her shoulders éeke were trée. Her armes long boughes yée myght haue thought, and not deceyued bée. But Bacchus was not so content: he quyght forsooke their land: And with a better companye remoued out of hand Unto the Uyneyarde of his owne mount Tmolus, and the riuer Pactolus though as yit no streames of gold it did deliuer, Ne spyghted was for precious sands. His olde accustomd rout Of woodwards and of franticke froes enuyrond him about. But old Silenus was away. The Phrygian ploughmen found Him réeling bothe for droonkennesse and age, and brought him bound With garlands, vnto Midas king of Phrygia, vnto whom The Thracian Orphye and the préest Eumolphus comming from The towne of Athens erst had taught the Orgies. When he knew His fellowe and companion of the selfe same badge and crew. Uppon the comming of this guest, he kept a feast the space Of twyce fyne dayes and twyce fyue nyghts toogither in that place
And now theleuenth tyme Lucifer had mustred in the sky The heauenly host, when Midas commes too Lydia iocundly And yéeldes the old Silenus too his fosterchyld. He glad That he his fosterfather had eftsoones recouered, bad King Midas ask him what he would. Right glad of that was hée, But not a whit at latter end the better should he bée. He minding too misvse his giftes, sayd: graunt that all and some The which my body towcheth bare may yellow gold become. God Bacchus graunting his request, his hurtfull gift performd, And that he had not better wisht he in his stomacke stormd. Reioycing in his harme away full merye goes the king: And for too try his promis true he towcheth euery thing. Scarce giuing credit too himself, he pulled yoong gréeue twiggs From of an Holmetrée: by and by all golden were the spriggs He tooke a flintstone from the ground, the stone likewyse became Pure gold. He towched next a cold of earth, and streight the same By force of towching did become a wedge of yellow gold. He gathered eares of rypened corne: immediatly beholde The corne was gold. An Apple then he pulled from a trée: Yée would haue thought the Hesperids had giuen it him. If hée On Pillars high his fingars layd, they glistred like the sonne. The water where he washt his hands did from his hands so ronne, As Danae might haue béene therwith beguyld. He scarce could hold His passing ioyes within his hart, for making all things gold. Whyle he thus ioyd, his officers did spred the boord anon, And set downe sundry sorts of meate and mancheate thervppon. Then whither his hand did towch the bread, the bread was massy gold: Or whither he chawde with hungry téeth his meate, yée might behold The péece of meate betwéene his awes a plat of gold too bée. In drinking wine and water mixt, yée myght discerne and sée The liquid gold ronne downe his throte. Amazed at the straunge Mischaunce, and being both a wretch and rich, he wisht too chaunge His riches for his former state, and now he did abhorre The thing which euen but late before he chéefly longed for. No meate his hunger slakes: his throte is shrunken vp with thurst: And iustly dooth his hatefull gold torment him as accurst. Then lifting vp his sory armes and handes too heauen, he cryde:
O father Bacchus pardon mée. My sinne I will not hyde. Haue mercy I beséech thée and vouchsauf too rid mée quyght From this same harme that séemes so good and glorious vntoo syght. The gentle Bacchus streight vppon confession of his cryme Restored Midas too the state hée had in former tyme. And hauing made performance of his promis, hée béereft him The gift that he had graunted him. And least he should haue left him Béedawbed with the dregges of that same gold which wickedly Hée wisshed had, he willed him too get him by and by Too that great ryuer which dooth ronne by Sardis towne, and there Along the chanell vp the streame his open armes to beare Untill he commeth too the spring: and then his head too put Full vnderneathe the foming spowt where greatest was the gut, And so in wasshing of his limbes too wash away his cryme. The king (as was commaunded him) ageinst the streame did clyme. And streyght the powre of making gold departing quyght from him, Infects the ryuer, making it with golden streame too swim. The force whereof the bankes about so soked in theyr veynes, That euen as yit the yellow gold vppon the cloddes remaynes. Then Midas hating riches haunts the pasturegrounds and groues, And vp & down with Pan among the Lawnds & mountaines roues. But still a head more fat than wyse, and dolsh wit he hath, The which as erst, yit once againe must woork theyr mayster scath. The mountayne Tmole from loftye toppe too seaward looketh downe, And spreading farre his boorely sydes, extendeth too the towne Of Sardis with the tonesyde and too Hypep with the toother. There Pan among the fayrye elues that dawneed round toogither In setting of his conning out for singing and for play Uppon his pype of réedes and war, presuming for too say▪ Apollos musick was not like too his, did take in hand A farre vnequall match, wherof the Tmole for iudge should stand. The auncient iudge sitts downe vppon his hill, and ridds his eares From trées, and onely on his head an Oken garlod weares, Wherof the Acornes dangled downe about his hollow brow. And looking on the God of nate he sayd: yée néede not now Too tarry longer for your iudge. Then Pan blew lowd and strong His country pype of réedes, and with his rude and homely song
Delighted Midas eares, for he by chaunce was in the throng. When Pan had doone, the sacred Tmole too Phebus turnd his looke, And with the turning of his head his busshye heare he shooke. Then Phebus with a crowne of ay vppon his golden heare Did swéepe the ground with scarlet robe. In left hand he did beare His viall made of precious stones and Iuorye intermirt. And in his right hand for too strike, his bowe was réedy fixt. He was the verrye paterne of a good Musician ryght Anon he gan with conning hand the tuned strings too smyght. The swéetenesse of the which did so the iudge of them delyght, That Pan was willed for to put his Réedepype in his cace, And not too fiddle nor too sing where vialls were in place. The iudgement of the holy hill was lyked well of all, Saue Midas, who found fault therwith and wrongfull did it call. Apollo could not suffer well his foolish eares too kéepe Theyr humaine shape, but drew them wyde, & made them long & déepe. And filld them full of whytish heares, and made them downe too sag. And through too much vnstablenesse continually too wag. His body kéeping in the rest his manly figure still, Was ponnisht in the part that did offend for want of skill. And so a slowe paaste Asses eares his heade did after beare. This shame endeuereth he too hyde. And therefore he did weare A purple nyghtcappe euer since. But yit his Barber who Was woont too notte him spyd it: and béeing eager too Disclose it, when he neyther durst too vtter it, nor could It kéepe in secret still, hée went and digged vp the mowld, And whispring softly in the pit, declaard what eares hée spyde His mayster haue, and turning downe the clowre ageine, did hyde His blabbed woordes within the ground, and closing vp the pit Departed thence and neuer made mo woordes at all of it. Soone after, there began a tuft of quiuering réedes too growe Which béeing rype bewrayd theyr séede and him that did them sowe. For when the gentle sowtherne wynd did lyghtly on them blowe, They vttred foorth the woordes that had béene buried in the ground And so reproude the Asses eares of Midas with theyr sound. Apollo after this reuenge from Tmolus tooke his flyght: And sweeping through the ayre, did on the selfsame syde alyght
Of Hellespontus, in the Realme of king Laomedon. There stoode vppon the right syde of Sigaeum, and vppon The left of Rhetye cliffe that tyme, an Altar buylt of old Too Ioue that héereth all mennes woordes. Héere Phebus did behold The foresayd king Laomedon beginning for too lay Foundation of the walles of Troy: which woork from day too day Went hard and slowly forward, and requyrd no little charge, Then he toogither with the God that rules the surges large, Did put themselues in shape of men, and bargaynd with the king Of Phrygia for a summe of gold his woork too end too bring. Now when the woork was done, the king theyr wages them denayd, And falsly faaste them downe with othes it was not as they sayd. Thou shalt not mock vs vnreuendgd ({quod} Neptune.) And anon He caused all the surges of the sea too rush vppon The shore of couetous Troy, and made the countrye like the déepe. The goodes of all the husbandmen away he quight did swéepe, And ouerwhelmd theyr féeldes with waues. And thinking this too small A pennance for the falsehod, he demaunded therwithall His daughter for a monster of the Sea. whom béeing bound Untoo a rocke, stout Hercules deliuering aufe and sound, Requyrd his stéeds which were the hyre for which he did compound. And when that of so great desert the king denyde the hyre, The twyce forsworne false towne of Troy he sacked in his ire. And Telamon in honour of his seruice did enioy The Lady Hesion daughter of the couetous king of Troy. For Peleus had already got a Goddesse too his wife, And liued vntoo both theyr ioyes a right renowmed lyfe. And sure he was not prowder of his graundsyre, than of thée That wert become his fathrinlaw. For many mo than hée Haue had the hap of mighty Ioue the nephewes for too bee. But neuer was it héeretoofore the chaunce of any one Too haue a Goddesse too his wyfe, saue only his alone. For vntoo watry Thetis thus old Protevv did foretell. Go marry: thou shalt beare a sonne whose dooings shall excell His fathers farre in feates of armes, and greater he shall bée In honour, hygh renowme, and fame, than euer erst was hée. This caused Ioue the watry bed of Thetis too forbeare
Although his hart were more than warme with loue of her, for feare The world sum other greater thing than Ioue himself should bréede, And willd the sonne of Aeäcus this Peleus to succéede. In that which he himself would faine haue done, and for too take The Lady of the sea in armes a moother her too make. There is a bay of Thessaly that bendeth lyke a boawe. The sydes shoote foorth, where if the sea of any depth did flowe It were a hauen. Scarcely dooth the water hyde the sand. It hath a shore so firme, that if a man theron doo stand, No print of foote remaynes behynd: it hindreth not ones pace Ne couered is with houering réeke. Adioyning too this place, There is a groue of Myrtletrées with frute of dowle colour, And in the midds thereof a Caue. I can not tell you whither That nature or the art of man were maker of the same. It séemed rather made by arte. Oft Thetis hither came Starke naked, ryding brauely on a brydled Dolphins backe. There Peleus as shee lay a sléepe vppon her often bracke. And forbycause that at her handes entreatance nothing winnes, He folding her about the necke with both his armes, beginnes Too offer force. And surely if shée had not falne too wyles And shifted oftentymes her shape, he had obteind erewhyles. But shée became sumtymes a bird: He hilld her like a bird. Anon shée was a massye log: but Peleus neuer stird Awhit for that. Then thirdly shée of speckled Tyger tooke The vgly shape: for feare of whose most féerce and cruell looke, His armes he from her body twicht. And at his going thence, In honour of the watry Goddes he burned frankincence, And powred wyne vppon the sea, with fat of neate and shéepe: Untill the prophet that dooth dwell within Carpathian déepe, Sayd thus. Thou sonne of Aeäcus, thy wish thou sure shalt haue Alonely when shée lyes a sléepe within her pleasant Caue, Cast grinnes too trappe her vnbewares: hold fast with snarling knot: And though shée fayne a hundreth shapes, deceyue thée let her not. But sticke vnoot what ere it bée, vntill the tyme that shée Returneth too the natiue shape shée erst was woont too bée. When Protevv thus had sed, within the sea he duckt his head, And suffred on his latter woordes the water for too spred.
The lyghtsum Titan downeward drew, and with declyning chayre Approched too the westerne sea, when Neryes daughter fayre Returning from the sea, resorts too her accustomd cowch. And Peleus scarcely had begon hir naked limbes too towch, But that shée chaungd from shape to shape, vntill at length shée found Herself surprysd. Then stretching out her armes with sighes profound, Shee sayd: Thou ouercommest mée, and not without the ayd Of God: and then she Thetis like, appéerd in shape of mayd. The noble prince imbracing her obteynd her at his will, Too both theyr ioyes, and with the great Achylles did her fill. A happye wyght was Peleus in his wyfe: A happy wyght Was Peleus also in his sonne. And if yée him acquight Of murthring Phocus, happy him in all things count yée myght. But giltye of his brothers blood, and bannisht for the same From bothe his fathers house and Realme, too Trachin sad he came. The sonne of lyghtsum Lucifer king Ceyx (who in face Exprest the liuely beawtye of his fathers heauenly grace,) Without all violent rigor and sharpe executions reignd In Trachin. He right sad that tyme vnlike himself, remaynd Yit moorning for his brothers chaunce transformed late before. When Peleus thither came, with care and trauayle tyred sore, He left his cattell and his shéepe (whereof he brought great store) Behynd him in a shady vale not farre from Trachin towne, And with a little companye himself went thither downe. Assoone as leaue too come too Court was graunted him, he bare A braunche of Olyf in his hand, and humbly did declare His name and lynage. Onely of his crime no woord hée spake, But of his slyght another cause pretensedly did make: Desyring leaue within his towne or countrye too abyde. The king of Trachin gently thus too him ageine replyde. Our bownty too the meanest sort (O Peleus) dooth extend: Wée are not woont the desolate our countrye too forfend. And though I bée of nature most inclyned good too doo: Thyne owne renowme, thy graundsyre Ioue are forcements therevntoo. Misspend no longer tyme in sute. I gladly doo agrée Too graunt thée what thou wilt desyre. Theis things that thou doost sée I would thou should account them as thyne owne, such as they bée
I would they better were. With that he wéeped. Peleus and His fréends desyred of his gréef the cause too vnderstand. He answerd thus. Perchaunce yée think this bird that liues by pray And putts all other birds in feare had wings and fethers ay. He was a man. And as he was right féerce in feats of armes, And stout and readye bothe too wreake and also offer harmes: So was he of a constant mynd. Daedalion men him hyght. Our father was that noble starre that brings the morning bryght, And in the welkin last of all giues place too Phebus lyght. My study was too maynteine peace, in peace was my delyght, And for too kéepe mée true too her too whom my fayth is plyght. My brother had felicite in warre and bloody fyght. His prowesse and his force which now dooth chase in cruell flyght The Dooues of Thisbye since his shape was altred thus a new, Ryght puyssant Princes and theyr Realmes did héeretoofore subdew. He had a chyld calld Chyone, whom nature did endew With beawtye so, that when too age of fowretéene yéeres shée grew, A thousand Princes liking her did for hir fauour sew. By fortune as bryght Phebus and the sonne of Lady May Came tone from Delphos, toother from mount Cyllen, by the way They saw her bothe at once, and bothe at once where tane in loue. Apollo till the tyme of nyght differd his sute too moue. But Hermes could not beare delay. He stroked on the face The mayden with his charmed rod which hath the powre too chace And bring in sléepe: the touch whereof did cast her in so dead A sléepe, that Hermes by and by his purpose of her sped. Assoone as nyght with twinckling starres the welkin had béesprent, Apollo in an old wyues shape too Chyon clocely went, And tooke the pleasure which the sone of Maya had forehent. Now when shée full her tyme had gon, shée bare by Mercurye A sonne that hyght Avvtolychus who provde a wyly pye, And such a fellow as in theft and filching had no péere. He was his fathers owne sonne right: he could mennes eyes so bléere, As for too make y• black things whyght, & whyght things black appéere. And by Apollo (for shée bare a payre) was borne his brother Philammon, who in musick arte excelled farre all other, As well in singing as in play. But what auayled it
Too beare such twinnes, and of twoo Goddes in fauour too haue sit. And that shée too her father had a stowt and valeant knight, Or that her graundsyre was the sonne of Ioue that God of might? Dooth glorie hurt too any folk? It surely hurted her. For standing in her owne conceyt shée did herself prefer Before Diana, and dispraysd her face. who there with all Inflaamd with wrath, sayd: well, with déedes we better please her shall. Immediatly shée bent her bowe, and let an arrow go, Which strake her through the toong, whose spight deserued wounding so. Her toong wext dumb, her spéech gan fayle that erst was ouer ryfe, And as shée stryued for too speake, away went blood and lyfe. How wretched was I then O God? how strake it too my hart? What woordes of comfort did I speake too ease my brothers smart? Too which he gaue his eare as much as dooth the stonny rocke Too hideous roring of the waues that doo against it knocke. There was no measure nor none ende in making of his mone, Nor in bewayling comfortlesse his daughter that was gone. But when he sawe her bodye burne, fowre tymes with all his myght He russhed foorth too thrust himself amid the fyre in syght. Fowre tymes hée béeing thence repulst, did put himself too flyght. And ran mée wheras was no way, as dooth a Bullocke when A hornet stings him in the necke. Mée thought hée was as then More wyghter farre than any man. Yée would haue thought his féete Had had sum wings. So fled he quyght from all, and being fléete Through eagernesse too dye, he gat too mount Parnasos knappe And there Apollo pitying him and rewing his missehappe, When as Daedalion from the cliffe himself had headlong floong, Transformd him too a bird, and on the soodaine as hée hung Did giue him wings, and bowwing beake, and hooked talants kéene, And éeke a courage full as féerce as euer it had béene. And furthermore a greater strength he lent him therwithall, Than one would thinke conueyd myght bée within a roome so small. And now in shape of Gossehawke hée too none indifferent is, But wreakes his téene on all birds. And bycause him selfe ere this Did feele the force of sorrowes sting within his wounded hart, Hée maketh others oftentymes too sorrow and too smart. As Caeyx of his brothers chaunce this wondrous story seth,
Commes ronning thither all in haste and almost out of breth Anaetor the Phocayan who was Pelyes herdman. Hée Sayd: Pelye Pelye I doo bring sad tydings vntoo thée. Declare it man ({quod} Peleus) what euer that it bée. King Ceyx at his fearefull woordes did stand in dowtfull stowne. Thiz noonetyde ({quod} the herdman) Iche did driue your cattell downe Too zea, and zum a them did zit vppon the yellow zand And looked on the large mayne poole of water néere at hand. Zum roayled zoftly vp and downe, and zum a them did zwim And bare their iolly horned heades abooue the water trim. A Church stondes néere the zea not deckt with gold nor marble stone But made of wood, and hid with trées that dréeping hang theron. A vissherman that zat and dryde hiz netts vppo the zhore Did tellz that Nereus and his Nymphes did haunt the place of yore, And how that thay béene Goddes a zea. There butts a plot vorgrowne With zallow trees vppon the zame, the which is ouerblowne With tydes, and is a marsh. Urom thence a woolf an orped wyght With hideous noyse of rustling made the groundes néere hand afryght. Anon he commes mée buskling out bezmeared all his chappes With blood daubaken and with vome as véerce as thunder clappes. Hiz eyen did glaster red as vyre, and though he raged zore Uor vamin and vor madnesse bothe, yit raged he much more In madnesse. Uor hée cared not his hunger vor too zlake, Or i the death of oxen twoo or thrée an end too make. But wounded all the herd and made a hauocke of them all, And zum of vs too, in devence did happen vor too vall, In daunger of his deadly chappes, and lost our lyues. The zhore And zea is staynd with blood, and all the ven is on a rore. Delay bréedes losse. The cace denyes now dowting vor too stond, Whyle owght remaynes let all of vs take weapon in our hond. Lets arme our zelues, and let vz altoogither on him vall. The herdman hilld his peace. The losse movde Peleus not at all. But calling his offence too mynde, he thought that Neryes daughter The chyldlesse Ladye Psamathe determynd with that slaughter. Too keepe an Obit too her sonne whom hée before had killd. Immediatly vppon this newes the king of Trachin willd His men too arme them, and too take their weapons in theyr hand,
And he addrest himself too bée the leader of the band. His wyfe Alcyone by the noyse admonisht of the same, In dressing of her head, before shée had it brought in frame, Cast downe her heare, and ronning foorth caught Ceyx fast about The necke, desyring him with teares too send his folk without Himself, and in the lyfe of him too saue the lyues of twayne. O Princesse, cease your godly feare ({quod} Peleus then agayne.) Your offer dooth deserue great thanks. I mynd not warre to make Ageinst straunge monsters. I as now another way must take. The seagods must bée pacifyde. There was a Castle hye, And in the same a lofty towre whose toppe dooth face the skye, A ioyfull mark for maryners too guyde theyr vessells by. Too this same Turret vp they went, and there with syghes behilld The Oxen lying euery where stark dead vppon the féelde And eeke the cruell stroygood with his bluddy mouth and heare. Then Peleus stretching foorth his handes too Seaward, prayd in feare Too watrish Psamath that she would her sore displeasure stay, And help him. She no whit relents too that that he did pray. But Thetis for hir husband made such earnest sute, that shée Obteynd his pardon. For anon the woolfe (who would not bée Reuoked from the slaughter for the swéetenesse of the blood) Persisted sharpe and eager still, vntill that as he stood Fast byghting on a Bullocks necke, shée turnd him intoo stone As well in substance as in hew, the name of woolf alone Reserued. For although in shape hée séemed still yit one, The verry colour of the stone béewrayd him too bée none, And that he was not too bee feard. How be it froward fate Permitts not Peleus in that land too haue a setled state. He wandreth like an outlaw too the Magnets. There at last Acastus the Thessalien purgd him of his murther past. In this meane tyme the Trachine king sore vexed in his thought With signes y• both before & since his brothers death were wrought, For counsell at the sacret Spelles (which are but toyes too foode Fond fancyes, and not counsellers in perill too doo goode) Did make him réedy too the God of Claros for too go. For heathenish Phorbas and the folk of Phlegia had as tho The way too Delphos stopt, that none could trauell too or fro.
But ere he on his iourney went, he made his faythfull make Alcyone préeuye too the thing. Immediatly theyr strake A chilnesse too her verry bones, and pale was all her face Like box and downe her heauy chéekes the teares did gush a pace. Three times about too speake, thrée times shée washt her face with teares, And stinting oft with sobbes, shée thus complayned in his eares. What fault of myne O husband déere hath turnd thy hart fro mée? Where is that care of mée that erst was woont too bée in thée? And canst thou hauing left thy déere Alcyone merrye bée? Doo iourneyes long delyght thée now? dooth now myne absence please Thée better then my presence dooth? Think I that thou at ease Shalt go by land? Shall I haue cause but onely for too moorne? And not too bée afrayd? And shall my care of thy returne Bée voyd of feare? No no. The sea mée sore afrayd dooth make. Too think vppon the sea dooth cause my flesh for feare too quake. I sawe the broken ribbes of shippes a late vppon the shore. And oft on Tumbes I reade theyr names whose bodyes long before The sea had swallowed. Let not fond vayne hope educe thy mynd, That Aeölus is thy fathrinlaw who holdes the boystous wynd In prison, and can calme the seas at pleasure. When the wynds Are once let looce vppon the sea, no order then them bynds. Then neyther land hathe priuiledge, nor sea exemption fynds. Yea euen the clowdes of heauen they vex, and with theyr méeting stout Enforce the fyre with hideous noyse too brust in flasshes out. The more that I doo know them, (for ryght well I know theyr powre, And saw them oft a little wench within my fathers bowre) So much the more I think them too bée feard. But if thy will By no intreatance may bée turnd at home too tarry still, But that thou néedes wilt go: then mée déere husband with thée take. So shall the sea vs equally toogither tosse and shake. So woorser than I féele I shall bée certeine not too feare. So shall wée whatsoeuer happes toogither ioyntly beare. So shall wée on the broad mayne sea toogither ioyntly sayle. Theis woodes and teares wherewith the imp of Aeölus did assayle Her husbond borne of heauenly race, did make his hart relent. (For he lovd her no lesse than shée lovd him.) But fully bent He séemed, neyther for too leaue the iourney which he ment
Too take by sea, nor yit too giue Alcyone leaue as tho Companion of his perlous course by water for too go. He many woordes of comfort spake her feare away too chace. But nought hée could perswade therein too make her like the cace. This last asswagement of her gréef he added in the end, Which was the onely thing that made her louing hart too bend. All taryante will assuredly séeme ouer long too mée. And by my fathers blasing beames I make my vow too thée That at the furthest ere the tyme (if God thertoo agrée) The moone doo fill her circle twyce, ageine I will héere bée. When in sum hope of his returne this promis had her set, He willd a shippe immediatly from harbrough too bée fet, And throughly rigged for too bée, that neyther maast, nor sayle, Nor tackling, no nor other thing should apperteyning fayle. Which when Alcyone did behold, as one whoose hart misgaue The happes at hand, shée quaakt ageine, and teares out gussing draue. And streyning Ceyx in her armes with pale and piteous looke, Poore wretched soule, her last farewell at length shée sadly tooke, And swounded flat vppon the ground. Anon the watermen (As Ceyx sought delayes and was in dowt too turne agen) Set hand too Ores, of which there were twoo rowes on eyther syde, And all at once with equall stroke the swelling sea deuyde. Shée lifting vp her watrye eyes behilld her husband stand Uppon the hatches making signes by beckening with his hand: And shée made signes to him ageine. And after that the land Was farre remoued from the shippe, and that the sight began Too bée vnable too discerne the face of any man, As long as ere shée could shée lookt vppon the rowing kéele. And when shée could no longer tyme for distance ken it wéele, Shée looked still vppon the sayles that flasked with the wynd Uppon the maast. And when shée could the sayles no longer fynd, She gate her too her empty bed with sad and sorye hart, And layd her downe. The chamber did renew a fresh her smart, And of her bed did bring too mynd the déere departed part. From harbrough now they quyght were gone: & now a plasant gale Did blowe. The mayster made his men theyr Ores asyde too hale, And hoysed vp the toppesayle on the hyghest of the maast,
And clapt on all his other sayles bycause no wind should waast. Scarce full tone half, (or sure not much aboue) the shippe had ronne Uppon the sea, and euery way the land did farre them shonne, When toward night the wallowing waues began too waxen whyght, And éeke the heady easterne wynd did blow with greater myght, Anon the Mayster cryed strike the toppesayle, let the mayne Sheate flye and fardle it too the yard. Thus spake he, but in vayne. For why so hideous was the storme vppon the soodeine brayd, That not a man was able there too héere what other sayd. And lowd the sea with méeting waues extréemely raging rores. Yit fell they too it of them selues. Sum haalde asyde the Ores: Sum fensed in the Gallyes sydes, sum downe the sayleclothes rend: Sum pump the water out, and sea too sea ageine doo send. Another hales the sayleyards downe. And whyle they did eche thing Disorderly, the storme increast, and from eche quarter ing The wyndes with deadly foode, and bownce the raging waues toogither. The Pilot being sore dismayd sayth playne, he knowes not whither Too wend himself, nor what too doo or bid, nor in what state Things stood. So howge the mischéef was, and did so ouermate All arte. For why of ratling ropes, of crying men and boyes, Of flusshing waues and thundring ayre, confused was the noyse. The surges mounting vp aloft did séeme too mate the skye, And with theyr sprinckling for too wet the clowdes that hang on hye. One whyle the sea, when from the brink it raysd the yellow sand, Was like in colour too the same. Another whyle did stand A colour on it blacker than the Lake of Styx. Anon It leth playne and loometh whyght with seething froth thereon▪ And with the sea the Trachin shippe ay alteration tooke. One whyle as from a mountaynes toppe it séemed downe too looke Too vallyes and the depth of hell. Another whyle beset With swelling surges round about which néere aboue it met, It looked from the bottom of the whoorlepoole vp aloft As if it were from hell too heauen. A hideous flusshing oft The waues did make in beating full against the Gallyes syde. The Gallye bing striken gaue as great a sownd that yde As did sumtyme the Battellramb of stéele, or now the Gonne In making battrye too a towre. And as féerre Lyons runne
Full brist with all theyr force ageinst the armed men that stand In order bent too kéepe them of with weapons in theyr hand, Euen so as often as the waues by force of wynd did raue: So oft vppon the netting of the shippe they maynely draue, And mounted farre aboue the same. Anon of fell the hoopes: And hauing washt the pitch away, the sea made open loopes Too let the deadly water in. Behold the clowdes did melt, And showers large came pooring downe. The seamen that them felt Myght thinke that all the heauen had falne vppon them that same tyme, And that the swelling sea likewyse aboue the heauen would clyme. The sayles were throughly wet wt showers. and with the heauenly raine Was mixt the waters of the sea. no lyghts at all remayne Of sunne, or moone, or starres in heauen. The darknesse of the nyght Augmented with the dreadfull storme, takes dowble powre and myght. Howbéet the flasshing lyghtnings oft doo put the same too flyght, And with theyr glauncing now and then doo giue a soodeme lyght. The lightnings setts the waues on fyre. Aboue the netting skippe The waues, and with a violent force doo lyght within the shippe. And as a souldyer stowter than the rest of all his band That oft assayles a citie walles defended well by hand, At length atteines his hope, and for too purchace prayse withall Alone among a thousand men getts vp vppon the wall: So when the loftye waues had long the Gallyes sydes assayd, At length the tenth waue rysing vp with howger force and brayd, Did neuer cease assaulting of the wéery shippe, till that Uppon the hatches lyke a fo victoriously it gat. A part thereof did still as yit assault the shippe without, And part had gotten in. The men all trembling ran about, As in a Citie commes too passe, when of the enmyes sum Dig downe the walles without, and sum already in are come. All arte and couning was too séeke. Theyr harts and stomacks fayle: And looke how many furges came theyr vessell too assayle, So many deathes did séeme too charge and breake vppon them all. One wéepes: another stands amazde: the third them blist dooth call Whom buryall dooth remayne. Too God another makes his vow, And holding vp his handes too heauen the which hée sées not now, Dooth pray in vayne for help. The thought of this man is vppon
His brother and his parents whom he cléerely hath forgone. Another calles his house and wyfe and children vntoo mynd, And euery man in generall the things he left behynd. Alcyone moueth Ceyx hart. In Ceyx mouth is none But onely one Alcyone. And though shée were alone The wyght that he desyred most, yit was he verry glad Shée was not there. Too Trachin ward too looke desyre he had, And homeward fayne he would haue turnd his eyes which neuer more Should sée the land. But when he knew not which way was the shore, Nor where he was. The raging sea did rowle about so fast: And all the heauen with clowds as black as pitch was ouer cast, That neuer nyght was halfe so dark. There came a flaw at last, That with his violence brake the maste, and strake the sterne away. A billowe proudly pranking vp as vaunting of his pray By conquest gotten, walloweth hole and breaketh not a sunder, Beholding with a lofty looke the waters woorking vnder. And looke as if a man should from the places where they growe Rend downe the mountaynes Athe & Rind, and whole them ouerthrowe Intoo the open sea: so soft the Billowe tumbling downe, With weyght and violent stroke did sink and in the bottom drowne The Gallye. And the moste of them that were within the same Went downe therwith and neuer vp too open aer came, But dyed strangled in the gulf. Another sort againe Caught péeces of the broken shippe. The king himself was fayne A shiuer of the sunken shippe in that same hand to hold, In which hée erst a royall mace had hilld of yellow gold. His father and his fathrinlawe he calles vppon (alas In vayne.) But chéefly in his mouth his wife Alcyone was. In hart was shée: in toong was shee: He wisshed that his corse Too land where shée myght take it vp the surges myght enforce: And that by her most louing handes he might be layd in graue. In swimming still (as often as the surges leaue him gaue Too ope his lippes) he harped still vpon Alcyones name, And when he drowned in the waues he muttred still the same. Behold, euen full vppon the wa a  of water blacke Did breake, and vnderneathe the sea the head of Ceyx stracke. That nyght the lyghtsum Lucifer for sorrowe was so dim,
As scarcely could a man discerne or thinke it too bée him. And forasmuch as out of heauen he might not steppe asyde, With thick and darksum clowds that nyght his countnance he did hyd▪ Alcyone of so great mischaunce not knowing aught as yit, Did kéepe a reckening of the nyghts that in the whyle did flit, And hasted garments both for him and for herself likewyse, Too weare at his homecomming which shée vaynely did surmyse. Too all the Goddes deuoutly shée did offer frankincence: But most aboue them all the Church of Iuno shée did sence. And for her husband (who as then was none) shée knéeld before The Altar, wisshing health and soone arriuall at the shore, And that none other woman myght before her be preferd. Of all her prayers this one péece effectually was heard. For Iuno could not fynd in hart intreated for too bée For him that was already dead. But too thentent that shée From dame Alcyones deadly hands might kéepe her Altars frée, Shée sayd. Most faythfull messenger of my commaundments, O Thou Raynebowe, too the slugguish house of Slomber swiftly go. And bid him send a Dreame in shape of Ceyx too his wyfe Alcyone, for too shew her playne the losing of his lyfe. Dame Iris takes her pall wherein a thousand colours were And bowwing lyke a stringed bow vpon the clowdy sphere, Immediatly descended too the drowzye house of Sléepe Whose Court the clowdes continually doo cloely ouerdréepe. Among the darke Cimmerians is a hollow mountaine found And in the hill a Caue that farre dooth ronne within the ground,The house of sleepe. The Chamber & the dwelling place where slouthfull sléepe dooth cowch. The lyght of Phebus golden beames this place can neuer towch. A foggye mist with dimnesse mixt streames vpwarde from the ground, And glimmering twylyght euermore within the same is found. No watchfull bird with barbed bill, and combed crowne dooth call The morning foorth with crowing out. There is no noyse at all Of waking dogge, nor gagling goose more waker than the hound Too hinder sléepe. Of beast ne wyld ne tame there is no sound. No bowghes are stird with blastes of wynd. no noyse of tatling toong Of man or woman euer yit within that bower roong Dumb quiet dwelleth there. Yit from the Roches foote dooth go
The ryuer of forgetfulnesse. which ronneth trickling so Uppon the little pebble stones which in the channell lye, That vntoo sléepe a great deale more it dooth prouoke thereby. Before the entry of the Caue, there growes of Poppye store. With séeded heades, and other wéedes innumerable more, Out of the milkye iewce of which the night dooth gather sléepes, And ouer all the shadowed earth with dankish deawe them dréepes. Bycause the craking hindges of the doore no noyse should make, There is no doore in all the house, nor porter at the gate. Amid the Caue, of Ebonye a bedsted standeth hye, And on the same a bed of downe with kéeuerings blacke dooth lye: In which the drowzye God of sléepe his lither limbes dooth rest. About him, forging sundrye shapes as many dreames lye prest, As eares of corne doo stand in féeldes in haruest tyme, or leaues Doo grow on trées, or sea too shore of sandye cinder heaues. Assoone as Iris came within this house, and with her hand Had put asyde the dazeling dreames that in her way did stand, The brightnesse of her robe through all the sacred house did shine. The God of sléepe scarce able for too rayse his heauy eyen, A thrée or fowre tymes at the least did fall ageine too rest, And with his nodding head did knocke his chinne ageinst his brest. At length he shaking of himselfe, vppon his elbowe leande. And though he knew for what shée came: he askt her what shée meand. O sleepe ({quod} shée,) the rest of things, O gentlest of the Goddes, Swéete sléepe, the peace of mynd, with whom crookt care is aye at oddes: Which cherrishest mennes weery limbes appalld with toyling sore, And makest them as fresh too woork and lustye as béefore, Commaund a dreame that in theyr kyndes can euery thing expresse, Too Trachine Hercles towne himself this instant too addresse. And let him liuely counterfet too Quéene Alcyonea The image of her husband who is drowned in the sea By shipwrecke. Iuno willeth so. Her message béeing told, Dame Iris went her way▪ shée could her eyes no longer hold From sléepe. But when shée felt it come shée fled that instant tyme, And by the boawe that brought her downe too heaue ageine did clyme. Among a thousand sonnes and mo that father slomber had He calld vp Morph the feyner of mannes shape a craftye lad.
None other could so conningly expresse mans verrye face, His gesture and his sound of voyce, and manner of his pace, Toogither with his woonted wéede, and woonted phrase of talk. But this same Morphye onely in the shape of man dooth walk. There is another who the shapes of beast or bird dooth take, Or else appéereth vntoo men in likenesse of a snake. The Goddes doo call him Icilos, and mortall folke him name Phobetor. There is also yit a third who from theis same Woorkes diuersly, and Phantasos he highteth. Intoo streames This turnes himself, and intoo stones, and earth, and timber beames, And intoo euery other thing that wanteth life. Theis thrée. Great kings and Capteines in the night are woonted for too sée. The meaner and inferiour sort of others haunted bée. Sir Slomber ouerpast the rest, and of the brothers all Too doo dame Iris message he did only Morphye call. Which doone he waxing luskish, streyght layd downe his drowzy head And softly shroonk his layzye limbes within his sluggish bed. Away flew Morphye through y• aire: no flickring made hi wings▪ And came anon too Trachine. There his fethers of he flings, And in the shape of Ceyx standes before Alcyones bed, Pale, wan, stark naakt, and like a man that was but lately deade. His berde séemd wet, and of his head the heare was dropping drye, And leaning on her bed, with teares he seemed thus too cry. Most wretched woman knowest thou thy louing Ceyx now Or is my face by death disformd? behold mée well, and thow Shalt know mée. For thy husband, thou thy husbandes Ghost shalt sée. No good thy prayers and thy vowes haue done at all too mée. For I am dead. In vayne of my returne no reckning make. The clowdy sowth amid the sea our shippe did tardy take, And tossing it with violent blastes asunder did it shake. And floodes haue filld my mouth which calld in vayne vppon thy name. No persone whom thou mayst misdeeme brings tydings of the same Thou hearest not thereof by false report of flying fame. But I myself: I presently my shipwrecke too thée showe. Aryse therefore and wofull teares vppon thy spouse bestowe. Put moorning rayment on, and let mée not too Limbo go Unmoorned for. In shewing of this shipwrecke Morphye so
Did feyne the voyce of Ceyx, that shée could none other déeme, But that it should bée his in déede. Moreouer he did séeme Too wéepe in earnest: and his handes the verry gesture had Of Ceyx. Quéene Alcyone did grone, and béeing sad Did stirre her armes, and thrust them foorth his body too embrace. In stead whereof shée caught but ayre. The teares ran downe her face. Shée cryed, tarry: whither flyste? toogither let vs go. And all this whyle she was a sléepe. Both with her crying so, And flayghted with the image of her husbands gastly spryght, She started vp: and sought about if fynd him there shee myght. (For why her Groomes awaking with the shréeke had brought a light.) And when shée no where could him fynd, shée gan her face too smyght, And tare her nyghtclothes from her brest, and strake it féercely, and Not passing too vnty her heare shée rent it with her hand. And when her nurce of this her gréef desyrde too vnderstand The cause: Alcyone is vndoone, vndoone and cast away With Ceyx her deare spouse (shée sayd.) Leaue comforting I pray. By shipwrecke he is perrisht: I haue séene him: and I knew His handes. When in departing I too hold him did pursew, I caught a Ghost: but such a Ghost as well discerne I myght Too bée my husbands Nathelesse he had not too my syght His woonted countenance, neyther did his visage shyne so bryght, As héere toofore it had beene woont. I saw him wretched wyght Starke naked, pale, and with his heare still wet: euen verry héere I saw him stand. with that shée lookes if any print appéere Of footing where as he did stand vppon the floore behynd. This this is it that I did feare in farre forecasting mynd, When flying mée I thée desyrde thou shouldst not trust the wynd. But syth thou wentest too thy death, I would that I had gone With thée▪ ah méete, it méete had béene thou shouldst not go alone Without mée. So it should haue come too passe that neyther I Had ouerliued thée, nor yit béene forced twice too dye. Already, absent in the waues now tossed haue I bée. Already haue I perrished. And yit the sea hath thée Without mée. But the cruelnesse were greater farre of mée Than of the sea, if after thy decease I still would striue In sorrow and in anguish still too pyne away aliue.
But neyther will I striue in care too lengthen still my lyfe, Nor (wretched wyght) abandon thée: but like a faythfull wyfe At leastwyse now will come as thy companion. And the herse shall ioyne vs, though not in the selfsame coffin: yit in verse. Although in tumb the bones of vs toogither may not couch, Yit in a grauen Epitaph my name thy name shall touch. Her sorrow would not suffer her too vtter any more. Shée sobd and syght at euery woord, vntill her hart was sore. The morning came, and out shée went ryght pensif too the shor Too that same place in which shée tooke her leaue of him before. Whyle there shée musing stood, and sayd, he kissed mée euen héere, Héere weyëd hée his Anchors vp, héere loosd he from the péere, And whyle shée calld too mynd the things there marked with her eyes: In looking on the open sea, a great way of shée spyes A certeine thing much like a corse come houering on the waue. At first shée dowted what it was. As tyde it néerer draue, Although it were a good way of, yit did it plainely showe Too bée a corce. And though that whose it was shée did not knowe, Yit forbycause it séemd a wrecke, her hart therat did ryse: And as it had sum straunger béene, with water in her eyes Shée sayd, alas poore wretch who ere thou art, alas for her That is thy wyfe, if any bée. And as the waues did stirre, The body floted néerer land: the which the more that shée Behilld, the lesse began in her of stayed wit too bée. Anon it did arriue on shore. Then plainely shée did sée And know it, that it was her feere. Shée shréeked it is hée. And therewithall her face, her heare, and garments shée did teare, And vntoo Ceyx stretching out her trembling handes with feare, Sayd: cumst thou home in such a plyght too mée O husband deere? Returnst in such a wretched plyght? There was a certeine péere That buylded was by hand, of waues the first assaults too breake, And at the hauons mouth too cause the tyde too enter weake. Shée lept theron. (A wonder sure it was shée could doo so) Shée flew, and with her newgrowen winges did beate the ayre as tho. And on the waues a wretched bird shee whisked too and fro. And with her crocking neb then growen too slender bill and round, like one that wayld and moorned still shée made a moaning sound.
Howbéet as soone as she did touch his dumb and bloodlesse flesh, And had embraast his loued limbes with winges made new and fresh, And with her hardened neb had kist him coldly, though in vayne, Folk dowt of Ceyx féeling it too rayse his head did strayne, Or whither that the waues did lift it vp. But surely hée It felt: and through compassion of the Goddes both hée and shée Were turnd too birdes. The loue of them éeke subiect too their fate, Continued after: neyther did the faythfull bond abate Of wedlocke in them béeing birdes: but standes in stedfast state. They treade, and lay, and bring foorth yoong and now theThe kings fisher. Alcyon sitts In wintertime vppon her nest (which on the water flitts A seuennyght. During all which tyme the sea is calme and still, And euery man may too and fro sayle saufly at his will. For Aeölus for his ofsprings sake the windes at home dooth kéepe, And will not let them go abroade for troubling of the déepe. An auncient father séeing them about the brode sea fly, Did prayse theyr loue for lasting too the end so stedfastly. His neyghbour or the selfsame man made answer (such is chaunce) Euen this fowle also whom thou séest vppon the surges glaunce With spindle shanks, (he poynted too the wydegoawld Cormorant) Before that he became a bird, of royall race might vaunt. And if thou couet lineally his pedegrée too séeke, His Auncetors were Ilus, and Assaracus, and éeke Fayre Ganymed who Iupiter did rauish as his ioy, Laomedon and Priamus the last that reygnd in Troy. Stout Hectors brother was this man. And had he not in pryme Of lusty youth béene tane away, his déedes perchaunce in tyme Had purchaast him as great a name as Hector, though that hée Of Dymants daughter Hecuba had fortune borne too bée. For Acsacus reported is begotten to haue béene By scape, in shady Ida on a mayden fayre and shéene Whose name was Alyxothoe, a poore mans daughter that With spade and mattocke for himselfe and his a liuing gat. This Aesacus the Citie hates, and gorgious Court dooth shonne, And in the vnambicious féeldes and woods alone dooth wonne. He séeldoom haunts the towne of Troy, yit hauing not a rude And blockish wit, nor such a hart as could not be subdewd
By loue, he spyde Eperie (whom oft he had pursewd Through all the woodes) then sitting on her father Cebrius brim A drying of her heare ageinst the sonne, which hanged trim Uppon her back. Assoone as that the Nymph was ware of him, She fled as when the grisild woolf dooth scare the fearefull hynd Or when the Fawcon farre from brookes a Mallard happes too fynd. The Troiane knyght ronnes after her, and béeing swift through loue, Purseweth her whom feare dooth force apace her feete to moue. Behold an Adder lurking in the grasse there as shee fled, Did byght her foote with hooked tooth, and in her bodye spred His venim. Shée did cease her flyght and soodein fell downe dead. Her louer being past his witts her carkesse did embrace, And cryde, alas it irketh mée, it irkes mée of this chace. But this I feard not. neyther was the gaine of that I willd Woorth halfe so much. Now twoo of vs thée (wretched soule) haue killd. The wound was giuen thée by the snake, the cause was giuen by mée. The wickedder of both am I: who for too comfort thée Will make thée satisfaction with my death. With that at last Downe from a rocke (the which the waues had vndermynde) he cast Himself intoo the sea. Howbéet dame Tethys pitying him, Receyud him softly, and as he vppon the waues did swim, Shée couered him with fethers. And though fayne he would haue dyde, Shée would not let him. Wroth was he that death was him denyde, And that his soule compelld should bee ageinst his will too byde Within his wretched body still, from which it would depart, And that he was constreynd too liue perforce ageinst his hart. And as he on his shoulders now had newly taken wings, He mounted vp, and downe vppon the sea his boddye dings. His fethers would not let him sinke. In rage he dyueth downe, And despratly he striues himself continually too drowne. His loue did make him leane, long leggs: long neck dooth still remayne. His head is from his shoulders farre: of Sea he is most fayne. And for he vnderneath the waues delyghteth for too driue A name according therevntoo the Latins doo him giue. Finis vndecimi Libri.
¶THE .XII. BOOKE OF Ouids Metamorphosis. RIng Priam béeing ignorant that Aesacus his sonne Did liue in shape of bird, did moorne: and at a tumb wheron His name was written, Hector and his brother solemly Did kéepe an Obit. Paris was not at this obsequye. Within a whyle with rauisht wyfe he brought a lasting warre Home vnto Troy. There followed him a thowsand shippes not farre Conspyrd toogither, with the ayde that all the Greekes could fynd: And vengeance had béene tane foorthwith but that the cruell wynd Did make the seas vnsaylable, so that theyr shippes were fayne At rode at fisshye Avvlys in Baeotia too remayne. Héere as the Greekes according too theyr woont made sacrifyse Too Ioue, and on the Altar old the flame aloft did ryse, They spyde a speckled Snake créepe vp vppon a planetrée bye Uppon the toppe whereof there was among the braunches hye A nest, and in the nest eyght birdes, All which and éeke theyr dam That flickering flew about her losse, the hungry snake did cram Within his mawe. The standers by were all amazde therat. But Calchas Thestors sonne who knew what méening was in that, Sayd▪ wée shall win. Reioyce yée Greekes by vs shall perish Troy But long the tyme will bée before wée may our will enioy. And then he told them how the birds nyne yéeres did signifie Which they before the towne of Troy not taking it should lye. The Serpent as he wound about the boughes and braunches gréene, Became a stone, and still in stone his snakish shape is séene. The seas continewed verry rough and suffred not theyr hoste Imbarked for too passe from thence too take the further coast. Sum thought that Neptune fauored Troy bycause himself did buyld The walles therof. But Calchas(who both knew, and neuer hilld His peace in tyme) declared that the Goddesse Phebe must Appeased bée with virgins blood for wrath conceyued iust. Assoone as pitie yéelded had too cace of puplicke weale, And reason got the vpper hand of fathers louing zeale, So that the Ladye Iphigen before the altar stood Among the wéeping ministers, too giue her maydens blood:
The Goddesse taking pitie, cast a mist before theyr eyes, And as they prayd and stid about too make the sacrifyse, Conueyes her quight away, and with a Hynd her roome supplyes Thus with a slaughter méete for her Diana béeing pleasd, The raging surges with her wrath toogither were appeasd, The thousand shippes had wynd at poope. And when they had abode Much trouble, at the length all safe they gat the Phrygian rode. Amid the world twéene heauen, and earth, and sea, there is a place, Set from the bounds of eche of them indifferently in space, From whence is séene what euer thing is practisd any where, Although the Realme bée nere so farre, and roundly too the eare Commes whatsoeuer spoken is▪ Fame hath his dwelling there. Who in the toppe of all the house is lodged in a towre. A thousand entryes, glades, and holes are famed in this bowre. There are no doores too shet. The doores stand open nyght and day. The house is all of sounding brasse, and roreth euery way, Reporting dowble euery woord it heareth people say. There is no rest within, there is no silence any where. Yit is there not a yelling out: but humming, as it were The sound of surges béeing heard farre of, are like the sound That at the end of thunderclappes long after dooth redound, When Ioue dooth make the clowdes too crack, within the courts is preace Of common people, which too come and go doo neuer ceace. And millions both of trothes and lyes ronne gadding euery where, And woordes confusely flye in heapes. Of which, sum fill the are That heard not of them erst, and sum Colearyers part doo play Too spread abrode the things they heard. And euer by the way The thing that was inuented growes much greater than before, And euery one that getts it by the end addes sumwhat more. Lyght credit dwelleth there. There dwells rash error: There dooth dwell Uayne ioy: There dwelleth hartlesse feare, and Brute that loues too tell Uncertayne newes vppon report, whereof he dooth not knowe The author, and Sedition who fresh rumors loues too sowe. This Fame beholdeth what is doone in heauen, on sea, and land, And what is wrought in all the world he layes to vnderstand. He gaue the Troyans warning that the Gréekes with valeant men And shippes approched, that vnwares they could not take them then.
For Hector and the Troian folk well armed were at hand Too kéepe the coast and bid them bace before they came a land. Protesilay by fatall doome was first that dyde in féeld Of Hectors speare: and after him great numbers mo were killd Of valeant men. That battell did the Gréeks full déerly cost. And Hector with his Phrygian folk of blood no little lost, In trying what the Greekes could doo. The shore was red with blood. And now king Cygnet Neptunes sonne had killed where he stood A thousand Greekes. And now the stout Achilles causd to stay His Charyot: and his lawnce did lea whole bandes of men that day. And séeking Cygnet through the féeld or Hector, he did stray. At last with Cygnet he did méete. For Hector had delay Untill the tenth yeare afterward. Then hasting foorth his horses With flaxen manes, ageinst his fo his Chariot he enforces. And brandisshing his shaking dart, he sayd: O noble wyght A comfort let it bée too thée that such a valeant knyght As is Achilles killeth thée. In saying so he threw A myghty dart, which though it hit the mark at which it flew, Yit perst it not the skinne at all. Now when this blunted blowe Had hit on Cygnets brest, and did no print of hitting showe, Thou Goddesse sonne ({quod} Cygnet) for by fame we doo the knowe) Why woondrest at mée for too sée I can not wounded bée? (Achilles woondred much thereat.) This helmet which yée sée Bedect with horses yellow manes, this shéeld that I doo beare, Defend mée not. For ornaments alonly I them weare. For this same cause armes Mars himself likewyse. I will disarme Myself, and yit vnrazed will I passe without all harme. It is too sum effect, not borne too bée of Neryes race, So that a man be borne of him that with thréeforked mace Rules Nereus and his daughters too, and all the sea besyde. This sayd, he at Achilles sent a dart that should abyde Uppon his sheeld. It perced through the stéele and through nyne fold Of Oxen hydes, and stayd vppon the tenth. Achilles bold Did wrest it out, and forcybly did throwe the same agayne. His bodye béeing hit ageine, vnwounded did remayne, And cléere from any print of wound. The third went éeke in vayne. And yitdid Cygnet too the same giue full his naked brist.
Achilles chafed like a Bull that in the open list With dreadfull hornes dooth push ageinst the scarlet clothes that ther Are hanged vp too make him féerce, and when he would them teare Dooth fynd his wounds deluded. Then Achilles lookt vppon His Iauelings socket, if the head thereof were looce or gone. The head stacke fast. My hand byléeke is weakened then ({quod} hée). And all the force it had before is spent on one I sée. For sure I am it was of strength, both when I first downe threw Lyrnessus walles, and when I did Ile Tenedos subdew, And éeke Axëtions Thebe with her proper blood embrew. And when so many of the folke of Tevvthranie I slew, That with theyr blood Caycus streame became of purple hew. And when the noble Telephus did of my Dart of stéele The dowble force, of wounding and of healing also féele. Yea euen the heapes of men slayne héere by mée, that on this strond Are lying still too looke vppon, doo giue too vnderstond That this same hand of myne both had and still hath strength. This sed, (As though he had distrusted all his dooings ere that sted,) He threw a Dart ageinst a man of Lycia land that hyght Menetes, through whose Curets and his brest he strake him quyght. And when he saw with dying limbes him sprawling on the ground, He stepped too him streyght, and pulld the Iaueling from the wound, And sayd alowd: This is the hand, this is the self same dart With which my hand did strike euen now Menetes too the hart. Ageinst my toother Copemate will I vse the same: I pray Too God it may haue like successe. This sed, without delay He sent it toward Cygnet, and the weapon did not stray, Nor was not shunned. Insomuch it lighted full vppon His shoulder: and it gaue a rappe as if vppon sum ston It lyghted had, rebownding backe. Howbéeit where it hit, Achilles sawe it bloodye, and was vaynly glad of it. For why there was no wound. It was Menetes blood. Then lept He hastly from his Charyot downe, and like a madman stept Too carelesse Cygnet with his swoord. He sawe his swoord did pare His Target and his morion bothe. But when it toucht the bare, His bodye was so hard, it did the edge thereof abate. He could no lengar suffer him too tryumph in that rate,
But with the pommell of his swoord did thump him on the pate, And bobd him well about the brewes a doozen tymes and more, And preacing on him as he still gaue backe amaazd him sore, And troubled him with buffetting, not respetting a whit. Then Cygnet gan too bée afrayd, and mistres béegan too flit Before his eyes, and dimd his syght. And as he still did yéeld, In giuing back, by chaunce he met a stone amid the feeld, Ageinst the which Achilles thrust him back with all his myght, And throwing him ageinst the ground, did cast him bolt vpryght. Then bearing bostowsely with both his knées ageinst his chest, And leaning with his elbowes and his target on his brest, He shet his headpéece cloce and iust, and vnderneathe his chin So hard it straynd, that way for breath was neyther out nor in, And closed vp the vent of lyfe. And hauing gotten so The vpper hand, he went about too spoyle his vanquisht fo. But nought he in his armour found, For Neptune had as tho Transformd him too the fowle whose name he bare but late ago. This labour, this encounter brought the rest of many dayes, And eyther partye in theyr strength a whyle from battell stayes. Now whyle the Phrygians watch & ward vppon the walles of Troy, And Greekes likewyse within theyr trench, there came a day of ioy, In which Achilles for his luck in Cygnets ouerthrow, A Cow in way of sacrifyse on Pallas did bestowe. Whose inwards when he had vppon the burning altar cast And that the acceptable fume had through the ayer past Too Godward, and the holy rytes had had theyr dewes, the rest Was set on boords for men too eate in disshes fynely drest. The princes sitting downe, did féede vppon the rosted flesh, And both theyr thirst and present cares with wyne they did refresh. Not Harpes, nor songs, nor hollowe flutes too héere did them delyght. They talked till they nye had spent the greatest part of nyght. And all theyr communication was of feates of armes in fyght That had béene doone by them or by theyr foes. And euery wyght Delyghts too vppen oftentymes by turne as came about The perills and the narrow brunts himself had shifted out. For what thing should bée talkt béefore Achilles rather? Or What kynd of things than such as theis could séeme more méeter for
Achilles too bée talking of? But in theyr talk most bréeme Was then Achilles victory of Cygnet. It did séeme A woonder that the flesh of him should bée so hard and tough As that no weapon myght haue powre too raze or perce it through, But that it did abate the edge of stéele: It was a thing That both Achilles and the Greekes in woondrous maze did bring. Then Nestor sayd: This Cygnet is the person now alone Of your tyme that defyed stéele, and could bée perst of none. But I haue séene now long ago one Cene of Perrhebye, I sawe one Cene of Perrhebye a thousand wounders defye With vnatteynted bodye. In mount Othris he did dwell: And was renowmed for his déedes: (and which in him ryght well A greater woonder did appéere) he was a woman borne. This vncouth made them all much more amazed than beforne, And euery man desyred him to tell it. And among The rest, Achilles sayd. Declare I pray thée (for wée long Too heare it euery one of vs) O eloquent old man The wisedome of our age: what was that Cene and how he wan Another than his natiue shape, and in what rode, or in What fyght or skirmish, twéene you first acquaintance did béegin, And who in fyne did vanquish him if any vanquisht him. Then Nestor. Though y• length of tyme haue made my senses dim, And dyuers things erst séene in youth now out of myne be gone: Yit beare I still mo things in mynd: and of them all is none Among so many both of peace and warre, that yit dooth take More stedfast roote in memorye. And if that tyme may make A man great store of things through long continuance for too sée, Two hundred yéeres already of my lyfe full passed bée, And now I go vppon the third. This foresayd Ceny was The daughter of one Elatey. In beawty shée did passe The maydens all of Thessaly. From all the Cities bye And from thy Cities also O Achilles came (for why Shée was thy countrywoman) store of wooers who in vayne In hope too win her loue did take great trauell sute and payne. Thy father also had perchaunce attempted héere too matcht But that thy moothers maryage was alreadye then dispatcht, Or shée at least affyanced. But Ceny match with none,
Howbéeit as shée on the shore was walking all alone, The God of sea did rauish her. (so fame dooth make report) And Neptune for the great delight he had in Venus sport, Sayd: Ceny, aske mée what thou wilt, and I will giue it thée. This also bruted is by fame.) The wrong héere doone too mée ({quod} Ceny makes mée wish great things. And therfore too thentent I may no more constreyned bée too such a thing, consent I may no more a woman bée. and if thou graunt theretoo, It is euen all that I desyre, or wish thée for too doo. In bacer tune theis latter woordes were vttred, and her voyce Did séeme a mannes voyce as it was in déede. For too her choyce The God of sea had giuen consent. He graunted him besyde That frée from wounding and from hurt he should from thence abyde, And that he should not dye of stéele. Right glad of this same graunt Away went Ceny, and the féeldes of Thessaly did haunt, And in the feates of Cheualrye from that tyme spent his lyfe. The ouer boldPirithos. Ixions sonne had taken too his wyfe Hippodame. And keuering boordes in bowres of boughes of trées His Clowdbred brothers one by one he placed in degrées. There were the Lordes of Thessaly. I also was among The rest, a chéerefull noyse of feast through all the Pallace roong. Sum made the altars smoke, and sum the brydale carrolls soong. Anon commes in the mayden bryde a goodly wench of face, With wyues and maydens following her with comly gate and grace. Wée sayd that sir Pirithous was happy in his wyfe: Which handsell had deceyued vs wellnéere through soodeine stryfe. For of the cruell Centavvres thou most cruell Evvryt, tho Like as thy stomacke was with wyne farre ouer charged: so Assoone as thou behilldst the bryde, thy hart began too frayne, And doubled with thy droonkennesse thy raging lust did reigne. The feast was troubled by and by with tables ouerthrowen. The bryde was hayled by the head, so farre was furye growen. Féerce Evvryt caught Hippodame, and euery of the rest Caught such as ommed next to hand, or such as likte him best. It was the liuely image of a Citie tane by foes. The house did ring of womens shréekes▪ wée all vp quickly rose. And first sayd Theseus thus. What aylst? art mad O Evvrytus?
That darest (séeing mée aliue) misse Pirithöus? Not knowing that in one thou doost abvse vs bothe? And least He myght haue seemd too speake in vayne, he thrustway such as preast About the bryde, and tooke her from them freating sore thereat. No answere made him Evvrytus: (for such a déede as that Defended could not bee with woordes) but with his sawcye fist He flew at gentle Theseus face, and bd him on the brist. By chaunce hard by, an auncient cuppe of image woork did stand. Which being howge himself more howge sir Theseus tooke in hand, And threwt at Evvryts head. He spewd as well at mouth as wound Mirt cloddes of blood, and brayne and wyne, and on the soyled ground Lay sprawling bolt vpryght. The death of him did set the rest His dowblelimbed brothers so on fyre, that all the quest With one voyce cryed out kill kill. The wyne had giuen them hart. Theyr first encounter was with cuppes & Cannes throwen ouerthwart, And brittle tankerds, and with boawles, pannes, dishes, potts, & trayes, Things seruing late for meate and drinke, and then for bluddy frayes. First Amycus Ophions sonne with out remorse began Too réeue and rob the brydehouse of his furniture. He ran And pulled downe a Lampbeame full of lyghtes, and lifting it Aloft like one that with an Ax dooth fetch his blowe too slit An Oxis necke in sacrifyse, He on the forehead hit A Lapith named Celadon, and crusshed so his bones That none could know him by the face: both eyes flew out at ones. His nose was beaten backe and too his pallat battred slat. One Pelates a Macedone excéeding wroth therat, Pulld out a maple tressles foote, and napt him in the necks, That bobbing with his chin ageinst his brest too ground he becks, And as he spitted out his téeth with blackish blood, he lent Another blowe too Amycus which streyght too hell him sent. Gryne standing by and lowring with a fell grim visage at The smoking Altars, sayd: why vse we not theis same? with that He caught a myghty altar vp with burning fyre thereon, And it among the thickest of the Lapithes threw anon. And twoo he ouer whelmd therewith calld Brote and Orion. This Orions moother Mycale is knowne of certeintye The Moone resisting too haue drawne by witchcraft from the skye.
Full dearely shalt thou by it ({quod} Exadius) may I get A weapon: and with that in stead of weapon, he did set His hand vppon a vowd harts horne that on a Pynetrée hye Was nayld, and with twoo tynes therof he strake out eyther eye Of Gryne: whereof sum stacke vppon the horne, and sum did flye Uppon his beard, and there with blood like ielly mixt did lye, A flaming fyrebrand from amids an Altar Rhaetus snatcht. With which vppon the leftsyde of his head Charaxus latcht A blow that crackt his skull. The blaze among his yellow heare Ran sindging vp, as if dry corne with lightning blased were. And in his wound the seared blood did make a gréeuous sound, As when a peece of stéele red who tane vp with tongs is drownd In water by the smith, it spirts and hisseth in the trowgh. Charaxus from his curled heare did shake the fyre. and thowgh He wounded were, yit caught he vp vppon his shoulders twayne. A stone the Iawme of eyther doore that well would loade a wayne. The masse therof was such as that it would not let him hi His fo. I lighted short: and with the falling downe of it A mate of his that Comet hyght, it all in péeces smit. Then Rhaete restreyning not his ioy, sayd thus: I would the rowt Of all thy mates myght in the selfsame maner proue them sowt. And with his halfeburnt brond the wound he searched new agayne, Not ceasing for to lay on loade vppon his pate amayne, Untill his head was crusht, and of his scalp the bones did swim Among his braynes. In iolly ruffe he passed streyght from him Too Coryt, and Euagrus, and too Dryant on a rowe. Of whom when Coryt (on whose chéekes yoong mossy downe gan grow) Was slayne, what prayse or honour ({quod} Euagrus) hast thou got By killing of a boy? mo woordes him Rhetus suffred not Too speake, but in his open mouth did thrust his burning brand, And downe his throteboll too his chest. Then whisking in his hand His fyrebrand round about his head he féercely did assayle The valyant Dryant. but with him he could not so preuayle. For as he triumpht in his lucke, procéeding for too make Continuall slaughter of his foes, sir Dryant with a stake (Whose poynt was hardned in the fyre) did cast at him a oyne And thrust him through the place in which the neck and shoulders ioyne.
He groand and from his cannell bone could scarcely pull the stake. And béeing foyled with his blood too flyght he did him take. Arnaeus also ran away, and Lycidas likewyse. And Medon (whose ryght shoulderplate was also wounded) flyes. So did Pisenor, so did Cavvne, and so did Mermeros Who late outronning euery man, now wounded slower goes: And so did Phole, and Menelas, and Abas who was woont Too make a spoyle among wylde Boares as oft as he did hunt: And éeke the wyzarde Astylos who counselled his mates Too leaue that fray: but he too them in vayne of leauing prates. He éeke too Nessus (who for feare of wounding séemed shye) Sayd, fly not thou shalt scape this fray of Hercles bowe too dye. But Lycid and Evvrinomos, and Imbreus, and Are Escapte not death. Sir Dryants hand did all alike them spare. Cayneius also (though that he in flying were not slacke, Yit was he wounded on the face: For as he looked backe, A weapons poynt did hit him full midway betwéene the eyes, Wheras the nore and forehead méete. For all this deane, yit lyes Aphipnas snorting fast a sléepe not mynding for to wake, Wrapt in a cloke of Bearskinnes which in Ossa mount were take. And in his lither hand he hilld a potte of wyne. Whom when That Phorbas saw (although in vayne) not medling with them, then He set his fingars too the thong: and saying, thou shalt drink Thy wyne with water taken from the Stygian fountaynes brink, He threw his dart at him. The dart (as he that tyme by chaunce Lay bolt vpright vppon his backe) did through his throteboll glaunce. He dyde and felt no payne at all. The blacke swart blood gusht out, And on the bed and in the potte fell flushing lyke a spout. I saw Petreius go about too pull out of the ground An Oken tree. But as he had his armes about it round, And shaakt it too and fro too make it looce, Pirithous cast A Dart which nayled too the trée his wrything stomacke fast. Through prowesse of Pirithous (men say) was Lycus slayne. Through prowesse of Pirithous dyde Crome. But they both twayne Lesse honour too theyr conquerour were, than Dyctis was, or than Was Helops. Helops with a dart was striken which though ran His head, and eutring at the ryght eare too the left eare went.
And Dyctis from a slipprye knappe downe slyding, as he ment Too shonne Perithöus preaching on, fell headlong downe, and with His howgenesse brake the greatest Ash that was in all the frith, And goard his gutts vppon y• stump. Too wreake his death cōmes Phare: And from the mount a mighty rocke with bothe his handes he tare: Which as he was about too throwe, Duke Theseus did preuent, And with an Oken plant vppon his mighty elbowe lent Him such a blowe, as that he brake the bones, and past no further. For leysure would not serue him then his maymed corce too murther. He lept on hygh Bianors backe, who none was woont too beare Besydes himself. Ageinst his sydes his knées fast nipping were, And with his left hand taking hold vppon his foretoppe heare He cuft him with his knubbed plant about the frowning face, And made his wattled browes too breake. And with his Oken mace He ouerthrew Nedimnus: and Lycespes with his dart, And Hippasus whose beard did hyde his brest the greater part: And Riphey tallar than the trées, and Therey who was woont Among the hilles of Thessaly for cruell Beares too hunt, And beare them angry home alyue. It did Demoleon spyght That Theseus had so good successe and fortune in his fyght. An old long Pynetrée rooted fast he straue with all his myght Too pluck vp whole bothe trunk & roote. which when he could not bring Too passe, he brake it of, and at his emnye did it fling. But Theseus by admonishment of heauenly Pallas (so He would haue folke beleue it were) start backe a great way fro The weapon as it came. Yit fell it not without some harme. It cut from Crantors left syde bulke, his shoulder, brest, and arme. This Crantor was thy fathers Squyre (Achilles) and was giuen Him by Amyntor ruler of the Dolops, who was driuen By battell for too giue him as an hostage for the peace Too bée obserued faythfully. When Peleus in the preace A great way of behilld him thus falne dead of this same wound, O Crantor déerest man too mée of all aboue the ground, Hold héere an obitgift hée sayd: and both with force of hart And hand, at stout Demoleons head he threw an asshen dart, Which brake the watling of his ribbes, and sticking in the bone, Did shake. He pulled out the steale with much a doo alone.
The head therof stacke still behynd among his lungs and lyghts Enforst too courage with his payne, he ryseth streight vprights, And pawing at his emny with his horsish séete, he smyghts Uppon him. Peleus bare his strokes vppon his burganet, And fenst his shoulders with his sheeld, and euermore did set His weapon vpward with the poynt, which by his shoulders perst Through both his brestes at one full blowe. Howbéet your father erst Had killed Hyle and Phlegrye, and Hiphinöus aloof And Danes who boldly durst at hand his manhod put in proof. Too theis was added Dorylas, who ware vppon his head A cap of woolues skinne. And the hornes of Oxen dyd red With blood were then his weapon. I (for then my courage gaue Mee strength sayd: sée how much thy hornes lesse force than Iron haue. And therewithall with manly might a dart at him I daue. Which when he could not shonne, he clapt his right hand flat vppon His forehead where the wound should bée. For why his hand anon Was nayled too his forehead fast. Hee roared out amayne. And as he stood amazed and began too faynt for payne, Your father Peleus (for he stood hard by him) strake him vnder The middle belly with his swoord, and ript his womb asunder. Out girdes mée Dorill streyght, and trayles his guttes vppon ye ground And trampling vnderneath his féete did breake them, and they wound About his leggs so snarling, that he could no further go, But fell downe dead with empty womb Nought booted Cyllar tho His beawtye in that frentick fray, (at leastwyse if wée graunt That any myght in that straunge shape, of natures beawtye vaunt.) His beard began but then too bud: his beard was like the gold: So also were his yellowe lokes, which goodly too behold Midway beneath his shoulders hung. There rested in his face A sharpe and liuely cheerfulnesse with swéete and pleasant grace. His necke, brest, shoulders, armes, and hands, as farre as he was man, Were such as neuer caruers woork yit stayne them could or can. His neather part likewyse (which was a horse) was euery whit Full equall with his vpper part, or little woorse than it. For had yee giuen him horses necke, and head, he was a beast For Castor too haue ridden on. So bouly was his brest: So handsome was his backe too beare a saddle; and his heare
Was blacke as ieate, but that his tayle and féete milk whyghtish were. Full many Femaes of is race did wish him too theyr make. But only dame Hylonome for louer he did take. Of all the halfbrutes in the woodes there did not any dwell More comly than Hylonome. She vie herself so well In dalyance, and in louing, and in vttring of her loue, That shée alone hilid Cyllarus. As much as did behoue In suchye limbes, shée trimmed them as most the eye might moue. With combing, smoothe shée made her heare: shée wallowed her full oft In Roses and in Rosemarye, or Uiolets sweete and soft: Sumtyme shée caryed Lillyes whyght: and twyce a day shée washt Her visage in the spring that from the toppe of Pagase past: And in the streame shee twyce a day did bath her limbes: and on Her leftsyde or her shoulders came the comlyest things, And none But fynest skinnes of choycest beasts. Alike eche loued other: Toogither they among the hilles roamd vp and downe: toogither They went too couert: and that tyme toogither they did enter The Lapithes house, and there the fray toogither did aduenter. A dart on Cyllars left syde came, (I know not who it sent) Which sumwhat vnderneathe his necke his brest a sunder splent. As lyghtly as his hart was raazd, no sooner was the dart Pluckt out, but all his bodye wext stark cold and dyëd swart. Immediatly Hylonome his dying limbes vp stayd, And put her hand vppon the wound too stoppe the blood, and layd Her mouth too his, and labored sore too stay his passing spryght. But when shée sawe him throughly dead, then speaking woordes which might Not too my hearing come for noyse, shée stikt herself vppon The weapon that had gored him, and dyde with him anon Embracing him béetwéene her armes. There also stood before Myne eyes the grim Pheöcomes both man and horse who wore A Lyons skinne vppon his acke fast knit with knotts afore. He snatching vp a timber log (which scarcely twoo good téeme Of Oxen could haue stird) did throwe the same with force extréeme At Phonolenyes sonne. The logge him all in fitters strake, And of his head the braynepan in a thousand peeces brake, That at his mouth, his eares, and eyes, and at his nosethrills too, His crusshed brayne came roping out as creame is woont too doo
From siues or riddles made of wood, or as a Cullace out From streyner or from Colender. But as he went about Too strippe him from his harnesse as he lay vppon the ground, (Your father knoweth this full well) my sword his gutts did wound, Teleboäs and Cthonius bothe, were also slaine by mée. Sir Cthonius for his weapon had a forked bough of trée. The toother had a dart. His dart did wound. mée you may sée The scarre therof remayning yit. Then was the tyme that I Should sent haue béene too conquer Troy. Then was the tyme that I Myght through my force and prowesse, if not vanquish Hector stout, Yit at the least haue hilld him wag, I put you out of Dout. But then was Hector no body: or but a babe. And now Am I forspent and worne with yéeres. What should I tell you how Piretus dyde by Periphas? Or wherefore should I make Long processe for too tell you of sir Ampycus that strake The fowrefoote Oecle on the face with dart of Cornell trée. The which had neyther head nor poynt? Or how that Macaree Of Mountaine Pelithronye with a leauer lent a blowe Too Erigdupus on the brest which did him ouerthrowe? Full well I doo remember that Cymelius threw a dart Which lyghted full in Nesseyes flank about his priuie part. And think not you that Mops the sonne of Ampycus could doo No good but onely prophesye. This stout Odites whoo Had bothe the shapes of man and horse, by Mopsis dart was slayne, And labouring for too speake his last he did but striue in vayne. For Mopsis dart toogither nayld his toong and neather chappe, And percing through his throte did make a wyde and deadly gappe. Fyue men had Cene already slayne: theyr wounds I cannot say: The names and nomber of them all ryght well I beare away. The names of them were Stiphelus, and Brome, and Helimus, Pyracmon with his forest bill, and stout Antimachus. Out steppes the biggest Centavvre there howge Latreus armed in Alesus of Aemathias spoyle slayne late before by him. His yéeres were mid twéene youth and age, his courage still was yoong, And on his abrun head hore heares péerd héere and there amoong His furniture was then a swoord, a target and a lawnce Aemathian like. Too bothe the parts he did his face aduaunce,
And brandishing his weapon braue, in circlewyse did prawnce About, and stoutly spake theis woordes. And must I beare with yow Dame Cenye? for none other than a moother (I auow) No better than a moother will I cout thée whyle I liue. Remembrest not what shape by birth dame nature did the giue Forgettst thou how thou purchasedst this counterfetted shape Of man? Consyderest what thou art by birth? and how for rape Thou art become the thing thou art? Go take thy distaffe, and Thy spindle, and in spinning yarne go exercyse thy hand. Let men alone with feates of armes. As Latreus made this stout, And scornefull taunting in a ring still turning him about, This Cenye with a dart did hit him full vppon the syde Where as the horse and man were ioynd toogither in a hyde. The strype made Latreus mad: and with his lawnce in rage he stracke Uppon sir Cenyes naked ribbes. The lawnce rebounded backe Like haylestones from a tyled house, or as a man should pat Small stones vppon a dromslets head. He came more néere with that, And in his brawned syde did stryue too thrust his swoord. There was No way for swoord too enter in. Yit shalt thou not so passe My handes (sayd he.) Well sith the poynt is blunted thou shalt dye Uppon the edge: and with that woord he fetcht his blow awrye, And sydling with a swéeping stroke along his belly smit. The strype did giue a clinke as if it had on marble hit. And therewithall the swoord did breake, and on his necke did lyght. When Ceny had sufficiently giuen Latreus leaue too smyght His flesh which was vnmaymeable. Well now ({quod} he) lets see, If my swoord able bée or no too byght the flesh of thée. In saying so, his dreadfull swoord as farre as it would go He vnderneathe his shoulder thrust, and wrinching too and fro Among his gutts, made wound in wound Behold with hydeous crye The dowblemembred Centavvres sore abasht vppon him flye, And throwe theyr weapons all at him. Theyr weapons downe did fall As if they had rebated béene, and Cenye for them all Abydes vnstriken through. Yea none was able lood too drawe. The straungenesse of the cace made all amazed that it sawe. Fy, fy for shame ({quod} Monychus) that such a rable can Not ouercome one wyght alone, who scarcely is a man.
Although (too say the very truthe) he is the man, and wée Through fayntnesse that that he was borne by nature for too bée. What profits theis huge limbes of ours? what helpes our dowble force? Or what auayles our dowble shape of man as well as horse By puissant nature ioynd in one? I can not thinke that wée Of souereigne Goddesse Iuno were begot, or that wée bée Ixions sonnes, who was so stout of courage and so hault, As that he durst on Iunos loue attempt too giue assault. The emny that dooth vanquish vs is scarcely half a man. Whelme blocks, & stones, & mountaynes whole vppon his hard brayne pan: And presse yée out his liuely ghoste with trées. Let timber choke His chappes, let weyght enforce his death in stead of wounding stroke. This sayd: by chaunce he gets a trée blowne downe by blustring blasts Of Southerne wynds, and on his fo with all his myght it casts, And gaue example too the rest too doo the like. Within A whyle the shadowes which did hyde mount Pehon waxed thin: And not a trée was left vppon mount Othris ere they went. Sir Cenye vnderneathe this greate howge pyle of timber pent, Did chauf and on his shoulders hard the heauy logges did beare. But when aboue his face and head the trées vp stacked were, So that he had no venting place too drawe his breth: One whyle He faynted: and anotherwhyle he heaued at the pyle, Too tumble downe the loggs that lay so heauy on his backe, And for too winne the open ayre ageine aboue the stacke: As if the mountayne Ida (lo) which yoonder we doo sée So hygh, by earth quake at a tyme should chaunce to shaken bée. Men dowt what did become of him. Sum hold opinion that The burthen of the woodes had driuen his soule too Limbo flat. But Mopsus sayd it was not so. For he did sée a browne Bird flying from amid the stacke and towring vp and downe. It was the first tyme and the last that euer I behild That fowle. When Mopsus softly saw him soring in the féeld, He looked wistly after him, and cryed out on hye. Hayle péerlesse perle of Lapith race, hayle Ceny, late ago A valeant knyght, and now a bird of whom there is no mo. The author caused men beléeue the matter too bee so. Our sorrow set vs in a rage. It was too vs a gréef
That by so many foes one knyght was killd without reléef. Then ceast wee not too wreake our éene till most was slaine in fyght, And that the rest discomfitd were fled away by nyght. As Nestor all the processe of this battell did reherce Betwéene the valeant Lapithes and misshapen Centavvres ferce, Tlepolemus displeased sore that Hercules was past With silence, could not hold his peace, but out theis woordes did cast. My Lord, I muse you should forget my fathers prayse so quyght. For often vntoo mée himself was woonted too recite, How that the clowdbred folk by him were chéefly put too flyght. Ryght sadly Nestor answerd thus. Why should you mée constreyne Too call too mynd forgotten gréefs? and for to réere ageine The sorrowes now outworne by tyme? or force mée too declare The hatred and displeasure which I too your father bare? In sooth his dooings greater were than myght bée well beléeued. He fild the world with high renowme which nobly he atchéeued. Which thing I would I could denye. For neyther set wee out Deïphobus, Polydamas, nor Hector that most stout And valeant knyght the strength of Troy. For whoo will prayse his fo? Your father ouerthrew the walles of Messen long ago, And razed Pyle, and Ely townes vnwoorthye seruing so. And feerce ageinst my fathers house hée vsde bothe swoord and fyre. And (not too speake of others whom he killed in his tre) Twyce six wée were the sonnes of Nele all lusty gentlemen. Twyce six of vs (excepting mée) by him were murthred then. The death of all the rest myght seeme a matter not so straunge: But straunge was Periclymens death whoo had the powre too chaunge And leaue and take what shape he list (by Neptune too him giuen, The founder of the house of Nele.) For when he had béene driuen Too try all shapes, and none could help: he last of all became The fowle that in his hooked féete dooth beare the flasshing flame Sent downe from heauen by Iupiter. He practising those birds, With flapping wings, and bowwing beake, and hooked talants girds At Hercle, and béescratcht his face. Too certeine (I may say) Thy father amde his shaft at him. For as hée towring lay Among the clowdes, he hit him vnderneath the wing. The stroke Was small: Howbéet bycause therwith the sinewes being broke,
He wanted strength too maynteine flyght, he fell me too the ground, Through weakenesse of his wing. The shaft that sticked in the wound, By reason of the burthen of his bodye perst his syde, And at the leftsyde of his necke all bloodye foorth did glyde. Now tell mée O thou beawtyfull Lord Amirall of the fléete Of Rhodes, if mée too speake the prayse of Hercle it bée méete. But least that of my brothers deathes men think I doo desyre A further vendge than silence of the prowesse of thy syre, I loue thée euen with all my hart, and take thée for my fréend. When Nestor of his pleasant tales had made this fréendly end, They called for a boll of wyne, and from the table went, And all the resdew of the nyght in sléeping soundly spent. But neptune like a father tooke the matter sore too hart That Cygnet too a Swan he was constreyned too conuert. And hating féerce Achilles, he did wreake his cruell téene Uppon him more vncourteously than had beséeming béene. For when the warres well neere full twyce fyue yéeres had lasted. Hée Unshorne Apollo thus bespake. O neuew vntoo mée Most déere of all my brothers impes, who helpedst mée too lay Foundation of the walles of Troy for which we had no pay, And canst thou syghes forbeare too sée the Asian Empyre fall? And dooth it not lament thy hart when thou too mynd doost call So many thousand people slayne in kéeping Ilion wall? Or (too thentent particlerly I doo not speake of all) Remembrest thou not Hectors Ghost whoo harryed was about His towne of Troy? where nerethelesse Achilles that same stout And farre in fyght more butcherly, whoo stryues with all his myght Too stroy the woorke of mée and thée, liues still in healthfull plyght▪ If euer hée doo come within my daunger he shall féele What force is in my tryple mace. But sith with swoord of stéele I may not méete him as my fo, I pray thée vnbéeware Go kill him with a sodeine shaft and rid mée of my care. Apollo did consent: as well his vncle for too please, As also for a pryuate grudge himself had for too ease. And in a clowd he downe among the host of Troy did slyde, Where Paris dribbling out his shaftes among the Gréekes hée spyde: And telling him what God he was, sayd wherfore doost thou waast
Thyne arrowes on the simple sort? It any care thou haste Of those that are thy fréendes, go turne ageinst Achilles head, And like a man reuendge on him thy brothers that are dead. In saying this, he brought him where Achilles with his brond Was beating downe the Troiane folk, and leueld so his hond As that Achilles tumbled downe starke dead vppon the lond. This was the onely thing wherof the old king Priam myght Take comfort after Hectors death. That stout and valeant knyght Achilles whoo had ouerthrowen so many men in fyght, Was by that coward carpet knyght béeréeued of his lyfe. Whoo like a caytif stale away the Spartane princes wyfe. But if of weapon womanish he had foreknowen it had His destnye béene too lose his lyfe, he would haue béene more glad That Quéene Penthesileas bill had slaine him out of hand. Now was the feare of Phrygian folk, the onely glory, and Defence of Gréekes, that péerelesse prince in armes, Achilles turnd Too asshes. That same God that had him armd, him also burnd. Now is he dust: and of that great Achilles bydeth still. A thing of nought, that scarcely can a little coffin fill. Howbéet his woorthy fame dooth lyue, and spreadeth ouer all The world, a measure méete sor such a persone too béefall. This matcheth thée Achilles full. And this can neuer dye. His target also (too thentent that men myght playnly spye What wyghts it was) did moue debate, and for his armour burst Out deadly foode. Not Diomed, nor Aiax Oylye durst Make clayme or chalendge too the same, nor Atreus yoonger sonne, Nor yit his elder, though in armes much honour they had wonne. Alone the sonnes of Telamon and Laërt did assay Which of them twoo of that great pryse should beare the bell away. But Agamemnon from himself the burthen putts, and cléeres His handes of enuye, causing all the Capteines and the Péeres Of Greece too méete amid the camp toogither in a place, Too whom he put the héering and the iudgement of the cace. Finis duodecimi Libri.
¶THE .XIII. BOOKE OF Ouids Metamorphosis. THe Lordes and Capteynes being set toogither with the King, And all the souldiers standing round about them in a ring, The owner of the seuenfold shéeld, too theis did Aiax ryse. And (as he could not brydle wrath) he cast his frowning eyes Uppon the shore and on the fleete that there at Anchor lyes And throwing vp his handes, O God and must wee plead ({quod} hée) Our case before our shippes? and must Vlysses stand with mee? But like a wretch he ran his way when Hector came with fyre, Which I defending from theis shippes did force him too retyre. It easyer is therefore with woordes in print too maynteine stryfe, Than for too fyght it out with fists. But neyther I am ryfe In woordes, nor hée in déedes. For looke how farre I him excell In battell and in feates of armes: so farre beares hée the bell From mée in talking. Neyther think I requisite too tell My actes among you. You your selues haue séene them verry well. But let Vlysses tell you his doone all in hudther mudther, And whervntoo the only nyght is priuy and none other. The pryse is great (I doo confesse.) For which wée stryue. But yit It is dishonour vntoo mée, for that in clayming it So bace a persone standeth in contention for the same. Too think it myne already, ought too counted bée no shame Nor pryde in mée: although the thing of ryght great valew bée Of which Vlysses standes in hope. For now alreadye hée Hath wonne the honour of this pryse, in that when he shall sit Besydes the quisshon, he may brag he straue with mée for it. And though I wanted valiantnesse, yit should nobilitée Make with mée. I of Telamon am knowne the sonne too bée Who vnder valeant Hercules the walles of Troy did scale, And in the shippe of Pagasa too Colchos land did sayle. His father was that Aeäcus whoo executeth ryght Among the ghostes where Sisyphus heaues vp with all his myght The massye stone ay tumbling downe. The hyghest Ioue of all Acknowledgeth this Aeäcus, and dooth his sonne him call. Thus am I Aiax the third from Ioue. Yit let this Pedegrée
O Achyues in this case of myne avaylable not bée, Onlesse I prooue it fully with Achylles too agrée He was my brother, and I clayme that was my brothers. Why Shouldst thou that art of Sisyphs blood, and for too filch and lye Expressest him in euery poynt, by foorged pedegrée Aly thée too the Aeacyds, as though we did not see Thée too the house of Aeäcus, a straunger for too bée? And is it reason that you should this armour mée denye Bycause I former was in armes, and néeded not a spye Too fetch mée foorth? Or think you him more woorthye it too haue, That came too warrefare hindermost, and feynd himself too raue, Bycause he would haue shund the warre? vntill a suttler head And more vnprofitable for himself, sir Palamed Escryde the crafty fetches of his fearefull hart, and drew Him foorth a warfare which he sought so cowardly too eschew? Must he now néedes enioy the best and richest armour? whoo Would none at all haue worne onlesse he forced were thertoo? And I with shame bée put besyde my cousin germanes gifts Bycause too shun the formest brunt of warres I sought no shifts? Would God this mischéef mayster had in verrye deede béene mad, Or else beléeued so too bée: and that wée neuer had Brought such a panion vntoo Troy. Then should not Paeans sonne In Lemnos like an outlawe too the shame of all vs wonne. Who lurking now (as men report) in woodes and caues, dooth moue The verry flints with syghes and grones, and prayers too God aboue Too send Vlysses his desert. Which prayer (if there bée A God) must one day take effect. And now béehold how hée By othe a Souldier of our Camp, yea and as well as wée A Capteine too, alas, (who was by Hercules assignde Too haue the kéeping of his shafts,) with payne and hungar pynde, Is clad and fed with fowles, and dribs his arrowes vp and downe At birds, which were by destinye preparde too stroy Troy towne. Yit liueth hée bycause hée is not still in companie With sly Vlysses. Palamed that wretched knyght perdie, Would éeke he had abandond béene. For then should still the same Haue béene alyue: or at the least haue dyde without our shame. But this companion bearing (ah) too well in wicked mynd
His madnesse which sir Palamed by wisdome out did fynd, Appeached him of treason that he practysde too betray The Gréekish hoste. And for too bouch the fact, he shewd streyght way A masse of goold that he himself had hidden in his tent, And forged Letters which he feynd from Priam too bée sent. Thus eyther by his murthring men or else by banishment Abateth hée the Gréekish strength. This is Vlysses fyght. This is the feare he puttes men in. But though he had more might Than Nestor hath, in eloquence he shal not compasse mée Too think his leawd abandoning of Nestor for too bée No fault: who béeing cast behynd by wounding of his horse, And slowe with age, with calling on Vlysses waxing hoarce, Was nerethelesse betrayd by him. Sir Diomed knowes this cryme Is vnsurmysde. For he himselfe did at that present tyme Rebuke him oftentymes by name, and féercely him vpbrayd With flying from his fellowe so who stood in néede of ayd. With ryghtfull eyes dooth God behold the déedes of mortall men. Lo, he that helped not his fréend wants help himself agen. And as he did forsake his fréend in tyme of néede: so hée Did in the selfsame perrill fall forsaken for too bée. He made a rod too beat himself. He calld and cryed out Uppon his fellowes. Streight I came: and there I saw the lout Bothe quake and shake for feare of death, and looke as pale as clout. I set my shéeld betwéene him and his foes, and him bestrid: And savde the dastards lyfe. small prayse redoundes of that I did. But if thou wilt contend with mée, lets to the selfe same place Agein: bée wounded as thou wart: and in the foresayd case Of feare, beset about with foes: cowch vnderneath my shéeld: And then contend thou with mée there amid the open féeld. Howbéet, I had no sooner rid this champion of his foes, But where for woundes he scarce before could totter on his toes, He ran away apace, as though he nought at all did ayle. Anon commes Hector too the féeld and bringeth at his tayle The Goddes. Not only thy hart there (Vlysses) did the fayle, But euen the stowtest courages and stomacks gan too quayle. So great a terrour brought he in. Yit in the midds of all His bloody ruffe, I coapt with him, and with a foyling fall
Did ouerthrowe him too the ground. Another tyme, when hée Did make a chalendge, you my Lordes by lot did choose out mée, And I did match him hand too hand. Your wisshes were not vayne. For if you aske mée what successe our combate did obteine, I came away vnvanquished. Behold the men of Troy Brought fyre and swoord, and all the féendes our nauye too destroy. And where was slye Vlysses then with all his talk so smooth? This brest of myne was fayne too fence your thousand shippes forsooth The hope of your returning home. For sauing that same day So many shippes, this armour giue. But (if that I shall say The truth) the greater honour now this armour beares away. And our renownes toogither link. For (as of reason ought) An Aiax for this armour, not an armour now is sought For Aiax. Let Dulychius match with theis, the horses whyght Of Rhesus, dastard Dolon, and the coward carpetknyght King Priams Helen, and the stelth of Palladye by nyght. Of all theis things was nothing doone by day nor nothing wrought Without the helpe of Diomed. And therefore if yée thought Too giue them too so small deserts, deuyde the same, and let Sir Diomed haue the greater part. But what should Ithacus get And if he had them? Who dooth all his matters in the dark, Who neuer weareth armour, who shootes ay at his owne mark Too trappe his o by stelth vnwares? The very headpéece may With brightnesse of the glistring gold his priuie feates bewray And shew him lurking. Neyther well of force Dulychius were The weyght of great Achilles helme vppon his pate too weare It cannot but a burthen bée (and that ryght great) too beare (With whose same shrimpish armes of his) Achilles myghty speare. Agen his target grauen with the whole howge world theron Agrées not with a fearefull hand, and chéefly such a one As taketh filching euen by kynd. Thou Lozell thou doost séeke A gift that will but weaken thée▪ which if the folk of Gréeke Shall giue thée through theyr ouersyght, it will bée vntoo thée Occasion, of thyne emnyes spoyld not feared for too bée And flyght (wherin thou coward, thou all others mayst outbrag) Will hindred bée when after thée such masses thou shalt drag. Moreouer this thy shéeld that féeles so séeld the force of fyght
Is sound. But myne is gasht and hakt and stricken thurrough quyght A thousand tymes, with bearing blowes. And therfore myne must walk And put another in his stead. But what néedes all this talk? Lets now bée seene another whyle what eche of vs can doo. The thickest of our armed foes this armour throwe intoo, And bid vs fetch the same fro thence. And which of vs dooth fetch The same away, reward yée him therewith. Thus farre did stretch The woordes of Aiax. At the ende whereof there did ensew A muttring of the souldiers, till Laertis sonne the prew Stood vp, and raysed soberly his eyliddes from the ground (On which he had a little whyle them pitched in a stound) And looking on the noblemen who longd his woordes too héere He thus began with comly grace and sober pleasant chéere. My Lordes, if my desyre and yours myght erst haue taken place, It should not at this present tyme haue béene a dowtfull cace, What person hath most ryght too this great pryse for which wée stryue. Achilles should his armour haue, and wee still him alyue. Whom sith that cruell destinie too both of vs denyes, With that same woord as though he wept, he wypte his watry eyes) What wyght of reason rather ought too bée Achilles heyre, Than he through whom too this your camp Achilles did repayre? Alonly let it not auayle sir Aiax héere, that hée Is such a dolt and grossehead, as he shewes himself too bée Ne let my wit (which ay hath done you good O Gréekes) hurt mée. But suffer this mine eloquence (such as it is) which now Dooth for his mayster speake, and oft ere this hath spoke for yow, Bée vndisdeynd. Let none refuse his owne good gifts he brings. For as for stocke and auncetors, and other such like things Wherof our selues no fownders are, I scarcely dare them graunt Too bée our owne. But forasmuch as Aiax makes his vaunt Too bée the fowrth from Ioue: euen Ioue the founder is also Of my house: and than fowre descents I am from him no mo. Laërtes is my father, and Arcesius his, and hée Begotten was of Iupiter. And in this pedegrée Is neyther any damned soule, nor outlaw as yée sée. Moreouer by my moothers syde I come of Mercuree, Another honor too my house. Thus both by fathers syde
And moothers (as you may perceyue) I am too Goddes alyde. But neyther for bycause I am a better gentleman Than Aiax by the moothers syde, nor that my father can Auouch himself vngiltye of his brothers blood, doo I This armour clayme. wey you the case by merits vprightly. Prouyded no prerogatyue of birthryght Aiax beare, For that his father Telamon, and Peleus brothers were. Let only prowesse in this pryse the honour beare away. Or if the case on kinrid or on birthryght séeme too stay, His father Peleus is aliue, and Pyrrhus éeke his sonne. What tytle then can Aiax make. This géere of ryght should woone Too Phthya, or too Scyros Ile. And Tevvcer is as well Achilles vncle as is hée. Yit dooth not Tevvcer mell. And if he did, should hée obteyne? well sith the cace dooth rest On tryall which of vs can proue his dooings too bée best, I néedes must say my déedes are mo than well I can expresse: Yit will I shew them orderly as néere as I can gesse. Foreknowing that her sonne should dye, The Lady Thetis hid Achilles in a maydes attyre. By which fyne slyght shée did All men deceyue, and Aiax too. This armour in a packe With other womens tryflyng toyes I caryed on my backe, A bayte too treyne a manly hart. Appareld like a mayd Achilles tooke the speare and shéeld in hand, and with them playd. Then sayd I: O thou Goddesse sonne, why shouldst thou bée afrayd Too raze great Troy, whoose ouerthrowe for thée is onely stayd? And laying hand vppon him I did send him (as you sée) Too valeant dooings méete for such a valeant man as hée. And therfore all the deedes of him are my déedes. I did wound King Teleph with his speare, and when he lay vppon the ground, I was intreated with the speare too heale him safe and sound. That Thebe lyeth ouerthrowne, is my déede you must think I made the folk of Tenedos and Lesbos for too shrink. Both Chryse and Cillas Phebus townes and Scyros I did take. And my ryght hand Lyrnessus walles too ground did leuell make. I gaue you him that should confound (besydes a number mo) The valeant Hector. Hector that our most renowmed fo Is slayne by mée. This armour héere I sew agein too haue
This armour by the which I found Achilles. I it gaue Achilles whyle he was aliue: and now that he is gone I clayme it as myne owne agein. What tyme the gréefe of one Had perst the harts of all the Gréekes, and that our thousand sayle At Avvlis by Evvboya stayd, bycause the wyndes did fayle, Continewing eyther none at all or cléene ageinst vs long, And that our Agamemnon was by destnyes ouerstrong Commaunded for too sacrifyse his gillesse daughter too Diana, which her father then refusing for too doo Was angry with the Godds themselues, and though he were a king Continued also fatherlyke: by reason, I did bring His gentle nature too relent for publike profits sake. I must confesse (whereat his grace shall no displeasure take) Before a parciall iudge I vndertooke a ryght hard cace. Howbéeit for his brothers sake, and for the royall mace Committed, and his peoples weale, at length he was content Too purchace prayse wyth blood. Then was I too the moother sent, Who not perswaded was too bée, but compast with sum guyle. Had Aiax on this errand gone, our shippes had all this whyle Lyne still there yit for want of wynd. Moreouer I was sent Too Ilion as ambassadour. I boldly thither went, And entred and behilld the Court, wherin there was as then Great store of princes, Dukes, Lords, knyghts, and other valeant men. And yit I boldly nerethelesse my message did at large The which the whole estate of Greece had giuen mee erst in charge. I made complaint of Paris, and accusde him too his head. Demaunding restitution of Quéene Helen that same sted And of the bootye with her tane. Both Priamus the king And éeke Antenor his alye the woordes of mée did sting. And Paris and his brothers, and the resdew of his trayne That vnder him had made the spoyle, could hard and scarce refrayne There wicked hands. You Menelay doo know I doo not feyne. And that day was the first in which wée ioyntly gan susteyne A tast of perrills, store whereof did then behind remayne. It would bee ouerlong too tell eche profitable thing That during this long lasting warre I well too passe did bring, By force as well as pollycie. For after that the furst
Encounter once was ouerpast, our emnyes neuer durst Giue battell in the open féeld, but hild themselues within Theyr walles and bulwarks till the tyme the tenth yéere did begin, Now what didst thou of all that whyle, that canst doo nought but stréeke? Or too what purpose seruedst thou? For if thou my déedes séeke, I practysd sundry pollycies too trappe our foes vnware: I fortifyde our Camp with trench which heretoofore lay bare: I hartned our companions with a quiet mynd too beare The longnesse of the wéery warre: I taught vs how wee were Bothe too bée fed and furnished: and too and fro I went Too places where the Counsell thought most méete I should bée sent. Behold the king deceyued in his dreame by false pretence Of Ioues commaundement, bade vs rayse our séedge and get vs hence. The author of his dooing so may well bée his defence. Now Aiax should haue letted this, and calld them backe ageine Too sacke the towne of Troy. he should haue fought with myght & maine. Why did he not restreyne them when they ready were too go? Why tooke he not his swoord in hand? why gaue he not as tho Sum counsell for the fléeting folk too follow at the brunt? In fayth it had a tryfle béene too him that ay is woont. Such vaunting in his mouth too haue. But he himself did fly As well as others. I did sée, and was ashamed I Too sée thée when thou fledst, and didst prepare so cowardly Too sayle away. And thervppon I thus aloud did cry. What méene yée sirs? what madnesse dooth you moue too go too shippe? And suffer Troy as good as tane, thus out of hand too slippe? What else this tenth yéere beare yée home than shame? wt such like woord And other, (which the eloquence of sorrowe did aoord,) I brought them from theyr flying shippes. Then Agamemnon calld Toogither all the capteines who with feare were yit appalld. But Aiax durst not then once creke. Yit durst Thersites bée So bold as rayle vppon the kings, and he was payd by mée For playing so the saweye Iacke. Then stood I on my toes And too my fearefull countrymen gaue hart ageinst theyr foes. And shed new courage in theyr mynds through talk that fro mée goes. From that tyme foorth what euer thing hath valeantly atchéeued By this good fellow beene, is myne, whoo him from flyght repréeued.
And now too touche thée: which of all the Gréekes commendeth thée? Or séeketh thée? But Diomed communicates with mée His dooings, and alloweth mée, and thinkes him well apayd Too haue Vlysses euer as companion at the brayd. And sumwhat woorth you will it graunt (I trow) alone for mée Out of so many thousand Gréekes by Diomed pikt too bée. No lot compelled mée too go, and yit I setting lyght, As well the perrill of my foes as daunger of the nyght, Killd Dolon who about the self same feae that nyght did stray, That wée went out for. But I first compelld him too bewray All things concerning faythlesse Troy, and what it went about. When all was learnd, and nothing left behynd too harken out, I myght haue then come home with prayse. I was not so content. Procéeding fruther too the Camp of Rhesus streyght I went, And killed bothe himself and all his men about his tent. And taking bothe his chariot and his horses which were whyght, Returned home in tryumph like a conquerour from fyght. Denye you mée the armour of the man whoose stéedes the fo Requyred for his playing of the spye a nyght, and so May Aiax bée more kynd too mée than you are what should I Declare vntoo you how my sword did waste ryght valeantly Sarpedons hoste of Lycia? I by force did ouerthrowe Alastor, Crome▪ and Ceranos, and Haly on a rowe. Alcander, and Noëmon too, and Prytanis besyde, And Thoön and Theridamas, and Charops also dyde By mée, and so did Evvnomos enforst by cruell fate. And many mo in syght of Troy I slew of bacer state. There also are (O countrymen) about mée woundings, which The place of them make beawtyfull. Sée héere (his hand did twich His shirt asyde) and credit not vayne woordes. Lo héere the brit That alwayes too bée one in your affayres hath neuer mist. And yit of all this whyle no droppe of blood hath Aiax spent Uppon his fellowes. Woundlesse is his body and vnrent. But what skills that, as long as he is able for to vaunt He fought against bothe Troy and Ioue too saue our fléete? I graunt He did so. For I am not of such nature as of spyght Well dooings too deface: so that he chalendge not the ryght
Of all men too himself alone, and that he yéeld too mée Sum share, whoo of the honour looke a partener for too bée. Patroclus also hauing on Achilles armour, sent The Troians and theyr leader hence, too burne our nauye bent. And yit thinks hée that none durst méete with Hector sauing hée. Forgetting bothe the king, and éeke his brother, yea and mée. Where hée himself was but the nyneth, appoynted by the king, And by the fortune of his lot preferd too doo the thing. But now for all your valeantnesse, what Issue had I pray Your combate? shall I tell? forsoothe, that Hector went his way And had no harme. Now wo is mée how gréeueth it my hart Too think vppon that season when the bulwark of our part Achilles dyde? When neyther teares, nor gréef, nor feare could make Mée for too stay, but that vppon theis shoulders I did take, I say vppon theis shoulders I Achilles body tooke, And this same armour claspt theron, which now too weare I looke. Sufficient strength I haue too beare as great a weyght as this, And éeke a hart wherein regard of honour rooted is. Think you that Thetis for her sonne so instantly besought Sir Vulcane this same heauenly gift too giue her, which is wrought With such excéeding cunning, too thentent a souldier that Hath neyther wit nor knowledge should it weare? He knowes not wha The things ingrauen on the shéeld doo méene. Of Ocean se, Of land, of heauen, and of the starres no skill at all hath he. The Beare that neuer dyues in sea he dooth not vnderstand, The Pleyads, nor the Hyads, nor the Cities that doo stand Uppon the earth, nor yit the swoord that Orion holdes in hand. He seekes too haue an armour of the which he hath no skill. And yit in fynding fault with mée bycause I had no will Too follow this same paynfull warre and sought too shonne the same, And made it sumwhat longer tyme before I thither came, He sées not how hée speakes reproch too stout Achilles name. For if too haue dissembled in this case, yée count a cryme, Wée both offenders bée. Or if protracting of the tyme Yée count blame woorthye, yit was I the tymelyer of vs twayne. Achilles louing moother him, my wyfe did mée deteyne. The former tyme was giuen too them, the rest was giuen too yow.
And therefore doo I little passe although I could not now Defend my fault, sith such a man of prowesse, birth and fame As was Achilles, was with mée offender in the same. But yit was he espyëd by Vlysses wit, but nat Vlysses by sir Aiax wit▪ And least yée woonder at The rayling of this foolish dolt at mée, hee dooth obiect Reproche too you. For if that I offended too detect Sir Palamed of forged fault, could you without your shame Arreyne him, and ondemne him éeke too suffer for the same? But neyther could sir Palamed excuse him of the cryme So heynous and so manifest: and you your selues that tyme Not onely his indytement hard, but also did behold His déed auowched too his face by bringing in the gold. And as for Philoctetes, that he is in Lemnos, I Deserue not too bée toucht therwith. Defend your cryme: for why You all consented thervntoo. Yit doo I not denye, But that I gaue the counsell too conuey him out of way From toyle of warre and trauell that by rest he myght assay Too ease the greatnesse of his peynes. He did theretoo obey And by so dooing is alyue. Not only faythfull was This counsell that I gaue the man, but also happye, as The good successe hath shewed since. Whom sith the destnyes do Requyre in ouethrowing Troy, Appoynt not mée thertoo: But let sir Aiax rather go. For he with loquence Or by some suttle pollycie, shall bring the man fro thence And pacyfie him raging through disease, and wrathfull ire. Nay. first the riuer Simois shall too his spring retyre, And mountaine Ida shal theron haue stonding neuer a trée, Yea and the faythlesse towne of Troy by Gréekes shall reskewd bée, Before that Aiax blockish wit shall aught at all auayle, When my attempts and practyses in your affayres doo fayle. For though thou Philoctetes with the king offended bée, And with thy fellowes euerychone, and most of all with mée, Although thou cursse and ban mée too the hellish pit for ay, And wsshest in thy payne that I by chaunce myght crosse thy way, Of purpose for too draw my blood: yit will I giue assay Too fetch thée hither once ageine. And (if that fortune say
Amen,) I will as well haue thée and éeke thyne arrowes, as I haue the Troiane prophet whoo by mée surprysed was, Or as I did the Oracles and Troiane faes disclose, Or as I from her chappell through the thickest of her foes The Phrygian Pallads image fetcht: And yit dooth Aiax still Compare himself with mée. Yée knowe it was the destnyes will That Troy should neuer taken bée by any force, vntill This Image first were got. and where was then our valeant knight Sir Aiax? where the stately woordes of such a hardy wyght? Why feareth hée? why dares Vlysses ventring through the watch Commit his persone too the nyght his buysnesse too dispatch? And through the pykes not only for too passe the garded wall? But also for too enter too the strongest towre of all? And for too take the Idoll from her Chappell and her shryne? And beare her thence amid his foes? For had this déede of myne Béene left vndoone, in vayne his shéeld of Oxen hydes seuen fold Should yit the Sonne of Telamon haue in his left hand hold. That nyght subdewed I Troy towne. that nyght did I it win. And opened it for you likewyse with ease too enter in. Cease too vpbrayd mee by theis lookes and mumbling woordes of thyne With Diomed: his prayse is in this fact as well as myne. And thou thy selfe when for our shippes thou diddest in reskew stand, Wart not alone: the multitude were helping thée at hand. I had but only one with mée. Whoo (if he had not thought A wyseman better than a strong, and that preferment ought Not alway followe force of hand) would now himself haue sought This Armour. So would toother Aiax better stayëd doo, And féerce Evvrypyle, and the sonne of hault Andremon too. No lesse myght éeke Idominey, and éeke Meriones His countryman, and Menelay. For euery one of these Are valeant men of hand, and not inferior vntoo thée In martiall feates. And yit they are contented rulde too bée By myne aduyce. Thou hast a hand that serueth well in fyght. Thou hast a wit that stands in néede of my direction ryght. Thy force is witlesse. I haue care of that that may ensew. Thou well canst fyght: the king dooth choose the tymes for fyghting dew By myne aduyce. Thou only with thy body canst auayle.
But I with bodye and with mynd too profite doo not fayle, And looke how much the mayster dooth excell the gally slaue, Or looke how much preheminence the Capteine ought too haue Aboue his souldyer: euen so much excell I also thée. A wit farre passing strength of hand inclosed is in mée. In wit rests chéefly all my force. My Lordes I pray bestowe This gift on him who ay hath béene your watchman as yée knowe. And for my tenne yéeres cark and care endured for your sake Full recompence for my deserts with this same honour make. Our labour draweth too an end, all lets are now by mée Dispatched. And by bringing Troy in cace too taken bée I haue already taken it. Now by the hope that yée Conceyue, within a whyle of Troy the ruine for too sée, And by the Goddes of whom a late our emnyes I bereft, And as by wisedome too bée doone yit any thing is left, If any bold auentrous déede, or any perlous thing, That asketh hazard both of lyfe and limb too passe too bring, Or if yée think of Troiane fates there yit dooth ought remayne, Remember mée. or if from mee this armour you restrayne, Bestowe it on this same. With that he shewed with his hand Mineruas fatall image, which hard by in syght did stand. The Lords were moued with his woordes, & then appéered playne The force that is in eloquence. The lerned man did gayne The armour of the valeant. He that did so oft susteine Alone both fyre, and swoord, and Ioue, and Hector could not byde One brunt of wrath. And whom no force could vanquish ere that tyde, Now only anguish ouercommes. He drawes his swoord and sayes: Well: this is myne yit. Untoo this no clayme Vlysses layes. This must I vse ageinst myself: this blade that heretoofore Hath bathed béene in Troiane blood, must now his mayster gor That none may Aiax ouercome saue Aiax. With that woord. Intoo his brest (not wounded erst) he thrust his deathfull swoord. His hand too pull it out ageine vnable was. The blood Did spout it out. Anon the ground bestayned where he stood, Did breede the pretye purple flowre vppon a clowre of gréene, Which of the wound of Hyacinth had erst engendred beene. The selfsame letters eeke that for the chyld were written than,
Were now againe amid the flowre new written for the man. The former tyme complaynt, the last a name did represent. Vlysses hauing wonne the pryse, within a whyle was sent Too Thoants and Hypsiphiles realme the land defamde of old For murthering all the men therin by women ouer bold. At length attayning land and lucke according too his mynd, Too carry Hercles arrowes backe he set his sayles too wynd. Which when he with the lord of them among the Gréekes had brought, And of the cruell warre at length the vtmost feate had wrought, At once both Troy and Priam fell. And Priams wretched wife Lost (after all) her womans shape, and barked all her lyfe In forreine countrye. In the place that bringeth too a streight The long spred sea of Hellespont, did Ilion burne in height. The kindled fyre with blazing flame continewed vnalayd, And Priam with his aged blood Ioues Altar had berayd. And Phebus préestesse casting vp her handes too heauen on hye, Was dragd and haled by the heare. The Grayes most spyghtfully (As eche of them had prisoners tane in méede of victorye) Did drawe the Troiane wyues away, whoo lingring whyle they mought Among the burning temples of theyr Goddes, did hang about Theyr sacred shrynes and images. Astyanax downe was cast From that same turret from the which his moother in tyme past Had shewed him his father stand oft fyghting too defend Himself and that same famous realme of Troy that did descend From many noble auncetors. And now the northerne wynd With prosperous blasts, too get them thence did put y• Greekes in mynd. The shipmen went aboord, and hoyst vp sayles, and made fro thence. A déew déere Troy (the women cryde) wée haled are from hence. And therwithall they kist the ground, and left yit smoking still Theyr natiue houses. Last of all tooke shippe ageinst her will Quéene Hecub: who (a piteous cace too see) was found amid The tumbes in which her sonnes were layd. And there as Hecub did Embrace theyr chists and kisse theyr bones, Vlysses voyd of care Did pull her thence. Yit raught shée vp, and in her boosom bare Away a crum of Hectors dust, and left on Hectors graue Her hory heares and teares, which for poore offrings shée him gaue. Ageinst the place where Ilion was, there is another land
Manured by the Biston men. In this same Realme did stand King Polemnestors palace riche, too whom king Priam sent His little infant Polydore too foster, too thentent He might bée out of daunger from the warres: wherin he ment Ryght wysely, had he not with him great riches sent, a bayt Too stirre a wicked couetous mynd too treason and deceyt. For when the state of Troy decayd, the wicked king of Thrace Did cut his nurechylds weazant, and (as though the sinfull cace Toogither with the body could haue quyght béene put away) He threw him also in the sea. It happened by the way, That Agamemnon was compeld with all his fléete too stay Uppon the coast of Thrace, vntill the sea were wexen calme, And till the hideous stormes did cease, and furious wynds were falne. Héere rysing gastly from the ground which farre about him brake, Achilles with a threatning looke did like resemblance make, As when at Agamemnon he his wrongfull swoord did shake, And sayd: Unmyndfull part yée hence of mée O Gréekes? and must My merits thanklesse thus with mée be buryed in the dust? Nay, doo not so. But too thentent my death dew honour haue, Let Polyxene in sacrifyse bée slayne vppon my graue. Thus much he sayd: and shortly his companions dooing as By vision of his cruell ghost commaundment giuen them was, Did fetch her from her mothers lappe, whom at that tyme, well néere, In that most great aduersitie alonly shée did chéere. The haultye and vnhappye mayd, and rather too bée thought A man than woman, too the tumb with cruell hands was brought, Too make a cursed sacrifyse. Whoo mynding constantly Her honour, when shée standing at the Altar prest too dye, Perceyvd the sauage ceremonies in making ready, and The cruell Neöptolemus with naked swoord in hand, Stand staring with vngentle eyes vppon her gentle face, Shée sayd. Now vse thou when thou wilt my gentle blood. The cace Requyres no more delay. bestow thy weapon in my chest, Or in my throte: (in saying so shée profered bare her brest, And éeke her throte.) Assure your selues it neuer shalbée séene, That any wyght shall (by my will) haue slaue of Polyxeene. Howbéet with such a sacrifyse no God yée can delyght.
I would desyre no more but that my wretched moother myght Bée ignorant of this my death. My moother hindreth mée, And makes the pleasure of my death much lesser for too bée. Howbéeit not the death of mée should iustly gréeue her hart: But her owne lyfe. Now too thentent I fréely may depart Too Limbo, stand yée men aloof: and sith I aske but ryght Forbeare too touch mée. So my blood vnsteyned in his syght Shall farre more acceptable bée what euer wyght he bee Whom you prepare too pacifye by sacrifysing mée. Yit (if that these last woordes of myne may purchace any grace,) I daughter of king Priam erst, and now in prisoners cace, Béeseeche you all vnraunsomed too render too my moother My bodye: and for buriall of the same too take none other Reward than teares: for whyle shée could shée did redéeme with gold. This sayd: the teares that shée forbare the people could not hold. And euen the verry préest himself full sore ageinst his will And wéeping, thrust her through the brest which shée hild stoutly still. Shée sinking softly too the ground with faynting legges, did beare Euen too the verry latter gasp a counnance voyd of feare. And when shée fell, shée had a care such parts of her too hyde, As womanhod and chastitie forbiddeth too bée spyde. The Troiane women tooke her vp, and moorning reckened King Priams children, and what blood that house alone had shed. They syght for fayer Polyxeene: they syghed éeke for thée Whoo late wart Priams wyfe, whoo late wart counted for too bée The flowre of Asia in his flowre, and Quéene of moothers all: But now the bootye of the so as euill lot did fall, And such a bootye as the sly Vlysses did not passe Uppon her, sauing that erewhyle shée Hectors moother was. So hardly for his moother could a mayster Hector fynd. Embracing in her aged armes the bodye of the mynd That was so stout, shée powrd theron with sobbing syghes vnsoft The teares that for her husband and her children had so oft And for her countrye sheaded béene. Shée wéeped in her wound And kist her pretye mouth, and made her brist with strokes too sound, According too her woonted guyse, and in the iellyed blood Béerayëd all her grisild heare, and in a sorrowfull mood
Sayd theis and many other woordes with bret bescratcht and rent. O daughter myne, the last for whom thy moother may lament, (For what remaynes?) O daughter thou art dead and gone. I sée Thy wound which at the verry hart strikes mée as well as thée. And least that any one of myne vnwounded should depart, Thou also gotten hast a wound. Howbéet bycause thou wart A woman, I beléeued thée from weapon too bée frée. But notwithstanding that thou art a woman, I doo sée Thée slayne by swoord. Euen he that kild thy brothers killeth thée, Achilles the decay of Troy and maker bare of mée. What tyme that he of Paris shaft by Phebus meanes was slayne, I sayd of féerce Achilles now no feare dooth more remayne. But then, euen then he most of all was feared for too bée. The asshes of him rageth still ageinst our race I sée. Wée féele an emny of him dead and buryed in his graue Too féede Achilles furie, I a frutefull issue gaue. Great Troy lyes vnder foote, and with a ryght great gréeuous fall The mischéeues of the common weale are fully ended all. But though too others Troy be gone, yit stands it still too mée: My sorrowes ronne as fresh a race as euer and as frée. I late a go a souereine state, aduaunced with such store Of daughters, sonnes, and sonneinlawes, and husband ouer more And daughtrinlawes, am caryed like an outlawe bare and poore, By force and violence haled from my childrens tumbes, too bée Presented too Penelope a gift, whoo shewing mée In spinning my appoynted taske, shall say: this same is shée That was sumtyme king Priams wyfe, this was the famous moother Of Hector. And now after losse of such a sort of other, Thou (whoo alonly in my greefe my comfort didst remayne,) Too pacifye our emnyes wrath vppon his tumb art slayne. Thus bare I deathgyfts for my foes. Too what intent am I Most wretched wyght remayning still? why doo I linger? why Dooth hurtfull age preserue mée still aliue? too what intent Yée cruell Goddes reserue yee mée that hath already spent Too manye yéeres? onlesse it bée new buryalls for too sée? And whoo would think that Priamus myght happy counted bée Sith Troy is razed? Happy man is hée in being dead.
His lyfe and kingdoome he forwent toogither: and this stead He sées not thëe his daughter slaine. But peraduenture thou Shall like the daughter of a king haue sumptuous buryall now, And with thy noble auncetors thy bodye layd shall bée. Our linage hath not so good lucke. the most that shall too thée Bée yéelded are thy moothers teares, and in this forreine land Too hyde thy murthered corce withall a little heape of sand. For all is lost. Nay yit remaynes (for whome I well can fynd In hart too liue a little whyle) an imp vntoo my mynd Most dëere, now only left alone, sumtyme of many mo The yoongest, little Polydore, deliuered late ago Too Polemnestor king of Thrace whoo dwelles within theis bounds But wherfore doo I stay so long in wasshing of her wounds, And face berayd with gory blood? in saying thus, shée went Too seaward with an aged pace and hory heare béerent. And (wretched woman) as shée calld for pitchers for too drawe Up water, shée of Polydore on shore the carkesse sawe, And éeke y• myghty wounds at which the Tyrants swoord went thurrow. The Troiane Ladyes shréeked out. But shée was dumb for sorrow. The anguish of her hart forclosde as well her spéech as éeke Her teares deuowring them within. Shée stood astonyed léeke As if shée had béene stone. One whyle the ground shee staard vppon. Another whyle a gastly looke shée kest too heauen. Anon Shée looked on the face of him that lay before her killd. Sumtymes his woundes, (his woundes I say) shée specially behilld. And therwithall shée armd her selfe and furnisht her with ire: Wherethrough as soone as that her hart was fully set on fyre, As though shée still had béene a Quéene, too vengeance shée her bent Enforcing all her witts too fynd some kynd of ponnishmet. And as a Lyon robbed of her whelpes becommth wood, And taking on the footing of her emnye where hée stood, Pursweth him though out of syght: euen so Quéene Hecubee (Now hauing meynt her teares with wrath) forgetting quyght that sée Was old, but not her princely hard, too Polemnestor went The cursed murtherer, and desyrde his presence too thentent Too she too him a masse of gold (so made shée her pretence) Which for her lyttle Polydore was hid not farre from thence.
The Thracian king beléeuing her, as eager of the pray, Went with her too a secret place. And as they there did stay, With flattring and deceytfull toong he thus too her did say. Make spéede I prey thée Hecuba, and giue thy sonne this gold. I sweare by God it shall bée his, as well that I doo hold Already, as that thou shalt giue. Uppon him speaking so, And swearing and forswearing too, shée looked sternely tho, And béeing sore inflaamd with wrath, caught hold vppon him, and Streyght calling out for succor too the wyues of Troy at hand Did in the traytors face bestowe her nayles, and scratched out His eyes, her anger gaue her hart and made her strong and stout. Shee thrust her fingars in as farre as could bée, and did bore Not now his eyes (for why his eyes were pulled out before) But bothe the places of the eyes berayd with wicked blood. The Thracians at theyr Tyrannes harme for anger wexing wood, Began too scare the Troiane wyues with darts and stones. Anon Quéene Hecub ronning at a stone, with gnarring seazd theron, And wirryed it béetwéene her téeth. And as shée opte her chappe Too speake, in stead of spéeche shée barkt. the place of this missehapp Remayneth still, and of the thing there done beares yit the name. Long myndfull of her former illes, shée sadly for the same Went howling in the féeldes of Thrace. Her fortune moued not Her Troians only, but the Gréekes her foes too ruthe: Her lot Did moue euen all the Goddes to ruthe: and se effectually, That Hecub too deserue such end euen Iuno did denye. Although the morning of the selfsame warres had fauorer beene: Shée had no leysure too lament the fortune of the Queene, Nor on the slaughters and the fall of Ilion for too think. A household care more néerer home did in her stomacke sink, For Memnon her beloued sonne, whom dying shée behild Uppon the feerce Achilles speare amid the Phrygian fld. Shee saw it, and her ruddy hew with which shée woonted was Too dye the breaking of the day, did intoo palenesse passe: And all the skye was hid with clowdes. But when his corce was gone Too burning ward, shée could not fynd in hart too looke theron: But with her heare about her eares shée knéeled downe before The myghtye Ioue, and thus gan speake vnto him weeping sore.
Of al that haue theyr dwelling place vppon the golden skye The lowest (for through all the world the feawest shrynes haue I) But yit a Goddesse, I doo come, not that thou shouldst decrée That Altars, shynes, and holydayes bée made too honour mée. Yit if thou marke how much that I a woman doo for thée, In kéeping nyght within her boundes, by bringing in thée light, Thou well mayst thinke mée worthy sum reward too clayme of ryght. But neyther now is that the thing the morning cares too haue, Ne yit her state is such as now dew honour for too craue. Bereft of my déere Memnon who in fyghting valeantly Too help his vncle, (so it was your will O Goddes) did dye Of stout Achilles sturdye speare euen in his flowring pryme, I sew too thée O king of Goddes too doo him at this tyme Sum honour as a comfort of his death, and ease this hart Of myne which greatly gréeued is with wound of percing smart. No sooner Ioue had graunted dame Aurora her desyre But that the flame of Memnons corce that burned in the fyre Did fall: and flaky rolles of smoke did dark the day, as when A foggy mist steames vpward from a Riuer or a fen, And suffreth not the Sonne too shyne within it. Blacke as cole The cinder rose: and intoo one round lump assembling whole Grew grosse, and tooke bothe shape and hew. The fyre did lyfe it send, The lyghtnesse of the substance self did wings vntoo it lend. And at the first it flittred like a bird: and by and by It flew a fethered bird in déede. And with that one gan fly Innumerable mo of selfsame brood: whoo once or twyce Did sore about the fyre, and made a piteous shréeking thryce. The fowrthtyme in theyr flying round, thmselues they all withdrew In battells twayne, and feercely foorth of eyther syde one flew Too fyght a combate. With theyr billes and hooked talents kéene And with theyr wings couragiously they wreakt theyr wrathfull téene. And myndfull of the valeant man of whom they issued béene, They neuer ceased iobbing eche vppon the others brest, Untill they falling both downe dead with fyghting ouerprest, Had offred vp theyr bodyes as a woorthy sacrifyse Untoo theyr cousin Memnon who too Asshes burned lyes. Theis soodeine birds were named of the founder of theyr stocke:
For men doo call them Memnons birds. And euery yéere a flocke Repayre too Memnons tumb, where twoo doo in the foresayd wyse In manner of a yeeremynd slea themselues in sacrifyse. Thus where as others did lament that Dymants daughter bark, Auroras owne gréef busyed her, that smally shée it markt Which thing shée too this present tyme with piteous teares dooth shewe: For through the vniuersall world shée sheadeth moysting deawe. Yit suffred not the destinyes all hope tooperrish quyght Toogither with the towne of Troy. That good and godly knyght The sonne of Venus bare away by nyght vppon his backe His aged father and his Goddes an honorable packe. Of all the riches of the towne that only pray he chose, So godly was his mynd: and like a bannisht man he goes By water with his owne yoong sonne Ascanius from the Ile Antandros, and he shonnes the shore of Thracia which ere whyle The wicked Tyrants treason did with Polydores blood defyle. And hauing wynd and tyde at will, he saufly wyth his trayne Arryued at Apollos towne where Anius then did reigne. Whoo being both Apollos préest and of that place the king, Did enterteyne him in his house and vntoo church him bring, And shewd him bothe the Citie and the temples knowen of old, And eeke the sacred trées by which Latona once tooke hold When shee of chyldbirth trauelled Assoone as sacrifyse Was doone with Oxens inwards burnt according too the guyse, And casting incence in the fyre, and sheading wyne thereon, They ioyfull too the court returnd, and there they tooke anon Repaste of meate and drink. Then sayd the good Anchyses this O Phebus souereine préest, onlesse I take my markes amisse, (As I remember) when I first of all this towne did sée, Fowre daughters and a sonne of thyne thou haddest héere with thée. King Anius shooke his head wheron he ware a myter whyght, And answerd thus. O noble prince, in fayth thou gessest ryght. Of children fyue a father then, thou diddest mée behold, Whoo now (with such vnconstancie are mortall matters rolld) Am in a manner chyldlesse quyght. For what auayles my sonne Whoo in the Ile of Anderland a great way hence dooth wonne? Which country takes his name of him, and in the selfsayd place,
In stead of father, like a king he holdes the royall mace. Apollo gaue his lot too him: And Bacchus for too showe His loue, a greater gift vppon his suters did bestowe, Than could bée wisht or credited. For whatsoeuer they Did towche, was turned into corne, and wyne, and oyle streyghtway. And so theyr was riche vse in them. Assoone as that the fame Hereof too Agamemnons eares the squorge of Troians came, Least you myght tast your stormes alone and wée not féele the same In part, an hoste he hither sent, and whither I would or no Did take them from mée, forcing them among the Gréekes too go Too féede the Gréekish army with theyr heauenly gift. But they Escaped whither they could by flyght. A couple tooke theyr way Too Ile Evvboya: toother twoo too Anderland did fly Theyr brothers Realme. An host of men pursewd them by and by, And threatened warre onlesse they were deliuered. Force of feare Subdewing nature, did constreyne the brother (men must beare With fearfulnesse) too render vp his susters too theyr fo. For neyther was Aenaeas there, nor valeant Hector (who Did make your warre last ten yéeres long) the countrye too defend. Now when they should like prisoners haue béene fettred, in the end They casting vp theyr handes (which yit were frée) too heauen, did cry Too Bacchus for too succour them, who helpt them by and by. At leastwyse if it may bee termd a help, in woondrous wyse Too alter folke. For neuer could I lerne ne can surmyse The manner how they lost theyr shape▪ The thing it selfe is knowen. With fethered wings as whyght as snow they quyght away are flowen Transformed intoo doouhouse dooues thy wyfe dame Venus burdes. When that the time of meate was spent wt theis & such like woordes, The table was remoued streyght, and then they went too sléepe. Next morrow rysing vp assoone as day began too peepe, They went too Phebus Oracle, which willed them too go Untoo theyr moother countrey and the coastes theyr socke came fro. King Anius bare them companie. And when away they shoold, He gaue them gifts. Anchises had a scepter all of goold. Ascanius had a quiuer and a Cloke right braue and tr. Aenaeas had a standing Cup presented vntoo him. The Thebane Therses whoo had beene king Anius guest erewhyle
Did send it out of Thessaly: but Alcon one of Myle Did make the cuppe. And hée therona story portrayd out. It was a Citie with seuen gates in circuit round about, Which men myght easly all discerne. The gates did represent The Cities name, and shewed playne what towne thereby was ment. Without the towne were funeralls a dooing for the dead, With herces, tapers, fyres, and tumbes. The wyues with ruffled head And stomacks bare pretēded gréef. The nymphes séemd teares too shead, And wayle the drying of theyr welles. The leauelesse trées did seare. And licking on the parched stones Goats romed héere and there. Behold amid this Thebane towne was lyuely portrayd out Echions daughters twayne, of which the one with courage stout Did profer bothe her naked throte and stomacke too the knyfe: And toother with a manly hart did also spend her lyfe, For saufgard of her countryfolk: And how that thervppon They both were caryed solemly on herces, and anon Were burned in the chéefest place of all the Thebane towne. Then (least theyr linage should decay whoo dyde with such renowne,) Out of the Asshes of the maydes there issued twoo yong men, And they vntoo theyr moothers dust did obsequies agen. Thus much was graued curiously in auncient precious brasse, And on the brim a trayle of flowres of bearbrich gilded was. The Troians also gaue too him as costly giftes agen. Bycause he was Apollos préest they gaue too him as then A Chist too kéepe in frankincence. They gaue him furthermore A Crowne of gold wherin were set of precious stones great store. Then calling too remembrance that the Troians issued were Of Tevvcers blood, they sayld too Crete. But long they could not there Abyde th'infection of the aire: and so they did forsake The hundred Cities, and with spéede to Itayle ward did make. The winter wexed hard and rough, and tost them verry sore. And when theyr shippes arriued were vppon the perlous shore Among the Strophad Iles, the bird Aëllo did them feare. The costes of Dulich, Ithaca, and Same they passed were, And eeke the Court of Neritus where wyse Vlysses reignd, And came too Ambrace for the which the Gods strong stryfe mayntein. There sawe they turned into stone the iudge whoose image yit
At Actium in Appollos Church in signe therof dooth sit. They vewed also Dodon groue where Okes spake: and the coast Of Chaön where the sonnes of king Molossus sapt a most Ungracious fyre by taking wings. From thence they coasted by The countrye of the Pheäks fraught with frute abundantly. Then tooke they land in Epyre, and too Buthrotos they went Wheras the Troiane prophet dwelt, whoose reigne did represent an image of theyr auncient Troy. There being certifyde Of things too come by Helen (whoo whyle there they did abyde Informed them ryght faythfully of all that should betyde) They passed into Sicilie. With corners thrée this land Shootes out intoo the Sea: of which Pachinnus front dooth stand. Ageinst the southcoast: Lilibye dooth face the gentle west, And Pelore vntoo Charlsis wayne dooth northward beare his brest. The Troianes vnder Pelore gate with ores and prosprous tydes And in the euen by Zanclye shore theyr fléete at anchor rydes. Uppon the leftsyde restlessely Charybdis ay dooth beate them. And swalloweth shippes & spewes them vp as fast as it dooth eate them. And Scylla beateth on theyr ryght: which from the nauell downe Is patched vp with cruell curres: and vpward too the crowne Dooth kéepe the countnance of a mayd, And (if that all bée trew That Poëts fayne) shée was sumtyme a mayd ryght fayre of hew. Too her made many wooers sute: all which shée did eschew. And going too the salt Sea nymphes (too whom shée was ryght déere) Shée vaunted, too how many men shée gaue the slippe that yéere. Too whom the Lady Galate in kembing of her heare Sayd thus with syghes. But they that sought too thée (O Lady) were None other than of humane kynd, too whom without all feare Of harme, thou myghtest (as thou doost) giue nay. But as for mée Although that I of Nereus and gray Doris daughter bée, And of my susters haue with mée continually a gard, I could not scape the Cyclops loue, but too my gréef full hard. (With that her teares did stoppe her spéeche.) Assoone as that the mayd Had dryde them with her marble thomb, & moande the nymph, she sayd. Déere Goddesse tell mée all your gréef, and hyde it not from mée: For trust mée I will vntoo you bothe true and secret bée. Then vntoo Cratyes daughter thus the nymph her playnt did frame.
Of Fawne and nymph Simethis borne was Acis, whoo became A ioy too bothe his parents, but too mée the greater ioy. For being but a sixtéene yéeres of age, this fayre swéete boy Did take mée too his loue, what tyme about his chyldish chin The tender heare like mossy downe too sprowt did first begin. I loued him beyond all Goddes forbod, and likewyse mée The Giant Cyclops. neyther (if demaunded it should bée) I well were able for too tell you whither that the loue Of Acis, or the Cyclops hate did more my stomacke moue. There was no oddes betwéene them. Oh déere Goddesse Venus, what A powre haste thou? Behold how euen this owgly Giant that No sparke of meekenesse in him hath, whoo is a terrour too The verrye woodes, whom neuer guest nor straunger came vntoo Without displeasure, whoo the heauens and all the Goddes despyseth, Dooth féele what thing is loue. The loue of mée him so surpryseth, That Polypheme regarding not his sheepe and hollowe Caue, And hauing care too please dooth go about too make him braue. His sturre stiffe heare he kembeth nowe with strong and sturdy rakes, And with a sythe dooth marcussotte his bristled berd: and takes Delyght too looke vppon himself in waters, and too frame His countnance. Of his murtherous hart the wyldnesse wexeth tame▪ His vnastaunched thyrst of blood is quenched: shippes may passe And repasse saufly. In the whyle that he in loue thus was, One Telemus Evvrymeds sonne a man of passing skill In birdflyght, taking land that tyme in Sicill, went vntill The orped Gyant Polypheme, and sayd: This one round eye That now amid thy forehead stands shall one day ere thou dye By sly Vlysses blinded bée. The Gyant laught therat, And sayd O foolish soothsayre thou deceyued art in that. For why another (euen a wench) already hathe it blynded. Thus skorning him that told him truthe bycause he was hygh mynded, He eyther made the ground too shake in walking on the shore, Or rowzd him in his shadye Caue. With wedged poynt before There shoots a hill intoo the Sea: whereof the sea dooth beate On eyther syde. The one eyd féend came vp and made his seate Theron, and after came his shéepe vndriuen. Assoone as hée
Had at his foote layd downe his staffe which was a whole Pyne trée Well able for too bée a maast too any shippe, he takes His pype compact of fyuescore réedes, and therwithall he makes So loud a noyse that all the hilles and waters therabout Myght easly éere the shirlnesse of the shepeherds whistling out. I lying vnderneathe the rocke, and leaning in the lappe Of Acis markt theis woordes of his which farre I heard by happe. More whyght thou art then Primrose leaf my Lady Galatee. More fresh than meade, more tall and streyght than lofty Aldertrée▪ More bright than glasse, more wanton than the tender kid forsooth. Than Cockleshelles continually with water worne, more smoothe. More chéerefull than the winters Sun, or Sommers shadowe cold, More séemely and more comly than the Planetrée too behold. Of valew more than Apples bée although they were of gold. More cléere than frozen yea, more swéete than Grape through rype ywis, More soft than butter newly made, or downe of Cygnet is. And much more fayre and beawtyfull than gardein too myne eye, But that thou from my companye continually doost flye. And thou the selfsame Galate art more tettish for too frame Than Oxen of the wildernesse whom neuer wyght did tame. More fléeting than the waues, more hard than warryed Oke too twyne, More tough thā willow twiggs, more lyth thā is the wyld whyght vyne. More than this rocke vnmouable, more violent than a streame. More prowd than Peacocke praysd, more féerce thā fyre & more extréeme. More rough than Bréers, more cruell than the new deliuered Beare, More mercilesse than troden snake, than sea more deafe of eare. And which (and if it lay in mée I cheefly would restrayne) Not only swifter paced than the stag in chace on playne, But also swifter than the wynd and flyghtfull ayre. But if Thou knew me well, it would thée irke too flye and bée a gréef Too tarrye from mée. Yea thou wouldst endeuour all thy powre Too kéepe mée wholly too thy self. The Quarry is my bowre Heawen out of whole mayne stone. No Sun in sommer there can swelt. No nipping cold in wintertyme within the same is felt. Gay Apples weying downe the boughes haue I, and▪ Grapes like gold, And purple Grapes on spreaded Uynes as many as can hold. Bothe which I doo reserue for thée. Thyself shalt with thy hand
The soft swéete strawbryes gather, which in wooddy shadowe stand. The Cornell berryes also from the tree thy self shalt pull: And pleasant plommes, sum yellow lyke new wax, sum blew, sum full Of ruddy ewce. Of Chestnutts éeke (if my wyfe thou wilt bée) Thou shalt haue store: and frute all sortes: All trées shall serue for thée. This Cattell héere is all myne owne. And many mo besyde Doo eyther in the bottoms feede, or in the woodes them hyde, And many standing at theyr stalles doo in my Caue abyde. The number of them (if a man should ask) I cannot showe. Tush beggars of theyr Cattell vse the number for too knowe. And for the goodnesse of the same, no whit beléeue thou mee. But come thyself (and if thou wilt) the truth ther of too see. See how theyr vdders full doo make them straddle. Lesser ware Shet vp at home in cloce warme péends, are Lambes. There also are In other pinfolds Kidds of selfsame yeaningtyme. Thus haue I alwayes mylke as whyte as snow. wherof I sum doo saue Too drink, and of the rest is made good chéese. And furthermore Not only stale and common gifts and pleasures wherof store Is too bée had at eche mannes hand, (as Leuerets, Kidds, and Dots, A payre of pigeons, or a nest of birds new found, or Roes,) Shall vntoo thée presented bée. I found this toother day A payre of Bearewhelpes, eche so lyke the other as they lay Uppon a hill, that scarce yée eche discerne from other may. And when that I did fynd them I did take them vp, and say Theis will I for my Lady kéepe for her therwith too play. Now put thou vp thy fayre bryght head good Galat I thée pray Aboue the gréenish waues: now come my Galat, come away. And of my present take no scorne. I know my selfe too bée A iollye fellow. For euen now I did behold and sée Myne image in the water shéere, and sure mée thought I tooke Delyght too sée my goodly shape, and fauor in the brooke. Behold how big I am not oue in heauen (for so you men Report one oue too reigne, of whom I passe not for too ken) Is howger than this doughty corce of myne. A bush of heare Dooth ouerdréepe my visage grim, and shadowes as it were A groue vppon my shoulders twayne. And think it not too bée A shame for that with bristled heare my body rough yée sée.
A fowle lfauored syght it is too sée a leauelesse trée A lothely thing it is, a horse without a mane too kéepe. As fethers doo become the birdes, and wooll becommeth shéepe, Euen so a beard and bristled skin becommeth also men. I haue but one eye, which dooth stand amid my frunt. what then? This one round eye of myne is lyke a myghty target. Why? Uewes not the Sun all things from heauen? Yit but one only eye Hath hee. moreouer in your Seas my father beares the sway. Him will I make thy fathrinlaw. Haue mercy I the pray, And harken too myne humble sute. For only vntoo thée Yéeld I. Euen I of whom bothe heauen and Ioue despysed bée And éeke the percing thunderbolt, doo stand in awe and feare Of thée O Nerye. Thyne ill will is gréeuouser too beare Than is the deadly Thunderclappe. Yit could I better fynd In hart too suffer this contempt of thyne with pacient mynd If thou didst shonne all other folk as well as mée. But why Reiecting Cyclops doost thou loue dwarf Acis? why say I Preferst thou Acis vntoo mée? well let him liked bée Both of himself, and also (which I would be lothe) of thée. And if I catch him he shall féele that in my body is The force that should bée. I shall paunch him quicke. Those limbes of his I will in péeces teare, and strew them in the féeldes, and in Thy waters, if he doo thée haunt. For I doo swelt within. And being chaafte the flame dooth burne more féerce too my vnrest. Mée thinks mount Aetna with his force is closed in my brest. And yit it nothing moueth thée. Assoone as he had talkt Thus much in vayne, (I sawe well all) he rose: and fuming stalkt Among his woodes and woonted Lawndes, as dooth a Bulchin, when The Cow is from him tane. He could him no where rest as then. Anon the féend espyed mee and Acis where wée lay, Before wée wist or feared it: and crying out gan say I sée yée. and confounded myght I bée with endlesse shame, But if I make this day the last agréement of your game. Theis woordes were spoke with such a réere as verry well became An angry Giant. Aeta shooke with lowdnesse of the same. I scaard therwith dopt vnderneathe the water, and the knyght Simethus turning streyght his backe, did giue himself too flyght,
And cryëd help mée Galate, help parents I you pray, And in your kingdome mee receyue whoo perrish must streyghtway. The roundeyd deuill made pursewt: and rending vp a fléece Of Aetna Rocke, threw after him: of which a little péece Did Acis ouertake. and yit as little as is was, It ouerwhelmed Acis whole. I wretched wyght (alas) Did that which destnyes would permit. Foorthwith I brought too passe That Acis should receyue the force his father had before. His scarlet blood did issue from the lump, and more and more Within a whyle the rednesse gan too vannish: and the hew Resembled at the first a brooke with rayne distroubled new, Which wexeth cléere by length of tyme. Anon the lump did clyue, And from the hollow cliffe therof hygh réedes sprang vp alyue. And at the hollow issue of the stone the bubling water Came trickling out. And by and by (which is a woondrous matter) The stripling with a wreath of réede about his horned head Auaunst his body too the waste. Whoo (saue he was that stead Much biggar than he erst had béene, and altoogither gray) Was Acis still. and being turnd too water, at this day In shape of riuer still he beares his former name away. The Lady Galat ceast her talk and streyght the companye brake. And Neryes daughters parting thence, swam in the gentle lake. Dame Scylla home ageine returnd. (Shée durst not her betake Too open sea) and eyther roamd vppon the sandy shore Stark naakt, or when for wéerinesse shée could not walk no more, Shée then withdrew her out of syght and gate her too a poole, And in the water of the same, her heated limbes did coole. Behold the fortune. Glaucus (whoo then being late before Transformed in Evvboya Ile vppon Anthedon shore, Was new becomne a dweller in the sea) as he did swim Along the coast was tane in loue at syght of Scylla trim, And spake such woordes as he did think myght make her tarry still. Yit fled shée still, and swift for feare shée gate her too a hill That butted on the Sea. ryght stéepe and vpward sharp did shoote A loftye toppe with trées, beneathe was hollowe at the foote. Héere Scylla stayd and being sauf by strongnesse of the place, (Not knowing if he monster were, or God, that did her chace,)
Shée looked backe. And woondring at his colour and his heare With which his shoulders and his backe all wholly couered were, Shée saw his neather parts were like a fish with tayle wrythde round Who leaning too the néerest Rocke, sayd thus with lowd créere sound. Fayre mayd, I neyther monster am nor cruell sauage beast: But of the sea a God, whoose powre and fauour is not least. For neyther Protevv in the sea nor Triton haue more myght Nor yit the sonne of Athamas that now Palaemon hyght. Yit once I was a mortall man. But you must know that I Was giuen too seawoorkes, and in them mée only did apply. For sumtyme I did draw the drag in which the fishes were, And sumtyme sitting on the clisses I angled heere and there. There butteth on a fayre gréene mede a bank wherof tone half Is cloasd with sea, the rest is clad with herbes which neuer calf, Nor horned Ox, nor seely shéepe, nor shakheard Goate did féede. The busye Bée did neuer there of flowres swéete smelling spéede. No gladsum garlonds euer there were gathered for the head. No hand those flowers euer yit with hooked sythe did shred. I was the first that euer set my foote vppon that plot. Now as I dryde my dropping netts, and layd abrode my lotte, Too tell how many fishes had bychaunce too net béene sent, Or through theyr owne too lyght béeléefe on bayted hooke béene hent: (The matter seemeth like a lye, but what auayles too lye?) Assoone as that my pray had towcht the grasse, it by and by Began too moue, and flask theyr finnes, and swim vppon the drye, As in the Sea. And as I pawsd and woondred at the syght, My raught of fishes euerychone too seaward tooke theyr flyght, And leaping from the shore, forsooke theyr newfound mayster quyght. I was amazed at the thing: and standing long in dowt, I sought the cause if any God had brought this same abowt, Or else sum iewce of herb. And as I so did musing stand, What herb ({quod} I) hath such a powre? and gathering with my hand The grasse, I bote it with my toothe. My throte had scarcely yit, Well swallowed downe the vncouth iewce, when like an agew fit I felt myne inwards soodeinly too shake, and with the same, A loue of other nature in my brest with violence came. And long I could it not resist: but sayd deere land adéew▪
For neuer shall I haunt thée more. And with that woord I thre▪ My bodye in the sea. The Goddes thereof receyuing mée, Uouchsaued in theyr order mée installed for too bée. Desyring old Oceänus and Thetis for theyr sake, The rest of my mortalitie away from mée too take. They hallowed mée, and hauing sayd nyne tymes the holy rym That purgeth all prophanednesse, they charged mée that tyme Too put my brestbulk vnderneathe a hundred streames. Anon The brookes from sundry coastes and all the Seas did ryde vppon My head. From whence as soone as I returned, by and by I felt my self farre otherwyse through all my limbes, than I Had béene before. and in my mynd I was another man. Thus farre of all that mée befell make iust report I can. Thus farre I beare in mynd. The rest my mynd perceyued not. Then first of all this hory gréene gray grisild beard I got, And this same bush of heare which all along the seas I swéepe, And theis same myghty shoulders, and theis grayish armes, and féete Coonfounded intoo finned fish. But what auayleth mée This goodly shape, and of the Goddes of sea too loued bée? Or for too be a God my self? if they delyght not thée? As he was speaking this, and still about too vtter more, Dame Scylla him forsooke: wherat he wexing angry sore. And béeing quickened with repulse, in rage he tooke his way Too Circes Titans daughters Court which full of monsters lay. Finis Libri decimi tertij.
¶THE .XIIII. BOOKE OF Ouids Metamorphosis. NOw had th' Evvboyan fisherman (whoo lately was becomme A God of sea too dwell in sea for ay,) alreadye swomme Past Aetna which vppon the face of Giant Typho lyes, Toogither with the pasture of the Cyclops which defyes Both Plough and harrowe, and by téemes of Oxen sets no store: An Zancle, and crackt Rhegion which stands a toother shore: And éeke the rough and shipwrecke sea which being hemmed in With twoo mayne landes on eyther syde, is as a bound betwin The frutefull Realmes of Italy and Sicill. From that place He cutting through the Tyrrhene sea with both his armes a pace, Arryued at the grassye hilles and at the Palace hye Of Circe Phoebus imp which full of sundry beastes did lye. When Glaucus in her presence came, and had her gréeted, and Receyued fréendly welcomming and gréeting at her hand, He sayd. O Goddesse pitie mée a God I thee desyre. Thou only (if at least thou think mée woorthy so great hyre) Canst ease this loue of myne. No wyght dooth better know than I The powre of herbes, whoo late ago transformed was therby. And now too open vntoo thee of this my gréef the ground, Uppon th'Italyan shore ageinst Messene walls I found Fayre Scylla. Shame it is too tell how scornfull shée did take The gentle woordes and promises and sute that I did make. But if that any powre at all consist in charmes, then let That sacret mouth of thyne cast charmes: or if more force bée set In herbes too compasse things withall, then vse the herbes that haue Most strength in woorking. Neyther think, I hither come too craue A medcine for too heale myself and cure my wounded hart: I force no end. I would haue her bée partener of my smart. But Circe (for no natures are more lyghtly set on fyre Than such as shée is) (whither that the cause of this desyre Were only in herself, or that Dame Venus bearing ay In mynd her fathers déede in once disclosing of her play, Did stirre her héere vntoo) sayd thus. It were a better way For thée too fancye such a one whoose will and whole desyre
Is bent too thine, and whoo is sindgd with selfsame kynd of fyre. Thou woorthye art of sute too thée. and (credit mee) thou shouldst Bée woode in déede, if any hope of spéeding giue thou wouldst. And therefore dowt not. Only of thy beawtye lyking haue. Lo, I whoo am a Goddesse and the imp of Phoebus braue, Whoo can so much by charmes, whoo can so much by herbes, doo vow My self too thée. If I disdeine, disdeine mée also thow. And if I yéeld, yéeld thou likewyse: and in one only déede Auenge thy self of twayne. Too her intreating thus too spéede, First trées shall grow ({quod} Glaucus) in the sea, and réeke shall thryue On toppes of hilles, ere I (as long as Scylla is alyue) Doo chaunge my loue. The Goddesse wext ryght wroth: & sith she could Not hurt his persone béeing falne in loue with him, ne would: Shée spyghted her that was preferd before her. And vppon Displeasure tane of this repulse, shée went her way anon. And wicked wéedes of grisly iewce toogither shée did bray, And in the braying, witching charmes shée ouer them did say. And putting on a russet cloke, shée passed through the rowt Of sauage beastes that in her court came fawning round abowt, And going vntoo Rhegion clifte which standes ageinst the shore Of Zancle, entred by and by the waters that doo rore With violent tydes, vppon the which shée stood as on firme land, And ran and neuer wet her féete awhit. There was at hand A little plash that bowwed like a bowe that standeth bent, Where Scylla woonted was too rest herself, and thither went From rage of sea and ayre, what tyme the sonne amid the skye Is whotest making shadowes short by mounting vp on hye. This plash did Circe then infect ageinst that Scylla came, And with her poysons which had powre most mōstrous shapes too frame Defyled it. Shée sprincled there the iewce of venymd wéedes. And thryce nyne tymes wt witching mouth shée softly mumbling, réedes A charme ryght darke of vncouth woordes. No sooner Scylla came Within this plash, and too the waast had waded in the same, But that shée sawe her hinderloynes with barking buggs atteint. And at the first, not thinking with her body they were meynt As parts therof, shée started back, and rated them. And sore Shée was afrayd the eager curres should byght her. But the more
Shée shonned them, the surer still shée was too haue them there. In séeking where her loynes, and thyghes, and féete and ancles were, Chappes like the chappes of Cerberus in stead of them shée found. Nought else was there than cruell curres from belly downe too ground. So vnderneathe misshapen loynes and womb remayning sound, Her mannish mastyes backes were ay within the water drownd. Her louer Glaucus wept therat, and Circes bed refusde That had so passing cruelly her herbes on Scylla vsde. But Scylla in that place abode. And for the hate shée bore Too Circe ward, (assoone as méete occasion serude therfore) Shée spoyld Vlysses of his mates. And shortly after, shée Had also drownd the Troiane fléete, but that (as yit wée sée) Shée was transformd too rock of stone, which shipmn warely shonne. When from this Rocke the Troiane fléete by force of Ores had wonne, And from Charybdis gréedye gulf, and were in maner readye Too haue arryude in Italy, the wynd did ryse so heady, As that it draue them backe vppon the coast of Affricke. There The Tyrian Queene (whoo afterward vnpaciently should beare The going of this Troiane prince away) did enterteine Aenaeas in her house, and was ryght glad of him and fayne. Uppon a Pyle made vnderneathe pretence of sacrifyse Shée goard herself vpon a swoord, and in most wofull wyse As shée herself had beene beguyld: so shée beguyled all. Eftsoone Aenaeas flying from the newly réered wall Of Carthage in that sandy land, retyred backe agen Too Sicill, where his faythfull fréend Acestes reignd. And when He there had doone his sacrifyse, and kept an Obit at His fathers umb, he out of hand did mend his Gallyes that Dame Iris Iunos messenger had burned vp almost. And sayling thence he kept his course aloof along the coast Of Aeolye and of Vulcanes Iles the which of brimston smoke. And passing by the Meremayds rocks, (His Pilot by a sroke Of tempest being drownd in sea) he sayld by Prochite, and Inarime, and (which vppon a barreine hill dooth stand) The land of Ape Ile, which dooth take that name of people slye There dwelling. For the Syre of Goddes abhorring vtterly The leawdnesse of the Cercops, and theyr wilfull periurye,
And éeke theyr guylefull dealing did transorme them eueryho Intoo an euillfauored kynd of beast: that béeing none They myght yit still resemble men. He knit in lesser space Theyr members, and he beate mée flat theyr noses too theyr face, The which he filled furrowlike with wrinckles euery where. He clad theyr bodyes ouer all with fallow coulourd heare, And put them intoo this same Ile too dwell for euer there. But first he did beréeue them of the vse of spéeche and toong, Which they too cursed periurye did vse bothe old and yoong. Too chatter hoarcely, and too shreeke, too iabber, and too squeake, He hath them left, and for too moppe and mowe, but not too speake. Aenaeas hauing past this Ile, and on his ryght hand left The towne of Naples, and the tumb of Mysen on his left, Toogither with the fenny grounds: at Cumye landed, and Went vntoo longlyvde Cybills house, with whom he went in hand That he too sée his fathers ghoste myght go by Auerne déepe. Shee long vppon the earth in sownd her eyes did fixed kéepe. And at the length assoone as that the spryght of prophesye Was entred her, shée raysing them did thus ageine reply. O most renowmed wyght, of whom the godlynesse by fyre And valeantnesse is tryde by swoord, great things thou doost requyre. But feare nt Troiane. for thou shalt bée lord of thy desyre. Too sée the reuerend image of thy déere béeloued syre, Among the fayre Elysian féeldes where godly folke abyde, And all the lowest kingdoomes of the world I will thee guyde. No way too vertue is restreynd. This spoken, shée did showe A golden bowgh that in the wood of Proserpine did growe, And willed him too pull it from the trée. He did obey: And sawe the powre of dreadfull hell, and where his graundsyres lay And éeke the aged Ghost of stowt Anchises. Furthermore He lernd the customes of the land arryvd at late before, And what aduentures should by warre betyde him in that place. From thence retyring vp ageine a slow and wéery pace, He did asswage the tediousnesse by talking with his guyde. For as he in the twylyght dim this dreadfull way did ryde, He sayëd: whither present thou thyself a Goddesse bée. Or such a one as God dooth loue most déerly, I will thée
For euer as a Goddesse take, and will acknowledge mée Thy seruant, for saufguyding mée the place of death too sée, And for thou from the place of death haste brought mée sauf and frée. For which desert, what tyme I shall atteyne too open ayre, I will a temple to thée buyld ryght sumptuous, large, and fayre, And honour thée with frankincence. The prophetisse did cast Her eye vppon Aenaeas backe, and syghing sayd at last. I am no Goddesse. Neyther think thou canst with conscience ryght, With holy incence honour giue too any mortall wyght. But too thentent through ignorance thou erre not, I had béene Eternall and of worldly lyfe I should none end haue séene, If that I would my maydenhod on Phebus haue bestowde. Howbéeit whyle he stood in hope too haue the same, and trowde Too ouercome mée with his gifts, thou mayd of Cumes ({quod} he) Choose what thou wilt, and of thy wish the owner thou shalt bée. I taking full my hand of dust, and shewing it him there, Desyred like a foole too liue as many yéeres as were Small graynes of cinder in that heape. I quight forgot too craue Immediately, the race of all those yéeres in youth too haue. Yit did he graunt mée also that, vppon condicion I Would let him haue my maydenhod, which thing I did denye. And so reiecting Phebus gift a single lyfe I led. But now the blessefull tyme of youth is altoogither fled, And irksome age with trembling pace is stolne vppon my head. Which long I must endure. For now already as you sée Seuen hundred yeares are come and gone and that the number bée Full matched of the granes of dust, thréehundred haruestes mo I must three hundred vintages sée more before I go. The day will come that length of tyme shall make my body small, And little of my withered limbes shall leaue or naught at all. And none shall think that uer God was tane in loue with mée. Euen out of Phebus knowledge then perchaunce I growen shall bée. Or at the least that euer he mée love he shall denye. So sore I shall be altered. And then shall no mannes eye Discerne mée. Only by my voyce I shall bée knowen. For why The fates shall leaue mée still my voyce for folke too know mée by. As Sybill in the vaulted way such talk as this did frame,
The Troiane knyght. Aenaeas vp at Cumes fro Limbo came, And hauing doone the sacrifyse accustomd for the same, He tooke his iourney too the coast which had not yit the name Receyued of his nurce. In this same place he found a mate Of wyse Vlysses Macare of Neritus whoo late Before, had after all his long and tediouse toyles, there stayd. He spying Achemenides (whom late ago afrayd They had among mount Aetnas Cliffs abandond when they fled From Polypheme:) and woondring for too sée he was not dead, Sayd thus. O Achemenides▪ what chaunce, or rather what Good God hathe savde the lyfe of thée? What is the reason that A barbrous shippe beares thée a Gréeke? or whither saylest thou? Too him thus, Achemenides his owne man fréely now And not forgrowen as one forlorne, nor clad in bristled hyde, Made answer. Yit ageine I would I should in perrill byde Of Polypheme, and that I myght those chappes of his behold Béesmeared with the blood of men, but if that I doo hold This shippe more déere than all the Realme of wyse Vlysses, or If lesser of Aenaeas I doo make account than for My father. neyther (though I did as much as doone myght bee,) I could ynough bée thankfull for his goodnesse towards mée. That I still speake and breathe: That I the Sun and heauen doo sée: Is his gift. Can I thanklesse then or myndlesse of him bée? That downe the round eyed gyants throte this soule of myne went not? And that from hencefoorth when too dye it euer be my lot I may bée layd in graue, or sure not in the Gyants mawe? What hart had I that tyme (at least if feare did not withdrawe Both hart and sence) when left behynd, you taking shippe I sawe? I would haue called after you but that I was afrayd By making outcrye too my to myself too haue béewrayd. For euen the noyse that you did make did put Vlysses shippe In daunger. I did sée him from a cragged mountaine strippe A myghty rocke, and intoo sea it throwe midway and more. Ageine I sawe his giants pawe throwe howge big stones great store As if it were a sling. And sore I feared least your shippe Should drowned by the water bée that from the stones did skippe, Or by the stones themselues, as if my self had béene therin.
But when that flyght had saued you from death, he did begin On Aetna syghing vp and downe too walke: and with his pawes Went groping of the trées among the woodes. And forbycause He could not sée, he knockt his shinnes ageinst the rocks eche where. And stretching out his grisly armes (which all beegrymed were With baken blood) too seaward, he the Gréekish nation band, And sayd. O if that sum good chaunce myght bring vntoo my hand Vlysses or sum mate of his, on whom too wreake myne ire. Uppon whose bowells with my téeth I like a Hawke myght tyre: Whose liuing members myght with theis my talants teared béene. Whoose blood myght bubble down my throte: whose flesh myght pant be∣twéene My iawes: how lyght or none at all this losing of myne eye Would séeme? Theis woordes and many mo the cruell féend did cry. A shuddring horror perced mée too sée his smudged face, And cruell handes, and in his frunt the fowle round eyelesse place, And monstruous members, and his beard bestowbered with the blood Of man. Before myne eyes then death the smallest sorrow stood. I loked euery minute too bée seased in his pawe. I looked euer when he should haue cramd mée in his mawe. And in my mynd I of that tyme mée thought the image sawe When hauing dingd a doozen of our fellowes too the grownd And lying lyke a Lyon féerce or hunger sterued hownd Uppon them, very eagerly he downe his gréedy gut Theyr bowwels and theyr limbes yit more than half aliue did put, And with theyr flesh toogither crasht the bones and marée whyght. I trembling like an aspen leaf stood sad and bloodlesse quyght. And in beholding how he fed and belked vp againe His bloody vittells at his mouth, and vttred out amayne The clottred gobbets mixt with wyne, I thus surmysde: like lot Hangs ouer my head now, and I must also go too pot. And hyding mée for many dayes, and quaking horribly At euery noyse, and dreading death, and wisshing for too dye, Appeasing hunger with the leaues of trées, and herbes and mast, Alone, and poore, and footelsse, and too death and pennance cast, A long tyme after I espyde this shppe a farre at last, And ronning downeward too the sea by fignes did succour séeke. Where fynding grace, this Troianeshippe receyued mée a Greeke.
But now I prey thée gentle fréend declare thou vntoo mée Thy Capteines and thy fellowes lucke that tooke the sea with thee. He told him how that Aeölus the sonne of Hippot, hea That kéepes the wyndes in pryson cloce did reigne in Tuskane sea, And how Vlysses hauing at his hand a noble gift The wynd enclosde in leather bagges, did sayle with prosperous drift nyne dayes toogither: insomuch they came within the syght Of home: but on the tenth day when the morning gan giue lyght, His fellowes being somewhat toucht with couetousenesse and spyght. Supposing that it had béene gold, did let the wyndes out quyght. The which returning whence they came, did driue them backe a mayne That in the Realme of Aeölus they went a land agayne. From thence ({quod} he) we came vntoo the auncient Lamyes towne Of which the féerce Antiphates that season ware the crowne. A cowple of my mates and I were sent vntoo him: and A mate of myne and I could scarce by flyght escape his hand. The third of vs did with his blood embrew the wicked face Of leawd Antiphate, whoo with swoord vs flying thence did chace, And following after with a rowt threw stones and loggs which drownd Both men and shippes. Howbéeit one by chaunce escaped sound, Which bare Vlysses and my self. So hauing lost most part Of all our deare companions, we with sad and sory hart And much complayning, did arryue at yoonder coast which yow May ken farre hence. A great way hence (I say) wée sée it now But trust mée truly ouer néere I saw it once. And thow Aenaeas Goddesse Venus sonne the iustest knight of all The Troiane race (for sith the warre is doone, I can not call thée to) I warne thée get thée farre from Crces dwelling place. For when our shippes arryued there, remembring eft the cace Of cruell king Antiphates, and of that hellish wyght The round eyed gyant Polypheme, wée had so small delyght Too visit vncowth places, that wée sayd wée would not go. Then cast we lotts. The lot fell out vppon myself as tho, And Polyte, and Eurylocus, and on Elpenor who Delyghted tootoomuch in wyne, and eyghtéene other mo. All wee did go too Circes house. Assoone as wée came thither, And in the portall of the Hall had set our féete toogither,
A thousand Lyons woolues and beares did put vs in a feare By méeting vs. But none of them was too bée feared there. For none of them could doo vs harme: but with a gentle looke And following vs with fawning féete theyr wanton tayles they shooke. Anon did Damzells welcome vs and led vs through the hall (The which was made of marble stone, floore, arches, roof, and wall) Too Circe. Shée sate vnderneathe a trauerse in a chayre Aloft ryght rich and stately, in a chamber large and fayre. Shée ware a goodly longtreynd gowne: and all her rest attyre Was euery whit of goldsmithes woork. There sate mée also by her The Seanymphes and her Ladyes whoose fyne fingers neuer knew What oozing wooll did méene, nor threede from whorled spindle drew, They sorted herbes, and picking out the flowers that were mixt, Did put them intoo mawnds, and with indifferent space betwixt, Did lay the leaues and stalks on heapes according too theyr hew. And shée herself the woork of them did ouersée and vew. The vertue and the vse of them ryght perfectly shée knew, And in what leaf it lay, and which in mixture would agrée. And so perusing euery her by god aduysement, shée Did wey them out. Assoone as shée vs entring in did see, And gréeting had bothe giuen and tane, shée looked chéerefully, And graunting all that wée desyrde, commaunded by and by A certeine potion too bée made of barly parched drye And wyne and hony mixt with chéese. and with the same shée slye Had meynt the iewce of certeine herbes which vnespyde did lye By reason of the swéetenesse of the drink. Wée tooke the cup Deliuered by her wicked hand, and quaft it cléerly vp With thirstye throtes. Which doone, and that the cursed witch had smit Our highest heare tippes with her wand, (it is a shame, but yit I will declare the truth) I wext all rough with brisled heare, And could not make complaint with woordes. In stead of spéech I there Did make a rawghtish grunting, and with groueling face gan beare My visage downeward too the ground. I felt a hooked groyne Too wexen hard vppon my mouth, and brawned neck too ioyne My head and shoulders. And the handes with which I late ago Had taken vp the charmed cup, were turnd to feete as tho. Such force there is in Sorcerie. In fyne wyth other mo
That tasted of the selfsame sawce, they shet mée in a Stye. From this missehappe Furilochus alonly scapte. For why He only would not taste the cup. which had he not fled fro, He should haue béene a bristled beast as well as we. And so Should none haue borne Vlysses woorde of our mischaunce, nor hée Haue cōme too Circe too reuenge our harmes and set vs free. The peaceprocurer Mercurie had giuen too him a whyght Fayre flowre whoose roote is black, and of the Goddes it Moly hyght Assurde by this and heauenly hestes, he entred Circes bowre. And béeing bidden for too drink the cup of balefull powre, As Circe was about too stroke her wand vppon his heare, He thrust her backe, and put her with his naked swoord in feare. Then fell they too agréement streyght, and fayth in hand was plyght. And béeing made her bedfellowe, he claymed as in ryght Of dowrye, for too haue his men ageine in perfect plyght. Shée sprincled vs with better iewce of vncowth herbes, and strake The awk end of her charmed rod vppon our heades, and spake Woordes too the former contrarie. The more shée charmd, the more Arose wée vpward from the ground on which wée daarde before. Our bristles fell away, the lift our clouen elées forsooke. Our shoulders did returne agein: and next our elbowes tooke Our armes and handes theyr former place. Then weeping wée enbrace Our Lord, and hing about his necke whoo also wept apace. And not a woord wée rather spake than such as myght appéere From harts most thankfull too procéede. Wée taryed theyr a yéere I in that whyle sawe many things, and many things did héere. I marked also this one thing with store of other geere Which one of Circes fowre chéef maydes (whoose office was alway Uppon such hallowes too attend) did secretly bewray Too mée. For in the whyle my Lord with Circe kept alone, This mayd a yoongmannes image sheawd of fayre whyght marble stone Within a Chauncell. On the head therof were garlonds store And éeke a woodspecke. And as I demaunded her wherfore And whoo it was they honord so in holy Church, and why He bare that bird vppon his head: Shée answéering by and by Sayd: lerne hereby sir Macare too vnderstand the powre My Lady hathe, and marke thou well what I shall say this howre.
There reignd erewhyle in Italy one Picus Saturnes sonne Whoo loued warlike horse and had delyght too sée them ronne. He was of feature as yée sée. And by this image héere The verry beawtye of the man dooth lyuelely appéere. His courage matcht his personage. And scarcely had he well Séene twentye yéeres. His countnance did allure the nymphes y• dwell Among the Latian hilles. The nymphes of fountaines and of brookes, As those that hauntedNow cal∣led Tyber. Albula were rauisht with his lookes And so were they that Numicke beares, and Anio too, and Alme That ronneth short, and heady Nar, and Farfar coole and calme. And all the nymphes that vsde too haunt Dianas shadye poole, Or any lakes or méeres néere hand, or other waters coole. But he disdeyning all the rest did set his loue vppon A lady whom Venilia bare (so fame reporteth) on The stately mountayne Palatine by Ianus that dooth beare The dowble face. Assoone as that her yéeres for maryage were Thought able, shée preerring him before all other men, Was wedded too this Picus whoo was king of Lavvrents then. Shée was in beawtye excellent. but yit in singing, much More excellent: and thervppon they naamd her Singer. Such The swéetenesse of her musicke was, that shée therwith delyghts The sauage beastes, and caused birdes too cease theyr wandring flyghts, And moued stones and trées, and made the ronning streames too stay. Now whyle that shée in womans tune recordes her pleasant lay At home, her husband rode abrode vppon a lustye horse Too hunt the Boare, and bare in hand twoo hunting staues of force. His cloke was crymzen butned with a golden button fast. Intoo the selfsame forest éeke was Phebus daughter past From those same féeldes that of herself the name of Circe beare, Too gather vncowth herbes among the frutefull hillocks there. Assoone as lurking in the shrubbes shée did the king espye, Shée was atrawght. Downe fell her herbes too ground. And by and by Through all her bones the flame of loue the marée gan too frye. And when shée from this forced heate had cald her witts agen, Shée purposde too bewray her mynd. But vntoo him as then Shée could not come for swiftnesse of his horse and for his men That garded him o euery syde. Yit shalt thou not ({quod} shée)
So shift thée fro my handes although the wynd should carrye thée, If I doo knowe myself, if all the strength of herbes fayle not, Or if I haue not quyght and cléene my charmes and spelles forgotte. In saying theis same woordes, shée made the likenesse of a Boare Without a body, causing it too swiftly passe before King Picus eyes, and for too séeme too get him too the woode, Where for the thickenesse of the trées a horse myght doo no good. Immediatly the king vnwares a whoe pursute did make Uppon the shadowe of his pray, and quikly did forsake His foming horses sweating backe: and following vayne wan hope, Did runne a foote among the woodes, and through the bushes crope. Then Circe fell a mumbling spelles, and praying like a witch Did honour straunge & vncowth Goddes wt vncowth charmes, by which Shee vsde too make the moone looke dark, and wrappe her fathers head In watry clowdes. And then likewyse the heauen was ouerspred With darknesse, and a foggye mist steamd vpward from the ground. And neare a man about the king too gard him could beé found, But euery man in blynd by wayes ran scattring in the chace, Through her inchauntments. At the length shée getting tyme & place, Sayd▪ By those lyghtsum eyes of thyne which late haue rauisht myne, And by that goodly personage and louely face of thyne, The which compelleth mée that am a Goddesse too enclyne Too make this humble sute too thée that art a mortall wyght, Asswage my flame, and make this sonne (whoo by his heauenly syght Foresées all things) thy fathrinlawe: and hardly hold not scorne Of Circe whoo by long discent of Titans stocke am borne. Thus much sayd Circe. He ryght féerce reiecting her request, And her, sayd: whooso ere thou art go set thy hart at rest. I am not thyne, nor will not bée. Another holdes my hart: And long God graunt shée may it hold, that I may neuer start Too leawdnesse of a forreine lust from bond of lawfull bed, As long as Ianus daughter my swéete singer is not dead. Dame Circe hauing oft renewd her sute in vayne beefore, Sayd: dearely shalt thou by thy scorne. For neuer shalt thou more Returne too Singer. Thou shalt lerne by proof what one can doo That is prouoked, and in loue, yea and a woman too. But Circe is bothe stird too wrath, and also tane in loue,
Yea and a woman. Twyce her fae too westward she did moue, And twyce too Eastward. Thryce shée layd her rod vppon his head. And therwithall thrée charmes shée cast. Away king Picus fled. And woondring that he fled more swift than arst he had béene woont, He saw the fethers on his skin, and at the sodein brunt Became a bird that haunts the wooddes. wherat he taking spyght, With angrye bill did iob vppon hard Okes with all his myght, And in his moode made hollowe holes vppo theyr boughes. The hew Of Crimzen which was in his cloke, vppon his fethers grew. The gold that was a clasp and did his cloke toogither hold, Is fethers, and about his necke goes circlewyse like gold. His seruants luring in that whyle oft ouer all the ground In vayne, and fynding no where of theyr kyng no incling, found. Dame Circe. (For by that tyme shée had made the ayr shéere, And suffred both the sonne and wyndes the mistye steames too cléere) And charging her with matter trew, demaunded for theyr kyng, And offring force, began theyr darts and Iauelings for too fling. Shée sprincling noysom venim streyght and iewce of poysoning myght, Did call toogither Eribus and Chaos, and the nyght, And all the féendes of darknesse, and with howling out along Made prayers vntoo Hecate. Scarce ended was her song, But that (a woondrous thing too tell) the woodes lept from theyr place The ground did grone: the trées néere hand lookt pale in all the chace: The grasse besprent with droppes of blood lookt red: the stones did séem Too roare and bellow hoarce: and doggs too howle and raze extréeme: And all the ground too crawle wt snakes blacke scaald: & gastly spryghts Fly whisking vp and downe. The folke were flayghted at theis syghts. And as they woondring stood amaazd, shée strokte her witching wand Uppon theyr faces. At the touche wherof, there out of hand Came woondrous shapes of sauage beastes vppon them all. Not one Reteyned still his natiue shape. The setting sonne was gone Beyond the vtmost cast of Spaine, and Singer longd in vayne Too sée her husband. Bothe her folke and people ran agayne Through all the woodes. And euer as they went, they sent theyr eyes Before them for too fynd him out, but no man him espyes. Then Singer thought it not ynough too wéepe and teare her heare, And beat herself (all which shée did.) Shée gate abrode, and there
Raundgd ouer all the broade wyld féelds like one besyds her witts. Six nyghts and full as many dayes (as fortune led by fitts) She strayd mée ouer hilles and dales, and neuer tasted rest, Nor meate, nor drink of all the whyle. The seuenth day, sore opprest And tyred bothe with trauell and with sorrowe, downe shée sate Uppon cold Tybers bank, and there with teares in moorning rate Shée warbling on her gréef in tune not shirle nor ouer hye, Did make her moane, as dooth the swan: whoo ready for too dye Dooth sing his buriall song before. Her marée molt at last With moorning, and shée pynde away: and finally shée past Too lither ayre. But yit her fame remayned in the place. For why the auncient husbandmen according too the cace, Did name it Singer of the nymph that dyed in the same. Of such as these are, many things that yéere by fortune came Bothe too my héering and my sight. Wée weing resty then And sluggs by discontinuance, were commaunded yit agen Too go a boord and hoyse vp sayles. And Circe told vs all That long and dowtfull passage and rowgh seas should vs befall. I promis thée those woordes of hers mée throughly made afrayd: And therfore hither I mée gate, and héere I haue mée stayd. This was the end of Macars tale. And ere long tyme was gone, Aenaeas Nurce was buryed in a tumb of marble stone, And this short verse was set theron. In this same verry place My Nurcechyld whom the world dooth know too bée a chyld of grace Deliuering mée Caeta quicke from burning by the Grayes, Hathe burnt mée dead with such a fyre as iustly winnes him prayse. Theyr Cables from the grassye strond were loozde, and by and by From Circes slaunderous house and from her treasons arre they fly. And making too the thickgrowen groues where through the yellow dust The shady Tyber intoo sea his guhing streame dooth thrust, Aenaeas got the Realme of king Latinus Favvnus sonne And éeke his daughter, whom in fyght by force of armes he wonne. He enterprysed warre ageinst a Nation féerce and strong. And Turne was wrothe for holding of his wyfe away by wrong. Ageinst the Shyre of Latium met all Tyrrhene, and long With busys car hawlt victorie by force of armes was sought. Eche partie too augment theyr force by forreine succour wrought.
And many sent the Rutills help, and many came too ayd The Troianes: neyther was the good Aenaeas ill apayd Of going too Euanders towne. But Venulus in vayne Too outcast Diomeds citie went his succour too obteine. This Diomed vnder Davvnus king of Calabrye did found A myghtye towne, and with his wyfe in dowrye hild the ground. Now when from Turnus, Venulus his message had declaard, Desyring help: Th' Actolian knyght sayd none could well bee spaard. And in excuce, he told him how he neyther durst be bold Too prest his fathers folk too warre of whom he had no hold, Nor any of his countrymen had left as then alyue Too arme. And least yée think ({quod} hée) I doo a shift contryue, Although by vppening of the thing my bitter greef reuyue I will abyde too make a new rehersall. After that The Gréekes had burned Troy and on the ground had layd it flat, And that the Prince of Narix by his rauishing the mayd In Pallas temple, on vs all the pennance had displayd Which he himself deserud alone: Then scattred héere and there And harryed ouer all the seas, wée Gréekes were fayne too beare Nyght, thunder, tempest, wrath of heauen and sea, and last of all Sore shipwrecke at mount Capharey too mend our harmes withall. And least that mée too make too long a processe yée myght déeme In setting forth our heauy happes, the Gréekes myght that tyme séeme Ryght rewfull euen too Priamus. Howbéet Minerua shee That weareth armour tooke mée from the waues and saued mée. But from my fathers Realme ageine by violence I was driuen. For Venus bearing still in mynd the wound I had her giuen Long tyme before, did woork reuendge. By meanes wherof such toyle Did tosse mée on the sea, and on the land I found such broyle By warres, that in my hart I thought them blist of God whom erst The violence of the raging sea and hideous wynds had perst, And whom the wrathfull Capharey by shipwrecke did confound: Oft wisshing also I had there among the rest béene drownd. My company now hauing felt the woorst that sea or warre Could woorke, did faynt, and wisht an end of straying out so farre. But Agmon whot of nature and too féerce through slaughters made Sayd. What remayneth sirs through which our pacience cannot wade?
What further spyght hath Venus yit too woork ageinst vs more? When woorse misfortunes may bée feard than haue béene felt before, Then prayer may aduauntadge men, and vowwing may them boote. But when the woorst is past of things, then feare is vnder foote. And when that bale is hyghst growne, then boote must next ensew. Although shée héere mée, and doo hate vs all (which thing is trew) That serue héere vnder Diomed: Yit set wée lyght her hate. And déerely it should stand vs on too purchase hygh estate. With such stowt woordes did Agmon stirre dame Venus vntoo ire And raysd ageine her settled grudge. Not many had desyre Too héere him talk thus out of square. the moste of vs that are His fréendes rebuke him for his woordes. And as he did prepare Too answere, bothe his voyce and throte by which his voyce should go, Were small: his heare too feathers turnd: his necke was clad as tho With feathers: so was brist and backe. The greater fethers stacke Uppon his armes: and intoo wings his elbowes bowwed backe. The greatest portion of his féete was turned intoo toes. A hardened bill of horne did growe vppon his mouth and noze, And sharpened at the neather end. His fellowes Lycus, Ide, Rethenor, Nyct, and Abas all stood woondring by his syde. And as they woondred, they receyvd the selfsame shape and hew. And finally the greater part of all my band vp flew, And clapping with theyr newmade wings, about the ores did gird. And if yée doo demaund the shape of this same dowtfull bird, Euen as they bée not verry Swannes: so drawe they verry néere The shape of Cygnets whyght.The Elk. With much a doo I settled héere, And with a little remnant of my people doo obteyne The drygrownds of my fathrinlaw king Davvnus whoo did reigne In Calabry. hus much the sonne of Oenye sayd. Anon Sir Venulus returning from the king of Calydon, Forsooke the coast of Puteoll and the féeldes of Messapie, In which hée saw a darksome denne forgrowne with busshes hye▪ And watred with a little spring. The halfegoate Pan that howre Possessed it: but héertoofore it was the fayryes bowre. A shepeherd of Appulia from that countrye scaard them fur. But afterward recouering hart and hardynesse they durst Despyse him when he chaced them, and with theyr mble féete
Continewed on theyr dawncing still in tyme and measure méete The shepeherd fownd mée fault with them: and with his lowtlike leapes Did counterfette theyr minyon dawnce, and rapped out by heapes A rabble of vnsauery taunts euen like a country cloyne, Too which, most leawd and filthy termes of purpose he did ioyne. And after he had once begon, he could not hold his toong, Untill that in the timber of a trée his throte was cloong. For now he is a trée, and by his iewce discerne yée may His manners. For the Olyfwyld dooth sensibly bewray By berryes full of bitternesse his rayling toong. For ay The harshnesse of his bitter woordes the berryes beare away. Now when the kings Ambassadour returned home without The succour of th' Aetolian prince, the Rutills being stout Made luckelesse warre without theyr help: and much on eyther syde Was shed of blood. Behold king Turne made burning bronds too glyde Uppon theyr shippes, and they that had escaped water, stoode In feare of fyre. The flame had sindgd the pitch, the wax, and wood, And other things that nourish fyre, and ronning vp the maste Caught hold vppon the sayles, and all the takling gan too waste, The Rowers seates did also smoke: when calling too her mynd That theis same shippes were pynetrées erst and shaken with the wynd On Ida mont, the moother of the Goddes dame Cybel filld The ayre with sound of belles, and noyse of shalmes. And as shée hilld The reynes that rulde the Lyons tame which drew her charyot, Shée Sayd thus. O Turnus all in vayne theis wicked hands of thée Doo cast this fyre. for by myself dispoynted it shall bée. I wilnot let the wasting fyre consume theis shippes which are A parcell of my forest Ide of which I am most chare. It thundred as the Goddesse spake, and with the thunder came A storme of rayne and skipping hayle. and soodeyne with the same The sonnes of Astrey méeting féerce and feyghting verry sore, Did trouble bothe the sea and ayre and set them on a rore. Dame Cybel vsing one of  serue her turne that tyde, Did breake the Cables at  which the Troiane shippes did ryde, And bare them proe,  vnderneathe the water did them dryue The Timber of them sotning urnd  odyes streyght alyue. The stemmes were turnd too heades, the  too swimming féete & toes,
The sydes too ribbes, the kéele that through the middle gally goes Became the ridgebone of the backe, the sayles and tackling, heare: And intoo armes on eyther syde the sayleyards turned were. Theyr hew is duskye as before, and now in shape of mayd They play among the waues of which euen now they were afrayd. And béeing Seanymphes, wheras they were bred in mountaynes hard, They haunt for ay the water soft, and neuer afterward Had mynd too see theyr natyue soyle. But yit forgetting not How many perills they had felt on sea by lucklesse lot, They often put theyr helping hand too shippes distrest by wynd, Onlesse that any caryed Gréekes. For bearing still in mynd The burning of the towne of Troy, they hate the Gréekes by kynd. And therfore of Vlysses shippes ryght glad they were too sée The shiuers. and as glad they were as any glad myght bée, Too sée Alcinous shippes wex hard and turned intoo stone. Theis shippes thus hauing gotten lyfe and béeing turnd eche one Too nymphes, a body would haue thought the miracle so greate Should intoo Turnus wicked hart sum godly feare haue beate, And made him cease his wilfull warre. But he did still persist. And eyther partye had theyr Goddes theyr quarrell too assist, And courage also: which as good as Goddes myght well be thought. In fyne they neyther for the Realme nor for the scepter sought, Nor for the Lady Lauine: but for conquest. And for shame Too séeme too shrinke in leauing warre, they still prolongd the same. At length dame Venus sawe her sonne obteyne the vpper hand King Turnus fell, and éeke the towne of Ardea which did stand Ryght strong in hygh estate as long as Turnus liued. But Assoone as that Aenaeas swoord too death had Turnus put, The towne was set on fyre: and from amid the embers flew A fowle which till that present tyme no persone euer knew, And béete the ashes féercely vp with flapping of his wing. The leanenesse, palenesse, dolefull sound, and euery other thing That may expresse a Citie sakt, yea and the Cities name Remayned still vntoo the bird. And now the verrye same With Hernesewes fethers dooth bewayle the towne wherof it came. And now Aenaeas prowesse had compelled all the Goddes And Iuno also (whoo with him was most of all at oddes)
Too cease theyr old displeasure quyght. And now he hauing layd Good ground wheron the growing welth of Iuly myght be stayd, Was rype for heauen. And Venus had great sute already made Too all the Goddes. and cléeping Ioue did thus with him perswade. Déere father whoo hast neuer béene vncurtuous vntoo mée, Now shewe the greatest courtesie (I pray thée) that may bée. And on my sonne Aenaeas (whoo a graundchyld vntoo thée Hath got of my blood) if thou wilt vouchsafe him awght at all) Uouchsafe sum Godhead too bestowe, although it bée but small. It is ynough that once he hathe alreadye séene the Realme Of Pluto vtter pleasurelesse, and passed Styxis streame. The Goddes assented: neyther did Quéene Iuno then appéere In countnance straunge, but did consent with glad and merry chéere. Then Ioue. Aenaeas woorthy is a saynct in heauen too bée. Thy wish for whom thou doost it wish I graunt thée frank and frée. This graunt of his made Venus glad. Shée thankt him for the same. And glyding through the aire vppon her yoked doues, shee came Too Lavvrent shore, where clad with reede the riuer Numicke déepe Too seaward (which is néere at hand) with stealing pace dooth créepe. Shée bade this riuer wash away what euer mortall were In good Aenaeas bodye, and them vnder sea too beare. The horned brooke fulfilld her hest, and with his water shéere Did purge and clenze Aenaeas from his mortall body cléere. The better porcion of him did remayne vntoo him sownd. His moother hauing hallowed him did noynt his bodye rownd With heauenly odours, and did touch his mouth with Ambrosie The which was mixt with Near swéete, and made him by and by A God too whom the Romanes giue the name of Indiges, Endeuering with theyr temples and theyr altars him too please. Ascanius with the dowble name from thence began too reigne, In whom the rule of Alba and of Latium did remayne. Next him succéeded Siluius, whoose sonne Latinus hild The auncien name and scepter which his graundsyre erst did wéeld. The famous Ept after this Latinus did succéede. Then Capys and king Capetus. But Capys was indéede The formest of the twoo. From this the scepter of the Realme Descended vntoo Tyberine, whoo drowning in the streame
Of Tyber left that name theretoo. This Tyberine begat Féerce Remulus and Acrota. By chaunce it hapned that The elder brother Remulus for counterfetting oft The thunder, with a thunderbolt was killed from aloft. From Acrota whoose stayëdnesse did passe his brothers skill, The crowne did cōme too Auentine, whoo in the selfsame hill In which he reygned buryed lyes, and left thertoo his name. The rule of nation Palatine at length too Proca came. In this Kings reigneIt may be interpreted Applebee. Pomona livd. There was not too bée found Among the woodnymphes any one in all the Latian ground That was so conning for too keepe an Ortyard as was shée, Nor none so paynefull too preserue the frute of euery trée. And thervppon shée had her name. Shée past not for the woodes Nor riuers, but the villages and boughes that bare bothe buddes And plentuous frute. In sted of dart a shredding hooke shée bare, With which the ouerlusty boughes shée eft away did pare That spreaded out too farre, and eft did make therwith a rift Too greffe another imp vppon the stocke within the clift. And least her trées should die through drought, with water of the springs Shée moystech of theyr sucking roots the little crumpled strings. This was her loue and whole delyght. And as for Venus déedes, Shée had no mynd at all of them. And forbycause shée dréedes Enforcement by the countrye folke, shée walld her yards about, Not suffring any man at all too enter in or out. What haue not those same nimble laddes so apt too frisk and daunce The Satyrs doone? or what the Pannes that wantonly doo praunce, With borned forheads? and the old Silenus whoo is ay More youthfull than his yéeres? and éeke the féend that scares away The theeues and robbers with his hooke, or with his priuy part? Too winne her loue? But yit than theis a farre more constant hart Had slyTurner. Vertumnus, though he sped no better than the rest. O Lord, how often being in a moawers garment drest, Bare he in bundells sheaues of corne? and when he so was dyght, He was the verry patterne of a haruest moawer ryght. Oft bynding newmade hay about his temples he myght séeme A haymaker. Oft tymes in hand made hard with woork extreeme He bare a goade, that men would sweere he had but newly then
Unyoakt his wéerye Oxen. Had he tane in hand agen A shredding hooke, yée would haue thought hée had a gardener béene, Or proyner of sum vynes. Or had you him with ladder séene Uppon his necke, a gatherer of frute yée would him déeme. With swoord a souldier, with his rod an Angler he did séeme. And finally in many shapes he sought too fynd accesse Too ioy the beawty but by syght, that did his hart oppresse. Moreouer, putting on his head a womans wimple gay, And staying by a staffe, graye heares he foorth too syght did lay Uppon his forehead, and did feyne a beldame for too bée. By meanes whereof he came within her goodly ortyards frée. And woondring at the frute, sayd. Much more skill hast thou I sée Than all the Nymphes of Albula. Hayle Lady myne, the flowre Unspotted of pure maydenhod in all the world this howre. And with that woord he kissed her a little: but his kisse Was such as trew old women would haue neuer giuen ywis. Then sitting downe vppon a bank, he looked vpward at The braunches bent with haruests weyght. Ageinst him where he sat A goodly Elme with glistring grapes did growe: which after hée Had praysed, and the vyne, likewyse that ran vppon the trée, But if ({quod} hée) this Elme without the vyne did single stand, It should haue nothing (sauing leaues) too bée desyred: and Ageine if that the vyne which ronnes vppon the Elme had nat The trée too leane vntoo, it should vppon the ground ly flat. Yit art not thou admonisht by example of this trée Too take a husband, neyther doost thou passe too maryed bée. But would too God thou wouldest. Sure Quéene Helen neuer had Mo uters, nor the Lady that did cause the battell mad Betwéene the halfbrute Centavvres and the Lapythes, nor the wyfe Of bold Vlysses whoo was éeke ay fearefull of his lyfe, Than thou shouldst haue. For thousands now (euē now most chéefly whē Thou séemest suters too abhorre) desyre thée, both of men, And Goddes and halfgoddes, yea and all the fayryes that doo dwell In Albane hilles. But if thou wilt bée wyse, and myndest well Too match thy self, and wilt giue eare too this old woman héere, (Too whom thou more than too them all art (trust mée) léef and déere, And more than thou thyself beleevst) the common matches flée,
And choose Vertumnus too thy make. And take thou mée too bée His pledge. For more he too himself not knowen is, than too mée. He roues not like a ronneagate through all the world abrode, This countrye héerabout (the which is large) is his abode. He dooth not (like a nomber of theis common wooers) cast His loue to euery one he sées. Thou art the first and last That euer he set mynd vppon. Alonly vntoo thée Hée vowes himself as long as lyfe dooth last. Moreouer hée Is youthfull, and with beawtye shéene endewd by natures gift, And aptly intoo any shape his persone he can shift. Thou canst not bid him bée the thing, (though al things yu shouldst name) But that he fitly and with ease will streyght becomme the same. Besydes all this, in all one thing bothe twayne of you delyght, And of the frutes that you loue best the firstlings are his ryght: And gladly he receyues thy gifts. But neyther couets hée Thy Apples, Plommes, nor other frutes new gathered from the trée, Nor yit the herbes of pleasant sent that in thy gardynes bée: Nor any other kynd of thing in all the world, but thée. Haue mercy on his feruent loue, and think himself too craue Héere present by the mouth of mée, the thing that he would haue. And feare the God that may reuenge: as Venus whoo dooth hate Hard harted folkes, and Rhamnuse whoo dooth eyther soone or late Expresse her wrath with myndfull wreake. And too thentent thou may The more beware, of many things which tyme by long delay Hathe taught mée, I will shewe thée one which ouer all the land Of Cyprus blazed is abrode, which being ryghtly skand May easly bow thy hardned hart and make it for too yild. One Iphis borne of lowe degrée by fortune had behild The Ladye Anaxarete descended of the race Of Tevvcer, and in vewwing her the fyre of loue a pace Did spred it self through all his bones. With which he stryuing long, When reason could not conquer rage bycause it was too strong, Came humbly too the Ladyes house: and one whyle laying ope His wretched loue before her nurce, besought her by the hope Of Lady Anaxarete her nurcechylds good successe, Shée would not bee ageinst him in that cace of his distresse. Anoother whyle entreating fayre sum fréend of hers, he prayd
Him earnestly with carefull voyce, of furthrance and of ayd. Oftymes he did preferre his sute by gentle letters sent. Oft garlonds moysted with the deawe of teares that from him went He hanged on her postes. Oft tymes his tender sydes he layd Ageinst the threshold hard, and oft in sadnesse did vpbrayd The locke with much vngentlenesse. The Lady crueller Than are the rysing narrowe seas, or falling kiddes, and farre More hard than stéele of Noricum, and than the stonny rocke That in the quarrye hath his roote, did him despyse and mocke. Besyde her dooings mercylesse, of statelynesse and spyght Shée adding prowd & skornefull woordes, defrauds the wretched wyght Of verry hope. But Iphis now vnable any more Too beare the torment of his greef, still standing there before Her gate, spake theis his latest woordes, well Anaxarete, Thou hast the vpper hand. Hencefoorth thou shalt not néede too bée Agréeued any more with mée. Go tryumph hardely: Go vaunt thy self with ioy: go sing the song of victorye: Go put a crowne of glittring bay vppon thy cruell head. For why thou hast the vpper hand, and I am gladly dead. Well stéely harted well: reioyce. Compeld yit shalt thou bée Of sumwhat in mée for too haue a lyking. Thou shalt sée A poynt wherein thou mayst mee déeme most thankfull vntoo thée, And in the end thou shalt confesse the great desert of mée. But yit remember that as long as lyfe in mée dooth last, The care of thée shall neuer from this hart of myne be cast. For bothe the lyfe that I doo liue in hope of thée, and toother Which nature giueth, shall haue end and passe away toogither. The tydings neyther of my death shall come too thée fame. Myself (I doo assure thée) will bée bringer of the same. Myself (I say) will present bée that those same cruell eyen Of thyne may féede themselues vppon this linelesse corce of myne. But yit O Goddes, (if you behold mennes déedes) remember mée. (My toong will seue too pray no more) and cause that I may bée. Longtyme heerafter spoken of: and length the lyfe by fame The which yée haue abridgd in yéeres. In saying of this same He lifted vp his watrye eyes and armes that wexed wan Too those same stulpes which oft he had with garlondes deckt ere than,
And fastning on the toppe therof a halter thus did say. Thou cruell and vngodly wyght, theis are the wreathes that may Most pleasure thée. And with that woord he thrusting in his head, Euen then did turne him towards her as good as being dead, And wretchedly did totter on the poste with strangled throte. The wicket which his féerefull féete in sprawling maynely smote, Did make a noyse: and flying ope bewrayd his dooing playne. The seruants shreekt, and lifting vp his bodye, but in vayne, Conueyd him too his moothers house, his father erst was slayne. His moother layd him in her lappe, and cléeping in her armes Her sonnes cold bodye, after that shée had bewayld her harmes With woordes and dooings mootherlyke, the corce with moorning chéere Too buryall sadly through the towne was borne vppon a beere. The house of Anaxarete by chaunce was néere the way By which this piteous pomp did passe, and of the doolefull lay The sound came too the eares of her, whom God alreadye gan Too strike▪ Yit let vs sée ({quod} shée) the buryall of this man. And vp the hygh wyde windowde house in saying so, shée ran. Scarce had shée well on Iphis lookt that on the béere did lye, But that her eyes wert stark: and from her limbes the blood gan flye. In stead therof came palenesse in. And as shée backeward was In mynd too go, her féete stacke fast and could not stirre. And as Shée would haue cast her countnance backe, shée could not doo it. And The stonny hardnesse which a late did in her stomacke stand, Within a whyle did ouergrow her whole from sole too crowne. And least you think this géere surmysde, euen yit in Salamin towne Of Lady Anaxarete the image standeth playne. The temple also in the which the image dooth remayne, Is vntoo Venus consecrate by name of looker out. And therfore weying well theis things, I prey thée looke about Good Lady, and away with pryde: and be content too frame Thy self too him that loueth thée and cannot quench his flame. So neyther may the Lentons cold thy budding frutetrées kill Nor yit the sharp and boystous wyndes thy flowring Gardynes spill. The God that can vppon him take what kynd of shape he list Now hauing sayd thus much in vayne, omitted too persist In bames shape, and shewde himself a lusty gentleman,
Appéering too her chéerefully, euen like as Phebus whan Hée hauing ouercomme the clowdes that did withstand his myght, Dooth blaze his brightsum beames agein with fuller heate and lyght. He offred force. but now no force was néedfull in the cace. For why shée béeing caught in loue with beawty of his face, Was wounded then as well as hée, and gan to yéeld a pace. Next Proca reignd Amulius in Avvsonye by wrong. Till Numitor the ryghtfull heyre deposed verry long, Was by his daughters sonnes restorde. And on the feastfull day Of Pale, foundation of the walles of Rome they gan too lay. Soone after Tacye, and the Lordes of Sabine stird debate: And Tarpey for her traytrous déede in opening of the gate Of Tarpey towre was prest too death according too desert With armour heapt vppon her head. Then féerce and stowt of hart The Sabines like too toonglesse woolues without all noyse of talke Assayld the Romanes in theyr sléepe, and too the gates gan stalke Which Ilias sonne had closed fast with lockes and barres. But yit Dame Iuno had set open one, and as shée opened it Had made no noyse of craking with the hindges, so that none Perceyud the opening of the gate but Venus allalone. And shée had shet it vp, but that it is not lawfull too One God too vndoo any thing another God hath doo. The waternymphes of Avvsonie hild all the groundes about The Church of Ianus where was store of springs fresh flowing out. Dame Venus prayd theis nymphes of help. And they coniering that The Goddesse did request no more but ryght, denyde it nat. They opened all theyr fountayne veynes and made them flowe apace. Howbéet the passage was not yit too Ianus open face Forclosed: neyther had as yit the water stopt the way. They put rank brimstone vnderneathe the flowing spring that day, And éeke with smokye rozen set theyr veynes on fyre for ay. Through force of theis and other things, the vapour perced lowe Euen downe vnto the verry rootes on which the springs did growe. So that the waters which a late in coldnesse myght compare Euen with the frozen Alpes, now whot as burning furnace are. The twoo gate posts with sprinkling of the fyry water smoakt. Wherby the gate béehyghted too the Sabines quyght was choakt
With rysing of this fountaine straunge, vntill that Marsis knyght Had armed him. Then Romulus did boldly offer fyght. The Romane ground with Sabines & with Romanes bothe were spred. And with the blood of fathrinlawes which wicked swoord had shed Flowde mixt the blood of sonninlawes. Howbéet it séemed best Too bothe the partyes at the length from battell for too rest, And not too fyght too vttrance: And that Tacye should becoome Copartner with king Romulus of souereintye in Roome. Within a whyle king Tacye dyde: And bothe the Sabines and The Romanes vnder Romulus in equall ryght did stand. The God of battell putting of his glittring helmet then, With such like woordes as theis bespake the fyre of Goddes and men. The tyme O father (in as much as now the Romane state Is wexen strong vppon the good foundation layd alate, Depending on the stay of an) is comme for thee too make Thy promis good which thou of mée and of thy graundchyld spake. Which was too take him from the earth and in the heauen him stay. Thou once (I markt thy gracious woordes and bare them well away) Before a great assembly of the Goddes didst too mee say. There shalbée one whom thou shalt rayse aboue the starry skye. Now let they saying take effect. Ioue graunting by and by The ayre was hid with darksom clowdes, and thunder foorth did fly, And lyghtning made the world agast. Which Mars perceyuing too Bée lackye tokens for himself his enterpryse too doo, Did take his  vppon his speare and boldly lept intoo His bloodye charyot. And he lent his horses with his whippe A yirking lash, and through the ayre full smoothely downe did lippe. And staying on the woody toppe of mountayne Palatine, He tooke away king Romulus whoo there did then defyne The pryuate caces of his folk vnseemly for a king. And as a leaden peller broade enforced from a ling Is woont too dye amid the skye: euen so his mortall flesh Sank from him downe the suttle ayre. In sted wherof a fresh And goodly shape more stately and more méete for sacred shryne. Succéeded, like our Quirin that in stately robe dooth shyne. Hersilia for her féere as lost, of moorning made none end, Untill Quéene Iuno did commaund dame Iris too discend
Uppon the Raynebowe downe, and thus her message for too doo. O of the Latian country and the Sabine nacion too Thou péerlesse perle of womanhod, most woorthy for too bée The wyfe of such a noble prince as héertoofore was hée, And still too bée the wyfe of him canonized by name, Of Quirin: cease thy teares. And if thou haue desyre the same Thy holy husband for too sée, ensew mée too the queache That groweth gréene on Quirins hill, whoose shadowes ouerreache The temple of the Romane King. Dame Iris did obey. And yding by her paynted bowe, in former woordes did say too Hersilia. Shée scarce lifting vp her eyes, With sober countnance answerd. O thou Goddesse (for surmyse I cannot whoo thou art, but yit I well may vnderstand Thou art a Goddess) leede mée O déere Goddesse léede mée, and My husband too mée shewe. Whom if the fatall susters thrée Will of they: gracious goodnesse graunt mée leaue but once too sée, I shall account mée intoo heauen receyued for too bée. Immediatly with Thavvmants imp too Quirins hill shée went. There glyding from the sky a starre streyght downe too groūd was sent, The sparkes of whoose bryght blazing beames did burne Hersilias heare. And with the starre the ayre did vher heare too heauenward beare. The buylder of the towne of Roome receyuing streyght the same Betweene his old acquaynted handes, did alter both her name And eeke her bodye, calling her dame Ora. And by this Shée ioyntly with her husband for a Goddesse woorshipt is. Finis Libri decimi quarti.
¶THE .XV. BOOKE OF Ouids Metamorphosis. A Persone in the whyle was sought sufficient too susteine The burthen of so great a charge, and woorthy for too reigne In stead of such a mighty prince. The noble Nume by fame (Whoo harped then vppon the truthe before too passe it came) Appoynted too the Empyre was. This Numa thought it not Inough that he the knowledge of the Sabine rites had got. The déepenesse of the noble wit too greater things was bent, Too serch of things the natures out. The care of this intent Did cause that he from Curie and his natiue Countrye went With peynfull trauell, too the towne where Hercules did hoste. And asking who it was of Greece that in th'Italian coast Had buylt that towne, an aged man well séene in storyes old, Too satisfye his mynd therin the processe thus him told. As Hercules enriched with the Spannish kyne did hold His voyage from the Ocean sea, men say with lucky cut He came a land on Lacine coast. And whyle he there did put His beace too grazing, he himself in Crotons house did rest The greatest man in all those parts and vntoo straungers best: And that he there refresht him of his tedious trauell, and That when he should depart, he sayd. where now thy house dooth stand, Shall in thy childers childrens tyme a Citie buylded bée. Which woordes of his haue proued trew as playnly now wée sée. For why there was one Myscelus a Greeke, Alemons sonne, A persone more in fauour of the Goddes than any one In those dayes was. TheHercules. God that beares the boystous club did stay Uppon him being fast a sléepe, and sayd: go seeke streyght way The stonny streame of Aeserie. Thy natiue soyle for ay Forsake. And sore he threatned him onlesse he did obey. The God and sléepe departed both toogither. Up did ryse Almons sonne, and in himself did secretly deuyse Uppon this vision. Long his mynd stroue dowtfull too and fro. The God had go. His country lawes did say he should not go, And death was made the penaltie for him that would doo so. Cléere Titan in the Ocean sea had hid his lyghtsomme head,
And duskye nyght had put vp hers most thick with starres bespred. The selfsame God by Myscelus did séeme too stand efsoone, Commaunding him the selfsame thing that he before had doone, And threatning mo and greater plages onlesse he did obey. Then being stricken sore in feare he went about streyghtway His household from his natyue lond too forreine too conuey. A rumor héerevppon did ryse through all the towne of Arge And disobedience of the lawe was layëd too his charge. Assoone as that the cace had first béene pleaded and the déede Apparantly perceyued, so that witnesse did not néede, Arreyned and orlorne too heauen he cast his handes and eyes, And sayd: O God whoose labours twelue haue purchaste thée the skyes, Assist mée I the pray. For thou art author of my cryme. When iudgement should bée giuen it was the guyse in auncient tyme With whyght stones too acquit the cléere, and éeke with blacke too cast The giltye. That tyme also so the heauy sentence past. The stones were cast vnmercifull all blacke intoo the pot. But when the stones were powred out too number, there was not A blacke among them. All were whyght. And so through Hercles powre A gentle iudgement did procéede, and he was quit that howre. Then gaue he thankes too Hercules, and hauing prosprous blast, Cut ouer the Iönian sea, and so by Tarent past Which Spartanes buylt, and Cybaris, and Neaeth salentine, And Thurine bay, and Emese, and éeke the pastures fyne Of Calabrye. And hauing scarce well sought the coastes that lye Uppon the sea, he found the mouth of fatall Aeserye. Not farre from thence, he also found the tumb in which the ground Did kiuer Crotons holy bones, and in that place did found The Citie that was willed him, and gaue theretoo the name Of him that there lay buryed. Such originall as this same This Citie in th'Italian coast is sayd too haue by fame. Héere dwelt a man of Samos Ile, who for the hate he had Too Lordlynesse and Tyranny, though vnconstreynd was glad Too make himself a bannisht man. And though this persone wéere Farre distant from the Goddes by site of heauen: yit came he néere Too them in mynd. And he by syght of soule and reason cléere Behild the things which nature dooth too fleshly eyes denye.
And when with care most vigilant he had assuredly Imprinted all things in his hart, he set them openly Abroade for other folk too lerne. He taught his silent sort (Which woondred at the heauenly woordes theyr mayster did report) The first fonndation of the world: the cause of euery thing: What nature was: & what was God: whence snow & lyghtning spring: And whither Ioue or else the wynds in breaking clowdes doo thunder: What shakes y• earth: what law ye starres doo kéepe theyr courses vnder: And what soeuer other thing is hid from common sence. e also is the first that did inioyne an abstinence Too feede of any lyuing thing. He also first of all Spake thus: although ryght lernedly, yit too effect but small. Yée mortall men forbeare too frank your flesh with wicked foode. Yée haue both corne & frutes of trées and grapes & herbes right good. And though that sum bée harsh and hard: yit fyre may make them well Both soft and swéete. Yée may haue milk, and honny which dooth smell Of flowres of tyme. The lauas earth dooth yéeld you plentiously Most gentle foode, and riches too content bothe mynd and ye. There néedes no slaughter nor no blood too get your liuing by. The beastes doo breake theyr fast with flesh: & yit not all beastes neyther. For horses, shéepe, and Rotherbeastes too liue by grasse had leuer. The nature of the beast that dooth delyght in bloody foode, Is cruell and vnmercifull. As Lyons féerce of moode, Armenian Tigers, Beares, and Woolues. Oh what a wickednesse It is too cra the mawe with mawe, and frank vp flesh with flesh, And for one liuing thing too liue by killing of another: As whoo should say, that of so great abundance which our moother The earth dooth yéeld most bountuously, none other myght delyght Thy cruell téethe too chawe vppon, than grisly woundes that myght Expresse the Cyclops guyse? or else as if thou could not stawnche The hunger of thy gréedye gut and euill mannerd pawnche, Onlesse thou stroyd sum other wyght. But that same auncient age Which wée haue naamd the golden world, cléene voyd of all such rage, Livd blessedly by frute of trées and herbes that grow on ground, And stayned not their mouthes wt blood. Then birds might safe & sound Fly where they listed in the ayre. The hare vnscaard of hound Went pricking ouer all the féeldes. No angling hooke with bayt
Did hang the séely fish that bote mistrusting no deceyt. All things were voyd of guylefulnesse: no treason was in trust: But all was fréendshippe loue and peace. But after that the lust Of one (what God so ere he was) disdeyning former fare, Too cram that cruell croppe of his with fleshmeate did not spare, He made a way for wickednesse. And first of all the knyfe Was staynd with blood of sauage beastes in ridding them of lyfe. And that had nothing béene amisse, if there had béene the stay. For why wée graunt, without the breach of godlynesse wée may By death confound the things that séeke too take our lyues away. But as too kill them reason was: euen so agein theyr was No reason why too eate theyr flesh. This leawdnesse thence did passe On further still. Wheras there was no sacrifyse beforne, The Swyne (bycause with) hoked groyne he wrooted vp the corne, And did deceyue the tillmen of theyr hope next yéere thereby) Was déemed woorthy by desert in sacrifyse too dye. The Goate for byghting vynes was slayne at Bacchus altar whoo Wreakes such misdéedes. Theyr owne offence was hurtful to theis twoo. But what haue you poore shéepe misdoone a cattell méeke and méeld, Created for too maynteine man, whoose fulsomme duggs doo yéeld Swéete Nectar, whoo dooth clothe vs with your wooll in soft aray? Whoose lyfe dooth more vs benefite than dooth your death farreway? What trespasse haue the Oxen doone? a beast without all guyle Or craft, vnhurtfull, simple, borne too labour euery whyle? In fayth he is vnmyndfull and vnwoorthy of increace Of corne, that in his hart can fynd his tilman too releace From plowgh, too cut his throte: that in his hart can fynde (I say) Those neckes with hatchets of too strike, whoose skinne is worne away With labring ay for him: whoo turnd so oft his land most tough, Whoo brought so many haruestes home. yit is it not ynough That such a great outrageousenesse committed is. They father Theyr wickednesse vppon the Goddes. And falsly they doo gather That in the death of peynfull Ox the hyghest dooth delyght. A sacrifyse vnblemished and fayrest vntoo syght, (For beawtye woorketh them theyr bane) adornd with garlonds, and With glittring gold, is cyted at the altar for too stand. There héeres he woordes (he wotes not what) y• which y• préest dooth pray,
And on his forehead suffereth him betwéene his hornes too lay The eares of corne that he himself hath wrought for in the clay, And stayneth with his blood the knyfe that he himself perchaunce Hathe in the water shéere ere then behild by soodein glaunce. Immediatly they haling out his hartstrings still aliue, And poring on them, séeke therein Goddes secrets too reryue. Whence commes so gréedy appetyte in men, of wicked meate? And dare yée O yée mortall men aduenture thus too eate? Nay doo not (I beséeche yée) so. But giue good are and héede Too that that I shall warne you of, and trust it as your créede, That whensoeuer you doo eate your Oxen, you deuowre Your husbandmen. And forasmuch as God this instant howre Dooth moue my toong too speake, I will obey his heauenly powre. My God Apollos temple I will set you open, and Disclose the woondrous heauens themselues, and make you vnderstand The Oracles and secrets of the Godly maiestye. Greate things, and such as wit of man could neuer yit espye, And such as haue béene hidden long, I purpose too descrye. I mynd too leaue the earth, and vp among the starres too slye. I mynd too leaue this grosser place, and in the clowdes too flye, And on stowt Atlas shoulders strong too rest my self on hye, And looking downe from heauen on men that wander heere and there In dreadfull feare of death as though they voyd of reason were, Too giue them exhortation thus: and playnely too vnwynd The whole discourse of destinie as nature hath assignd. O men amaazd with dread of death, why feare yée Limbo Styx, And other names of vanitie, which are but Poets tricks? And perrills of another world all false surmysed géere? For whither fyre or length of tyme consume the bodyes héere, Yee well may thinke that further harmes they cannot suffer more. For soules are frée from death. Howbéet, they liuing euermore Theyr former dwellings are receyud and liue ageine in new. For I myself (ryght well in mynd I beare it too be trew) Was in the tyme of Troian warre Euphorbus Panthevves sonne Quyght through whoose hart the deathfull speare of Menelay did ronne. I late age in Iunos Church at Argos did behold
And knew the target which I in my left hand there did hold. Al things doo chaūge. But nothing sure dooth perrish. This same spright Dooth fléete, and fisking héere and there dooth swiftly take his flyght From one place too another place, and entreth euery wyght, Remouing out of man too beast, and out of beast too man. But yit it neuer perrisheth nor neuer perrish can. And euen as supple wax with ease receyueth fygures straunge, And kéepes not ay one shape, ne bydes assured ay from chaunge, And yit continueth alwayes wax in substaunce: So I say The soule is ay the selfsame thing it was and yit astray It fléeteth intoo sundry shapes. Therfore least Godlynesse Bée vanquisht by outragious lust of belly beastlynesse, Forbeare (I speake by prophesie) your kinsfolkes ghostes too chace By slaughter: neyther nourish blood with blood in any cace. And sith on open sea the wynds doo blow my sayles apace, In all the world there is not that that standeth at a stay. Things eb and flow: and euery shape is made too passe away. The tyme itself continually is fléeting like a brooke. For neyther brooke nor lyghtsomme tyme can tarrye still. But looke As euery waue dryues other foorth, and that that commes behynd Bothe thrusteth and is thrust itself: Euen so the tymes by kynd Doo fly and follow bothe at once, and euermore renew. For that that was before is left, and streyght there dooth ensew Anoother that was neuer erst. Eche twincling of an eye Dooth chaunge. Wée see that after day commes nyght and darks the sky, And after nyght the lyghtsum Sunne succéedeth orderly. Like colour is not in the heauen when all things wéery lye At midnyght ound a sléepe, as when the daystarre cléere and bryght Commes foorth vppon his milkwhyght stéede. Ageine in other plyght The morning Pallants daughter fayre the messenger of lyght Deliuereth intoo Phebus handes the world of cléerer hew. The circle also of the sonne what yme it ryseth new And when it setteth, looketh red▪ but when it mounts most hye, Then lookes it whyght, bycause that there the nature of the skye Is better, and from filthye drosse of earth dooth further flye The image also of the Moone that shyneth ay by nyght, Is neuer of one quantitie. For that that giueth lyght
Too day, is lesser than the next that followeth, till the full. And then contrarywyse eche day her lyght away dooth pull. What? seest thou not how that the yéere as representing playne The age of man, departes itself in quarters fowre? first bayne And tender in the spring it is, euen like a sucking babe. Then gréene, and voyd of strength, and lush, and foggye, is the blade▪ And chéeres the husbandman with hope. Then all things florish gay. The earth with flowres of sundry hew then seemeth for too play, And vertue small or none too herbes there dooth as yit belong. The yeere from spring tyde passing foorth too sommer, wexeth strong, Becommeth lyke a lusty youth. For in our lyfe through out There is no tyme more plentifull, more lusty whote and stout. Then followeth Haruest when the heate of youth growes sumwhat cold, Rype, méeld, disposed meane betwixt a yoongman and an old, And sumwhat sprent with grayish heare. Then vgly winter last Like age steales on with trembling steppes, all bald, or ouercast With shirle thinne heare as whyght as snowe. Our bodies also ay Doo alter still from tyme too tyme, and neuer stand at stay. Wée shall not bée the same wée were too day or yisterday. The day hath béene wée were but séede and only hope of men, And in our moothers womb wée had our dwelling place as then, Dame Nature put too conning hand and suffred not that wée Within our moothers streyned womb should ay distressod bée, But brought vs out too aire, and from our prison set vs frée. The chyld newborne lyes voyd of strength. Within a season tho He wexing fowerfooted lernes like sauage beastes too go. Then sumwhat foltring, and as yit not firme of foote, he standes By getting sumwhat for too helpe his sinewes in his handes. From that tyme growing strong and swift, he passeth foorth the space Of youth: and also wearing out his middle age a pace, Through drooping ages stéepye path he ronneth out his race This age dooth vndermyne the strength of former yeares, and throwes It downe. which thing old Milo by example playnely showes. For when he sawe those armes of his (which héeretoofore had béene As strong as euer Hercules in woorking deadly téene Of biggest beastes) hang flapping downe, and nought but empty skin, He wept. And Helen when shée saw her aged wrincles in
A glasse wept also: musing in herself what men had séene, That by twoo noble princes sonnes shée twyce had rauisht béene. Thou tyme the eater vp of things, and age of spyghtfull téene. Destroy all things. And when that long continuance hath them bit, You leysurely by lingring death consume them euery whit. And theis that wée call Elements doo neuer stand at stay. The enterchaunging course of them I will before yée lay. Giue héede thertoo. This endlesse world conteynes therin I say Fowre substances of which all things are gendred. Of theis fower The Earth and Water for theyr masse and weyght are sunken lower. The other cowple Aire, and Fyre the purer of the twayne Mount vp, & nought can kéepe thē downe. And though there doo remayne A space betwéene eche one of them: yit euery thing is made Of themsame fowre, and intoo them at length ageine doo fade. The earth resoluing leysurely dooth melt too water shéere. The water fyned turnes too aire. The aire éeke purged cléere From grossenesse, spyreth vp aloft, and there becommeth fyre. From thence in order contrary they backe ageine retyre. Fyre thickening passeth intoo Aire, and Ayër wexing grosse, Returnes too water: Water éeke congealing intoo drosse, Becommeth earth. No kind of thing kéepes ay his shape and hew. For nature louing euer chaunge repayres one shape a new Uppon another▪ neyther dooth there perrish aught (trust mée) In all the world, but altring takes new shape. For that which wée Doo terme by name of being borne, is for too gin too bée Another thing than that it was: And likewise for too dye, Too cease too bée the thing it was. And though that varyably Things passe perchaunce from place too place: yit all from whence they came Returning, doo vnperrisshed continew still the same. But as for in one shape, bée sure that nothing long can last. Euen so the ages of the world from gold too Iron past. Euen so haue places oftentymes exchaunged theyr estate. For I haue séene it sea which was substanciall ground alate, Ageine where sea was, I haue séene the same become dry lond, And shelles and scales of Seafish farre haue lyen from any strond. And in the toppes of mountaynes hygh old Anchors haue béene ound. Déepe valleyes haue by watershotte béene made of leuell ground,
And hilles by force of gulling oft haue intoo sea béene worne. Hard grauell ground is sumtyme séene where marris was beforne, And that that erst did suffer drowght, becommeth standing lakes. Héere nature sendeth new springs out, and there the old in takes. Full many riuers in the world through earthquakes heretoofore Haue eyther chaundgd theyr former course, or dryde and ronne no more. Soo Lycus béeing swallowed vp by gaping of the ground, A greatway of fro thence is in another channell found. Euen so the riuer Erasine among the feeldes of Arge Sinkes onewhyle, and another whyle ronnes greate ageine at large▪ Caycus also of the land of Mysia (as men say) Misliking of his former head, ronnes now another way. In Sicill also Amasene ronnes sumtyme full and hye, And sumtyme stopping vp his spring, he makes his chanell drye. Men drank the waters of the brooke Anigrus heretoofore, Which now is such that men abhorre too towche them any more. Which commes too passe, (onlesse wée will discredit Poets quyght) Bycause the Centaures vanquisshed by Hercules in fyght Did wash theyr woundes in that same brooke. But dooth not Hypanis That springeth in the Scythian hilles, which at his fountaine is Ryght pleasant, afterward becomme of brackish bitter taste? Antissa, and Phenycian Tyre, and Pharos in tyme past Were compast all about with waues: but none of all theis thrée Is now an Ile. Ageine the towne of Levvcas once was frée From sea, and in the auncient tyme was ioyned too the land. But now enuirond round about with water it dooth stand. Men say that Sicill also hath béene ioynd too Italy Untill the sea consumde the bounds béetwéene, and did supply The roome with water. If yee go too séeke for Helicee And Burye which were Cities of Achaia, you shall sée Them hidden vnder water, and the shipmen yit doo showe The walles and stéeples of the townes drownd vnder as they rowe. Not farre from Pitthey Troyzen is a certeine high ground found All voyd of trées, which héeretoofore was playne and leuell ground, But now a mountayne for the wyndes a (woondrous thing too say) Inclosed in the hollow caues of ground, and séeking way Too passe therefro, in struggling long too get the open skye
In vayne, (bycause in all the caue there was no vent wherby Too issue out,) did stretch the ground and make it swell on hye, As dooth a bladder that is blowen by mouth, or as the skinne Of horned Goate in bottlewyse when wynd is gotten in. The swelling of the foresayd place remaynes at this day still, And by continuance waxing hard is growen a pretye hill. Of many things that come too mynd by héersay, and by skill Of good experience, I a fewe will vtter too you mo. What? dooth not water in his shapes chaunge straungely too and fro: The well of horned Hammon is at noonetyde passing cold. At morne and euen it wexeth warme. At midnyght none can hold His hand therin for passing heate. The well of Athamane, Is sayd too kindle woode what tyme the moone is in the wane. The Cicons haue a certeine streame which béeing droonk dooth bring Mennes bowwelles intoo Marble hard: and whatsoeuer thing Is towcht therwith, it turnes too stone. And by your bounds behold The riuers Crathe and Sybaris make yellow heare like gold And Amber. There are also springs (which thing is farre more straunge) Which not the bodye only, but the mynd doo also chaunge. Whoo hath not hard of Salmacis that fowle and filthye sink? Or of the lake of Aethyop, which if a man doo drink, He eyther ronneth mad, or else with woondrous drowzinesse Forgoeth quyght his memorie. Whoo euer dooth represse His thirst with drawght of Clitor well, hates wyne, and dooth delyght In only water: eyther for bycause there is a myght Contrary vntoo warming wyne by nature in the well, Or else bycause (for so the folk of Arcadye doo tell) Melampus Amythaöns sonne (when he deliuered had King Praeus daughters by his charmes and herbes from being mad,) Cast intoo that same water all the baggage wherewithall He purdgd the madnesse of theyr mynds. And so it did befall, That lothsomnesse of wyne did in those waters ay remayne. Ageine in Lyncest contrarie effect too this dooth reigne. For who o drinkes too much therof, he êeleth héere and there As if by quaffing wyne no whyt alayd he droonken were. There is a Lake in Arcadye which Pheney men did name In auncient tyme, whoose dowtfulnesse deserueth iustly blame.
A nyght tymes take thou héede of it, for if thou taste the same A nyghttymes, it will hurt. but if thou drink it in the day It hurteth not. Thus lakes and streames (as well perceyue yée may) Haue diuers powres and diuersly. Euen so the tyme hathe béene That Delos which stands stedfast now, on waues was floting séene. And Galyes haue beene sore afrayd of frusshing by the Iles Symplegads which toogither dasht vppon the sea erewhyles, But now doo stand vnmouable ageinst bothe wynde and tyde. Mount Aetna with his burning ouens of brimstone shall not byde Ay fyrye: neyther was it so for euer erst. For whither The earth a liuing creature bée, and that too breathe out hither And thither flame, great store of vents it haue in sundry places, And that it haue the powre too shift those vents in diuers caces, Now damming theis, now opening those, in mouing too and fro: Or that the whisking wynds restreynd within the earth bylowe, Doo beate the stones ageinst the stones, and other kynd of stuffe Of fyrye nature, which doo fall on fyre with euery puffe: Assoone as those same wynds doo cease, the caues shall streight bée cold. Or if it bée a Rozen mowld that soone of fyre takes hold, Or brimstone mixt with clayish soyle on fyre dooth lyghtly fall: Undowtedly assoone as that same soyle consumed shall No longer yéeld the fatty foode too féede the fyre withall, And rauening nature shall forgo her woonted nourishment, Then being able too abyde no longer famishment, For want of sustenance it shall cease his burning. I doo fynd By fame, that vnder Charlsis wayne in Pallene are a kynd Of people which by dyuing thryce thrée tymes in Triton lake Becomme all fethred, and the shape of birdes vppon them take. The Scythian witches also are reported for too doo The selfsame thing (but hardly I giue credit thervntoo) By smearing poyson ouer all theyr bodyes. But (and if A man too matters tryde by proof may saufly giue beléef,) Wée sée how flesh by lying still a whyle and ketching heate Dooth turne too little liuing beastes. And yit a further feate, Go kill an Ox and burye him, (the thing by proof man sées) And of his rotten flesh will bréede the flower gathering Bées, Which as theyr father did before, loue féeldes excéedingly,
And vntoo woork in hope of gayne theyr busye limbes apply. The Hornet is engendred of a lustye buryed Stéede. Go pull away the cleas from Crabbes that in the sea doo bréede, And burye all the rest in mowld, and of the same will spring A Scorpion which with writhen tayle will threaten for too sting. The Caterpillers of the féelde the which are woont too weaue Hore filmes vppon the leaues of trées, theyr former nature leaue, (Which thing is knowen too husbandmen) and turne too Butterflyes. The mud hath in it certeine séede wherof gréene frosshes ryse. And first it brings them footelesse foorth. Then after, it dooth frame Legges apt too swim: and furthermore of purpose that the same May serue them for too leape a farre, theyr hinder part is mych More longer than theyr forepart is. The Bearwhelp also which The Beare hath newly littred, is no whelp immediatly. But like an euill fauored lump of flesh alyue dooth lye. The dam by licking shapeth out his members orderly Of such a syse, as such a péece is able too conceyue. Or marke yée not the Bées of whom our hony wée receyue, How that theyr yoong ones which doo lye within the sixsquare wax Are limblesse bodyes at the first, and after as they wex In processe take bothe féete and wings? What man would think it trew That Ladye Venus simple birdes the Dooues of siluer hew, Or Iunos bird that in his tayle beares starres, or Ioues stowt knyght The Earne, and euery other fowle of whatsoeuer flyght, Could all bée hatched out of egges, onlesse he did it knowe? Sum folk doo hold opinion when the backebone which doothe growe In man, is rotten in the graue, the pith becommes a snake. Howbéete of other things all theis theyr first beginning take. One bird there is that dooth renew itself and as it were Beget it self continually. The Syrians name it there A Phoenix. Neyther corne nor herbes this Phoenix liueth by. But by the iewce of frankincence and gum of Amomye. And when that of his lyfe well full fyuehundred yéeres are past, Uppon a Holmerrée or vppon a Date trée at the last He makes him with his talants and his hardened bill a nest. Which when that  with Casia swéete and Nardus soft hathe drest, And strowed it with Cynnamom and Myrrha of the best,
He rucketh downe vppon the same, and in the spyces dyes. Soone after, of the fathers corce men say there dooth aryse Another little Phoenix which as many yéeres must liue As did his father. He (assoone as age dooth strength him giue Too beare the burthen) from the trée the weyghty nest dooth lift, And godlyly his cradle thence and fathers herce dooth shift. And flying through the suttle aire he gettes too Phebus towne, And there before the temple doore dooth lay his burthen downe. But if that any noueltye woorth woondring bée in theis, Much rather may we woonder at the Hyën if we please. Too sée how interchaungeably it one whyle dooth remayne A female, and another whyle becommeth male againe. The creature also which dooth liue by only aire and wynd, All colours that it leaneth too dooth counterfet by kynd. The Grapegod Bacchus, when he had subdewd the land of Inde, Did fynd a spotted beast cald Lynx, whoose vrine (by report) By towching of the open aire congealeth in such sort, As that it dooth becomme a stone. So Corall (which as long As water hydes it is a shrub and soft) becommeth strong And hard assoone as it dooth towch the ayre. The day would end, And Phebus panting stéedes should in the Ocean déepe descend, Before all alterations I in woordes could comprehend. So sée wée all things chaungeable. One nation gathereth strength: Another wexeth weake: and bothe doo make exchaunge at length. So Troy which once was great and strong as well in welth as men, And able tenne yéeres space too spare such store of blood as then, Now béeing bace hath nothing left of all her welth too showe, Saue ruines of the auncient woorkes which grasse dooth ouergrowe, And tumbes wherin theyr auncetours lye buryed on a rowe. Once Sparta was a famous towne: Great Mycene florisht trim: Bothe Athens and Amphions towres in honor once did swim. A pelting plot is Sparta now: great Mycene lyes on ground. Of Theab the towne of Oedipus what haue we more than sound? Of Athens king Pandions towne what resteth more than name? Now also of the race of Troy is rysing (so sayth fame) The Citie Roome, which at the bank of Tyber that dooth ronne Downe from the hill of Appennyne) already hath begonne
With great aduysement for too lay foundation of her state. This towne then chaungeth by increase the forme it had alate, And of the vniuersall world in tyme to comme shall hold The souereintye so prophesies and lotts (men say) haue told. And as (I doo remember mee) what tyme that Troy decayd, The prophet Helen Priams sonne theis woordes ensewing sayd Before Aenaeas dowting of his lyfe in wéeping plyght: O Goddesse sonne, beléeue mée (if thou think I haue foresyght Of things too comme) Troy shalnot quyght decay whyle thou doost liue. Bothe fyre and swoord shall vntoo thée thy passage fréely giue. Thou must from hence: and Troy with thée conuey away in haste, Untill that bothe thyself and Troy in forreine land bée plaast More fréendly than thy natiue soyle. Moreouer I foresée, A Citie by the ofspring of the Troians buylt shall bée, So great as neuer in the world the lyke was séene before Nor is this present, neyther shall be séene for euermore. A number of most noble péeres for manye yéeres afore Shall make it strong and puyssant: But hée that shall it make The souereine Ladye of the world, by ryght descent shall take His first beginning from thy sonne the little Iule. And when The earth hathe had her tyme of him, the sky and welkin then Shall haue him vp for euermore, and heauen shall bée his end. Thus farre I (well remember mée) did Helens woordes extend Too good Aenaeas. And it is a pleasure vntoo mée The Citie of my countrymen increasing thus too sée: And that the Grecians victorie becommes the Troians weale. But least forgetting quyght themselues our horses happe too steale Beyond the mark: the heauen and all that vnder heauen is found, Dooth alter shape. So dooth the ground and all that is in ground. And wée that of the world are part (considring how wée bée Not only flesh, but also sowles, which may with passage frée Remoue them intoo euery kynd of beast both tame and wyld) Let liue in saufty honestly with slaughter vndefyld, The bodyes which perchaunce may haue the sprits of our brothers, Our sisters, or our parents, or the spirits of sum others Alyed too vs eyther by sum fréendshippe or sum kin, Or at the least the soules of men abyding them within.
And let vs not Thyëstes lyke thus furnish vp our boordes With bloodye bowells. Oh how leawd example he auoordes? How wickedly prepareth he himself too murther man? That with a cruell knyfe dooth cut the throte of Calf, and can Unmouably giue héering too the lowing of the dam? Or sticke the kid that wayleth lyke the little babe? or eate The fowle that he himself before had often fed with meate? What wants of vtter wickednesse in woorking such a feate? What may he after passe too doo? well eyther let your stéeres Weare out themselues with woork, or else impute theyr death too yéeres. Ageinst the wynd and weather cold let Wethers yéeld yée cotes. And vdders full of batling milk receyue yée of the Goates. Away with sprindges, snares, and grinnes, away with Risp and net. Away with guylefull feates: for fowles no lymetwiggs sée yée set. No feared fethers pitche yée vp too kéepe the Reddéere in, Ne with deceytfull bayted hooke séeke fishes for too win. If awght doo harme, destroy it. but destroyt and doo no more. Forbeare the flesh: and féede your mouthes with fitter foode therfore. Men say that Numa furnisshed with such philosophye As this and like, returned too his natiue soyle, and by Entreatance was content of Roome too take the souereintye. Ryght happy in his wyfe which was a nymph, ryght happy in His guydes which were the Muses nyne, this Numa did begin Too teach Religion. by the meanes whereof hée shortly drew That people vntoo peace whoo erst of nought but battell knew. And when through age he ended had his reigne and éeke his lyfe, Through Latium he was moorned for of man and chyld and wyfe As well of hygh as low degrée. His wyfe forsaking quyght The Citie, in vale Aricine did hyde her out of syght, Among the thickest groues▪ and there with syghes and playnts did let The sacrifyse of Diane whom Orestes erst had fet From Taurica in Chersonese, and in that place had set. How oft ah did the woodnymphes and the waternymphes perswade Egeria for too cease her mone? what meanes of comfort made They? Ah hw often Theseus sonne her wéeping thus bespake? O Nymph, thy moorning moderate: thy sorrow sumwhat slake: Not only thou hast cause too hart thy fortune for too take.
Behold like happes of other folkes, and this mischaunce of thyne Shall gréeue thée lesse. would God examples (so they were not myne) Myght comfort thée. But myne perchaunce may comfort thée. If thou In talk by hap haste heard of one Hippolytus ere now, That through his fathers lyght beleefe, and stepdames craft was slayne, It will a woonder séeme too thée, and I shall haue much payne Too make thée too beléeue the thing. But I am very hée. The daughter of Pasyphae in vayne oft tempting mée My father chamber too defyle, surmysde mée too haue sought The thing that shée with al her hart would fayne I should haue wrought. And whither it were for feare I should her wickednesse bewray, Or else for spyght bycause I had so often sayd her nay, Shée chardgd mée with hir owne offence. My father by and by Condemning mée, did banish mée his Realme without cause whye. And at my going like a fo did ban me bitterly. Too Pitthey Troyzen outlawelike my chariot streight tooke I My way lay hard vppon the shore of Corinth. Soodeinly The sea did ryse, and like a mount the waue did swell on hye, And séemed howger for too growe in drawing euer nye, And roring clyued in the toppe. Up starts immediatly A horned bullocke from amid the broken waue, and by The brest did rayse him in the ayre, And at his nosethrills and His platter mouth did puffe out part of sea vppon the land. My seruants harts were sore afrayd. But my hart musing ay Uppon my wrongfull banishment, did nought at all dismay. My horses setting vp theyr eares and snorting wexed shye, And béeing greatly flayghted with the monster in theyr eye, Turnd downe too sea: and on the rockes my wagon drew. In vayne I stryuing for too hold them backe, layd hand vppon the reyne All whyght with ome, and haling backe lay almost bolt vpryght. And sure the feercenesse of the stéedes had yéelded too my might, But that the whaele that ronneth ay about the Extrée round, Did breake by dashing on a stub, and ouerthrew too ground. Then from the Charyot I was snatcht the brydles béeing cast About my limbes. Yée myght haue séene my sinewes sticking fast Uppon the stub: my guts drawen out alyue: my members, part Still left vppon the stump, and part foorth harryed with the cart:
The crasshing of my broken bones: and with what passing peyne I breathed out my wéery ghoste. There did not whole remayne One peece of all my corce by which yée myght discerne as tho What lump or part it was. For all was wound from toppe too to. Now canst thou nymph, or darest thou compare thy harmes with myne? Moreouer I the lightlesse Realme behild with theis same eyne, And bathde my tattred bodye in the riuer Phlegeton. And had not bright Apollos sonne his cunning shewde vppon. My bodye by his surgery, my lyfe had quyght bée gone. Which after I by force of herbes and léehecraft had ageine Receyud by Aesulapius meanes, though Pluto did disdeine, Then Cynthia (least this gift of hers myght woorke mée greater spyght) Thicke clowds did round about mée cast. And too thentent I myght Bée saufe myself, and harmelessely appéere too others syght: Shée made mee old. And for my face, shée left it in such plyght, That none can knowe mée by my looke. And long shee dowted whither Too giue mée Dele or Crete. At length refusing bothe toogither, Shée plaast mée héere. And therwithall shée bade me giue vp quyght The name that of my horses in remembrance put mée myght. For whereas erstHorsesaine. Hippolytus hath béene thy name ({quod} shée) I will thatTwyce man. Virbie afterward thy name for euer bée. From that tyme foorth within this wood I kéepe my residence, As of the meaner Goddes, a God of small magnificence And héere I hyde mée vnderneathe my souereine Ladyes wing Obeying humbly too her hest in euery kynd of thing. But yit the harmes of other folk could nothing help nor boote Aegerias sorrowes too asswage. Downe at a mountaines foote Shée lying melted intoo teares, till Phebus sister shéene For pitie of her greate distresse in which shee had her séene, Did turne her too a fountaine cléere, and melted quyght away Her members intoo water thinne that neuer should decay. The straungenesse of the thing did make the nymphes astonyed: and The Ladye of Amazons sonne amaazd therat did stand, As when the Tyrrhene Tilman sawe in earing of his land The fatall clod first stirre alone without the help of hand, And by and by forgoing quyght the earthly shape of clod, Too take the séemely shape of man, and shortly like a God
Too tell of things as then too comme. The Tyrrhenes did him call By name of Tages. He did teach the Tuskanes first of all Too gesse by searching bulks of beastes what after should befall. Or like as did king Romulus when soodeinly he found His lawnce on mountayne Palatine fast rooted in the ground, And bearing leaues, no longer now a weapon but a trée, Which shadowed such as woondringly came thither for too sée. Or else as Cippus when he in the ronning brooke had séene His hornes. For why he saw them, and supposing there had béene No credit too bée giuen vntoo the glauncing image, hée Put oft his fingers too his head, and felt it so too bée. And blaming now no more his eyes, incomming from the chase With conquest of his foes, he stayd. And lifting vp his face And with his face, his hornes too heauen, he sayd: what euer thing Is by this woonder meant O Goddes, If ioyfull newes it bring I pray yée let it ioyfull too my folk and countrye bée: But if it threaten euill, let the euill light on mée. In saying so, an altar gréene of clowwers he did frame, And offred fuming frankincence in fyre vppon the same, And powred boawles of wyne theron, and searched therwithall The quiuering inwards of a shéepe too know what should befall. A Tyrrhene wizard hauing sought the bowelles, saw therin Great chaunges and attempts of things then readye too begin, Which were not playnly manifest. But when that he at last His eyes from inwards of the beast on Cippus hornes had cast, Hayle king (he sayd.) For vntoo thée O Cippus, vntoo thée, And too thy hornes shall this same place and Roome obedyent bée. Abridge delay: and make thou haste too enter at the gates Which tarrye open for thée. So commaund the soothfast fates. Thou shalt bée king assoone as thou hast entred once the towne, And thou and thyne for euermore shalt weare the royall crowne. With that he stepping back his foote, did turne his frowning face From Roome ward, saying. Farre, O farre, ye Goddes such handsel chace. More ryght it were I all my lyfe a bannisht man should bée, Than that the holy Capitoll mée reigning there should sée Thus much he sayd: and by and by toogither he did call The people and the Senators, But yit he first of all
Did hyde his hornes with Lawrell leaues: and then without the wall▪ He standing on a mount the which his men had made of soddes, And hauing after auncient guyse made prayer too the Goddes Sayd: héere is one that shall (onlesse yée bannish him your towne Immediatly) bée king of Roome and weare a royall crowne. What man it is, I will by signe, but not by name bewray. He hath vppon his brow twoo hornes. The wizard héere dooth say, That if he enter Roome, you shall lyke seruants him obey. He myght haue entred at your gates which open for him lay, But I did stay him thence. And yit there is not vntoo mée A néerer fréend in all the world. Howbéet forbid him yée O Romanes that he comme not once within your walles. Or if He haue deserued, bynd him fast in fetters like a théef. Or in this fatall Tyrants death, of feare dispatch your mynd. Such noyse as Pynetrées make what tyme the heady easterne wynde Dooth whiz amongst them, or as from the sea dooth farre rebound: Euen such among the folk of Roome that present was the sound. Howbéet in that confused roare of fearefull folk, did fall Out one voyce asking, whoo is hée? And staring therewithall Uppon theyr foreheads, they did séeke the foresayd hornes. Agen ({quod} Cippus) lo, yée haue the man for whom yée séeke. And then He pulld (ageinst his peoples will) his garlond from his head, And shewed them the twoo fayre hornes hat on his browes were spred. At that the people dassheth downe theyr lookes and syghing, is Ryght sorye (whoo would think it trew?) too sée that head of his Most famous for his good deserts. Yit did they not forget The honour of his personage, but willingly did set The Lawrell garlond on his head ageine. And by and by The Senate sayd. Well Cippus, sith vntill the tyme thou dye Thou mayst not cōme within theis walles, wée giue thée as much groūd In honour of thée, as a téeme of stéeres can plough thée round, Betwéene the dawning of the day, and shetting in of nyght. Moreouer on the brazen gate at which this Cippus myght Haue entred Roome, a payre of hornes were graude too represent His woondrous shape, as of his déede an endlesse monument. Yée Muses whoo too Poets are the present springs of grace, Now shewe (for you knowe, neyther are you dulld by tyme or space)
How Aesculapius in the Ile that is in Tyber déepe Among the sacred sayncts of Roome had fortune for too créepe. A cruell plage did héertoofore infect the Latian aire, And peoples bodyes pyning pale the murreine did appayre. When tyred with the buriall of theyr fréends, they did perceyue Themselues no helpe at mannes hand nor by Phisicke too receyue. Then séeking help from heauen, they sent too Delphos (which dooth stand Amid the world) for counsell too bée had at Phebus hand. Beséeching him with helthfull ayd too succour theyr distresse, And of the myghtye Citie Roome the mischéef too redresse. The quiuers which Apollo bryght himself was woont too beare, The Baytrées, and the place itself toogither shaken were. And by and by the table from the furthest part of all The Chaūcell spake theis woords, which did theyr harts with feare appal. The thing yée Romanes séeke for héere, yée should haue sought more ny Your countrye. Yea and néerer home go séeke it now. Not I Apollo, but Apollos sonne is hée that must redresse Your sorrowes. Take your iourney with good handsell of successe, And fetch my sonne among you. When Apollos hest was told Among the prudent Senators, they sercht what towne did hold His sonne, and vntoo Epidavvre a Gallye for him sent. Assoone as that th'Ambassadour arryued there they went Untoo the counsell and the Lordes of Gréekland: whom they pray Too haue the God the present plages of Romanes for too stay, And for themselues the Oracle of Phebus foorth they lay. The Counsell were of sundry mynds and could not well agrée. Sum thought that succour in such néede denyed should not bée. And diuers did perswade too keepe theyr helpe, & not too send Theyr Goddes away sith they themselues myght néede them in the end. Whyle dowtfully they of and on debate this curious cace, The euening twylyght vtterly the day away did chace, And on the world the shadowe of the earth had darknesse brought. That nyght the Lord Ambassadour as sléepe vppon him wrought, Did dreame he saw before him stand the God whose help he sought, In shape as in his chappell he was woonted for too stand, With ryght hand stroking downe his berd, and staffe in toother hand, And méekely saying: feare not, I will comme and leaue my shryne.
This serpent which dooth wreath with knottes about this staffe of mine Mark well, and take good héede therof: that when thou shalt it sée, Thou mayst it knowe. For intoo it transformed will I bee. But bigger I will bée. for I will séeme of such a syse, As may celestiall bodyes well too turne intoo suffise. Streyght with the voyce, the God: and with the voyce and God, away Went sléepe: and after sléepe was gone ensewed chéerfull day. Next morning hauing cléerely put the fyrye starres too flyght, The Lordes not knowing what too doo, assembled all foorthryght Within the sumptuous temple of the God that was requyred, And of his mynd by heauenly signe sum knowledge they desyred. They scarce had doone theyr prayers, when the God in shape of snake With loftye crest of gold, began a hissing for too make, Which was a warning giuen. And with his presence he did shake The Altar, shryne, doore, marble floore, and roofe all layd with gold, And vauncing vp his brest he stayd ryght stately too behold Amid the Church, and round about his fyrye eyes he rold. The syght did fray the people. But the wyuelesse préest (whoose heare Was trussed in a fayre whyght Call) did know the God was there. And sayd, behold tiz God, tiz God. As many as bée héere Pray both with mouth and mynd. O thou our glorious God, appéere Too our béehoofe, and helpe thy folke that keepe thy hallowes ryght. The people present woorshipped his Godhead there in syght, Repeating dowble that the préest did say. the Romaynes éeke Deuoutly did with Godly voyce and hart his auour séeke. The God by nodding did consent, and gaue assured signe By shaking of his golden crest that on his head did shyne, And hissed twyce with spirting toong. Then trayld he downe the fyne And glistring gréeces of his church. And turning backe his eyen, He looked too his altarward and too his former shryne And temple, as too take his leaue and bid them all fare well From thence ryght howge vppon the ground (which swéete of flowres did smell That people strewed in his way,) he passed stately downe, And bending intoo bowghts went through the hart of all the towne, Untill that hée the bowwing wharf besyde the hauen tooke. Where saying, when he had (as séemd) dismist with gentle looke His trayne of Chapleynes and the folke that wayted on him thither,
Hée layd him in the Romane shippe too sayle away toogither. The shippe did féele the burthen of his Godhed too the full, And for the heauye weyght of him did after passe more dull. The Romanes being glad of him, and hauing killd a stéere Uppon the shore, vntyde theyr ropes and cables from the péere. The lyghtsum wynd did dryue the shippe. The God auauncing hye, And leaning with his necke vppon the Gallyes syde, did lye And looke vppon the gréenish waues, and cutting easly through Th'Iönian sea with little gales of westerne wynd not rough, The sixt day morning came vppon the coast of Italy. And passing foorth by Iunos Church that mustreth too the eye Uppon the head of Lacine he was caryed also by The rocke of Scylley. then he left the land of Calabrye And rowing softly by the rocke Zephyrion, he did draw Too Celen cliffs the which vppon the ryghtsyde haue a flawe. By Romeche and by Cavvlon, and by Narice thence he past, And from the streyghtes of Sicily gate quyght and cléere at last. Then ran he by th'Aeölian Iles and by the metall myne Of Tempsa, and by Levvcosye, and temprate Pest where fyne And pleasant Roses florish ay. From thence by Capreas And Atheney the headlond of Minerua he did passe Too Surrent, where with gentle vynes the hilles bée ouerclad, And by the towne of Hercules and Stabye ill bestad And Naples borne too Idlenesse, and Cumes where Sybell had Hir temples, and the scalding bathes, and Linterne where growes store Of masticke trées, and Vulturne which beares sand apace from shore, And Sinuesse where as Adders are as whyght as any snowe, And Minturne of infected ayre bycause it stands so lowe, And Caiete where Aeneas did his nurce in tumbe bestowe, And Formy where Antiphates the Lestrigon did kéepe, And Trache enuyrond with a fen, and Circes mountayne stéepe: Too Ancon with the boystous shore. Assoone as that the shippe Arryued héere, (for now the sea was rough,) the God let slippe His circles, and in bending bowghts and wallowing waues did glyde Intoo his fathers temple which was buylded there besyde Uppon the shore. and when the sea was calme and pacifyde, The foresayd God of Epidavvre, his fathers Church forsooke,
(The lodging of his néerest fréend which for a tyme hée tooke,) And with his crackling scales did in the sand a furrowe cut, And taking hold vppon the sterne did in the Galy put his head, and rested till he came past Camp and Lauine sands, And entred Tybers mouth at which the Citie Ostia stands. The folke of Roome came hither all by heapes bothe men and wyues And éeke the Nunnes that kéepe the fyre of Vesta as theyr lyues, Too meete the God, and welcomd him with ioyfull noyse. And as The Gally rowed vp the streame, greate store of incence was On altars burnt on bothe the banks, so that on eyther syde The fuming of the frankincence the very aire did hyde, And also slaine in sacrifyse full many cattell dyde. Anon he came too Roome the head of all the world: and there The serpent lifting vp himself, began his head too beare Ryght vp along the maast, vppon the toppe whereof on hye He looked round about, a méete abyding place too spye The Tyber dooth deuyde itself in twaine, and dooth embrace A little pretye Iland (so the people terme the place) From eyther syde whereof the bankes are distant equall space. Apollos Snake descending from the maast conueyd him thither, And taking eft his heauenly shape, as one repayring hither Too bring our Citie healthfulnesse, did end our sorrowes quyght. Although too bée a God with vs admitted were this wyght. Yit was he borne a forreiner. But Caesar hathe obteynd. His Godhead in his natiue soyle and Citie where he reignd. Whom péerelesse both in peace and warre, not more his warres vp knit With triumph, nor his great exployts atchéeued by his wit, Nor yit the great renowme that he obteynd so spéedely, Haue turned too a blazing starre, than did his progenie. For of the actes of Caesar, none is greater than that hée Left such a sonne behynd him as Augustus is, too bée His heyre. For are they things more hard too ouercomme thy Realme Of Britaine standing in the sea? or vp the seuenfold streame Of Nyle that beareth Paperréede victorious shippes too rowe? Or too rebelliouse Numidye too giue an ouerthrowe? Or Iuba king of Moores, and Pons (which proudely did it beare
Uppon the name of Mythridate) too force by swoord and speare Too yéeld them subiects vntoo Roome? or by his iust desert Too merit many triumphes, and of sum too haue his part? Than such an heyre too leaue béehynd, in whom the Goddes doo showe Excéeding fauour vntoo men for that they doo bestowe So great a prince vppon the world? Now too thentent that hée Should not bée borne of mortall séede, the oother was too bée Canonyzed for a God. Which thing when golden Venus sée, (Shée also sawe how dreadfull death was for the bisshop then Prepaard, and how conspiracye was wrought by wicked men) Shée looked pale. And as the Goddes came any in her way, Shée sayd vntoo them one by one. Behold and sée I pray, With how exceeding eagernesse they séeke mée too betray, And with what woondrous craft they stryue too take my lyfe away, I méene the thing that only now remayneth vntoo mée Of Iule the Troians race. Must I then only euer bée Thus vext with vndeserued cares? How seemeth now the payne Of Diomeds speare of Calydon too wound my hand ageyne? How séemes it mée that Troy ageine is lost through ill defence? How séemes my sonne Aenaeas like a bannisht man, from thence Too wander farre ageine, and on the sea too tossed bée, And warre with Turnus for too make? or rather (truth too say) With Iuno? what méene I about harmes passed many a day Ageinst myne ofspring, thus too stand? This present feare and wo Permit mée not too think on things now past so long ago. Yée sée how wicked swoordes ageinst my head are whetted. I Beséeche yée kéepe them from my throte, and set the traytors by Theyr purpose. neyther suffer you dame Vestaas fyre too dye By murthering of her bisshop. Thus went Venus wofully Complayning ouer all the heauen, and moovde the Goddes therby. And for they could not breake the strong decrées of destinye, They shewed signes most manifest of sorrowe too ensew. For battells feyghting in the clowdes with crasshing armour flew. And dreadfull trumpets sownded in the aire, and hornes éeke blew, As warning men before hand of the mischéef that did brew. And Phebus also looking dim did cast a drowzy lyght.
Uppon the earth, which séemd lykewyse too bée in sorye plyght. From vnderneathe amid the starres brands oft séemd burning bryght It often rayned droppes of blood. The morning starre lookt blew, And was bespotted héere and there with specks of rusty hew. The moone had also spottes of blood. The Scréeche owle sent from hell Did with her tune vnfortunate in euery corner yell. Salt teares from Iuory images in sundry places fell. And in the Chappells of the Goddes was singing heard, and woordes Of threatning. Not a sacrifyse one signe of good auoordes. But greate turmoyle too bée at hand theyr harstrings doo declare. And when the beast is ripped vp the inwards headlesse are. About the Court, and euery house, and Churches in the nyhgts The doggs did howle, and euery where appéered gastly spryghts. And with an earthquake shaken was the towne. Yit could not all Theis warnings of the Goddes dispoynt the treason that should fall, Nor ouercomme the destinies. The naked swoordes were brought Intoo the temple. For no place in all the towne was thought So méete too woork the mischéef in, or for them too commit The heynous murder, as the Court in which they vsde too sit In counsell. Venus then with both her hands her stomacke smit, And was about too hyde him with the clowd in which shée hid Aenaeas, when shée from the swoord of Diomed did him rid. Or Paris, when from Menelay shée did him saufe conuey. But Ioue her father staying her did thus vntoo hir say. Why daughter myne, wilt thou alone bée stryuing too preuent Unuanquishable destinie? In fayth and if thou went Thy self intoo the house in which the fatall susters thrée Doo dwell, thou shouldest there of brasse and stéele substantiall sée The registers of things so strong and massye made too bee, That au and euerlasting, they doo neyther stand in feare Of thunder, nor of lyghtning, nor of any ruine there. The destnyes of thyne ofspring thou shalt there fynd grauen déepe In Adamant. I red them: and in mynd I doo them kéepe. And forbycause thou shalt not beiquyght ignorant of all, I will declare what things I markt herafter too befall. The man for whom thou makest sute, hath liued full his tyme
And hauing ronne his race on earth must now too heauen vp clyme. Where thou shalt make a God of him ay honord for too bée With temples and with Altars on the earth. Moreouer hée That is his heyre and beares his name, shall allalone susteyne The burthen layd vppon his backe, and shall our help obteyne His fathers murther too reuenge. The towne of Mutinye Beséedged by his powre, shall yéeld. The féelds of Pharsaly Shall féele him, and Philippos in the Realme of Macedonne Shall once ageine bée staynd with blood. The greate Pompeius sonne Shall vanquisht be by him vppon the sea of Sicilye. The Romane Capteynes wyfe the Quéene of Aegypt through her hye Presumption trusting too her match too much, shall threate in vayne Too make her Canop ouer our hygh Capitoll too reigne. What should I tell thee of the wyld and barbrous nacions that At bothe the Oceans dwelling bée? The vniuersall plat Of all the earth inhabited, shall all be his. The sea Shall vntoo him obedient bée likewyse. And when that he Hathe stablisht peace in all the world, then shall he set his mynd Too ciuill matters, vpryght lawes by iustice for too fynd, And by example of himself all others he shall bynd. Then hauing care of tyme too comme, and of posteritye, A holy wyfe shall beare too him a sonne that may supply His carefull charge and beare his name. And lastly in the end He shall too heauen among the starres his auncetors ascend, But not before his lyfe by length too drooping age doo tend. nd therfore from the murthred corce of Iulius Caesar take is sowle with spéede, and of the same a burning cressed make, That from our heauenly pallace he may euermore looke downe Uppon our royall Capitoll and Court within Roome towne. He scarcely ended had theis woordes, but Venus out of hand Amid the Senate house of Roome inuisible did stand, And from her Caesars bodye tooke his new expulsed spryght The which shée not permitting too resolue too ayer quyght, Did place it in the skye among the starres that glister bryght And as shée bare it, shée did féele it gather heauenly myght, And for too wexen fyrye. Shée no sooner let it flye,
But that a goodly shyning starre it vp a lost did stye And drew a greate way after it bryght beames like burning heare. Whoo looking on his sonnes good déedes confessed that they were Farre greater than his owne, and glad he was too sée that hée Excelled him. Although his sonne in no wyse would agrée Too haue his déedes preferd befor his fathers: yit dooth fame, (Whoo ay is frée, and bound too no commaund) withstand the same And stryuing in that one behalf ageinst his hest and will, Procéedeth too preferre his déedes before his fathers still. Euen so too Agamemnons great renowne giues Atreus place Euen so Achilles déedes, the déedes of Peleus doo abace. Euen so beyond Aegaeus farre dooth Theseyes prowesse go. And (that I may examples vse full matching theis) euen so Is Saturne lesse in fame than Ioue. Ioue rules the heauenly spheres, And all the trple shaped world. And our Augustus beares Dominion ouer all the earth. They bothe are fathers: They Are rulers both. Yee Goddes too whom both fyre and swoord gaue way, What tyme yée with Aenaeas came from Troy: yée Goddes that were Of mortall men canonyzed: Thou Quiin whoo didst réere The walles of Roome: and Mars whoo wart the valcant Quirins syre And Vesta of the household Goddes of Caesar with thy fyre Most holy: and thou Phebus whoo with Vesta also art Of household: and thou Iupiter whoo in the hyghest part Of mountayne Tarpey haste thy Church: and all yee Goddes that may With conscience sauf by Poëts bée appealed too: I pray Let that same day bée slowe too comme and after I am dead, In which Augustus (whoo as now of all the world is head) Quyght giuing vp the care therof ascend too heauen for ay There (absent hence,) to fauour such as vntoo him shall pray. Now haue I brought a woork too end which neither Ioues féerce wrath, Nor swoord, nor fyre, nor freating age with all the force it hath Are able too abolish quyght. Let comme that fatall howre Which (sauing of this brittle flesh) hath ouer mée no powre, And at his pleasure make an end of myne vncerteyne tyme. Yit shall the better part of mée assured bée too clyme Aloft aboue the starry skye. And all the world shall neuer Be able for too quench my name. For looke how farre so euer
The Romane Empyre by the ryght of conquest shall extend, So farre shall all folke reade this woork. And tyme without all end (If Poets as by prophesie about the truth may ame) My lyfe shall euerlastingly bée lengthened still by fame. Finis Libri decimi quinti. Laus & honor soli Deo. ❧ IMPRINTED AT LON∣don by Willyam Seres dwelling at the west end of Paules church, at the signe of the Hedgehogge.
