19218 99854312 19726
A Bill of Fare: For, A Saturday nights Supper, A Sunday morning Breakfast, and A Munday Dinner, Described in a pleasant new merry Ditie. To the tune of Cooke Laurell, or, Michaelmas Terme. ILe tell you a Iest, which you'l hardly beleeue: No matter for that, you shall hear't right or wrong, A hungry appetite may perhaps grieue, To heare such a Banquet set forth in a Song, He rather would haue it then heare on't hée'l say, But I cannot promise him such a faire sight; All that I can doe, is with words to display, What we had to Supper on Saturday night. Inprimis, foure Fancies, two boyld, and two roast, A large dish of Enimions (good for one's drinke) Sir Pelican Chickens as hote as a toast, And six Birds of Paradise, brae meat I thinke, A couple of Phenix, a Cocke and a Hen, That late from Arabia had tan their flight. I thinke such a Banquet was ne're made for men, As wee had to Supper on Saturday night. Two paire of Elephants Pettitoes boyld, A greene Dragon Spitchcock (an excellent dish) One messe by the Cooke was like to be spoil'd, And yet by good hap 'twas to euery one's wish: It was a Rhenoceros boyld in Alegant, To all who did taste it, gaue great delight: Iudge whether we haue not occasion to vaunt Of this our rare Supper on Saturday night. A Calues head was roast with a pudding i'th belly, (Of which all the women did heartily feed) A dish of Irish Harts hornes boyld to a Ielly, (Which most men esteem'd as a good dish indeed) I had almost forgotten to name a sowc'd Owle, Brought vp to the Master o'th Feast as his right, He lou'd it he said aboue all other Fowle, And this was out Supper on Saturday night. The next in due course was foure golden Horshooes, Exactly dissolued through a Woodcocks bill, Six Camelions in greene-sawce (Maids commonly chuse) This dish euery day if they may haue their will, The chine of a Lyon, the haunch of a Beare, Well larded with Brimstone and Quicksiluer bright: Iudge Gentlemen, was not this excellent cheere, That wee had to Supper on Saturday night. A whole Horse sowst after the Russian manner, Twelue Pigs of a strange Capadocian Bitch, Six dozen of Estridges rost, (which a Tanner Did send out of Asia by an old Witch) A Leg of an Eagle carbonadoed (in Snow) The Pluck of a Grampoise stew'd till it was white, And thus in particular I let you know, What we had to Supper on Saturday night. Then came in an Ell of a Iackanapes taile, Seru'd in vpon Sippits as dainty as may be: O that is a dainty, which rather then faile, Might well serue to feast an Utopian Lady: Twelue Maids were stew'd in the shell of a Shrimp, And cause it was meat that was held very light, They had for thir Sawce a salt pickled Pimpe, And this was our Supper on Saturday night.
The second part, To the same tune. TWo Beares sowst pig fashion sent wole to the ard, And 4 black swans seru'd by 2 in a dish, With a Lobster fried in steaks: take my word, I know not well whether it was Flesh or Fish, Two Cockatrices, and three Baboones boyld, Two dry Salamanders, a very strange sight, A Ioale of a Whale soundly butter'd and oyl'd, And this was our Supper on Saturday night. A good dish of Modicums, I know not what, In Barbary Uinegar boyld very soft, I mus'd how my Hostis became so huge fat, I find tis with eating these Modicums oft: A Grosse of Canary birds roasted aliue, That out of the dishes (for sport) tooke their flight, And euery one present to catch them did striue: This was our rare Supper on Saturday night. A shoale of Red-herrings with bls 'bout their neekes, Which made such rare sport that I neuer saw such, They leaped and danced with other fine tricks, A man may admire how they could doe so much. Two Porposes parboild in May-dew and Roses, That vnto the smell yeelded so much delight i Some (fearing to lose them) laid hold on their noses, All this was at Supper on Saturday night. Three dozen of Welsh Embassadors bak't, Which made such a nois it was heard through ye town Some hearing the eccho their foreheads so akt, That many a smile was orecome with a frowne: A dish of Bonitoes, or Fish that can flie. That out of the Indies came hither by flight, To close vp our stomacks, a Gridiron Pye We had to our Supper on Saturday night. But what commeth after must not be forgotten, The Fruit and the Cheese as they follow by course, A West-Indian Cheese (not a bit of it rotten, Thats made of no worse then the milke of a Horse) A dish of Pine-apples, two bushels at least, An hundred of Cokernuts for our delight. The world may admire at this wonderfull Feast, Which we had at Supper on Saturday night. Six Pumpans codled with exquisite Art, To pleasure the palate of euery one there. Then we at the last had a great Cabbage Tart; Thus haue I exactly described our Cheere: What all this amounted to, I cannot tell, It cost me iust nothing, no faith not a mite, The Master o'th Feast (whom I know very well) Did pay for this Supper on Saturday night. Wee rose from our mirth with the 12 a clock Chimes, Went euery one home as his way did direct; And I for my part on the morning betimes, Had a Breakfast prepar'd, which I did not expect: My wife, because she was not bidden to Supper, (It seemes by the story) she bare me a spight: The Breakfast she gaue me, to you I will vtter, It passed our Supper on Saturday night. Sunday morning Breakfast. FIrst had I a dish of Maundering broath, So scolding hote that I could not abide it, But I like a patient man (though I was loath) Must swallow all down, cause my wife did prouide it, A many small Reasons she put in the same, Her Nose yeelded Pepper that keenly did bite; Thought I here's a Breakfast, I thank my good dame, That passes our Supper on Saturday night. A great Carpe Pye, and a dish of sad Pots, With Crocodile Uinegar, sawce very tart, Quoth she thou last night wast among thy sound trets, Now fall to thy Breakfast, and comfort thy heart: Then had I a Cup full of stout Wormwood Beere, It seemes that in Physicke she has good insight, This shew'd me the difference 'twixt the homely cheere And our dainty Supper on Saturday night. Munday Dinner. ON this sorry Fare all that day I did feed, And on Munday morning on purpose to win her, I went and got money to furnish her need, And now you shall heare what I had to my Dinner: A Pye made of Conies, with Ducks and Pigs eyes, With a deale of sweet Hony my taste to delight: With sweet Lambe and Chicken my mind to suffice, These passed my Supper on Saturday night. Another Pye made with a many Sheepes eyes, With sweet Sugar Candy that pleased my pallet, These seuerall Banquets my Muse did aduise, And with her assistance I made this mad Ballet. There's no man that's wise will my paines reprehend For most married men will confesse I say right; Yet on no occasion this Ditie was pend, But to shew our rare Supper on Saturday night. FINIS. M. P. London, Printed by M.P. for Fr: Grove, neere the Sarazens head without Newgate.
