19518 99849590 14747
DAT GRATIAM HVMILIBVS God hates the proud, the humble are his care Hence hils are barren. Valleies fruitful are,
THE VALLEY OF VARIETIE: OR, Discourse fitting for the Times, Containing very Learned and rare Passages out of Antiquity, Philosophy, and History. Collected for the use of all ingenious spirits, and true lovers of learning. By Henry Peacham Mr. of Arts, sometime of Trinitie Colledge in CAMBRIDGE. —inutilis olim Ne videar vixisse— Palingen. LONDON, Printed by M. P. for Iames Becket, at his Shop at the Inner-Temple Gate in Fleet-street. 1638.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, And truly Noble, HENRY Earle of DOVER, &c. MY LORD, I Have beene heretofore very much ingaged to your Honour, aswell for many noble Cour∣tesies conferred upon mee,
as your respect, and ever well-wishing towards mee, altogether unworthie, I confesse, so great a fa∣vour. I must heereunto adde that Dutie, wherein I stand obliged unto your Religious and Honorable COUNTESSE, since my last being at your house in Broad-street, for her re∣ally expressed favour to mee and mine: As also, to my Lord of Rochford, the hope of your ancient and renowned Family. But since I am not a∣ble,In Farrag. Epistol Cum tota mea sup∣pellex
sit Chartacea, as Erasmus saith of himself, To requite you with any thing but Paper; I offer unto your Honour, these selected Collections of mine, not altogether (at your houres of leisure) unwor∣thie your view and peru∣sall, since for ought I know, not any one of them hath spoken English before: be∣side, they are compact of Rarities, to enable Inge∣nious and Schollerly Dis∣course. But howsoever, such as they are, I hum∣bly present them to your
Honours Patronage (whom I know (as many more be∣beside) to be a true lover of the Church of God, as also of Learning, and all vertuous Parts:) And with them, my service to your Honour, and my most Noble Ladie; who shall ever be Devoted unto you both, HENRY PEACHAM.
To the Ingenious and Learned READER. READER who∣soever, these are Collections which I have, at leasureable houres, collected out of Pan∣cirolla and other Authors, ha∣ving intended a good while since, to have wholly transla∣ted that Booke into English; but having little leasure, and expecting lesse gaine for so great a labour, in these un∣thankfull times; wherein to be ignorant, is accounted by too many, to be a Gentleman∣like
Qualitie. I resolved to give the world a taste of the Fruit, before I opened the Basket; and if what I have done shall not dislike thee, I will proceed, and goe on with the Remainder: which doubt∣lesse cannot but (as all Varie∣tie doth) please thee, since thou shalt see what the Anci∣ents had, which are lost and unknowne of us; and what wee have which they never knew. Although I confesse, in this Booke I have inter∣mixed many other things for Varietie, and pleasures sake, which hereafter may be Me∣thodically disposed; but as I find this accepted, so will I proceed. Thine, H. P.
The Contents of the CHAPTERS. Chap. I. WHat to thinke of the which length of Age, Men lived in former Times, and shortly after the Creation. Fol. 1. Chap. II. Of the Dead Sea. 9 Chap. III. Of that admirable Alteration or Change, which is every five hundred yeares, as well in the Church, as in everie Common-wealth: As also of the contrary Fortunes of cer∣tain Kingdomes under Prin∣ces of the same Name. 18
Chap. IV. Of those Locusts, which the Scripture saith John Bap∣tist did eate: where beside, many admirable things are reported of strange and unac∣customed meats. 26 Chap. V. Of many who having received Poyson, have not onely mi∣raculously escaped, but beene thereby cured of (else) incu∣rable Diseases. 37 Chap. VI. Of that Fire which perpetually burneth in ancient Monu∣ments. 49 Chap. VII. Of the strange mixture of Ver∣tue and Vice, in the Na∣tures and Dispositions of ma∣nie men. 54
Chap. VIII. The Vanitie of some mens Am∣bition, in Titles and Ho∣nours. 65 Chap. IX. Of the ancient Triumphs among the Romanes. 74 Chap. X. The extreme Madnesse, and vaine Pride of some great Persons informer Ages. 86 Chap. XI. Of Cinnamome. 97 Chap. XII. Of Balsamum. 101 Chap. XIII. What Studies and Exercises best become Princes. 107 Chap. XIV. Of incombustible Flaxe, or
which will not consume by Fire. 129 Chap. XV. Of an artificiall kinde of guil∣ding amongst the Romanes, which they called Pyropus, as also of Electrum. 133 Chap. XVI. Of Margaret the Wife of Her∣man, Earle of Henneberge. 140 Chap. XVII. Of Glasse made Malleable, to be beaten forth every way. 144 Chap. XVIII. Of Bells. 151 Chap. XIX. The occasion of the alteration of the Armes of Bohemia. 158
Chap. XX. A most ancient and pleasant manner of Choosing their Prince in Carinthia. 162 Chap. XXI. The marveilous simplicitie of a Monke, fetched out of his Monasterie, to be crowned a King. 168 Chap. XXII. A wittie, but a ridiculous re∣ply, and vindication of a dis∣grace. 172
MARCH 10. 1637. IMPRIMATUR, GVIL: BRAY.
THE VALLEY OF VARIETIE. CHAP. I. What to thinke of the length of Age, which men lived in former times, and shortly af∣ter the Creation. IT hath been a que∣stion, What man∣ner of yeares those were, our Forefa∣thers (in the holy Scriptures) are said to have lived; as some, seven hun∣dred, others, eight hundred,
and some, nine hundred; as Methuselah; since, yeares have beene taken diversly. Some have imagined they could not be our Anni solares, as wee account yeares by the course of the Sun, as being a thing incredible, that the date of a mans life should extend it selfe to that length, farre beyond the age of the eldest Oakes that may be found. Some ac∣counted every Summer a year, (as Pliny reporteth) & Winter another;Histor. lib. 7. cap. 48. as also the Arcadians counted their yeare by three Moneths; others againe, ac∣cording to the age of the Moone, as the Egyptians: so some amongst them are re∣ported to have lived a thou∣sand yeares. Thus far Pliny. There are therefore that
imagine, Gen. 5. those yeares are to be understood,Consist∣ing of 36 daies. that ex∣ceed not the (fore-named) Lunarie yeares, ten whereof make but one of our Solar yeares; hereby reckoning, that who are in the Scripture said to have lived nine hun∣dred yeares, lived of our yeares but ninety, every hun∣dred of those monthly yeares amounting but to ten of ours. So they beleeved all that space of time which is con∣tained in one yeare, to have beene anciently divided into ten parts,Six times six, or 36. and every part ta∣ken for a yeare, and every one of these ten parts to have had, Senarium quadratum, be∣cause in six daies God finished his worke of the Creation; all which number multiplied
by tenne, make just twelve Moneths. But these conclusions which they thinke witty, fall out to be most absurd, they not ob∣serving what followeth here∣upon; for then should Canan, who begat children when he was aged 70 yeares, have begotten them when he was but seven yeares old. Beside, if wee make a yeare but of six and thirty daies, of what length must the Moneth be? surely, no more than three dayes: And how may that place in Genesis be reconci∣led,Genes. 6. where it is said, The flood began the seven and twentieth day of the second Moneth? and how will it agree, where it is said, The Arke rested upon the mountaines of Aarat, the se∣ven
and twentieth day of the se∣venth Moneth. Let us therefore certainly beleeve the yeares then to have beene all one with ours, and that which is spoken of the great Age of those Fa∣thers, not much to differ from the computation, accor∣ding to our yeares. It is a∣gaine said, that The Moun∣taines appeared upon the first day of the eleventh Moneth; therefore the yeare consisted of many Moneths: and that we may not think the Month then consisted of no more than three daies, or there∣abouts, observe the seven and twentieth day is named. Now, if you would hap∣pily know the reason why the Fathers then lived so long,
know there were two causes; first, the Finall; then, the Effi∣cient: the Finall causes were; First, increasing the World with people, wherby it might be replenished, which they could not doe, but by living a long time. Secondly, Arts were to be invented, for they are not found, but by long Experience. Thirdly, the Worship of God was to be delivered by Tradition, for as yet the written Word was not. But that could not be in such a varietie of people, ex∣cept those who received it from God, had beene long liv'd. The Efficient causes of this their length of life, were I. The singular Blessings of God, Deuter. 30. I am thy
life, and the length of thy daies. II. The nearnesse in time to the Creation, when the bo∣dies of men were of a singu∣lar, and a most perfect con∣stitution and soundnesse, and state of Health. III. The Diet and feeding was farre more wholesome before the Flood, then since. IV. The wits and invention were more accurat and subtile, in search∣ing and finding out the nature and qualities of all things whereof they had need, to the sustenance of life, then ours are in these daies. For these reasons, I suppose their lives were of that length. Neither may wee wonder at it, since Heathen Writers testifie, That even in their Times, some thousands of
yeares after the Flood, many lived two hundred, others three hundred yeares. Hella∣nic (cited by Plinie) repor∣teth, That in Aetolia,Plin. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 4. many lived till they were two hun∣dred yeares of age: which Damastes confirmeth, while hee maketh mention of one Pictoreus amongst them, who lived strong and able of body, till hee had ful∣filled three hundred years; this saith Plinie.
CHAP. II. Of the Dead Sea. THe Sacred Scriptures so sufficiently shew us the fearfull punish∣ment, and vengeance of God upon Sodome and Gomorrah, that wee need looke no far∣ther. But what the estate of that place (where those fa∣mous and noble Cities stood) at this day is not commonly knowne, wherefore my in∣tent is, to make Relation of what wee find, aswell in Monuments of venerable An∣tiquitie, as by the Report of Travellers, who in these
last times have seene those places. Then first know, that the whole Tract,The val∣ley of Siddim. or Countrie wherein those Cities stood, was called The valley of Sid∣dim, which was exceedingly fruitfull and fertile, inso∣much, that it was compared to the earthly Paradise; and to Egypt, of Countries the most delicate and plentifull. But this place, so beautified and adorned vvith such a wonderfull richness of Soile, and all pleasures whatsoever might make glad the heart of man; through the wic∣kednesse of the sinfull Inha∣bitants, is so changed, that after those Cities and Fields about, were destroyed by fire and brimstone from hea∣ven,
the whole Countrie (sometime the pleasantest, and most fertile place of the world) was turned into a most horrid, stinking, and in∣fectious Lake, called even at this day, Mare mortuum, or The Dead Sea. The Water hereof is thick, filthy, stinking, most bitter, and salt beyond any Sea wa∣ter whatsoever, wherein no creature liveth, or can live; wherefore this Lake is called, The Dead Sea. The famous River Iordan runneth into this Lake, and is infected, or cor∣rupted by it, insomuch as the Fish of that River shun this Lake as a deadly poison, and if through the swiftnesse of the streame, they are forcibly carried thereinto, they dye
presently. No quicke or li∣ving thing can be drowned in the same; which Vespasian being desirous to make triall of, who came purposely in person to see this Lake, hee caused some, altogether un∣skilfull in swimming, to be bound with their hands be∣hind them, and to be throwne into the Lake, but as it were, repulsed by a certaine Spirit of the water, like fishes, they floated aloft the superficies of the water. Every faire and Sun-shinie day, it changeth the colour thrice, and that by meanes of the Sun-beames, falling either rightly, or obliquely upon the same, as at Morning, Noone, and Sunne-set, according to which, it varieth the colour.
It yeelds a certaine pitchie substance, called , in Latine, Bitumen, (whence it is called, Lacus Asphaltites) which swimmes upon the top of the Lake in great abun∣dance, some pieces being in bignesse, as great as the body of an Oxe; and it is of such a nature, as if any small Ships come neare the place to fetch part of it away, they are caught, and drawne away by the tenacitie, or limie catch∣ing hold thereof, and not to be loosened or freed againe, but by application of Vrine. Cui menses muliebres permixti sunt, saith mine Author; and with this onely, the Bitumen is dissolved. It sendeth up a most Pesti∣lent Aire, in so much, you
would thinke the steame of Hell-fire were underneath it, casting up most poisonous and harmfull vapours; hereupon the Bankes, and the neigh∣bour Mountaines are quite barren: if but an Apple groweth thereby, it is by na∣ture such, that it speakes the Anger of God, and the bur∣ning of the place; for with∣out, it is beautifull and red; but within, nothing but dusty smoake and cinders. A thing to be admired at, whereof, not onely Christians, as Ter∣tullian and Augustine, but also Heathen Authors make mention of; for thus writeth Solinus upon Polyb: (speak∣ing of the place: There are, saith hee, two Townes, one called Sodom, another Gomor∣rah,
where grow Apples, al∣though they carry a shew of ripenesse, yet can they not be eaten, for the cover of the outermost rinde containeth within, an ashie sootie sub∣stance, which being touched, though but lightly, yeeld no∣thing but smoake and dust. Also Tacitus in his last booke, saith, Not farre from this place (or Lake) there are Fields, which they say in times past to have been won∣derfully fruitfull, and inha∣bited with many Cities, but to have been burned by light∣ning from Heaven, the marks whereof still remaine, and the earth all scorched, to have ut∣terly lost her naturall strength of yeelding fruit. For if any thing there groweth of the
owne accord, or be set, or sowne with the hand, and they grow up into herbes or flowers, still keeping their owne formes, yet are they blacke, without sap and sub∣stance, turning presently, as into ashes. This saith Ta∣citus. All which things are so to bee weighed and considered of us, that we have alwayes in remembrance the just judgements of God, and take heede of committing those sinnes which drew downe the vengeance of God upon So∣dome and Gomorrha. Behold, (sayth the Prophet Ezechiel) this was the sinne of Sodome thy sister,Eezec. 18. Pride, Fulnesse of Bread, Abundance of Idle∣nesse; beside, shee stretched not
out her hand to the poore and needie. The like in Saint Pe∣ter,2 Pet 2. God condemned the Cities of Sodome and Gomorrha, and turned them into ashes, and hath set them up as an example to those who shall live wicked∣ly. Let mee moreover adde how IosephusIosephus Antiq. c. 12. testifieth, that in his time the Pillar of Salt, (into which Lots Wife was turned) was still remaining, and that hee saw the same himselfe. Reade the tenth Chapter of the Booke of Wis∣dome; and for a Conclusion, take this of Prudentius: Nemo memor Sodomae, quae mundi forma cremandi est Vt semel è muris gressum promoverit, ore Post tergum verso, respecte funera rerum.
CHAP. III. Of that admirable Alteration or Change, which is every five hundred yeares, as well in the Church, as in everie Common-wealth: As also of the contrary Fortunes of cer∣taine Kingdomes under Prin∣ces of the same Name. IT is marvellous, and a remarkable thing in Histories, that at the ende of every five hundred yeares, there are great Changes and Alte∣rations in States, whereof I bring you these examples: The Assyrians possessed A∣sia
five hundred yeares; after∣wards the Assyrians beeing driven out, the Medes pos∣sessed the same. The King∣dome of Athens continued foure hundred ninetie yeares, from Cecrops unto Codrus; from that time, of a Mo∣narchie, it became a Demo∣cracie. As many yeares flou∣rished the Common-wealth of the Lacedemonians, which being brought to a forme by Lycurgus, fell to ruine under Alexander the Great. Five hundred yeares passed from the expulsion of the Romane Kings, unto the time of Au∣gustus the Emperour, under whom was a Monarchie esta∣blished, when formerly the Roman Common wealth was mixed of an Aristocracie, and
a Democracie. It was about five hundred yeares, from the time that Constantine the Great translated the seate of the Empire to Constantinople, to the time of Charles the Great, under whom the Em∣pire was divided; and the Romane Eagle, which for∣merly had but one head, now was allowed two, and so be∣came a Monster. From the battell of Actium, which as∣sured to Augustus the Empire of the West, unto Valenti∣nian the last of the Romane Emperours, are likewise num∣bred, five hundred yeares. This vvas Valentinian the third, and last Emperour of the West, untill Charles the Great, although after him, many would be called Em∣perours,
albeit they possest scarse a very small part of Italy. Moreover, the Church of God under the Gospell eve∣rie five hundred yeares, hath found a great change and al∣teration. In the first five hun∣dred yeares, from the birth of our Saviour Christ, the Church shone in her puritie, and Discipline severely ex∣acted, albeit toward the end of this Period, it grew more remisse. In the next follow∣ing five hundred yeares, Fal∣shood so contended vvith Truth, Superstition with sin∣ceretie of the Faith, Ambi∣tion in the Clergie, with Christian Humilitie; that by degrees crept in, and gathe∣red head, the Invocation of
the Dead, Worshipping of Images, Adoration of the Eucharist, those dreames of Purgatorie, and the Prima∣cie of the Romane Bishops, with the like. Then came the third Pe∣riod, wherein those named abuses and errors, that be∣fore did bud, now grew ripe, yeelding unsavourie and bit∣ter fruit; the Authoritie of the Emperours abated and vi∣lified, Pardons established and confirmed. The Aposto∣licall Doctrine of the saving Grace of God, and the Me∣rit of Christ Jesus little va∣lued; in the roome whereof, crept in the Merits of Saints, Workes of Supererogation, Cowles, Rosaries, Beades, Holy water, and other such
like, vvhich vvere defen∣ded and maintained by the Monks, with no lesse impu∣dencie than impietie; and in this Period the Papacie was at the height. But in the fourth Period of five hundred yeares, God respecting, and in mercie looking downe upon his Church, hee raised up lear∣ned and godly men, who re∣ducing the Church to her former puritie, overthrew the Romish Idolatrie, and brideld the Popes Tyranny, as all the world knoweth. Thus wee see, every five hundred yeares there hath beene a change in the out∣ward, or visible Church of God, although the Elect in all Ages of the Church, have
evermore laid fast hold upon the Rocke whereupon they were built, and founded. But observe another thing no lesse wonderfull, that is, under Kings and Princes of the same name, how the for∣tune and estate of their King∣domes hath fallen out to have beene quite contrarie. The Kingdome of the Persians grew up, and increased under one Darius, under another Darius it was ruined. The Kingdome of Macedonia was greatly augmented, and in∣deed grew first famous, un∣der Phillip the Father of A∣lexander: the same Kingdome under Phillip the Father of Perseus came to decay. The Easterne Empire began with Constantine, and ended with
Constantine Palaeologus; that it was truly said, a Constantine was to that famous and re∣nowned Empire, the Rise, and the Ruine. I could here al∣leage examples of nearer, and our owne times, but it would not be so pleasing. Surely, the Providence of God governing all things, hath set certaine bounds and limits to worldly promoti∣ons, and will have nothing to be certaine upon earth; that mindfull of our mortall and uncertaine estates, we should not be proud, but alwaies a∣spire, and seeke after that cer∣taine Good, wherein is no mutability, which is God himselfe.
CHAP. IV. Of those Locusts, which the Scripture saith John Bap∣tist did eate: where beside, many admirable things are reported of strange and unac∣customed meats. MAny do wonder what he Evangelist S. Mat∣thew might meane, where hee saith, Saint Johns meat (in the Wildernesse) were Locusts; supposing it to have beene a most absurd thing, and in a manner impossible: withall taking the word , which the Evangelist useth, either for the tender tops of
Herbes, Crabbes, or wilde Peares, but by their leaves they are farre deceived. For no Greeke Author hath said, or example can be brought, that ever  was taken for any thing else then a Locust, and so named, as Gramma∣rians and Etymologists say; . But some may say, the na∣ture of man abhorreth from the eating of Locusts; indeed no, if the Taste may be judge: but it may be (as also all o∣ther meats) they may be loathed of some; be it so. In the Law of Moses,Levit. 11. 22. Locusts were allowed of to be eaten, which surely had not beene done, except they had beene good, and fitting for meat.
The Parthians (as Plinie tels us) fed upon them, as dainties among their other meats. Al∣so Strabo affirmeth,Strabo, lib. 16. That the Aethiopians lived most upon Locusts. And our Country∣man, venerable Bede,Bede de locis San∣is. c. 24. tels us out of Archulphus, who had travelled all Palaestina over, That Locusts were most com∣mon there, being in shape of body small and short, not much unlike to a mans little finger, which being taken and found among Herbes, and boiled in Oyle, proved excel∣lent meat among the poorer sort. And they that doubt here∣of, will lesse wonder, when they shall know that the Ae∣gyptians did eate Vipers and Adders, as familiarly as wee
now adaies eate Ecles. If a∣ny make question hereof, let him reade Gallen, lib. 3. de ali∣ment. facultat. The like doe our Travellers testifie of the Indians at this day. Beside, Saint HieromeHieron. Contra o∣vinianum. lib. 2. affirmeth, That in Pontus and Phrygia, they usually eate those vvhite Wormes with blacke heads, that lye in wood, and be∣tweene the barke of Trees; and that by Tenants they were presented to the Land∣lords, as especiall dainties, and some tooke them in lieu of Rent. And as among us the Pheasant, Moor-cock, Finch, Mullet, and Rochet, &c. are accounted for delicate dishes; so were these , or Wood-wormes among them. Hee addeth moreover, The
Syrians were wont to eate land Crocodiles; and the A∣fricans, greene Lizards. Pli∣niePlin. l. 17. cap. 24. in like manner affirmeth, That the aforesaid Wood, Magots or Wormes grew to be the principall Dish at e∣verie riotous and luxurious Feast; and those which bred in Oakes of the bigger sort, to be the best and daintiest: moreover, saith hee, They were kept in Meale to be fed, untill such time as they were to be used. Among others, Dormise were accounted the daintiest meat; here the Laws of the Censors tooke order they should not be admitted any ordinary Table,Plin. l. 8. cap. 57. no more then shall Fish, or Birds trans∣ported out of another Coun∣trie. Some liquorish Belly-gods
in France, eate of them continually; and rather then they will want them, they will (saith mine Author) throw downe Cottages,oding. in Theatro Natura. lib. 3. and poore mens houses, to make search for them. In Cozu∣mella and Iucatana,Scaliger Exerci. 202. Ilands of the East Indies, and other places thereabouts, they fat a kind of Dogs (which can∣not barke) as we doe Swine, and eate them. The Anci∣ents also supposed sucking Whelpes to be so cleane and pure, that they offered them their Gods in their sacrifices; and in the Feasts of the Gods, Whelpes flesh was highly e∣steemed of.Benzo de novo orbe. lib. 1. c. 3. The Parian In∣dians did not onely eate mans flesh, but also (as Apes doe) Lice, Frogs, Wormes, and
such filthy things. In the coun∣try of Mango there are red Ants (wch as we do Crefishes,Scaliger Exer. 196. or the like) so they eat with Pepper. The Tartarians eate the Carrion, carcasses of Horses, of Cammels, Asses, Catts, Dogs,Vadianu in Mela. lib. 3. yea when they stinke, and are full of Maggots; and hold them as dainty, as wee doe Venison. Surely, the reason why we loath many kinds of Food eaten by others, is nothing else but our opinion, thinking them not fit to be eaten; as wee see in our Europe, cer∣taine Countries to affect the eating of Periwinkles, Frogs, fat Cats, which others can∣not abide. The Germans loath to eate of a Slinke (or yong Calfe, cut out of the Cowes
belly before it be calved;) but in Princes Courts, both in Italy and Spaine, it is accoun∣ted one of the daintiest dishes. And there are againe, that account yong Rabbets, be∣fore they be kindled, and out of the damms belly; (as also yong sucking ones, the in∣trals never taken out) to be of as great esteeme: these are called Haurices. Plinie in his 19 book, c. 36. speaking of Thistles,He mean∣ech Arti∣chocks. which began then to be eaten, finds great fault, that the strangest things growing out of the Earth, should serve our riot and gluttonie; yea such as foure-footed Beasts refuse to touch; yet now, these in most placcs, are usuall dishes, plea∣sing to the taste, and very
wholesome. I omit, how a∣bove all meats, the Matrix of a Sow after her pigging, was commended among the old Romanes, as Horace and Mar∣tiall testifie. See further here∣of in Plinie, lib. 11. cap. 37. There are divers other things from which wee ab∣staine, not because they are not good to be eaten, but because the commoditie wee receive by them, and the ra∣ritie of them in diet withholds us. Of which sort you may reckon Horses and Asses flesh, which our common people doe loath, as if Nature her selfe abhorred them; yet be∣ing well dressed and prepared, they oft times prove better then many other meats wee commonly feed upon. The
Arabians (as also Iewes) eate no Swines flesh, but the flesh of Cammels is their ordina∣ry food. And in some places (as Saint Hierome testifieth) it was esteemed a most hainous offence to kill a Calfe, not for that it was not allowed for good meat, but because when it was growne great, it was so many waies usefull to man. What should I say now, of those things which men may be by necessitie compelled to feed upon? Surely, that ex∣treme hunger those of San∣cerro felt, when that Towne was besieged, constrained the miserable Inhabitants to eate, not onely Mice and Catts, (which above the rest were dainties) but which is horri∣ble to relate, they were dri∣ven
to eate all manner of Leather, as upper Leathers of Shoes, Gloves, Purses and Girdles, &c. Beasts hornes, and Horses hoofes boiled in water, Straw, that stone which they call in France, Ardes; and even Mans dung. See the Historie of this Siege, Anno 1573. In a word, the Sto∣macke of Man is a monster, which being contained in so little a bulke as his Body, is able to consume and devoure all things.
CHAP. V. Of many who having received Poyson, have not onely mi∣raculously escaped, but beene thereby cured of (else) incu∣rable Diseases. MAny things have been accidentally found out, which allowed of after by Use and Ex∣perience, have become in∣fallible and constant Rules: Of this GalenGalen, lib. 11. Simpl. Med. gives us an ex∣cellent Example, and most worthy admiration, which was this: A certaine man (saith Ga∣len)
being extreame sicke of a Disease which they call E∣lephantiasis, or Leprosie, kept company a good time with some Companions of his, un∣till one above the rest was infected with the contagion of the Disease: for hee was not to bee endured, by reason of the most loathsome stench that proceeded from his un∣cleane bodie: beside, he was growne monstrously defor∣med; wherefore a Cottage was built for him neere the Towne, upon a Hill remote from people, a faire Spring running hard by, and herein this Leper was placed, with a man attending to bring him victuals, and other necessaries every day. But about the beginning of
the Dog-dayes, sweet Wine being brought in an earthen pitcher into the Field to the Mowers neere the place, hee that brought it, set it not farre from them, and vvent his way. Being gone, and some of them being thirstie, and having occasion to drinke, one takes up the Pitcher, to poure out the Wine into a great Bowle halfe full of water, which they mixed with their Wine, and out falls a drow∣ned Viper from the pitcher into the bowle. Heereupon the Harvest-men being ama∣zed, let the Wine alone, and dranke and contented them∣selves with other water: But when they had finished their dayes worke, and were to goe out of the Field, as it
were out of pitie, they gave to the poore Leprous man that Wine wherein the Viper was drowned, supposing it better for him to dye, than to live in that miserie. But hee, when hee had drunke it, was as it were, miracu∣lously cured: For all that thicke and most loathsome scabbie swelling of the Dis∣ease, that as a Coat covered him all over, fell away from him, like the hard out-side of a Crab-fish, or Lobster, new skinne and flesh succee∣ding underneath in the place, not much unlike that soft and thin skinne of Crab-fishes, when the outward shell is ta∣ken away. Another Example hereof, though upon an unlike occa∣sion,
happened in Mysia, a Towne of Asia, not farre (saith Galen) from the Citie where I dwell: A certaine man who was extreamely le∣prous, went unto a hote Bath, hoping to finde helpe there∣by. This man had a very fayre and handsome young wench to his servant, who was an arrant—This wench had many Suitors, some of whom shee well af∣fected: but these being gone, and shee having occasion to use water in the house, went into an out place, or some ruinous shedde neere to the house, which was full of Vi∣pers, by chance one of them fell into a pot of Wine, be∣ing somewhere carelesly set, and there was drowned: shee
thinking to make good use heereof for her owne profit, fills her Master, at his re∣turne, a large Cupp of this Wine, vvhich hee dranke quite off, and hereby, (as the other before that lived in the Cottage) was perfectly cured. Hitherto Galen. Heereby it appeareth (s I said before) most true, that many things have been found out by chance, which after∣ward being confirmed by Reason and Experience, have been received gladly into the closet of Aesculapius. And at this day there is nothing better to cure a Le∣prosie, then the drinking of that Wine wherein a Viper hath been drowned: If any make doubt hereof, out best
and learnedst Physicians will soone resolve him. Moreover, I heere observe two remarkable Arguments of Gods divine goodnesse; the one is, That there is no∣thing so ill created by God to punish sinnfull man with∣all, whereunto there is not some commoditie adjoyned. The Viper is the most veni∣mous creature that is, but yet it is not onely good against the Leprosie, but in Treacle, (which is made of the flesh of Vipers) it is the most ex∣cellent Receipt that is against all poysons. Heereof see Ga∣len, lib. 1. de Antidot. The other is, (which is also ob∣served by Galen) the Divine Providence oftentimes dispo∣seth of things ill meant by
malicious man, to wholsome and good ends; whereof Au∣sonius in elegant Verse gives us an excellent Example: Toxica Zelotyp, dedit xor moecha marito; Nec satis ad mortem, credidit esse datum. Miscuit argenti, lethalia pon∣dera, vivi, Congerat ut celerem, vis ge∣minata necem. Dividat haec siquis, faciunt discreta venenum, Antidotum sumet, qui so∣ciata bibet &c. Ergo inter sese dum noxia pocula certant, Cessit Lethalis nxa saluti∣ferae, Protinus & vacuos alvi pe∣tiêre recessus.
Lubrica dejectis qui via no∣ta cibis. Quam pia cura Deum? pro∣dest crudelior uxor, Et cum fata volunt, bina ve∣nena juvant. That one poison expels and prevailes against another, it is so well knowne that it were in vaine here to goe about to prove it. Cantharides are a present remedie against the biting of a mad Dogge; the Scorpion heales his owne wounds, and the Viper (the head and taile being cut off) being beaten and applyed, cures her owne biting: inso∣much, there is nothing, be it never so bad, but it con∣taines some profitable good∣nesse in it. Hemlock is a dead∣ly
Plant, yet the juice ap∣plyed, heales Ignis Sacer, and hot corroding Vlcers, and much asswageth the Inflam∣mation of the eyes. Nerium, or Rose-laurell, kils Asses, Mules, and Horses, which shall eate of it; yet being drunken in Wine, it cures those who are bitten of Serpents. Meconium, the juice and leaves of Poppie, brings the takers into an ever∣lasting sleep; yet notwithstan∣ding, it helps the most painfull aking, or smarting Diseases. Here is now place and occa∣sion offered, to shew how some Diseases have beene proper to some Countreyes; as the Elephantiasis unto Ae∣gypt, which Lucretius a most ancient Poet vvitnesseth, saying:
Est Elephas morbus qui prop∣tr flumina Nili, Gignitur Aegpti in medio, ne{que} praetereà usquam Hac suae tentatur gressus ocu∣li{que} trementes. Also the swelling in the Throat, or Mentagra, to Asia onely; the Sweating-sicknesse , and  to the Inhabitants of the North: but now by the just judge∣ment of God, that same main Leprosie, Elephantiasis, as many other before named, are common to all Countries in generall. But for certaine (if wee may beleeve Plinie)Plin lib. 26. this Elephantiasis was utterly unknowne to Italie, before the time of Pompey the Great.
I might here also speake of the divers Species, or kinds of Leprosie which are cura∣ble, and which are not; ac∣cording as Moses hath given in charge,Levit. 23. to judge betweene Leprosie and Leprosie: what Lepers for a time were to be removed, and who were to be by themselves secluded for ever: but I shall find both place and occasion to speake hereof els∣where.
CHAP. VI. Of that Fire which perpetually burneth in ancient Monu∣ments. THere was found in the Territorie of Patavium in Italy,In Athre∣ste villula agri Pata∣vini. in the memorie of our Fathers, a very ancient Monument, wherein were two Vrnes, a greater and a lesse, both made of Earth, the bigger contained the lesse; now in the lesser was found, a Lampe burning betweene two Viols, the one whereof was Gold, the other Silver, and either full of a most pure
liquor; by the benefit of which,Bernardi∣ni Scardeo, lib. 1. An∣tiq. Pata∣vin. in fine. it was supposed to have burned many yeares. Surely the most learned, comming to the Monument, affirmed the same to be that Perpetuall Fire, invented by the wonderfull industry of the ancient Philosphers, which would indure so many yeares. In which opinion they were confirmed, by Verses written in either Vrne, which seemed to be of great Antiquitie, by their vaine. These were in the bigger Vrne: Plutoni sacrum munus, ne at∣tingite fures; Ignotum est vobis, hoc quod in rbe late.
Nam{que} elementa gravi, clau∣sit digesta labore, Vase sub hoc modico, Maxi∣mus Olibius: Adsit faecundo, custos tibi co∣pia cornu, Ne pretium tanti, depereat laticis. These were read in the lesser: Abite hinc pessimi fures, Vos, qui voltis vestris cum oculis emississiis; Abite hinc, vestro cum Mer∣curio petasato, caduce ato{que}. Maximus, maximo donum Plutoni, hoc Sacrum facit. The like Ludovicus Vives (upon the twentie one booke
of Saint Augustine, De Ci∣vitate Dei) reports in his time, to have beene found in ancient Graves, which by inscription had burned there, above fifteen hundred yeares. Moreover, Saint Augustine himselfe, in the said booke affirmeth, That in the Tem∣ple of Venus, was a Lampe that never went out; which hee supposeth to have beene done, either by Art Magicall, or by the industrie of some man, who had put Lapidem Asbestum, or the unquench∣able burning stone within the said Lampe. Concerning this Lampe, found burning in Graves, I wonder; First, how by the helpe of Art (for they say this Oyle is made of Gold)
Gold may be resolved into a fattie substance? Secondly, how the flame should endure so many yeares? Thirdly, how within the ground, all Aire being excluded? And for a certaine, in our Age, in the time of Pope Paul the third,Pancirol. in libr: re∣rum deperditarum. the Grave of Tullia, Cicero's Daughter was found, wherein was the like Lampe burning, but assoone as the Ayre came to it, it presently went out: this Lampe had there burned, one thousand five hundred yeares. The like also was found with us at York,Some say Constan∣tiu. in the Monument, ei∣ther of Severus the Empe∣rour, or some other of the Ancients there buried. See Master Camden in his Britannia.
CHAP. VII. Of the strange mixture of Ver∣tue and Vice, in the Na∣tures and Dispositions of ma∣nie men. THat saying of Plato is most true; He∣roicall Natures, as they are re∣nowned for ma∣nie excellent and commen∣dable Vertues, so are they subject, for the most part, to as many, and as great Vices. And as Aegypt affordeth as deadly poisons, together with as exellent Antidotes as any place of the world beside; so,
both much good, and as much evill hang over the heads of the greatest Com∣mon wealths, from these He∣roicke great ones: although many heretofore have pro∣ved the same by many exam∣ples, it shall not be amisse to acquaint you with some choise ones, out of the best Historians. Velleius Paterculus saith of Mecoenas, That he was wake∣full, provident, and able to manage his weightiest Af∣faires: but againe, when hee got any leisure from busi∣nesse, hee affected his ease, and all manner of loose effe∣minacie, beyond any Wo∣man. Xiphilinus writes of Tibe∣rius, That hee was a man
indued with many and great vertues, and (as it were) o∣verwhelmed with vice and villanies, as if alike hee had exercised himselfe to either. Againe, the same Author re∣porteth of the Emperour O∣tho, where all his life long hee had lived wickedly and dissolutely, hee died most ho∣nestly, and resigned up his Empire (which hee had got∣ten by Tyrannie and wicked meanes) in a most glorious and honest manner. And the Emperour Iulian, as Ammi∣anus MarcellinusAmmian. Marcell. lib. 22. saith, By his vicious errors: Obnubi∣lasse gloriae multiplices cursus. Victor writing of Dioclesian, saith, Hee was a man greatly esteemed, but thus conditio∣ned; for hee was the first
that ever ware cloth of Gold, used to tread upon Silke and Purple, embellished vvith Pearle and Precious stone: which, though it were more then did become him, and argued in him a lofty and a proud Spirit; yet this was no∣thing in respect of his other carriage: for (next after Ca∣ligula) hee was the first that allowed himselfe to be called, (ridiculously) Lord and God, and to be adored and sued unto, as unto God himselfe: (but by and by, this follow∣eth in the same Author) though he was so called, hee carried and bare himselfe ra∣ther like a Father, then a Lordly Tyranne. And of Theodosius thus writes Suidas, Indeed I admire the in∣clinations,
to bend so much ei∣ther way. For when hee was void of care and businesse, hee gave himselfe up to all manner of pleasures; but when necessitie compelled him, and feare of bondage and subjection possessed him, he tooke courage, cast of sloath, and bad adieu to all delights, and underwent all manner of labour, and used his best dili∣gence; but shortly after, when all danger was past, and hee saw himselfe free, hee fol∣lowed his pleasure and disso∣lute living, as before. And of Tribonianus, saith Procopius, Hee vvas second to none in the knowledge of all Scien∣ces and Learning, being of a most sweet and excelent disposition: which verts,
, the dis∣ease of Covetousnesse very much obscured. Guicciardine also in the life of Pope Leo the tenth,Lib. 14. writes thus: There were in that great Prelate, many things, both praise-worthy, and to be condemned; for having obtained the Papacie, hee de∣ceived mightily the expecta∣tion of a great number: for there was in him great wise∣dome, but hee fell farre short of that honesty which all men expected to be in him. Of King Henrie the eight, saith Master Cambden; Fue∣runt quidem in illo Rege mag∣nae virtutes, nec minora vitia, confuso quaedam Temporamen∣to mixta. There were in King Henry the eight, surely great
and many vertues,Arnoldus Ferronus in Franc. Valesio. neither fewer vices confusedly mixed each with other. It is also reported of Iohn de Medicis, that hee was a good Souldier, very venturous in greatest dangers, and of great industry: but great and hor∣rible vices overclouded those vertues, because hee was an horrible, and with unheard of Oathes, a blasphemer of God and his Saints: and being gi∣ven to the dishonest and filthy love of boyes, hee was set on fire with the flames of Lust; and often hee was heard to breake into Atheisticall spee∣ches, not fit to be named a∣mongst Christians. Folieta Galeazo reporteth in like manner of Sfortia,Lib. 11. . 247. . Duke of Millaine, that hee
was a very Monster, made up and compact of Vertue and Vice: for hee was emi∣nent and honoured for his Magnificence, Liberalitie, and Bountie, as well to∣wards his owne people, as to Strangers: for the various and stately Furniture of his House or Court, hee excee∣ded all the Princes of his time: for hee had abundance of massie Plate of every fa∣shion, and for all uses, as well of Gold as Silver, as Ba∣sons, Ewers, drinking Boules, &c. infinite store of the best Horses hee could come by out of all Nations; all pro∣vision for Hunts-men, and Hounds, which yearly stood him in six hundred thousand Crownes, a great sum at that
time. For, besides his large Kennels of Dogs, there were great open Galleries, where∣in, in long rankes, stood all kinds of Faulcons, and other Hawkes upon their perches: and a wonder it was to see the state and riches of his costly hangings of Gold, Silk and Silver, embroidered with the Needle, by cunning hand, with devices, and Pictures of the most cunning Masters. All men, who excelled in Learning or Eloqence, hee held in great esteeme, and procured them unto him, from all parts, by large and honorable stipends. More∣over, hee honored and loved all honest men, who were up∣right, and of good life; on the contrary, hee hated and
punished all bad livers, op∣pressors, blasphemers, &c. he was easie of accesse, for any might come freely unto him, & declare their mind: he was very courteous in his speech and discourse, & a true payer to all men their stipends or wages, for they never twice demanded the same, but it was ever as sure unto them, as under locke in their chest, (saith Galeazzo.) But alas, fearfull vices disgraced and sullied the face and beautie of these excellent vertues; as beastly lusts, in deflowring of honest Maids and Matrons, afterwards causing them to be prostituted unto his friends, or followers: his inhumane Crueltie, his insatiable Cove∣ousnesse, and Rapine, ever
oppressing his people with new Levies and payments; which vices drowning his other vertues, brought him into deadly hatred and con∣tempt among his people. But the cause of this strange di∣stemperature in the Nature and Dispositions of men, I leave as a depth not now to be sear∣ched into.
CHAP. VIII. The Vanitie of some mens Am∣bition, in Titles and Ho∣nours. WHen Seneca saw the excesse,Epist. 6. and abuse of Bathes in Rome, no lesse witty then truly, hee complained, say∣ing, Postquam munda Balnea inventa sunt, spurciores sunt qui lavant. Since cleane and scowring Bathes were inven∣ted, they that wash them∣selves are become fowler,Vide De∣cret. part. 3. de Con∣secrat. di∣stinct. 1. Canon 44. and more filthy. Not much unlike was that saying of Pope Boniface; When wee
used wooden Chalices, wee had golden Priests; but now having golden Chalices, wee have wooden Priests. May not the like be truly said of the Ambition of some men, concerning their foolish thir∣sting after Names, Honors and Titles? The time was, when vertuous, men laboured to ex∣cell each other by Merit, and deserving well of their Coun∣tries or Common vvealths. The Emperour Trajan (other∣wise a good Prince) was sicke of this Disease; who, upon whatsoever hee builded or repaired, would set up a glo∣rious superscription in Honor of himselfe; whereupon (saith Aurelius Victor) Constantine the Emperour was wont to call him, Herbam Parieta∣riam,
for his so many Titles upon every Wall,Wal-wort or Pellito∣rie upon the Wall. and new houses. Ammianus Marcelli∣nus also compareth with Tra∣jan, one Lampadius, a great person also, who (saith Mar∣cellinus) tooke it ill at any mans hand, if hee did not commend him every time he spet upon the ground; adding this also, Another Example of his Vanitie. Per omnia enim civitatis membra, &c. In e∣very part of the Citie, where other great men had bestow∣ed cost in building, he would set up his owne Name, not as a repairer of the worke, but as the chiefe builder, Quo vitio dicitur laborasse Traja∣nus, unde herbam parietinam jocando cognominarunt. Somewhat a kinne to these
former follies was that of the Emperour Constantius,Lib. 16. repor∣ted by the said Author, who many times would send his Letters unto the Senate, in∣terwoven, and dressed up with Laurell, concerning his nota∣ble Victories, egregiously be∣lying himselfe, with an hate∣full bragging (of that hee ne∣ver did) how hee was among the formost in the battell, how hee had obtained the victorie, and taken Captive, Kings kneeling unto him, and craving his mercie, when hee never came at the battell, or durst venture himselfe there. Hereunto belong those foo∣lish attributes, the Turks, Per∣sians, and other Barbarians take unto themselves, who
call themselves, Brothers of the Sonne, borne before Lu∣cifer; King of Kings, the Scourges of God, as Tamber∣lane, in a wicked and fran∣ticke kind of Blasphemie. Which kind of madnesse in Arsaces the Persian, Fl. Ve∣spasian heartily laughed at (as Xiphilinus mentioneth) It was a great signe that Darius his ruine to be at hand, in his proud Embassie unto Alex∣ander, when by his Embassa∣dour hee called himselfe, The King of Kings, and Cozen of the Gods, but for Alexander, hee called him, his Servant. Paulus Iovius vvriting of Pompeio Colonna, Bishop of Reatino, saith, That when the said Bishop, by the meanes
of many great personages, was reconciled againe, and brought into favour with the said Pope, whom he had for∣merly offended: and that, when they signified so much unto him in a short Letter, in whose superscription (Bishop of Reatino by chance was left out) he receiving the Letter, threw it away, and bad the Messenger goe seek some o∣ther Pompeio, to whom that Letter was directed. Very sarcasticall and bitter was that which wee reade of Francis, the first King of France, returned to that mag∣nanimous Emperour, and of famous memorie, Charles the fift; at what time they being at warre each with o∣ther, when the Emperour,
according to his greatnesse, writing to the said King, and having filled up a large space of the Paper with his long stile, and imperiall Titles of his Dominions and Territo∣ries, belonging to the house of Austria: the French King very bitingly filled up in an∣swer, as large a space in his Letter, by the often repeti∣tion of France, as Francis the first, King of France, of France of France, &c. adding with∣all, That his Kingdome of France was sufficient to en∣counter with, and subdue, if need were, all the Emperours Kingdomes and Provinces: for in times past, petty King∣domes carried large Titles; as at this day, how are those Kingdomes esteemed, of Si∣cilie,
Naples, Toledo, Granado, Sclavonia, Dalmatia, Sardi∣nia, Corsica, Croatia? Many pettie Princes have larger Territories. To conclude, it was excel∣lently answered, and to be immitated of all moderate Princes, Aelius Lampridius hath left recorded, of Alex∣ander Severus, whom, when all Titles of Honor and Dig∣nitie were heaped upon him, after the Romane Custome, aswell by the Senate as the people; it is reported, that hee answered most modest∣ly, It displeaseth mee much, to assume unto my selfe, that which belongeth unto others: againe, I find my selfe to be over-laden with your love and good-wils, for these glorious
Names are very burdensome unto mee. Whereupon, the Historian addeth his owne censure; The Emperour gat more Honor, in not recei∣ving Titles appertaining to o∣thers, then if hee had taken them upon him; and hereby, for ever after hee gained to himselfe the reputation, not onely of a grave and mo∣derate, but of a wise man.
CHAP. IX. Of the ancient Triumphs among the Romanes. THe first who is re∣ported, ever to have rode in Tri∣umph, was Ba∣chus, after him in Rome, Ro∣mulus, who sending his Cap∣tives before him, followed himselfe after on foot, after him his whole Armie. Tul∣lus Hostilus rode on Horse-backe; L: Tarquinius Pris∣cus rode in a Charret of foure wheeles; M. Curius Camillus was drawne with foure white Horses, whom all after him
imitated: The day appointed for the solemnitie of a Tri∣umph, was kept Festivall through the whole Citie, all the Temples being set wide open, and all the Nobilitie providing in their houses the greatest Cheere they could make, insomuch as the whole Armie was abundantly feast∣ed. The whole Senate went unto the gate Capena, in their Robes, to meet, and enter∣taine the Triumpher, by which Port or Gate, he was to enter in: afterwards they went together into the Capi∣toll, then followed all the Trumpeters, sounding to the Charge, as if they were pre∣sently to fall on upon the Enemie: after came Char∣riots laden with the Spoiles
of the conquered Enemies; there followed then goodly Statues, and curious Tables of Brasse, or Ivorie. Also Towers, and formes of such Cities as they had taken; al∣so, a representation of the forme, and manner of their fight with their Enemie. Af∣terwards followed, all the Silver, Brasse and Gold, to∣gether with Statues, Tables, Candlesticks, Platters, Dish∣es, Trenchers, Basons of Gold and Silver taken from the Enemie. Likewise, Jewels, Purple, costly Garments of cloth of Gold, with Crowns of Silver and Gold, which were given to the Victor: then all sorts of Armes taken from the Enemie, as Swords, Speares, Pollaxes, Bucklers,
Brest-plates, Helmets, Tas∣ses, and the like. After were brought the Gifts bestowed upon the Triumpher, as Gold and Silver brought by some thousands of people: then came other Trumpeters, whom followed fifty, or a∣bout an hundred Oxen to be sacrificed, with their hornes gilded, and Garlands upon their heads; these Oxen were accompanied by Boyes, who carried vessels of Gold and Silver to be used in the Sa∣crifice, all the Attendants were clad in Garments of Gold and Purple, interwo∣ven; then came along the Charriots, laden with the Diademes, and Armes of those Kings and Princes which were taken Captives.
After followed the Kings and Princes themselves, with their Wives, Children, Bre∣thren, and other of their kin∣dred and friends. Moreover, others of the Enemies, with their hands bound behind them, and these being of the Nobler, or better sort, were many thousands. Then fol∣lowed the Triumpher him∣selfe, sitting in a golden Char∣riot, made in the forme of a Tower, who was drawne with foure white Horses, and clad in a Robe of Gold and Purple; in his right hand hee carried a Laurell bough, in his left, an Ivorie Scepter; next before him, the Lictors or Marshals, with bundles of Rods and Axes; on every side of him the Trumpets
sounded, and Musicians sang sweetly to their Harpes, clad in Purple, and wearing Co∣ronets of Gold upon their heads; amongst whom, one clad in a Garment of Gold reaching to his feet, break∣ing scurrilous and bitter jests upon the distressed Prisoners, made sport to the people. Many sweet Odours and Perfumes were kindled, and carried about, whilest a pub∣like Officer bearing up in his hands, a Crowne of pure Gold, beset with many rare and precious Gemms, ever and anon uttered this before the Victor; Respice futura, & hominem te esse cgita: Con∣sider what will follow, and thinke how you are but a man. Wherfore, in the char∣riot
of the Triumpher, there hung up a little Bell and a Whip, to put him in mind hee might one day fall upon such times, wherein (like a Slave) hee might be whipt, or as an Offender, lose his head; for those who were to be beheaded, had alwaies a little tingling Bell borne be∣fore them, lest, as one pol∣luted and cursed, he might be touched of the people. Sometimes the Sonnes and Daughters of the Triumpher rode with their Father in his Charriot, but the next of his kindred went close by his Horses sides, and sometimes gat up (as if also they would ride in Triumph) upon their backes. When Augustus rode in
Triumph, Marcellus rode upon the formost Horse on the right hand, and Tiberius on the left: the Triumphers Followers, and the Shield∣bearers followed his Char∣riot; after all the Captaines, with the whole Army in their order, carried Laurell bran∣ches in their hands, and Crownes of Laurell on their heads; and if any of them had purchased any notable rewards,  Crovvnes of Gold, Bracelets, Speares, Shields, and the like, they bare them in their hands, singing Paeans, or Songs of Praise, in honour of the Tri∣umpher, adding hereto, ma∣ny riiculous passages. After that in this pomp they came into the Forum, or the
spacious place of the Citie, hee chose out one Captive, especially, whom destinated to death, hee presently sent to prison. After this, hee went up into the Capitoll, the whole Senate, and all the Magistrates accompany∣ing him. Then the execution of the said Captive being publikely proclaimed, they sacrificed their Buls, conse∣crating certaine Spoiles unto Iupiter. Afterward they feast∣ed without the Galleries, or Walkes of the Capitoll, sit∣ting untill the evening: then with Sagbuts and other Mu∣sicall Instruments, they ac∣companied the Triumpher home to his house, and so they ended this Festivall So∣lemnity. This Triumph lasted
two or three dayes, especial∣ly, if they had gotten many and large Spoiles. And thus wee reade Titus Flaminius, L: Paulus, C: Pompeius, and Augustus to have triumphed. None were allowed this Tri∣umph, except they had put to slight, or slaine five thou∣sand Enemies, and had be∣sides, inlarged the bounds of the Romane Empire. This Pompe and Solemnitie is col∣lected out of Dyonisius Hali∣carnasseus, lib. 2. & 5. Vale∣rïus Maximus, lib. 2. cap. 8. Iosephus de Bello Iudaico, lib. 7. cap. 24. Plutarch in the life of Paulus Aemilius, Appian, and others. Those also tri∣umphed, who had won any notable victorie by Sea, the Beakes and Anchors of Ships
and allies being brought to Rome before. Now all this Gold, Silver, and other booty gotten in the Warre, belong∣ed to the Citizens, and was laid up in the Treasurie, one∣ly the charges of the Tri∣umph deducted. Againe, those who had put their Enemies to flight with∣out effusion of blood, or had overcome Inferiors, as Ser∣vants, they had a kind of a boasting Solemnitie; for they rode into the Citie of Romo on Hors-backe, accom∣panied with the Knights, their friends, and the Armie, being clad in Gownes of cloth of Gold, and Purple, sacrificing Sheepe onely in the Capitoll; and this was called, The les∣ser Triumph.
Three hundred and fiftie Triumphs are reckoned from Romulus unto Bellisarius, who was the last that triumphed under Iustinian, Emperour of Constantinople. But this custome of riding in Triumph, was allowed but under very few Emperours, although Triumphall Orna∣ments were kept for them, as the Laurell, their Robe, and Ivorie Scepter, which they used when they went abroad in publike.
CHAP. X. The extreme Madnesse, and vaine Pride of some great Persons in former Ages. WEll knowne is that sentence of Plau∣tus, Decent secun∣das fortunas su∣perbiae; Pride be∣commeth a prosperous For∣tune. But many, the more mighty and potent they are, so much the more basely and foolishly they abuse their greatnesse; wherof I will give you some examples; as Xerxes that most famous Monarch of the Persians, was in his
time, the greatest Prince in the world; so for his ridicu∣lous folly, hee surpassed, and bare away the Palme from all other. Of whom, thus writeth Herodotus:Herodot. lib. 7. When he heard that the Hellespont from Asia, joyned it selfe to Eu∣rope, taking it in a high dis∣daine, hee commanded three hundred blowes to be given (by striking) to the Hellespont, and a paire of Fetters to be cast downe into the bottome of that Sea. And I have heard (saith Herodotus) that hee sent to brand, or burne the said Sea with a hot iron; but most true it is, hee caused it to be soundly box'd and beaten, uttering these barbarous and franticke words; Oh bitter Water, thy King and Lord
inflicts this punishment upon thee, because thou hast wron∣ged him who never deserved ill at thy hands: but K. Xer∣xes in despite of thee,Libello de cohibenda ra will turne thee another way; thou seest no man sacrificeth unto thee, because thou art a de∣ceitfull and bitter streame. Whereto agreeth Plutarch, saying, Xerxes branded the Sea, and extremely beat the same. Moreover, hee sent this Letter and Message to the great Mountaine Atho; Divine Atho, thou that touch∣est Heaven with thy top, see that thou yeeldest no huge and intractable stones to hin∣der my workes; f thou dost, I will dig thee up, and throw thee into the Sea. The like madnesse among
the Romanes, possessed Lucul∣lus, who cast huge stones into the Sea, and by undermining Mountaines, let it into the maine Land: whereupon, very wittily, Pompey called him, Xerxes togatus. C. Ca∣ligula grew very angry with Heaven, because it blew, and stormed upon certaine Stage-players (whom himselfe ra∣ther imitated, than beheld) and because at a Feast, hee was affrighted with Light∣ning, he challenged the field of Iupiter, to fight with him hand to hand, uttering aloud (beholding heaven) that verse of Homer, , that is, Take my life, or else I will have thine. Afterward, when hee saw hee could doe Iupiter no harme, hee would
himselfe Iupiter (as Dio and Suetonius write in his life) and imitated him in all his lustfull actions; for first hee commit∣ted Incest with his owne Si∣sters, as did Iupiter with Iuno, who being his Sister, he kept as his Wife: then hee fol∣lowed him in all other his adulteries and vvhoredomes, imitating him onely in his vi∣ces, since hee could not in his vertues; so that truly it may be said of him, as Iuvenal (and I suppose of him) speaketh: —nihil est quod redere de se,atyra 4. Non possit, si conlubeat Dîs aequa potestas. This same Monster of Na∣ture also feigned, that he was crowned by the hands of Vi∣ctorie
her selfe; and that hee did court and kisse the Moone, imbracing her at his pleasure; and one day in the presence of Vitellius, hee affirmed that hee had carnall knowledge of her: withall asked Vitellius, if hee saw him not when hee committed the act? Vitellius wittily and pleasantly replied, No indeed Sir, you Gods doe all within your selves, with∣out the knowledge of Mor∣tals. This reporteth Xiphili∣nus; adding beside, That hee made artificiall engines to re∣semble Thunder, and to cast out fire, that hee might in all things resemble Iupiter. And this Historie following, Athe∣naeus, lib. 12. recordeth out of Theopompus. Cotys, a certaine King of Thracia, who for a
dissolute life, and Epicurisme, gave place to no man alive; one time he thought himselfe worthy, in marriage to match with Minerva, and was verily perswaded, that the Goddesse would yeeld unto his lustfull desire: there having made a most sumptuous Banquet, and prepared a most delicate bed in a goodly Chamber, richly furnished with whatsoever ap∣pertaining to State, being well gone in drinke, hee wait∣ed for the comming of Mi∣nerva; but having stayed long for her, and shee not appear∣ing, hee sent one of his Guard to see whether she were come into the Chamber, or no: when hee told the King, shee was not yet come, the King shot him to death with Ar∣rowes:
then sent he another, who brought the same Mes∣sage, and him hee slew in like manner: then a third went, vvho being terrified by the example of his fel∣lowes, brought word the Goddesse was there, and ex∣pected him. Rhianus a Greek Poet, very ingeniously scof∣fed this his folly, translated since by Henricus Stephanus, that famous Scholler and Printer, into Latine, which were too long to recite. Lopez de Gomara saith, that the Kings of Mexico, when they were consecrated, or crowned, used to take their Oath after this manner: I sweare that the Sunne, du∣ring my life, shall hold on his course, shall keepe his wonted
glorie and brightnesse, that the Clouds shall send downe Raine, the Rivers shall run, and the Earth shall bring forth all manner of Fruit. These proud Princes should have done better, and wiser, if they had imitated the ex∣ample of King Canutus, the Dane, sometime King of Eng∣land, as it is reported by Hen∣ry of Huntingdon: who, tooke off a flattering Parasite (when he told him, all things through his Dominions, were at his becke and command) after this manner, Canutus causing a Chaire to be set upon the Sea shore, wherein being set, hee said to the Sea, flowing fast towards him, Thou be∣longest unto mee, and the Land, upon which I now sit,
is mine owne; neither is there any whosoever that obeyes mee not, shall escape unpu∣nished: I command thee ther∣fore (thou Sea) that thou commest up no higher into my Land, nor that thou pre∣sumest once to wet thy Ma∣sters Legges, or Garments. But the Sea, keeping his ordi∣narie course, without duty or reverence, washed both his Legges and Gowne. He then leaping backe, said, Let all the Inhabitants of the world know, that the power of Kings is frivolous and vaine; neither is there any mortall man worthie the name of a King, but he to whose becke, Heaven, Earth and Sea, by his lawes eternall, are obe∣dient. Neither did Canutus,
after this time, weare a crown. Extreme was the madnesse of Attils, King of the Goths, (as Olatus writes in his life) who, after hee had overcome Aetius and Thrasimundus his enemies, uttered this proud saying, That now the Starres were ready to fall before him; now the earth trembled, and that himselfe was the Maule, or Hammer of the whole World: and after hee grew to that arrogancie, that hee commanded The Scourge of God to be added to his Title, himselfe to be so called, and written in all his Letters and Proclamations whatsoever.
CHAP. XI. Of Cinnamome. GAlen writes, lib. 1. Antidot. that in his time., Cinna∣mome was very rare, and hard to be found, except in the Store-houses of great Emperours and Princes. And Plinie re∣porteth, That a pound of Cin∣namome was vvorth a thou∣sand Denarii, which is an∣swerable to the value of one hundred and fiftie Crownes of our money. Afterwards, when the Woods of Arabia and India vvere set on fire,
and consumed, it was a great deale dearer. That which the Latines call Cassia lignea, it is comparable but to the worst sort of Cinnamome, which in Italy they call Cannella. For indeed, the true Cinnamome is utterly unknowne of us; as also of Xylocinnamome, which is onely the Wood of the Cinnamome Tree, but the true Cinnamome, the Barke thereof. Of this Cinnamome, you shall find a large description in Plinie, lib. 12. cap. 19. but Solinus more briefly, thus: This shrub groweth in a short time, with low bran∣ches, bending downward; it is never above two Ells in height; if it grow up small and slender, it is esteemed the
better, that which is thicke is the worser. It is gathered by the Indian Priests, they having first slaine certaine beasts for a Sacrifice, which when they have offered, they observe, that their harvest of this Cin∣namome, shall not be before the Sunne-rising, nor endure after the Sun-setting. Who∣soever is Lord of the Soile, or the principall man, hee divideth the heapes of the branches, or stickes of the same, gathered with a Speare, which is consecrated for the same purpose: and a portion of some handfuls is dedicated to the Sunne, which, if it be equally divided, enkindled by his beames, it presently taketh fire, and burneth. Thus farre Solinus, in his descrip∣tion
of Africa, cap. 39. & 42. Of this Cinnamome, Salomon maketh mention, Proverbs 7. & 17. also Marcian the Ci∣vilian, in l. Caesar 16. §. Spe∣cies. ff: de public. & Vecti∣gal, where hee notes out of Plinie and Dioscorides, that the vertue of this Plant was in the Barke of the Tree; and that in Galens time it was most rare, and not to be found, but in the Closets of Emperours: hereof is a very precious un∣guent made, caled Cinnami∣um, being in substance very thicke, whose chiefe com∣mendation is, that the smell hereof (if you carry it about you) drawes any Woman, though passing by you, and minding other things, to draw neere unto you, saith
Philip Beroaldus upon Apu∣lius, lib. 2. Milesiac. and which is affirmed also by ma∣nie others. CHAP. XII. Of Balsamum. BAlsamum being more famous by Report, then knowne, is the juice of a certaine Tree grow∣ing in Iury, in the valley of Iericho, like unto a Vine: these Plants (except counter∣seit) are not now any where to be found; they say the Turke hath some few in Ae∣gypt, from which every yeare hee receiveth onely some few
drops of the Liquor; else are they to be found in no part of the World. For when the Turkes, enemies of all good∣nesse and civilitie, destroyed all the Vineyards in and a∣bout Iericho, withall, they cut downe these Plants; for since, they were never found in that Countrie, and therefore no true Balsame is brought into Europe: if happily some there be, it is not worth the speak∣ing of. Yet I have heard some affirme, there have been some of these Balsame Plants found in the West Indies, but I much doubt of that: it may be some other Tree, afford∣ing a medicinable Liquor (as there are many) like unto the other. For this aforenamed true Balsamum, grew no where
but in Iury, in the valley of Iericho, in two large Gardens which belonged onely unto the King: as it was like a Vine, so it was planted like unto our Vines, by setting the slippings into the Earth: but whereas the Vine had props to guide it, the Balsa∣mum had none. Within three yeares after the planting, it brought forth the fruit; the height of it, being growne, was not fully two Cubits: a∣mong all other unguents, for goodnesse, Balsamum hath the preheminence, because also it excels all other for sweetnesse of smell; the juice or liquor, is called Opobalsamum. —Hir suto spirant Opobal∣samo collo; saith Iuvenal.
Xylobalsamum is the Wood of the body, or of the branch, which the Shops sometimes substituted for the liquor; the chiefe vertue is attributed to the Juice; the next, to the Seed; the third, to the Barke; the least of all, to the Wood. The triall of true Balsame, is to put it into Milke, which it will presently turne to a curd; and if any drop chanceth to fall upon a Garment, it will leave no spot or staine be∣hind. Dioscorides saith, When the Liquor was to be drawne forth, the body was cut with small clawes of iron. Which Claudian also affirmeth in E∣pithal: Palladii;. 1. Ferre is ungìb Dioscor. lib. 1. . 18. Gemmatis alii per totum Bal∣sama tectum
Effudêre cadis, duro quae sau∣cius ungue Niliacus pingui desudat vul∣nere cortex. Plinie, Solinus and Tacitus, rather affirme the veines of the Tree to be opened with Glasse, a sharpe Stone, or with Knives of Bone; aver∣ring, the nature of the Tree cannot abide iron, but pre∣sently dieth, if you cut it ne∣ver so small a depth. Strabo also affirmeth this Plant to have beene peculiar to the Land of Iury onely: it hath the name,Whence Balsamum hath the name.Balsamum, from the Arabian word, Bal∣samin; that is, The Lord, or Prince of Oyles. And wee find it in Exodus,Exod. 30. 23. to be Aro∣matum praestantissimum; by
this, the Iews gained to them∣selves great riches;Lib. 36. de Opobal∣samo. as Iustine, the Epitomizer of Trogus af∣firmeth. The place where it grew, was but two hundred acres of ground, which was with Mountains, like the wals of a Castle, enclosed round; they sweat out their Balsame but at one certaine time of the yeare: and one thing is to be admired of the place where these Trees grow, when all the Country round about (by reason of the nearnesse of the Sunne) was extremely hot, in this Vale onely, the Ayre was ever temperate and re∣freshing, with a shady coolnesse.
CHAP. XIII. What Studies and Exercises best become Princes. AN ancient Histo∣rian, writing the life of Galienus the Emperour, saith, Hee excel∣led in Poetrie, Oratorie, and in all Arts, and it were an hard matter to collect all his workes; which made him fa∣mous in his time, as well a∣mong Poets as Rhetoricians. But one thing must be expe∣cted from an Emperour, ano∣ther from a Poet and an Ora∣tor: which passage when I
well considered, and having perused many Hiories, I quickly found what Studies concerned Princes, and what vulgar persons. And first, I met with that of Livie, con∣cerning Servius Tullius, wri∣ting thus; Inde puerum libe∣rûm loco caeptum haberi erudi∣ri{que} artibus, quibus ingenia ad magna fortunae cultum exci∣tantur After that, from a Boy, hee began to be accoun∣ted in the ranke of his chil∣dren, and to be instructed in those Arts, by which good Wits are excited, to be made capable of a great fortune. And another writes thus of Augustus; Hee was first exer∣cised in the way of speaking Greeke and Latine, hee did endure the travell and labour
which belonged unto service in the Warre, hee learned whatso∣ever appertained to the Rule of a Common wealth, or a King∣dome. The like did Agrip∣pina in the education of Ne∣ro her Sonne. For as wee read, shee perswaded Clau∣dius to adopt Domitius Nero her Sonne; which when shee had done, shee procured Se∣neca (who had,Seneca possessed Land in Essex. about that time, a great quantity of Land given him, amongst us, lying in Essex) to teach and in∣struct him, and to make him fit for Imperiall Governe∣ment. Now what are these Stu∣dies? I will shew you in few words. I speake nothing of Pietie and Religion, which the meanest knoweth to be
the Basis, and foundation of all Princely Education; and without vvhich, all other parts, be they never so ex∣cellent, doe but totter and reele: hee therefore bee∣ing first grounded in the true knowledge of God, and the puritie of Christian Religion; I first bring him to the Rhe∣torick Schoole, and to learne to be Eloquent: being ad∣monished hereunto by Luci∣an, vvho in his Dialogue, (which he intituleth ) doth faine Hercules Ogrisius to draw a mightie compa∣nie of the common people unto him, fastened by the cares, unto little Chaines which proceeded from his mouth. By which fiction hee meaneth, that a good Prince,
by the benefit of Eloquence, may eaily keepe his subjects in awe, and order. Musonius in Stobaeus, also saith, It is a most Kingly thing for a Prince, not to be out-gone in abilitie of an Eloquent tongue. Neither doe I desire, that a Prince (as King Iames said) should be a passe-master in Rhetorick and Eloquence, or to sift all Oratorie for stile and figures; it is enough if hee but have a proper and ready sweetnesse of utterance, lest perhaps, if any should perswade him to be excel∣lent herein, hee might an∣swer his Tutor, as a certaine Prince in Euripides, answered his, . Princes are not to be
instructed concerning light matters, but in those things which especially concerne the Common wealth. From Eloquence, I would leade a Prince to the studie of Philosophy, not to those subtill Quiddits, and deepe Theoremes, which may make one learned, but seldome bet∣ter, and oftentimes worse: For, how many hath the sub∣tilties heereof made plaine Atheists; and a Prince ought not to studie to bee eminent in a Schoole, but learne to know what may concerne the life and safetie of his sub∣jects; wherefore the Theo∣rique part of Philosophie for Recreation sake may bee ta∣sted of, according to that of Neoptolemus, Philosophandum
paucis, nam omnino non place∣re. And as much is confessed by Apollonius in Philostra∣tus, where hee sayeth: The studie of Philosophie in a King or Prince, if it be with moderation, worketh in him an admirable Temperature: but overmuch toyling in the same studie, is odious and troublesome, and more sor∣did then may suite with the State of a King. Marcus Antoninus Emperour, though hee gave himselfe but mode∣rately to this studie, yet the Name of Antoninus the Phi∣losopher stucke by him all his life afer. Iulian the Empe∣rour also was taxed of his best friends,Ammian. Marcell. quod nimius cir∣ca Philosophorum disputationes esset. But I would have him
versed and well acquainted with those Theoricall Stu∣dies which concerne the Ma∣thematiques, after the Ex∣ample of many great Prin∣ces and Monarchs, who have made singular use heereof: For it is a most fitting and necessarie thing, that a Prince should know the Situation of Countries, people, and their manners; Kingdomes, and their forme of government; Passages, Havens, and to beare them in memory: and withall, not to bee altoge∣ther ignorant in Astronomie, concerning the Heavens and their Motions, Constellati∣ons, their names, with their arising, descending, and the like. This was the studie of Iulius Caesar in his Campe, as Lucan testifieth:
—Media inter praelia semper, Stellarum, coelíque plagis, supèrisque vacare, Soleba. Alphonsus the tenth King of Spaine, was so given to the studie of the Mathema∣tiques, that hee was tearmed the Astrologer, and from his Name, those Mathematicall Tables, so well knowne, are called to this day, Alphonsus his Tables. Likewise that famous Em∣perour, whom for his merits of Christendome, may bee justly called a Second Charles the Great, hee tooke such de∣light in the Study of the Ma∣thematiques, that even in the midst of his whole Armie in his Tent, sate close at this stu∣die,
having for that purpose as his Instructor, Turrianus of Cremona evermore with him. I meane not that I vvould have Princes, under the co∣lour of Astronomy, give them∣selves to Astrologie, that For∣tune-telling, and groundlesse profession of Almanack-ma∣kers, and quacksalving Empe∣riques, which casteth Nati∣vities, and necessitates the actions of men, (more then God himselfe ever did:) this studie is to bee avoyded of Princes especially, because it is impious, and will both make them superstitious and cowards. This deceived A∣lexander, who when heereby (being both sicke in body and minde, vexed vvith many cares) hee thought to have
prevented death, hee drew it upon him. And of this Disease also laboured Lewis the Eleventh, as you shall find it recorded by Philip Commi∣nes. To conclude in a word, how farre we should wade in this knowledge, I will make Tullies wordes mine owne; Didici ego (saith hee) comper∣tum{que} habeo Reges & Princi∣pes ab Theoreticae Philosophiae subtiliori studio laudari non so∣lere. After this first part of Phi∣losophy, I perswade a Prince to the other Practicall, which is Politicall, or concerning Pollicie, which to say truth, ought to bee his onely studie: For this Politicall part is most imployed in directing Prin∣ces in their manner of living,
and all those things vvhich concerne the good of the Commonwealth, saith a lear∣ned Geographer. I presuppose every Prince to bee by Nature apt to take advice and wholesome coun∣sell: And a Prince being in∣genious, and by Nature apt and capable of understanding, hee is to be first grounded in the Rules and Instructions of the best Politicians that have written, whose Bookes teach him without affection, feare, or flattery. Excellent vvas that saying of Alphonsus King of Arragon, That his dead Counsellors (meaning books) were to him better then his living, who neither mooved by feare, shame, favour, ha∣tred, or any other affection,
would tell him the truth sin∣cerely and plainly. Hereupon the best Authours in this kind are to bee enquired for, and read, after the Example of the most able, and who ever were famous either in peace or warre. Marcus Varro gave to C. Pompeie when hee was first elected Consull, for his instruction, Isagogicum com∣mentarium de Officio Senatus habendi, as saith Agellius.Agell. lib. 14. cap. 7. Demetrius Phaleraeus, (as Plutarch saith) earnestly per∣swaded Ptolomy that he should provide himselfe of those Bookes entituled, Commenta∣rj de Regno. So Livie, from the first foundation of Rome, maketh mention of the Com∣mentaries of Numa. Xiphili∣nus of Caesars Commentaries.
Tacitus, of the Register or Ac∣count Booke of Augustus. So∣ranzo, of the Commentaries of Amurath, Emperour of the Turks. Many Princes left be∣hind them in writing to their Heires politike observations, and their Experience for their use and instruction. Reade Xiphilinus, of Augustus Caesar his Will and his wise & thrif∣tie Counsell to Tiberius and the people of Rome, which were too tedious to insert here; though one thing here∣in I will not overpasse: Au∣gustus heerein charged them to be content with what they had already, & by no meanes they should strive to enlarge the Bounds of their Empire: for it was both hard getting more; and gotten, it might
endanger the losing of that wc• they now possessed quietly. Xiphilinus writeth also, that Nero had books, . Am∣mianus Marcellinus testifieth, That Iulian read continually a certaine Booke, which Con∣stantius wrote with his owne hand, when hee sent him to studie in the Vniversitie of Pa∣ris. And these kind of Books were called, either Commen∣tarii, Breviaria, Raetionaria, Instrumenta Imperii; the Grae∣cians call, . In these and the like Books, con∣cerning the Government of a Common wealth, as of Plato, Aristotle, and Plutarch, left to Posteritie; if a Prince be well exercised, he shall have here∣in understanding enough. But I would have him with∣all,
converse with learned men well skilled in this kind. For (as Seneca saith) as those who walk in the Sun (though they goe not out for that pur∣pose) cannot chuse but bee Sun-burn'd; so hee, who is delighted in the companie, and acquaintance of Wise men, and makes use of the same, cannot chuse but par∣take of some Wisdome. So Scipio Africanus and Polybius and Panaetius evermore with him; Lucullus had Antiochus, the younger Scipio, either Laelius; Augustus, Agrippa; and Statilius, Taurus; Nero (as long as hee continued honest) Seneca; Themistocles, Mnesi∣philus; Themistocles, Anaxago∣ras; Dio, Plato; Philip of Mace∣don, and Epimanndas, Lysias
of Tarentum; Alexander, Aristotle; Cicero, Nigidius; and so of others. These of the Latines, were called Monitores; of the Graeci∣ans, , or Remēbrancers. Besides, a Prince is not onely to have about him, such as are skilled in humane Lear∣ning, but also such as have knowledge in Militarie Af∣faires; for a Prince must be fitted, not onely for times of Peace, but of Warre. Severus is commended of Capitolinus in these vvords; It was his custome, if he was to deale in serious busi∣nesse, and matters of Law, and State, to make learned, wise, and understanding men of his Counsell, if of matters concerning Warre, ancient
Souldiers, such as had deser∣ved well, and had experience; who were skilfull of Coun∣tries and places, and of for∣tifications, but especially of either, who were best read in Historie: for Historie and Po∣licie goe hand in hand with either; Historie declares what hath beene done, Policie, how justly. But some Courtier may say, Wil you have a Prince to be alwaies poring upon his Booke, and allow him no ex∣ercise? Honest and seasona∣ble exercise ought never to be denied to a Prince. Which Exercises I reckon, to ride and manage a great Horse, to exercise his Armes, to leape, to hunt, to play at Tennis, and the like, which may further and confirme his strength.
Sometimes Princes, if they be so pleased, may exercise Mechanicall Arts, if they be not illiberall or base; where∣fore Domitian is justly taxed by Historians, that hee tooke pleasure in killing of Flies, with a small sharpe sticke. Moreover, Commdus is bla∣med by Lampridius, because he was skilfull in those things which became not his Impe∣riall dignitie, as making of Wooden Cups, Dancing, Singing, playing the Foole, and using himselfe to Fencing. Neither are those Exercises to be allowed of in a Prince, which draw blood, as playing the Butcher, and to kill Beasts for his recreation, which are Arguments of a cruell and a bloody mind.
There are certaine Mecha∣nicall Arts, neare a kinne to the Liberall, wherein a Prince may take his pleasure, as Painting, wherein Alexan∣der Serverus, and Alexander (by the relation of Histories) were excellent. Belonging to this, is Statuarie or Carving, wherein, Xiphiline and Spar∣tianus report the same Adrian to have beene most skilfull. Turning hath a share with the other, an Art lately found out, yet much commended, and allowed of, for Sigismund, that most valiant and vvise K. of Poland is said to have ex∣ercised himselfe much herein. Wee reade also of many Princes, who have beene ex∣cellent Goldsmiths; Collenu∣tius reports, That Manfred of
Naples, made a most curious Eagle of silver, which he ware upon his Helmet. Alphonsus, Duke of Ferrara, could cast great Pieces of Ordnance, whereof, two he made in the Venetian Warre, one he called the Earthquake, th'other, Gran∣diabolo, or the great devill. Of Iames the 4th K. of Scots, Buchanan writes, lib. 13. That he had learned, and studiously practised, how to cure all manner of wounds perfectly; which skill was common to most of the Nobilitie of Scot∣land, as men accustomed to War and wounds. Collenutius againe reporteth, That Ferdi∣nand the second, K. of Naples, was skilfull in all Mechanicall Arts; neither skilfull onely, but an excellent Master in all
whatsoever. Rodulph the last Emperour, was a rare Jewel∣ler, and had great skill in ma∣king of Clocks and Watches. Neither in our daies are ex∣amples wanting of great Prin∣ces and persons, who delight themselves in these & the like. These bee those short Rules which I have out of others, I confess, prescribed out of ma∣nie Examples unto Princes; which if they shall observe, there is no doubt but they shal give their Subjects great hope of their just and moderate go∣vernment, and draw their eies as glorious Mirrors to admire them; Provided their Teach∣ers, and Counsellor be lear∣ned & just. For as Lampridius saith, Tantum valet aut ingenii vis, aut eorum qui in Aula in∣stitutores habentur.
CHAP. XIV. Of incombustible Flaxe, or which will not consume by Fire. THere was anciently a kinde of Flaxe, which the Graeci∣ans called Asbesti∣num, the Latines, Linum vivum: Hereof were made whole pieces of Linnen cloth, and garments, which were not only not consumed by any fire, but cast into the same, the soyle and dirtinesse being consumed and burn'd away, taken out againe, it be∣came more white then any
water could wash it. The bo∣dies of Emperours and Kings were burned in sheets of this linnen, lest the ashes of their Bodies burned, should mingle with the ashes of the wood. This Flaxe is esteemed above all other Flaxe in the world,Plin. lib. 19. cap. 1. (saith Plinie;) it is hard to bee found, and as difficult to bee woven, by reason of the short∣nesse therof, and being found, in price it equalled the most excellent Pearles. Nero is re∣ported to have had a linnen garment of the same: but at this day it is not any where to be found; Yet I remember I had given me by an Arabian, when I lived in Saint Martins Parish in the Fields, twentie yeares since, a pretty quantity of a Stuffe like Flaxe, which
he ad mee put into the fire, but it consumed not; whether it were of this Plane or no, or that Flae of Cyprus, which a Knight of Cy∣prus (who wrote an History of Cyprus, Ann MDLXVI.) brought to , and the fire could not consume it, I kno not. Now this Flax of Cyprus proceedeth from no plant, as our Flaxe, but from the stone Amiants, which being found in Cyprus, and broken with an hammer, the earthy drosse purged from it, there remaines fine hairie threds, like unto Flax, which are woven into cloth. This Flaxe was seene in the house of the said Podo∣ by many men of worth and credit, as Porcachio wit∣nesseth, Tabula 2. Funeralium.
Wherefore Line being made of this stone, and incombusti∣ble, Constantine the Emperor ordained that it should ever burne in lampes in his chappel at Rome: this reports Damasus in the life of Pope Sylvester. Moreover, Ludovicus Vives, in his Commentaries upon St Aug. de Civit. Dei. lib. 21. c. 6. saith, that hee saw lampes at Paris, whose lights never consumed. Also at Lovaine a Napkin ta∣ken from the table at a feast, and throwne into the fire, and being quite red as a coale, was taken out againe, cooled, and restored to the owner more white then if it had been wa∣shed with all the water and sope in the towne. But enough of this subject.
CHAP. XV. Of an artificiall kinde of guil∣ding amongst the Romanes, which they called Pyropus, as also of Electrum. PYropus, is common∣ly taken for a bigger sort of Ru∣bies, called a Car∣buncle, from the resemblance of a burning coale, but false∣ly: for Pyropus was, as Plinie telleth us, lib. 34. cap. 8. a kind of Copper, to every ounce of which, ixe scruples of gold were added, and so beaten in∣to thin leaves: tops of Pira∣mids, Towers, and the like,
were guilded therwith, which when the beames of the Sun tooke hold of, it shone like fire; thence had it the name of Pyropus. But this Art of making it is utterly lost: so is that mettall called Electrum, which was a composition of gold with a fift part of silver added thereunto; and heere∣with the Ancients beautified their beds, silings, and tables, as Homer testifieth. With Py∣ropus Stage-players used to guild their Coronets, being first drawn or beaten into thin sheets or leaves, and after stee∣ped in the gall of a Bull sayth Pliny:Plin. l 34. cap. 8. wherefore our Schole∣masters, and ordinary Gram∣marians may see their errour, in taking Pyropus in Ovid for a Caruncle, wher Ovid des∣bing
the house of the Sunne, saith it was, —sublimibus alta columnis,Metam 2. Clara micanta auro, flammas{que} imitante Pyropo. And that it was no kind of mettall, but was to be layd on as we doe our leafe-gold, Pro∣pertius will affirme, where hee saith, Picta nec inducto fulgebt parma Pyropo. Isidore supposeth ElectrumElectrum. was so named, by reason of the brightnesse from the Sun, called by many Poets (as Pliny testifieth) Elector; whereof there are three kindes:Plin. l 37. cap. 2. The first proceedeth from the fa∣ty substance of a Tree, which is a kind of Bine, and runneth downe, as we see the Gumme upon Cherry Trees, and is
hardned with the coldnesse of the Aire, or the working of the Sea; for when great Tides flow up into those Ilands where it groweth, carrying it away, they cast it upon other Shores, giving the forme of roundnesse thereunto, by of∣ten rouling the same. The Ancients called it, Succinum, quod ex arboris, succo distillan∣te congelasceret. Now from what Tree it falleth, it is a question, Aristotle names not any Tree. Dioscorides saith, It is the teares, or distilled hu∣mour of Poplar Trees, grow∣ing neare to the River Po in Italy;This Ele∣ctrum is our Am∣ber. & being hardned in the Streame, becometh Electrum, which is no other then our Amber.Ambros: Hexame∣ron. lib. 2. cap. 15. S. Ambrose saith, It is the teare, or dropping of a lit∣tle
low shrub: and true it is, at the first it is liquid, and run∣neth down as teares from the eyes, since oftentimes many kinds of small creatures are found buried in Amber, as Flies, Bees, little Wormes, &c. which vvere intangled in the same when it was liquid. MartialMarti. l. 4. hath a most elegant EpigrammeEpigr. 32. of a Bee inclo∣sed within a piece of Amber: which is, Et latet, & lucet, Phaeton∣tide condita gutta, Vt vidcatur Apis nectare clausa suo: Dignum tantorum, pretium tulit illa laborum; Credibile est ipsam, sic vo∣luisse mori. The like, and altogether as good, or better, hath the same
Poet of a Viper, buried in the same manner, where hee wil∣leth Cleopatra, not to esteeme so highly of her royall and stately Monument, when the Viper found a more rich and magnificient Tombe then her selfe. I over-passe that Poeti∣call Fable of Phaëton, who by Lightning, was cast downe from his Charriot, into the River Po, or Eridanns; whose fall, when the Sisters Heliaedes continually wept & bewail'd, they were turned into Poplar Trees: Vnde fluunt lachrymae,Ouid Me∣ttm. 2. 4. stilla∣ta{que} sole rigescunt; De ramis electra novis— A second sort of this Ele∣ctrum, is a Metall which an∣ciently was digged out of Pits, and deepe Ditches, as
Isidore reporteth, perhaps out of Plinie, lib. 33. cap. 4. The 3d and last kind, is this artificial Electrū we spake of, a quantity of Gold, mixed with five times as much silver. This Mettall, or matter for Gild∣ing, was highly esteemed from all Antiquitie. Homer report∣eth, That the Palace of Mene∣las shone, and glistered with Gold Electrum, Silver and I∣vori. And at Lindos, an Iland belonging to Rhodes, was the Temple of Minerva; to which Temple, Helen of Troy con∣secrated, and gave a Cup or Bowle made of this Electrum, of the just bignesse of one of her Papps or Brests; say Tre∣bellius, Pollio and Pompnius, of Electrum, money anciently was made and coined: so were
also Rings to be worne in ares, and upon fingers, saith Savaro in Notis ad Appollina∣rem, carm. 24. CHAP. XVI. Of Margaret the Wife of Her∣man, Earle of Henneberge. THis Ladie lived in the time of Hen∣rie the 3d Empe∣ror, who brought forth at one birth 365 children, the just number of daies in the yeare; in memo∣ry wherof, not far from Leiden in Holland, in a Village called Lausdunen, there is yet a faire Table of Marble, which con∣taineth
the whole Historie of this stupendious accident; which, as it there standeth in∣graven upon the Marble, I will truly relate: for I my self have twice or thrice, when I lived in Holland, seen the same: these two Verses are ingraven uppermost, En tibi monstrosum nimis,The Epi∣taph of Margaret, Countesse of Henne∣berge. & memorabile factum, Quale ne à mundi conditi∣one datum. Margaret the wife of Her∣man, Earle of Henneberge, and daughter of Florence the 4h Earle of Holland and Zeland, sister of William King of the Romanes, and after Caesar, or Governor of the Empire, and of Alithea, Countesse of He∣nault, whose Vncle was the Bishop of Vtrecht, and Cousin
to the Duke of Brabant, and the Earle of Thuringia, &c. This Noble Countesse being about forty yeares of age, up∣on Easter day, and about nine of the clocke in the yeare of our Lord, 1276. was brought to bed of three hundred sixtie and five children, all which were baptized in two brazen Basons, by Guido the Suffra∣gane of Vtrecht; the males, how many soever there were of them, were christened by the name of Iohn, the daugh∣ters were al named Elizabeth, who all together with their mother dyed the same day, and with their mother lie bu∣ried in this Church of Losdu∣nen. This happened by the meanes of a poore woman, who carried in her armes two
children, who were twinnes, & both of them males, which the Countesse admiring, said, That she could not have them by one father, and so shooke her off in contempt and scorn. Whereupon this poore wo∣man being much perplexed in her mind, presenly prayed to God to send her as many chil∣dren as there were dayes in the whole yeare: which thing beside the course of Nature, in a stupendious and wonder∣full manner came to passe, as it is briefly set downe and de∣clared in this Table for a per∣petuall Memorie, testified as well by ancient Manuscripts, as by many printed Chro∣nicles. The Almightie and great GOD of Heaven here∣upon bee feared, honoured,
and praysed from this time forth for evermore. Amen. CHAP. XVII. Of Glasse made malleable, to be beaten forth every way. IT is reported, that in the time of Tibe∣rius the Romane Emperour, there was invented Glasse of that temper, that it would abide the hammer, and bee beaten in length or breadth like lead, and pliable to bend every way like paper; and that the Inventor heereof was put to death, upon this occasion:
When hee had built a most magnificent Pallace in Rome, which after the building be∣gan to inke, and was likely to fall, and Tiberius having paid him for his worke, comman∣ded him to depart, and never to look him in the face again. Hee shortly after having in∣vented the way to make Glass Malleable, or to abide the Hammer, and came to shew the same to Tiberius, expe∣cting a reward (as Dio re∣ports) for his Invention;Dio. l. 57. His whole Shop, saith Plinie, was pulled downe, and laid waste, lest Brasse, Gold and Silver should be undervalued in their price and esteeme. Others re∣port, That Tiberius did it out of malice and envie, because hee naturally hated learned,
vertuous, and all ingenious men. More at large, Petronius reporteth this matter after this manner, saying, There was a skilfull Crafts-man, who made Cups, and vessels of Glasse, of that strength and firmness, that they would no more breake, then Pots of Silver and Gold. Now when hee had made a Viall of this most pure and solid Glasse, and thought the same a Gift vvorthy to be given to Caesar, (meaning Ti∣berius) hee was brought with his present before Caesar, who much commended the man∣ner of the making, and the skilfull hand of the Worke∣man; his gift was taken, and his good-will accepted of.
This Work-man, more to amaze all the beholders by, and that he might make him∣selfe a farther way into the Emperours favour, tooke the Glasse-viall againe out of the Emperours hand, and threw it downe upon the Pavement, with so great a force, that had it been made of Gold or Silver, it had beene either bruized or bro∣ken. Tiberius heereat, was not onely astonied, but wax∣ed very fearfull. The Maker tooke up his Glasse againe, which was a little bruized, but no where broken; as if, saith Petronius, the substance of Brasse had converted it selfe to Glasse: then taking a Hammer out of his bo∣some, he beat out the bruize,
and brought it againe into fa∣shion, as a Tinker should beat out a bruized Kettle. Which being done, hee thought that hee had purcha∣sed Heaven, gaining at once, Caesars familiaritie and admi∣ration; but it fell out other∣wise. For Caesar demanded, if any other knew the Art of making that kind of Glasse, but himselfe? Hee answered, None that he knew. Wher∣upon Tiberius commanded, That hee should be behead∣ed; for (quoth hee) if this Art were publikely knowne, Gold and Silver would be no more esteemed of then Clay. Coelius Rhodoginus reports also this same Historie, taxing the vanitie of Tiberius, who
was of a craftie and a catching disposition, dissembling, and making the World beleeve hee would doe those things which hee never meant, and what hee meant to doe, hee would not; as seeming an∣grie with those whom hee meant to prefer, and friendly to others, whose throas hee meant to cut. As this Glasse-maker, so all great Wits must be work∣ing upon new Inventions, one after another, which indeed is the fewell or food of Wit; which the same Rhodoginus doth elegantly expresse, l. 29. cap. 16. but as one saith, Rara ingeniorum praemia, rara item & merces. Eumolpus in Petro∣nius, maketh also the same complaint: one asking him
the question why he went so poorely apparelled? for this reason, quoth hee, Amor in∣genii, neminem unquam divi∣tem fecit. The love of Wit, (or witty Inventions) never made any man rich. And af∣terward hee addeth, Nescio quomodo bonae mentis soror est paupertas; I know not how it comes to passe, that Povertie is alwaies the Sister of a ver∣tuous, or honest mind. And true it is that Apuleius saith,In Apolog. Paupertas est Philosophiae ver∣nacula, Paupertas; or, Pover∣tie is the mother tongue, or proper language of Philosophie.
CHAP. XVIII. Of Bells. BElls are imagined to have beene inven∣ted in the yeare of our Redemption, Foure hundred, by Paulinus Bishop of Nola. Nola is a Towne in Campania, where Augustus died: they were called Campanae, because they were invented in Campania: and the lesser Bells, Nolae, from the place where they were made. The use of Bells is very great; for by the benefit of them, the houres of the time
of the day are heard a farre off, whether wee lye in our beds, or be abroad in the fields, or journeying on the way; they tell us the houre of the day, though we cannot see the clouded Sun. Before these Water-glasses, called Clepsidrae, were in use and request. Moreover, Bells call us to Divine Service; they call for helpe, when houses in Cities, and Townes are on fire; or when there is any mutinie or uproare; they call the Magistrates of Cities to their Halls, or common Counsell-house; Schollers in Vniversities, to Congre∣gations, and Disputations; Judges to the Hall and Bench. And in a word, they serve, and helpe us in all publike
Actions, and without them, wee knew not well what to doe. But indeed Paulinus, that holy and religious Bishop, did rather reforme the abuse of Bells, then invent them; and taugh them to call Chri∣stians to the Church, and to serve God, whereas in for∣mer times, their chiefe use was (as they then imagined) to chase away Devils, and evill Spirits; they hindred also Magicall Inchantments, as Tibullus, not obscurely notes, when hee thus writes: Cantus & è curr Lunam de∣ducere tentat, Et faceret si non ara repulsa sonen.
For they beleeved, that by the tingling of Brasse, that the sound of Magicall verses should be hindred from com∣ming up to the Moone; and when shee was mooved with these Verses, this sound re∣lieved her: in which sense I take that of Statius Papinius Thebaid. 6. —Attonitis quoties avelli∣tur astris, Solis opaca soror, procul au∣xiliantia gentes Aura crepant, frustraque ti∣ment— Yet I must confesse, as now, so in ancient times, when any one dyed, Belles did ring, and they made Brasse to sound; but they
did it to the ende (as I sayd before) they might chase a∣way Devills and Spirits from comming neere them. Bells are rung many times in thun∣der, to reverberate the in∣fectious Ayre, which I am perswaded they doe. The like doeth great Ordnance, shott off as well in Thunder, as in soultry and close hote weather. The Laconians, when their King dyed, used to beat up∣on Kettles, instead of ringing of Bells. The Africanes, e∣specially those who are Pre∣ster Iohns Subjects, have Bells made of Stone. The Iewes at Funeralls used playing up∣on Pipes, as it may bee ga∣thered out of Mathw 9. which Custome it seemed the
Romanes borrowed from the Iewes, as appeareth by Ovid. 1. Tristium. Tibia funeribus convenit ista meis. The little Bell, which we commonly call, The Saints Bell, Iohn Pierius useth for an Hieroglyphick, teaching Preachers of Gods Word, that to the sound of their voyce, they should lead their lives according; else like the Bell, while they call upon others, themselves are deafe and stupid, alluding where∣unto, Beza hath this excellent Epigramme: Aera gravi unctos, veluti Campana sonore,
Ipsa licet penitùs sint sibi surda, cient: Sic es recta docens alios, per∣versa sequute, Quique alijs sapiens, non sa∣pis ipse tibi. Thus much concerning Bells, and their use.
CHAP. XIX. The occasion of the alteration of the Armes of Bohemia. WHen Vladislaus K. of Bohemia tooke part with Frede∣rick Barbarossa, and very much assisted him with Men, Mu∣nition, and all things neces∣sarie for his Expedition a∣gainst Millan: Millan being taken, the day after the Em∣peror had entred into the Ci∣tie, mounted upon a goodly Courser, in his Imperiall Robes, wearing the Crowne which the King of England
had sent him, all beset with most resplendent and prize∣lesse Jemmes, hee entred in∣to the choyce Church of the Citie, wherein the Arch bi∣shop of Millane sayd Masse; there taking off his Crowne, hee presented it to the King of Bohemia in these words: Vladislaus, this Crowne, and the Honour thereunto be∣longing, being the gift of my loving Friend the King of England, appertaineth by right unto your selfe: for you have been both the head and foot of that Victory which now I have obtained. More∣over, as a perpetuall Testi∣monie and Monument of our mutuall love and friendship unto all posteritie, give mee leave to change your Single
blacke Eagle into a sterne Li∣on: for a Lyon in strength and courage farre excelleth an Eagle. The King yeelded un∣to him, giving him many thankes. Then by the Com∣mandement of the Emperour a Painter was sent for, who should draw this Lyon in an Ensigne: but heare a merry jeast vvhich followed. The Paynter by chance had so drawne him, that his Tayle lay close between his legges, as if he had had none at all; which the Bohemians obser∣ving; and I pray you (quoth they to the Painter) Where is his tayle? this is more like an ill-favoured Jack an apes, then a generous Lyon. Hereupon despising this coward-like Li∣on, they desired (being much
grieved) that they might have their old Eagle againe. This when it was related unto the Emperour, he fell into a great laughter, saying, It is no hard matter to finde a remedy for this, and to please the Bohemi∣ans. Wherfore he caused pre∣sently to bee new paynted, a white Lion, not with one taile onely, but with two, and those fairely aloft, cast over his backe: which remaineth the Armes of the Bo∣hemians even to this day.
CHAP. XX. A most ancient and pleasant manner of Choosing their Prince in Carinthia. IN Carinthia, as of∣ten as a new Prince is to bee chosen, and to take the government upon him, they observe a Cu∣stome, the like whereof is not in the world. Not farre from the Towne of Saint Vi∣tus, in a goodly Valley, are seen the ruines of an old Ci∣tie, the name whereof An∣tiquitie of Time hath aboli∣shed. Not farre off, among
many large Medowes, is ere∣cted a Marble stone: on this stone a Peasant or Country∣man gets up, (which office hee hath Haereditarie, as be∣longing to him and his poste∣ritie) at whose right hand standeth a leane blacke Oxe, and an ill-favoured Mare of Paramatiae; about this Mare stand a multitude of people, and all the Husbandmen of the Countrie. Then the Prince commeth on forward from the other part of the Medow, all his Nobles in Purple accompa∣nying him; the Earle of Go∣ritia (who is Steward, and keeper of the Princes Pal∣lace) carrieth the Banner and Armes of the Country, run∣neth before between twelve
lesser Banners; the other Ma∣gistrates follow after. In all this companie, every one goeth in an honourable and respectfull fashion, saving the Prince himselfe: who goeth like a Clowne or a Country∣man, and apparrelled accor∣dingly; for hee weareth an old side-coat, a Plow-mans cap, high shooes, and a Shep∣herds hooke in his hand; whom, as soone as the other Country-man upon the stone hath espied, he cals out aloud unto him in the Slavonian tongue, (for the Carinthians are all of them Slavonians) Who is this whom I espie comming in that state, and so proud a gate towards me? The standers by answer, That the Prince of the Country is
come. He upon the stone then replies, What is hee? Is hee an upright Judge? And seeks the good and safety of the Countrie? Is hee of a free condition, and worthy of Ho∣nour? Is he a professour and maintainer of the Christian Religion? and will hee be a defender of the same? All then answer together, He is, and will be. I therefore de∣mand, by what right hee can dispossesse and stirre me from my seate, this same stone? The Earle of Goritia answers, This place shall be bought of you for threescore pence, these Cattle shall be yours, (shewing him the Oxe and the Mare) besides, you shall have also the Princes appa∣rell, which shortly hee will
leave off, your house shall be free, without paying Tribute. Which words being pronoun∣ced, the Country-man upon the stone, gives the Prince a gentle box on the care, and bids him be a good Judge; then arising, and taking his goodly beasts with him, he yields his place to the Prince. The Prince getting up up∣on the Stone, turnes himselfe round about toward the peo∣ple, with his Sword drawne, which hee flourisheth every way, and over his head, pro∣mising true Justice unto the people. Then they bring him fayre water to drinke out of a Countrey-mans Cap, meaning, that hee should put downe the drinking, and use of Wine. After this hee go∣eth
unto a Church dedicated vnto the Blessed Virgine Ma∣rie, which standeth upon a little Mount not farre off, where solemne Service being finished, hee casteth off his Countrey habit, putting on a princely Robe, and having feasted royally with his No∣bles, hee goeth againe into the aforesayd Meadowe, and there sitting in a Chaire of State, hee administers Ju∣stice to all that aske it, and disposeth of houses and lands. The Duke of Carinthia had sometime the place of chiefe Hunts-man of the Empire, before whome all Contro∣versies amongst Hunters and Wood-men, vvere brought and decided.
CHAP. XXI. The marveilous simplicitie of a Monke, fetched out of his Monasterie, to bee Crowned a King. THe Arragonians, who inhabite be∣tweene the River Iberus, & the king∣dome of Valentia in Spaine, who derive their name from the most ancient Citie Tar∣racona, built by Cn: Publius, Scipio's Brother, in the se∣cond Punicke Warre, chose one Tarrensis, a Noble man for their King; who being possessed of his Regall Au∣thoritie,
and Dignitie, began to abuse his government, and to grow proud and insolent: so incurring the hatred of his people, hee was soone after by them deprived of his king∣dome. Now being cast out of his Throne, when they could meet with none whom they thought worthy and a∣ble to take the charge of the Crowne and government up∣on him, by the Popes Autho∣ritie, they tooke out of a Monasterie, one Ranimiro, a Monke, (a Bastard sonne of Sanchio Maior's) and made him King of Arragon and Osea, as Colleutius will have it; but (Roderiges Sanchi cal∣leth it Osca) crowned in the yeare One thousand and se∣venteene.
This Monke, not accusto∣med to the Warres, or Mili∣tarie Affayres (as it seemed) when hee was to set forward in an Expedition against the Moores, he was by his Nobles set upon a goodly great horse in his complete Armes, gi∣ving him his Shield in his left hand, and his Lance in his right: then they gave him the Bridle; which when hee considered, and utterly ig∣norant how hee should use or carry them, hee told them in these wordes, That both his hands were full, and de∣sired them that hee might take the Bridle in his mouth, which gaping wide hee did: at which words all the No∣bilitie fell on a laughter. But shortly after, having left off
his Monasticall simplicitie, calling many of his Nobles unto him, hee caused them to bee beheaded, adding this vvittie, though bitter Sar∣casme: Non sa ben la Volpe∣gia, con quien trmpegia: The Foxe knowes no with whom hee playes.
CHAP. XXII. A wittie, but a ridiculous re∣ply, and vindication of a dis∣grace ROBERT Duke of Normandie, a witty Prince, and of a pleasant dis∣position, cōming on a time to Constantinople, to visit Constantine: the Empe∣rour to make tryall of his wit, upon set purpose, comman∣ded Stooles to bee set about the Table, when dinner was readie for him and his Com∣panie, not above one foote
and an halfe high. It vvas done as the Emperour com∣manded. When the Norman Duke came to sit downe, and found all the stooles too low for him and his friends, su∣specting that there was a trick put upon him; hee (as hee had a readie wit) purposed to bee even with him: for when they were to it downe, hee tooke his Cloake, and wrap∣ping it round, made it serve for a Cushio  make his seat higher  st of his Normans im him: so then they sate all downe; and having din'd, and the Cloath being taken away Duke Ro∣bert, leaving his cloke (where∣on hee fate) behinde him, the other of his Nobility and follovvers did so likewise.
Constantine wondred at it; and when he saw they would bee gone in good earnest, I pray you (quoth  Emperour) why doe you not take your Cloakes along vvith you? Duke Robert answered, It is not the fashion in our Coun∣trey, when we are invited to a Feast, to carry away the Cushions wee sae on FINIS.
