19893A.7 S106667 99842380 7028
Phisicke for the Soule, verye necessarie to be vsed in the Agonie of death, and in those extreme, and moste perillous seasons, aswell for those, which are in good health, as those, which are endewed with bodily sicknesse. Translated out of Latine into Eng∣lishe, by H. Thorne. Quid prodest homini, si vniuersum mun tur, animae autem suae detrimentum pa MATH. 16. What shall it man auaile, if all the worlde, he gaine. And after that of his owne soule, he do the losse sustaine? Pervsed, and allowed, according to the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions. IMPRINTED AT LONDON, by Henry Denham.
blazon or coat of arms
Phisick for the Soule, very necessary to be vsed in the Agonie of death, and in these extreme and moste pe∣rilous seasons, as well for those that are in good health, as those, which are endu∣ed with bodily sicknesse. Translated out of Latine, into ¦lishe, by H. Thorne. DIseases trou∣bling our bodies, and corporall death, shak our mindes with ho¦rible feare,  much that of  wee tremb  the recy ¦cion of them. Mans natur  had leauer not to bee at all  cannot but waxe pale,  when these sicknesses doe ap  déede, no calamitie can b
more cruell, none more horrible, none more houge, then the sicknesse of the soule, and the death and destruction therof. Euery man abhorreth, euery man detesteth and eschew∣eth by Sea and lande, punishments, pitifull labors, diseases, and this bodily death. But we ought much more to endeuor our selues, to auoide and leaue off the occasions of those euilles, that is to wit, sinne and wicked∣sse, and that we ought to dread the heauie  of God, which wée prouoke against  ers and manifold offences. our bodily health is ympaired, we straigh wayes poste vnto the Phisitiō, here we spare for no charges, we lesse estéeme all things then the safegarde of our life, we pro∣cure medicines & remedies at a great price,  the intent, that this oure earthen vessell  otsheard, mought be againe repaired,  thin short space after notwithstan∣  die to breake. Why doe wée not  die and carefulnesse, desire, and  ies against the diseases, and  Soule, béeing farre more  ore perillous? For what  an take, if he did abounde  s of the whole worlde, and
did liue a thousand yeares togithers, a ioyed continual and most exquisite pleasu of this lyfe, and were not incumbred wi any trouble of sicknesse, or other calamiti But yet in the meane while, his soule  infected with the deadlye gilt and poys sinne, and oppressed with the cruell tir of Sathan, God was displeased at him  he most certainly knewe, that after the  of this life, hée shoulde suffer eternall de and damnation both of body & soule? Ther∣fore Christ said: Watch. For ye know ne¦ther the day, nor yet the howre, in the wi the sonne of man shall come. And le  shoulde followe light, friuolous,  things, the good & most profitable no ¦ded, he showeth vs a most compendi ¦taine, and sure way, to aspire vnto tr  citie, where as he sayeth: Séeke ye  kingdome of heauen, and the righteou  thereof, and all these things shall bée ¦stred vnto you. The cares of lyuing, and  establishing of oure wealth, & other  yea, many times foolishe, bruckle,  ¦ting, which nothing preuaile vs, b  ¦ten ye occasions of verie greeuou  and most wicked offences,
vs night and day. But in the séeking & getting of heauenly ches, what thing is more flow thē we are? hat more negligent? what more vnadui∣? what more foolish? What blindnesse or nesse, I pray you, ought more to be fea∣  Whilst wee liue in good health, scarce  uch as one little thought at any time  meth in our mindes of the lyfe to come,  of that our temporall death. But when  we lie downe and are sicke, death nowe (as  were) knocking at oure dores, when wée ould stande vp in the front and fight, then  ast we begin to thinke of the taking  r weapons against Sathan, and of  endment of oure life. These things  ufficient argument to prooue, that we  dued with a slender and weake fayth,  at we are little exercised in the christi∣  arfare. God be mercifull vnto vs. ut truely euerie age is méete to amend, d no repentance commeth to late, so that it  ne before the ende of this lyfe. Yet I  ll and earnestly giue admonishment,  an do linger and deferre the doing  e, vntill this last and most bit∣  or euen they which are strong
and in good health all their life  haue prepared and furnished thee ¦gainst this howre of departing, they  and with much adoe, scarcely defende ¦selues, from the deceiptes, guiles,  and inuasion of that most passing  subtill enimie: what shall bée d those, which beeing voide of al feare of  knowing not howe to repent, haue li filthie, and dissolute, and naughtie life,  I besech you shall they fight, how shall th resist? Now therfore, seeing that there is a gr multitude and aboundance of people eue where, and séeing that the Ministers of  Gospell are not néere at hand in all pla neyther are able to performe their dilige or office alwaies, and vnto all men, we of good and godly minde, willing to profite a men, haue written this waye and forme comforting, instructing, and admonishin the sick, collected out of the worde of God  their commoditie & profite especially, which are yet ignoraunt, and not instructed suffi¦ently in the Sentences of holy Scripture  such occasiōs, that they hearing those thing read vnto them, maye thereof conceiue tru∣
solation or comfort, least they  alse hearted, should dispaire and pe∣ in the bitter Agonie of death. is chiefly necessarie for the Sick,  de the paines of the body, and  temptations, wherwith he is pestered. MAn therefore lying on bed by vehemencie of sickenesse, and béeing in daunger of death, is assayled and ouer∣whelmed with dyuers and gréeuous tēptations, against  which he must contende and striue. And  of all, this is a most bitter temptation,  hen the most horrible Image of death bée∣g (as it were) before our eies, wée thinke at we must forsake and leaue the most de∣ctable and pleasaunt light of this lyfe, and ll our deare kinsfolkes and friends. Finally hat wée muste héere forgo all our pleasant  welbeloued things. And anon, our sinnes mmitted against the will and commaun∣ment of God, doe present themselues vn∣o  vs, rushing in with a great violence, are
cléerely renued, and waxe raw againe, and they séeme to be many moe in number, and more gréeuous, then euer they did before, so that they maruellously torment, vexe, and trouble our conscience. Here death, Gods iudgement, Hell, damnation, feare, and trembling, like an hoste gathered togither, torment our olde man, with moste violent and troublous stormes of verie great dolors and terrors, and doth assault and shake our hearts with moste vehement ingines of sor∣rowes and heauinesse. There will be great daunger in those Agonies and troubles of the minde, if oure heart bée not established with a sure and constant faith, least we now béeing weakned and wearied with the mul∣titude and greatnesse of temptations, do dis∣paire. For those things, which come in our mindes when we are sicke, séeme to be most horrible and gréeuous, and for none other cause, then that oure faith is verie little and doth wauer, neyther yet is so strong, that trusting vnto the worde of God, is able to apprehende that vnmeasurable and ineasti∣mable treasure and riches of God the sonne, that is to wit, the remissiō of sinnes through Christ, the resurrection of the fleshe, that
most pleasaunt and exoptable felowship of all the elect, and the lyfe euerlasting, and that all these things are giuen vs fréely in Christ, and for Christ. We ought daylie to exercise our selues in these Articles of our faith, and to fastē them in vs diligently, pondering & weighing them in our mindes. Also we shoulde oftentimes come vnto the Sacrament,Synaxis. or the Table of the Lords supper. But we must first diligēt∣ly trie, fashion, and prepare our selues. For we ought especially to beware of this, that we meddle not with the most royall Sacra∣ment Eucharist, or of thankesgiuing, with vnwashed mindes, and spotted consciences. It is truely a shamefull matter, and much to be lamented, that this many yeares this Sacrament of the body and bloude of Iesus Christ, hath béene supersticiously admini∣stred, and of some other it hath béene hand∣led vnreuerently, and little according to the worthinesse thereof, in so much that of some Heretikes it hath béene vtterly contemned and dispised. The present punishments and afflictions doe sufficiently declare vnto vs, how haynously they offended therein, wher∣of S. Paule foretold vnto the Corinthians.1. Corin. 11.
This Sacrament surely is a great and marueylous pledge of his especiall loue and singular mercy towards vs, which he would haue to be testified and declared vnto vs, in that his last Supper, how that he adioyneth vs vnto him, as his mysticall members, that we may know and vnderstande, that we are beloued, regarded, and preserued of him. Thus doe godlye mindes determine, that Christ is effectuall in vs. I woulde to God we would learne to consider in our mindes, the worthynesse of this so royall a gifte, that we might be therefore thankfull, and when we aduaunce & lift vp our faith, we mought then also haue a reuerent feare, and thinke how detestable an offence and ingratitude is, and what horrible punishments will en∣sue the prophanatiō, or vnholy vsing of this so worthie a mysterie. And it is not to bée thought, those moste grieuous threatnings, which Saint Paule maketh mention off, to be vaine, and of none effect. For God is alwaies true. And I suppose assuredly, that the greatest parte of those publicke euilles, which haue béene in our dayes, are to be im∣puted vnto the disorderly, and grosse vsing of that most holy pledge. Let vs therefore
oftentimes prepare our selues, to come vnto the Communion Table, with feruent de∣sire of vertue and holynesse, that our mindes béeing refreshed and comforted with that heauenly foode of the soule, faith and charitie maye bée daylie increased and strengthened in vs. The Articles of our Faith, are diligent∣ly to be considered of the Sicke. WEe ought also furthermore to remember, and alwayes haue in our mindes, all the Arti∣cles of our Catholike Faith. But foure especially are dili∣gently to be considered, and to be poured into vs, by often repiticion, in the Agonies and troubles of death, that is to saye, the communion of Saintes, the for∣giuenesse of sinnes throughe the bloode of Christ, the rising againe of the fleshe, and the eternall lyfe. Wherefore sicknesses ar sent vnto vs from God.
THen as death is ye punishment of sinne: Euen so diseases are many times sent vnto vs from God, for our sinnes, the whi∣che thing is manifest by ma∣nye testimonies of Scripture, as in Ioan. 5. Psalme. 88. Deut. 28. 2. Reg. 24. We are also often afflicted, that oure fayth thereby mought be tryed. For then surely a man may sée, how much wée loue God, how muche we trust in him, when we are afflic∣ted, and oppressed with some gréeuous crosse. Then here aboue all things sée, that thou re∣pent vnfaynedly, turning thy whole heart, minde, and senses vnto God, that thou mai∣est confesse and bewayle thy sinnes before him. For sinne is the onely cause, why we deserue the most iust wrath, & heauie plague of God.Ioan. 20. And thou shalt gather out of Saint Iohn his Gospell, the most aboundant com∣fort, off absolution or remission of sinnes, which Christ hath instituted and left vnto his vniuersall Church. This vnmeasurable treasure, is opened and offered vnto thée dai∣lye. Christ sayth, receiue yée the holy Ghost,Math. 18. whose sinnes soeuer yée forgiue, they are for∣giuen them, and whose sinnes soeuer yée re∣taine,
they are retained. Now when we haue desired and obtained forgiuenesse of our mis∣déedes, without all question to the contrarie, the paine and griefe or affliction also béeing on vs, either will cease and leaue vs, either will redownd vnto the saluation of the sicke body, according to the passing good will and pleasure of almightie God. For thou must be throughly perswaded, that thou nothing doubt herein, but that the paine or crosse (al∣though it séeme vnto the flesh a verie heauie yoke and burthen) is a méere fatherly rodde and correction, whereby God doth withhold, and call backe thée, his childe, from commit∣ting of sinne, entising and alluring thée vn∣to him. God verily loueth vs with a feruent zeale, hée willingly tendereth our saluation, and worketh all things vnto this ende and purpose, that he may correct vs, and bring vs vnto good. For looke whome he loueth, him doth he correct, him doth he chasten & afflict in this world, least after this lyfe, he should be tormented with the euerlasting paine of vnquenchable fire. And wauer not, but per∣swade thy selfe most certainely, that God is thy most louing Father, and much desirous of thée, howsoeuer he seeme to be angry with
thée. This is not the wrath of a Tiraunt, and an executioner, but of a father intéerely louing vs, which would not that we should be lost, and cast awaye: but that we béeing corrected shoulde amende, and obtaine sal∣uation. This is a most certaine truth, if so be that we, whose faith is so weake, can be∣leue it. First of all therefore, aske thou for∣giuenesse and remission of all thy sinnes, but through Christ, and with a verie repentant heart, that thou mayest well accorde with God, that thou mayest find him pacified and mercifull vnto thée. After this done, thou mayest also beséech him to delyuer thée from the affliction, which troubleth thée. So doth Ecclesiasticus teach vs, whereas he sayth:Eccle. 38. My sonne despise not thy selfe, in thy sicke∣nesse, but pray vnto the Lorde, and he shall heale thée. And so doth the Psalmist praye. Remember not (O Lorde) our olde iniqui∣ties, let thy mercies spéedily preuent vs,Psal. 79. help vs O God our Sauior. Conuert vs O thou Lorde God of power, shewe vs thy louing countinance, and we shall be safe, how long wilt thou be angrie? First he desireth forgiuenesse of his sinnes, that he might be iustified by the grace of god.
Next he entreateth against ye wrath of God, And when thou prayest for the deliuerance and easement of the crosse, which oppresseth thée, thou shalt alwayes put to this additiō: Thy most blessed and holy will be done. For we cannot better sée vnto our selues, then cā our most faithfull Father, of his endlesse po∣wer, wisedome, and infinite goodnesse, which neuer turneth his eies from vs, but with all diligence taketh care of vs, which knoweth the number of the heares of our heads,Math. 10. which doth quicken, comfort, cherishe, couer, nou∣rish, preserue, and defend all things, which helpeth and prouideth for all men, much more, and farre better, then any creatures can bée able, yea, to wish for.
There be three things, which torment vs most greeuously, and cruelly, and doe trouble our mindes in the A∣gonie of death, that is to wit, Sinne, Death, Hell, or Dam∣nation. Sinne WHen those Sinnes come in our mindes (we lying sicke) wherein wée haue wickedly & noughtily passed ouer our lyues, wherby we haue very gréeuously offēded both God, and our neighbor: we are striken with great feare and sorrow, euen as S. Paule sayeth vnto the Romaines: Indignation & wrath,Rom. 2. tribulation, and anguishe shall come vpon the soule, of euery man that doth euill. Death. ADam, our flesh, dieth very vn∣wyllingly. Wherefore when death approcheth neere, mans heart is altoo shaken wyth great dolors and heauinesse,
which no tongue is able to expresse. For our fearefull affection, and oure naturall man, dreadeth miserablie, least yt when he is once dead and buried vnder the earth, he shall ne∣uer returne againe and liue, but supposeth that he is vndone for euer. Hell fire, and Damnation. WHen those things come (as it were) before our eyes, then man feareth, least he bée vt∣terly cast away from the pre∣sence of God, and séeth none other thing in himselfe, but euerlasting death. Wée haue neede therfore of a good courage in this case, and of a strong and valiant heart, that there appeare in vs, no point of cowardnesse, and desperation. ¶A Prayer for the same. O Most mercifull God, and most louing Father, I beséech thée aide vs, and graunt that we, which bée yet in good health and safetie, may learn to feare
and dreade thée, may loue and imbrace thy holy worde, and that we may set thée before vs, as a scope and marke whervnto we may direct all our doings, and that we being al∣wayes mindefull of the most bitter agonie of death, may so prepare & arme our selues, that we maye order all our deedes to thy glory, as doe the godly, which feare thée, and that we may in the ende obteyne euer∣lasting lyfe. Amen. What is to be done, when Sinne doth vexe, and stirre our consciences. THinke with thy selfe, that the sonne of GOD came downe from heauen into the lowest partes, and was made man, he tooke vpon him thy sinnes, and the sinnes of the whole worlde, hée willingly dyed on the crosse for them, and made full satisfactiō for them all, suffering for thy sake most gréeuous paines.
The moste precious blood of Christ was shed for thy saluation, and thou art parta∣ker of his death, if so be that thou constantly beleue on Christ, that he died as wel for thée, as for Peter and Paule. And thou oughtest not to doubt any thing at all, but that hée dyed as effectuallye for thée, as for Paule. Thou art baptised throughe the death of Christe. This thing ought to comforte thée, this thing ought to lift vp, and streng∣then thy minde. For séeing that thou art baptised through the death of Christ: his death shall ayde and saue thée, through his death thou shalt not die in thy sinnes, but through his death thou shalt vndoubtedly obteine forgiuenesse of them all, and in the ende through Christ his death thou shalt rise againe vnto a new, and euerlasting life. For baptisme is a sure token,Babtisme pledge, and signe of Gods grace and fauour, wherein thou art reconciled vnto God, yt thou maiest haue a ioyous and quiet conscience through him,Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. for the forgiuenesse of thy sinnes by Christ his resurrection. And he certeinlye speaketh vnto thée in the institution of his last supper, where as he professeth, and te∣stifieth, that his blood was shed for the re∣mission
of sinnes. Now therfore although thou haue not li∣ued an vpright, and pure life, in eche respect, yet,Rom. 10. there is no cause why thou shouldest dispaire, but spéedily call vpon the name of of the lorde, without ceassing, and thou shalt bée safe. And thus begin thou to saye: O moste mercifull GOD,A prayer. O father of all compassion, father of oure lorde Ie∣sus Christ, bee mercifull vnto mée a sin∣ner, haue compassion on me a poore wretch, and make haste to helpe mée, for that most bitter, yea moste precious passion, and death of Iesus Christ, thy onely begotten sonne, and our onely redéemer, and sauior. Enter not into iudgemēt with thy seruant oh lorde,Psal. 143. deale not with mée according to my desertes, neyther rewarde me according to mine iniquities, but receiue me for thine infinite, and endlesse goodnesse, and mercies sake. I a wretch, and séely creature, am in thine hand, power, and daunger, oh moste mightie, and mercifull God, oh most louing father, cast mée not awaye vtterly refused in miserie. I am thine, whatsoeuer I am. No man can comfort mée, no man can help
me besides thee onely. Thou art the true propulsour, & driuer awaye of all mischiefe from men. Thou art the most sure, and rea∣die helpe, ayde, succour, and defence. Thou art the moste strong tower. Thou art O God our hope,Psal. 46. Psal. 31. and strength, thou art a very present help in trouble. In thée O Lorde do I put my trust, let me not be cōfounded, let me neuer bee ashamed, my hope béeing in vayne, but deliuer me in thy righteousnesse. Bow downe thine eare to mee, make haste to deliuer me. And be thou my strong rock, and house of defence, that thou mayest saue mée. Thou art my strong rock, & my castle. Thou art my lorde, my porcion is in thine handes. Lighten thy face vpon thy seruant, and saue me O lorde in thy mercie. Further, thou, that art sick, must be chief∣ly admonished of this point, that thou think not what sinnes thou hast committed, but rather haue before thine eies to cōtemplate, and looke on, the image of Christ, his most holesome, & precious death. Fasten it sure∣ly in thy minde, and thorowly perswade thy selfe,Esay. 53. Math. 8. that thou art not now oppressed with thy sinnes for Christ, and that they are all layed vpō his shoulders, which taking them
vpon him, hath made satisfaction and re∣demption for vs,Pet. 32. Rom. 4. so that he will neuer im∣pute them vnto vs, but will fréely forgiue them all, euen as we saye in the articles of our faith: I beleue the remission of sinnes. The testimonies of scripture for the re∣mission of sinnes throughe Christ, must be diligently repeated vnto the sick, wherof, I haue here vnder recited some, that they may be in a readynesse. BEholde the Lambe of God,Ioan. 1. which taketh away ye sinnes of the worlde. Wée are not redéemed with bryckle thinges,1. Petr. 1. as with corruptible siluer, and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lambe vndefiled and without spot. Let these things enter into the bottome of thine heart, let these things lift thée vp, and giue thee comforte. There is no cause why thou shouldest doubt of the forgiuenesse of sinnes, if thou constantly professe the name
of Christ, and trustest in his mercie, he will also take away thy sinnes. If so be that thou nothing stick, nor stacker, but vndoubtedly beléeuest this, nowe thou art become the sonne of God, there is no cause why thou shouldest wauer, there is nothing that thou shouldest feare. Hearken vnto the testimo∣nies of scripture, but so hearken vnto them, that thou mayest surely print them in thy minde. Ioan. 3.So God loued the worlde, that he gaue his onely begotten sonne, that none, that be∣léeue in him, should perishe, but should haue euerlasting lyfe. He that beléeueth on him, shall not be condemned. Math. 9.I came not to call the righteous, but sin∣ners vnto repentance. Math. 11.Come vnto mée all yee, that labour, and are laden, and I will refresh you. He calleth all men vnto him, he refuseth no man, he casteth no man in the téeth. Thou art also comprehended in this worde, All. Call vp∣on his mercie, and he will comfort thée. Rom. 5.God setteth out his loue, that he hath to vs, séeing that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for vs. Much more then nowe, séeing that we are iustified in his blood,
shall we be saued from wrath thorowe him. God the father, which earnestly loueth thée, would yt this gospell full of comfort, shoulde bée also declared vnto thée. For Christ was sent vnto thée, and he also died for thee, be∣léeue onely, and commende thy selfe vnto Christ, thy preseruer, and defender. If, when we were enimies,Rom. 5. we were re∣conciled vnto God, by ye death of his sonne: muche more, séeing we are reconciled, wee shall be preserued by his lyfe. Christ is made to vs wisedome,1. Cor. 1. and al∣so righteousnesse, and sanctifying, and re∣demption. Here, déerely beloued brother, take a good hart, although thou bée neuer so great an offender, yet there is no matter, why thou shouldest despeire, but confesse, and acknow∣ledge thy selfe before Christ, to be a sinner. Call vpon his mercie, and desire pardon of him, aske forgiuenesse of thy sinnes, and be∣léeue that Christ is thy onely sauiour, thy health, and iustification, and euer will be,Rom. 4. he will both couer, and also abolishe all thy sinnes, that thou shall neither feare perill nor dammage for them. God hath made him to bée sinne for vs,2. Cor. 5.
which knew no sinne, yt we, by his meanes, should be that righteousnesse, which before God is allowed. Gala. 1.Christ gaue himselfe for our sinnes, to de∣lyuer vs from this presente euill worlde, through the will of God our father. Ephe. 1.By Christ we haue redemption thorowe his blood, euen the forgiuenesse of sinnes, according to the riches of his grace. 1. Timo. 1.Christ Iesus came into the worlde, to saue sinners. Haue thou a confidence in these wordes, and giue good credite vnto them, and thou shalt be iustified, and saued, as wel as saint Paule. 1. Timo. 2.Christ Iesus gaue himselfe a ransome for all men. Constantly beléeue this, and without all question to the contrarie, thou art one of that number which shall be saued. Hebr. 10.We are sanctified by the offering vp of the body of Iesus Christ, once for all. Thou hearest Christ also speaking vnto thée, in his laste supper, féeding thée with his body, and giuing himselfe vnto thée spi∣ritually, that thou mightest drink his blood, vnto euerlasting lyfe.Luc. 22. Where as he sayeth:
Take eate this is my body,Math. 26. Mark. 14. 1. Cor. 11. which is gy∣uen for you. This do in the remembrance of mée. And likewise when he had supped, he tooke the cup saying: This cup is the new testament in my blood, which is shedde for you, for the forgiuenesse of sinnes. Doe this as often as yée shall drinke it, in the re∣membrance of mée. Thinke thou, déerely beloued, that those wordes were spoken vnto thée, fasten them in the bottome of thine heart. For when he speaketh generally vnto al men,Mark. 13. he speaketh to thee also. All things which Christ suffe∣red, shall doe thée good, they shall redownde vnto thine aduantage, and saluation, they shall profite thée, as much as they shall the déere saintes of God. Christ himselfe bare our sinnes in his bo∣die, on the trée.1. Petr. 2. Christ hath once suffered for sinnes,1. Petr. 3. the iust for the vniust, for to bring vs to God. The blood of Iesus Christe clenseth vs from all sinne.1. Ioan. 1. If anye man sinne,1. Ioan. 2. we haue an aduo∣cate with the father, Iesus Christ, which is righteous. He it is that abteyned grace for our sinnes.
Thou mayest take moe fewer or lesse sen∣tences of scripture, for this purpose, euen as thou shalt perceyue the sick to be affected. The words, which thou hast now heard, are not the wordes of man, but of the holy Ghost, which plainly testifie, that God the father, whiche woulde not the death of a sinner,Ezech. 18. but that he might be conuerted and liue, for that his feruent loue, which he bea∣reth towardes thee, hath eased, and released thée, from the burthen of thy sinnes, & hath layed them on the shoulders of his deerely beloued sonne,Esay. 53. which hath so borne and suffered them all in his body: that they shal neuer be thy condemnation. For if so bée that thou beléeue in Christ, God reputeth, and accepteth the death of his sonne, in the stead of a full and sufficient repentance, sa∣tisfaction, and absolution for all thy sinnes. Séeing therefore, thy sinnes layed vpon Christ, coulde not deteyne, or kéepe him in death, and condemne him: ransome is true∣ly payd for them, and they are all fréely for∣giuen thée. Beléeue this, and thou shalt liue eternally. Christ himselfe suffered for thy sinnes,Rom. 4. 1. Ioan. 2. & died for them. But he rose againe, and the sinnes of all faithfull beléeuers, are
by his death acquited, purged, and clensed, so that the straight iustice, seuere iudgement of God, is aboundantly satisfied through Christ. Nowe therefore Christ is become thine, and all others which beleeue, with al his benefites, with his death, with his re∣surrection, with his assension into heauen, with his lyfe, with his merites, and with his glorie. Wherfore sathan hath no po∣wer ouer thee at all, he can not hurte thée,Rom. 8. séeing that thou art iustified through Christ, séeing that thou art deliuered from all thy sinnes, séeing that thou art become the child of GOD. God is thy father, earnestly lo∣uing thée for Chiist his sake, which hath re∣conciled, and made a tonement for thée. Wherefore be thou of good courage, and re∣ioyce thou in the lorde. For séeing that thou art in the hands of almightie God, thy good and most faithfull father, thou art in safetie, and out of al daunger. For thou art enclosed and compassed about, with the custodie of God, and garde of angelles. Christ is alto∣gither become thine, he couereth, and taketh awaye all thy sinnes,Ioan. 10. by his innocencie and righteousnesse. No man can by violence pluck thée out of the handes of thy heauenly
father. Thou hast now the victorie, when thou hast suffered, and passed ouer this cor∣porall crosse, & affliction, the which being truely compared with eternall lyfe, shal ap∣pere very easie,2. Cor. 4. Heb. 6. Ephe. 1. momentanie, & but of a short time. Christ was in the like agony, yea, in a farre more bitter, & more horrible. He is gon before thée, he is thine head, to whom yu must néedes become lyke, and die vnto sinne, and must lay aside this lyfe, spotted, and embru∣ed with wickednesse, that thou mayest after lyue, the true life for euer, with thy mayster Christ. Let not thy sinnes, trouble thée. There is no cause, why thy cōscience should be tormēted, séeing that thy sinnes are now done away and abolished. Thou hast ouer∣come, and hast cast vnder foote, that malig∣nant spirite, which goeth about to worke the destruction of our soules. God now hath compassion on thée, he careth for thée, he doth defende, and kéepe thée, all the felowship of saintes, and aungels doe regarde thée. And euen as Christ can not be damned, so lyke∣wise thou canst not be damned, if so be that, thou beleue on him, with the full confidence of thine whole hart. If sinne, death, and hell, can nothing
hurt thy lorde, and mayster Christ, ney∣ther can they hurt thée, for thou art mistical∣ly graffed into Christ by fayth, and Christ is effectuall in thée, therefore thou canst ne∣uer be damned. If so be that, thou thy selfe shouldst beare thy sinnes, and make a tone∣ment for them, thou wouldst by no meanes be able to susteine and beare so great, and heauie a burthen, they woulde bee farre to weightie for thée, they woulde deuour thée, as one drowned into the bottome of hell. But Christ being perfite God, and per∣fite man, did offer himself vp of his owne ac∣cord for thée, he did put himself in thy roume, discharging & paying all things for thee, as it is written in the Psalme:Psal. 69. I payde them the things, I neuer tooke. Truely thou did∣dest commit sinne against thy selfe, but Christ purged them, and made satisfaction for thée, and planted thée in libertie, if so be that thou beléeue this Gospell. Although al the sinnes of ye whole world, were layde vpon thée onely, yet, God hath grace and mercie sufficient for them, & more then sufficient. God hath promised thée his grace, and blessing in Christ, and the same is ratified, certeine, full absolute, and perfite
in Christ thy lorde, and mayster. Thou must néedes be saued, if so be that thou fastē thine eyes vpon Christ.Hypo∣stasis. For Christ is the naturall sonne of God in diuine substance, veritie it selfe, and touching his humanitie, he is our fleshe, and blood. Who will be more sure, and certeine, then this Christ, to giue and perfourme the promise of grace, which is himselfe the veritie of his promise, and loueth vs vnfaynedly, in somuch that, he had léefer dye, then to disappoint vs in any parte of his promise. Wherefore if thou beleue in Christ, thou art now made parta∣ker of his heauenly blessing, thou art now eased of the burthen of thy sinnes, nowe thou art the eire of God, and the fellowe eire with Christ for euer.Math. 24. For heauen and earth shall passe, but the worde of the lorde endureth for euer. Therefore beléeue and strengthen thy minde with good hope, and doubt not, but GOD is chéefest and al∣mightie, yea, euen for thée, hee became man for thy saluation, he was also borne for thy sake, hée dyed on the crosse, he rose from the deade, for thy sake, and ascen∣ded into heauen, he offered vp, and perfor∣med all things, which were promised vnto
vs. For all the promises of God,2. Cor. 1. by Christ are yea: and are by him. Amen. Wherfore desire of God, to haue his mercy, and then looke for none other thing at his hand, but méere grace, and mercy, and the same for Christ, and through Christ. For without him truely there is no consolatiō, no health, no hope, no helpe, or succour. In this only Christ, is all comfort, all ayde, and staye, and to be bréefe, all the meanes of our salua∣tion. In him is all grace and mercie, much more infinite, and greater, more highe, plentifull, and abundant, then anye man can either comprehend, or wyshe for. God vouchsafe to graunt vs a sure, and constant fayth. After this maner, thou shalt comfort the sick body, either with longer, or shorter com∣munication, as the matter shall require. And I admonish thée, déere brother in the lorde, that thou withdrawe thy minde, with as great endeuor, and studie, as thou mayest, from the horrible contemplation of sinne, and death, and bend all thy thoughts vpon Christ onely, fasten the eyes of thy minde vpon him, cleane vnto him with all thine hart, and as it were drinke him into thée,
call vpon him with full trust of minde, and commit thy selfe wholy vnto him. For thou shalt finde none other thing in this Christ, than excellent innocencie, righteousnesse, lyfe, and saluation, all the which, being deryued from Christ into thée, are now be∣come thine, if so be that thou wilt acknow∣ledge him to be thy redéemer, and authour of thy saluation. Wherefore I warne thée, & doe oftentimes beate it into thée by repeti∣tion, and that for good cause, that thou re∣nue not, or call to minde the remembraunce of thy sinnes, nor torment thy self by way∣ing the multitude, and greatnesse of them. Whē thy sinnes are banished farre off from thée, set Christ crucified onely before thine eies, fasten him in thine hart, let thy whole minde, & senses be surely set on him, cleane fast vnto him with all thine heart, neuer to be pulled away. By this meanes thou shalt withstande, and preuaile against the gates of hell, be they neuer so cruell, be they ne∣uer so horrible, and terrible. Call to minde with how great humanitie, and clemencie, with what gentlenesse? & benignitie Christ in the Euangelicall historie,Math. 9. hath receyued, and vsed all sinners, which truely repen∣ting,
haue asked forgiuenesse, and besought his ayde, and mercy. And thou shalt finde Marie of Magdalene,Luc. 8. Luc. 23. Luc. 19. thou shalt finde the theefe hanged on his right hande, thou shalt finde the publicane, Zachaeus, and many others, whom he receyued with mar∣ueilous kindnesse, & pronounced them free from all their sinnes, were they neuer so gréeuous. For Christ is verie grace it selfe, mercie, aide, consolation, life, ioy, and salua∣tion to all them which desire those things of him, and doe put their trust, and confidence in him. God, which is veritie, and cannot lye, hath promised al these things for Christ his sake vnto vs. He therefore will neuer deceiue vs, beguile vs, nor forsake vs. Furthermore, it will come into thy minde also, when thou art in daunger of death, if yu haue hurted, or endammaged thy neigh∣bour by any meanes, as if thou eyther haue stollen, or taken away any thing from him, or if thou haue slaundered him. Here thou shalt doe euen the same thing, which Christ did, hanging vpon the Crosse,Luc. 23. thou shalt praye for all thine enimies, and shalt for∣giue them, from the bottome of thine hart, all the wrongs they haue done vnto thée. If
any thing of thine be stolen from thée, thou shalt not violently requyre it agayne. If thou haue taken awaye anye other mans good, restore it againe if thou maye, or pro∣uide, that it may be restored againe, neyther shalt thou kéepe any thing priuie, but shalt confesse it vnto God, and aske forgiuenesse of the same, and be sorie that thou hast so offended. If so be that thou be not able for thy pouertie to repaie the thing thou hast wrongfully taken, it shall bée sufficient, if thou forgiue others, which haue done eyther wrong, or violence to thée in body, or goods, or haue takē away thy good name. If (I say) thou forgiue them with all thine hart, there is no cause, why thou shouldest be carefull. Be of good comfort, and doubt not, but God will forgiue thée, the wrongs which thou hast done vnto others. Truely hée can not but release his sinnes, which forgiueth his neighbour. For he himselfe hath taught vs this order, and way of recompen∣sing,Math. 6. and loosing. If yée shall for∣giue other men there trespas∣ses, your heauenly fa∣ther shall also for∣giue you.
Whether the sick may lawfully seeke the phisitions help, and vse phisick, or no. THe sick body shall neyther despise ye phisition his help, nor haue it in admiration. Let his chéefe hope be sted∣fastly fastined vppon God, which as he alone did put the soule into the body: So he onely taketh it awaye, when it pleaseth him. Sometime notwithstanding, the phisition is to bée sent for, least we shoulde séeme to tempt God. For séeing medicines of themselues neither can restore health, nor cause disea∣ses, yet, notwithstanding, when they are ministred of a naturall wise phisition, well exercised in reasonable rules, thei are whole∣some, and worthily called the handes of God, as Herophilus witnesseth, the which thing also holye scripture testifieth. For it is written: Honor the phisition.Eccle. 38. For the most highest hath created him, for necessities sake. The most highest hath created medi∣cine out of the earth, and the prowdest man
will not abhorre it. Tellers of destinies, inchauntours, wicked coniurers, and de∣ceyuers, which pretende to cure the sicke with false prayers, and orisons, are to bée driuen awaye, and eschued, as the pesti∣lence. For witches are the handes of the diuell, and not of almightie God, by whose worde, and power, all things ought to bée gouerned. What is to be done, when death bring∣eth terror, and feare vpon vs. THou shalt thinke that death is conquered, and vtterly destroyed by Christ. And except Christ hauing com∣passion on vs, had suffered death for vs, ye feare of death woulde haue troubled vs, with great and horrible heauinesse, and intolerable tor∣mentes of minde. But death béeing ouer∣come, and destroyed by Christ, the soules of them, which trust in him, can not dye and perishe, but they go straight wayes vnto Christ, after their departing out of this bodye. As the théefe béeing in extremitie
heard it sayed vnto him:Luc. 23. This daye thou shalt be with me in paradise. The body in the meane season resteth in sure hope, to rise againe in the last daye, vnto that most blessed immortall lyfe, with great glorie, magnificence, and honour, as renewed, and clarified, that it may liue togither with the soule, for euer with Christ, and all his elect, amongst whom we shall finde many, which were either our fréendes, or kinsfolks here in this worlde.The death of godly mē is called a sleepe. Therefore holy Scrip∣ture calleth the death of godly men, a sléepe. For ye verie same our brickle, fraile, weake, mortall, and corruptible body, shall be ray∣sed vp in the last day, as a man stirred out of his sléepe, and forthwith, death extinct, and abolished, it shall appéere incorruptible, glo∣rious, beautifull, sounde, helthfull, immor∣tall, whole, pure, perfite, & spirituall, as it is written vnto the Corinthians.1. Cor. 15. Psal. 116. And hereof the psalmist sayeth: Right déere in the sight of the lorde, is the death of his saints. Waighe those things diligently in thy minde, déerely beloued, that thou mayest not be seduced with ye wicked world, which supposeth vs vtterly to dye, the body togi∣ther with the soule to decaye, and perishe,
and that no part of vs shall remayne, after the departing out of this lyfe. But they are farre out of the waye, and greatly deceyued therein. Our body is not so vile, and so lit∣tle regarded in the sight of God, but great honour, glorie, and saluation, is prepared and appointed for it. For the verie same bo∣dy, which we carie about with vs, and the same, which lyeth vpon the bedde afflicted, and tormented, the verie same body (I say) renewed, and glorified, shall liue togither with the soule for euer. If so bée that wée shoulde léese our body and neuer recouer it againe, the death of saintes were not pre∣cious, and honorable, but vile, horrible, and most cruell. Wherfore these things conside∣red diligently, thou shalt support, and holde vp thy wauering mind, erected by sure hope in the sentences of holy scripture. Beléeue them, and doubt nothing at all. For it is vndoutedly true that I tell thée. As the bo∣dy of Christ béeing buried, euen vntill the thirde daye, rose againe the thirde day vnto a new and eternal life, neuer to die againe: so the bodies of all them, which haue slept in Christ, that is to say, which haue belée∣ued on Christ, doe rest in there graues one∣ly
for a time, to rise againe in the last daye, in sure hope of the most ioyful, and glorious resurrection, into a new and perpetual life, where shall bée neyther sinne, nor anye death, calamitie, or any other thing,Apoc. 21. than righteousnesse, innocencie, lyfe, ioy, blisful∣nesse, and saluation worlde without ende. God, which is of infinite power, and veritie it selfe, hath promised those things. They shall therefore come to passe vndoubtedly. Therefore trust thou stedfastly vnto hys promises. Furthermore, the testimonies of scrip∣ture for the resurrection of the fleshe, are di∣ligently to be thought vpon, and earnestly to be beaten into our mindes by often repe∣ticion. Thus doth saint Paule teache vs,1. Thes. 4. that we strengthen one another with such communication of the resurrection, that we mought thereby be comforted. There can be none more certaine, nor more plenti∣full consolations giuen vnto vs, than those which we seeke out of the testimonies of ho∣lye scripture, for the approbation of the re∣surrection. Wée declare not the wordes of man but of God, which surely, and migh∣tily will performe, and bring to passe, all
that he hath spoken. No man can alter the the will of God, no man can let, or hinder his purpose, and counsell. His power can∣not be measured, he is true, and faithfull, his goodnesse, and mercie is endlesse. Ther∣fore let no man doubt thereof. The testimonies of scripture, for the resurrection of the deade. Math. 23.THe iust men shall shine as bright, as the Sunne, in the kingdome of there Father. Ioan. 5.Verily, verily, I saye vnto you, hée that heereth my words, and beléeueth on him that sent mée, hath euerlasting lyfe, and shall not come into damnation, but is esca∣ped from death vnto lyfe. Ioan. 6.This is the will of him, that sent me, that euery man which seeth the sonne, and be∣léeueth on him, haue euerlasting lyfe, and I will rayse him vp at the last day. Ioan. 8.Verily, verily, I saye vnto you, if a man kéepe my sayings, he shall neuer sée death. Ioan. 11.Christ sayde yt Lazarus did sléepe, which notwithstanding, had yéelded vp the ghost, whose deade body was committed vnto the
graue. But Christ restoreth the dead vnto lyfe againe, and calleth those things which be not, as though they were. Therefore he addeth this, saying: I am the resurrection,Rom. 4. Ioan. 11. and the lyfe. He that beléeueth on mée, yea though he were deade, yet shall lyue, and forthwith after those wordes, hée raysed vp Lazarus, which had layne foure daies in his graue, being putryfied, and smelling. And bicause we are fearefull, and faint-harted by nature in those agonies: that we maye haue the better helpe to beléeue, that there shall be a Resurrection, many were restored from death to lyfe, in the dayes of the prophets, and the apostles. Christ raysed vp from death to lyfe the wydowes.Luc. 7. He raysed vp also the maister of the Sinagoge his daughter.Iairus was hir father. Luc. 8. He restored Lazarus vnto lyfe.Ioan. 11. Act. 9. Act. 20. 4. Reg. 4. Peter likewyse made Tabytha aliue again. Paule reuiued Eutychus. Helyseus the prophet reuiued his Hostes dead sonne. Helias the prophet reuoked the womans childe of Sareptha to lyfe againe.3. Reg. 17. God also assumed, and tooke vnto him,
that two most holy,Gene. 5. 4. Reg. 2. & mighty men: Enoch, and Elia, rapt alyue both body, and soule togithers, out of this frayle, and wretched world, that he might by them giue vs some taste, and signification of the true lyfe to come, least we also shoulde beleue, that no parte of vs remayneth after this miserable lyfe, according to the opinion of the heathen gentiles, and Epicures. Furthermore, the faint harted sick body, is to be admonished, that he remember, and thinke what that greatest, and mightie lord both of lyfe, and death, Iesus Christ sayed in saint Luke his gospell:Luc. 8. Iairus daughter. Wéepe not, for the damsell is not deade, but sléepeth. Mans reason harde of beléefe, not vnderstanding the secrete mysteries of God, did laugh these wordes to scorne. But Christ making it true, verifying his words, restored the dead mayden vnto life againe, as soone as he had spoken the wordes. The very same lord Iesus Christ, wil receiue thy soule, and will preserue it, and in the last day he wil restore thy body vnto thy soule a∣gaine, & will couple them vnto eternall lyfe. Ioan. 5.The time shall come when al they, which are in there graues, shall heare the voice of
the sonne of God, and they that haue done good, shall come forth vnto the resurrection of lyfe. If so be that the spirite of him, that raysed vp Iesus from death dwell in you, euen hée, that raysed vp Christ from death,Rom. 8. shall quicken your mortall bodies, bicause that his spirite dwelleth in you. God hath raysed vp the lorde Christ, and shall rayse vs vp by his power. The .xv.1. Cor. 6. chapter of the first epistle to the corinthians, is full of most sweete, and effectual consolations hereof, no golde is to be compared vnto them. Saint Paule in the same chapter, so knitteth, and fasteneth our resurrection vnto the resur∣rection of Christ, that it maye not be pul∣led, or seperated from it, as by this rea∣son. Christ is risen againe from the deade, the which thing is most certeine. Therefore without all doubt, wée also shall ryse a∣gaine. For Christ is our heade,Ephe. 4.5. Ioan. 12. and we are hys members mystically. This head is not wtout his members, neyther doth he leaue, and forsake his members. Where Christ is,Ephe. 5. there shall we be also. For we are members of his bodye, of his fleshe, and of his bones. Who can sufficiently declare, according to the worthynesse thereof, that vnmeasurable
glorie, of inestimable, & vnspeakable grace, and mercy, that God descending from hea∣uen into the lowest partes, did vouchsafe to become a mortall man, that this frayle, and bryckle nature of man, vnited vnto his de∣uine nature, mought be brought vnto euer∣lasting life, being made partaker of the hea∣uenly kingdome, by the infinite, and in∣comprehensible might, and efficacie of his diuinitie, and godhead. If we beléeue, that so great riches were bestowed vpon vs, and that so blessed a lyfe remayneth for vs, how, I praye you, can we be false harted, or trou∣bled in minde? The nature of all faithfull people, which haue béene both before, and also since Christ, and those which are yet to come, without all question, hath put on im∣mortalitie in Christ, being perfite God and perfite man. The comfort therfore of Christ his resurrection, is most plentiful, and effec∣tuall, wherewith saint Paule doth streng∣then the mindes of the Corinthians,1. Cor. 15. where as he sayeth: Christ is risen from the deade, and is become the first fruites of them, that sléepe. For by a man came death, and by a man came the resurrection of the dead. For, as by Adam all dye, euen so by Christe,
shall all be made alyue, and euery man in his own order. The first is Christ, than they that are Christs. Here saint Paule maketh a similitude of naturall things, whereby the resurrection maye be the more cléerely, and manifestly perceyued. And the similitude is taken of drie seede, which the husbandman casteth into the earth. It dieth, & rotteth af∣ter a fashion. Yet notwithstanding, that which is committed vnto the earth, doth not vtterly perishe, but it commeth forth of the earth againe, freshe, and new, with a plea∣sant, hansome, ioyful forme, and shape. And euen so shall our bodye rise againe, not cor∣ruptible, bryckle, fraile, feeble as now it is, but faire, cleane, beautifull, strong, of per∣fite force, and immortall vnto euerlasting lyfe. This is the way by thys corporall death, vnto true, and eternall lyfe, into oure true countrey.1. Cor. 15. Flesh and blood cannot inherite the kingdome of God, wherein is nothing but lyfe, and therefore this mortalitie must put on immortalitie.Esac. 25. Oseae. 13. Then shall the saying come to passe, which is written: Death is swalowed vp into the victorie, they nowe whiche beléeue in Christ, haue ouercome
sinne, death, and hell. They therefore con∣temning death, & being strong and bolde in Christ, will say: Hell where is thy victorie? Sinne is the sting of death, the lawe is the strength of sinne. But prayse be vnto God, which hath giuen vs the victorie, through our lorde Iesus Christ. We wyll adde also, other sentences of scripture, conteyning plen∣tifull comfort. 1. Cor. 4.HE that raysed vp the lorde Iesus Christ from death, shall rayse vs vp also. Phill. 3.Our conuersation is in heauen, from whence we looke for a sauiour, euen the lorde Iesus Christ, which shall chaunge our vile bodies, that they maye be fashioned like vnto his glorious bodye, according to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all things vnto him. Colos. 3.Yée are dead, and your lyfe is hidde with Christ in God. When Christ, which is our lyfe, shall shewe himselfe, then shall ye also appéere with him in glorie.
I woulde not, brethren,1. Thes. 4. haue you igno∣rant concerning them which are fallen a sléepe, that ye sorrow not, as other do, which haue no hope. For if we beléeue that Iesus Christ dyed, and rose againe: euen so they also which sléepe by Iesus, will God bring againe with him. And saint Paule doth comfort Tymothe his scholar in the articles of the resurrecti∣on by these wordes: Remember (sayeth he) that Iesus Christ, being of the séede of Da∣uid, rose againe from death,2. Timo 3.2. according to my gospell. If we are dead with Christ, we shall also liue with him. If we suffer with him, we shall raigne with him. Saint Paule sayeth, that Christ,Hebr. 2. by the grace of GOD, should taste of death for all men. And in the same place he sayeth also, that Christ was made partaker of our flesh, and blood, that is to saye, hée became perfite man, that hée might put downe through death, him that had lordship ouer death, that is to wit, the diuell, and that he might de∣lyuer them, whosoeuer through feare of death, were all there lyfe time in daunger of bondage. God saued vs,2. Timo. 1. and called vs with an holy
calling, not according to our déedes, but ac∣cording to his owne purpose, & grace, which grace was giuen vs through Christ before the world was, but is now declared openly by the appéering of our sauior Iesu Christ, which hath put away death, & hath brought lyfe, and immortalitie to light. 1. Ioan. 3.We know yt we are translated from death vnto lyfe, bicause we loue the brethren. 1. Ioan. 4.In this appéered the loue of God to vs warde, bicause that God sent his onely be∣gotten sonne into the world, that we might liue thorow him. Iob. 19.I am sure that my redéemer lyueth, and that I shall ryse out of the earth at the last day, and that I shall be clothed againe with this skin, and sée God in my fleshe, yea, I my selfe shall beholde him, not with other, but with the same eyes. He that diligently doth meditate & thinke vpon these testimonies of scripture, cannot choose but take much comfort, and great ioy therof. Saint Paule may be a most euident example thereof vnto vs, which hartily re∣ioyseth in his owne behalfe, that he know∣eth Christ,Phill. 3. and the power of his resurrectiō, whereby our death is slaine. Now therfore
death is dead vnto all them, which beléeue in Christ, there is nothing now in death terrible, which is to be dreaded, and feared, besides the onely ymage and shape thereof. Euen as a serpent being kylled, kéepeth notwithstanding that his olde and fearefull figure, but hath no power in him to doe harme,Num. 21. and euen as the lyue serpentes died, when the brasen serpent was looked on, which Moyses set vp in the wildernesse, by the might of the power of God, and the Iewes could not be infected, with venome of the lyue serpentes: Likewise also our death his dead and made harmlesse, and no∣thing to be feared, if we looke vpon and be∣holde the liuely death of Christ, wyth the eyes of our fayth. And to be short, death is like the verie ymage and shadowe of death, yea, more rather she is the beginning, and enteraunce into the true lyfe. Christ, which is the veritie it selfe, sayeth:Ioan. 24. Ioan. 8. If a man kéepe my wordes, he shall neuer sée death. How, I pray you, may this be? I will showe you howe. A man, that trusteth in the mercie of Christ, by the fayth which he hath taken out of the gospell, is so incorporated, as I may so terme it, and so vnited, and coupled vnto
his lorde, and mayster Christ, which is the true lyfe,Ioan. 14. that he may not be pulled or sepa∣rated from him. This body therefore is sun∣dred, and deuided from the soule, in moste sure hope of the glorious resurrection, vnto euerlasting lyfe. For within short space, the body shal be restored againe vnto the soule, that they maye both enioy felicitie. And he that thus beléeueth in Christ, shall not sée eternall death of body and soule, that is to witte, perpetuall damnation, which is the true death.The death of godly men, is a going forth in∣to the company of the elect. For the death of godlye men, is a going forth, and departing out of this mortall life, into immortalitie, vnto Christ, vnto the angelles, and vnto all the saints. What is to bee done, when hell, or eternall damnation, comming in our minds, doth feare vs. THe malignant spirite ma∣keth man verie solicitous, & pensiue about his predesti∣nation, putting those cruell, and horrible thoughts of pre∣destination in hys mynde.
What if thou shouldest not please God? What if he hath vtterly cast thée off? How knowest thou, that thou art one of ye num∣ber of them, whome God hath elected, and chosen vnto euerlasting lyfe? These, and the lyke temptations, are most bitter, and doe most gréeuously torment, and vexe the minde. Wherefore, thou must here stande fast on both féete, as the prouerbe is, and it is needefull, that thou constantly defend thy selfe in this conflict. But it thou wouldest obtaine the victory in this battell, thou must set vpon him, by this policie, & craft. Forth∣with, as soone as these temptations come vnto thée from the Diuell, beware thou en∣ter not into disputation with him, beware thou deale not with him, neyther answere him againe. But put him off from thée, cha∣sed awaye with these wordes, and cogitati∣ons. Sathan get thée hence, depart vnto thy destruction. For it is writtē:Math. 4. Thou shalt not tempt the Lorde thy God. Séeing that God hath endued mée alwayes with most large, and infinite benefites, according to his fa∣therly loue towardes me, seing that he hath giuen me this lyfe, and hath nourished, and preserued the same euen hitherto, seing that
he hath heaped me vp, with all kind of good∣nesse, what madnesse were it for mée, to doubt of his mercie? Seing that through baptisme he hath appointed me into ye num∣ber, to bée one of the receyued flocke of the christians, seing that he hath called me vn∣to the gospell of his grace, wherein he hath promised to be my father, why shoulde I not then looke for all goodnesse at his hands? Why should I not assure my selfe of him in all things? Wherfore should not his great good will, and kindnesse towardes mée, al∣wayes be remembred of mée, for my stay, and comfort? What néede many words? It is a most foolishe, & perillous thing, to yeelde our minds, & studie to such cogitations con∣cerning predestination, but forthwith con∣found, & preuent thou such cogitations, with others, wherwith god would haue thy mind to be occupied, & preuented, yt is to wit, with those, which Christ himselfe hath appoin∣ted,Ioan. 3. where as he sayeth: He, that beleeueth in Christ, shall not perishe, but shall haue euerlasting life.1. Cor. 1. Hearest thou, that he, which beléeueth in Christ, which acknowledgeth Christ to bee his sanctification, saluation, and iustification, cannot be damned, and
that he shall bée partaker of eternall lyfe? How many soeuer therof doe trust vnto the mercie of Christ, without all doubt, they be of the number of them, which are chosen vn∣to lyfe euerlasting, being foreknowne and fore ordayned in Christ,Ephe. 1. now already writ∣ten in the booke of lyfe. And those which are predestinate vnto eternall lyfe, are made and become, like vnto the ymage of Christ. For they conceyue there fayth, for the which they are counted to bée iust before God, of none other thing, but of the worde of God. They are saued therfore, by this faith,The iust man ly∣ueth by faith. Gala. 3. Abac. 2. Rom. 1. Ephe. 1. that is to saye, by the trust and hope of mercie, fréely giuen vs for Christ his sake. Those things are most certeine and true. God can neyther be deceyued, nor deceyue any man. This is the purpose, and intent of God, our most bountifull father, and the true louer of mankinde. He from the beginning hath so purposed, so foreknowne, so before determi∣ned those things. There is no cause there∣fore, that thou shouldest be letted, or feared with those things, which that enimie enuy∣ing our saluation, and pretending the de∣struction of our soules, putteth in thy minde and layeth against thée. Sée onely that thou
beléeuing in Christ, doe comfort thy selfe, in the confidence of his mercie, and there shall be no perill at all. For if thou fasten thy hope,Ioan. 6. Rom. 4. & trust on Christ, Christ is made thine, and thou art Christes. If he haue re∣déemed thée, thou canst by no meanes bée damned, and perishe. For he that beléeueth on Christ, is drawen vnto him by the fa∣ther,Ioan. 10. and he will haue them to be saued by him, & none of them to perish. Wherfore, sée that thou haue a good hart, sée that thou be∣léeue constantly on Christ, and conceyue sure hope of him. How many soeuer beleue on Christ, the same are predestinate vnto euerlasting lyfe. We must therefore, fasten our eyes vpon Christ, we must flye vnto him. This our onely, and true sauiour, is to be taken holde on by faith, if we intende to be saued. Here let euery mā diligently way, that earnest exhortation of saint Paule, whose words are these: Let vs runne with pacience vnto the battell, that is set before vs,Hebr. 12. looking vnto Iesus, the author, and the finisher of our fayth, which for the ioy, that was set before him, abode the crosse, and de∣spised the shame, and is set downe on the right hande of the throne of God.
Furthermore, Christ for vs, and for our sakes suffered all temptations, with the which, being most gréeuous, he was vexed, and troubled, the same saint Paule bearing witnesse thereof saying:Hebr. 5. We haue not an high priest, which can not haue compassion of our infirmities, but was in all pointes tempted lyke as we are, but yet withoute sinne. Let vs therefore, go boldly vnto the seate of grace, that we may receyue mercie, and finde grace to helpe in tyme of néede. Print those things, déerely beloued, in thy minde. First, Christ was giuen vnto vs for this purpose, that he might redéeme vs, re∣concile vs, and make vs partakers of euer∣lasting saluation. Secondly, that he might be an example vnto vs, to leade, and passe ouer a godly life. Therfore if so be that thou desire to finish thy life wel, and vertuously, sée that the death of Christ, being set before thine eyes, thou ende thy lyfe after his ex∣ample. For Christ is set before vs, as a patterne to be folowed of vs, in our lyfe, and conuersation, in all afflictions, and in our death. No man lyueth godly, no man suffereth aduersitie, no man dyeth well, ex∣cept he set before him the lyfe, and death of
Christ, and doe folow the same. The death of all godly men, is abolished, & swalowed vp in the death of Christ. Wherfore, thou shalt consider, & diligently meditate, what kinde of death he suffered, how he behaued himselfe in that agonies of all other moste bitter, when he hanging on the crosse, was troubled, and pestered with most gréeuous temptations. Folow this Christ, as neere as thou mayest, calling for helpe at Gods handes. Howe christ was tempted on the crosse. Mark. 15. Math. 27. Luc. 23.First, he was tempted with death, when as it was sayd vnto him: He saueth others, but himselfe he cannot saue. As though they should saye. Now he is vndone, he must die, and perishe for euer, no man shall delyuer him, and pluck him out of our hands. After this manner, that our olde, and mortall enimie will bring the terrour of death on thée. But so muche the bolder go thou a∣gainst him, pluck vp thine hart, and streng∣then thee in him with a sure hope. Christ will subdue, and tread vnder foote, that eni∣mie, and thou also shalt ouercome him by Christ. Hold vp the shield of faith in Christ. Christ is the lorde,Ephe. 6. 1. Petr. 5. he is the king of glorie, and he is the lorde of lyfe, he is not subiect
to death, but liueth and reigneth. This thy lorde, and reuenger, will not suffer death to exercise hir tirannie vpon thée. He cannot deceyue thée, neyther can he lye, seing that he is the veritie it selfe. Con∣ceyue thou this trust, and confidence of him. Assure thy selfe, to receyue all goodnesse at his hands, and thou shalt lyue with him for euer. And for that he woulde haue the gree∣ued with temptations, and to suffer death of bodye, it is done onely for thy commoditie. Thou must therefore leaue and forsake this lyfe, if thou wilt enioy euerlasting lyfe. So after this lyfe, thou shalt in the ende begin to lyue in deede. Furthermore, this corpo∣rall death, profiteth thée to this purpose, that when thou hast tasted the bitternesse, and sharpnesse therof, thou mayest trie, & know, how feruent the affection of Christ his loue was towardes thée, what an vnestimable benefite hée bestowed vpon thée, that he dy∣ing for thée, did paye, and make satisfaction with his bodye for all thine offences, death throughly extinguished, and abolished, and the gates of hell throwne downe, destroyed, and also broken. For thou couldest neuer any other wayes know, and vnderstand the
strength, and power of life in Christ, which hath swalowed vp our death, thou shouldst not know the largenesse of his benifits nei∣ther shouldest thou be able to giue so harty thankes to Christ, thy lorde and redéemer. Wherfore, seing that Christ doth liue, thou also shall lyue by him, and this same death shal be vnto thée a certeine, happy, & whole∣some sléepe. It shall be also an entrance, and gate into that true, and most blessed lyfe. Secondly, Christ was also tempted with sinne, when they did reuile, and vpbraide him, as a verie wicked man, and giltie of most gréeuous crime.Math. 27. If thou be the sonne of God, come downe from the crosse. Thou sauest others, why doest thou not saue thy selfe also? What other thing meane these contumelious wordes, then that they sup∣posed, and thought, that he deceiued the peo∣ple by fraude, dole, slight, wiles, noughtie craftinesse, and that he was not in déede the sonne of God, yea, they iudged him rather to be most wicked, most abhominable, and most worthy of reproch. Euen likewise sa∣than will tempt man, being in daunger of death, he will present vnto him, whatsoeuer he hath done, and committed against the
commaundement of God, and will put into his minde, whole waynlodes, as it were, of sinnes, the same heaped vp, into a great abundance, that by the outragiousnesse, and greatnesse of sinnes, he maye bring man in∣to desperation, which staggereth, and doub∣teth of Gods mercie, and pardon. And here thou must stand fast, and strongly, and shalt enterteine thine enimy assaulting thée, with these wordes: I confesse that I am a most manifold, and gréeuous sinner. But Christ frée from all sinne, he, that innocent lambe, in whose mouth was founde no guile,1. Petr. 2. hath suffered cruell death for my sinnes, he hath clensed them all, be they neuer so great, nor neuer so many, and hath made sufficient sa∣tisfaction for them all. Christ his death, is the propitiation for al my sinnes.1. Ioan. 2. Christ ve∣rily hath suffered all my féeblenesse. He in déede hath caried all my sorowes. He was wounded for mine iniquities.Esay. 53. He was smit∣ten for my sinnes. By his woundes am I healed. He hath takē vpō him, al my sinnes, I now acknowledge none, I thank Christ, which hath payed ransome for them all. Thirdly, he was also tempted with hell, or eternall damnation, when they obiected
against him, saying: He hath trusted in the Lorde,Math. 27. let him take him, let him saue him, bicause he will haue him, as thoughe they should say: All his hope in God shal deceyue him. God is his aduersarie, and abhorreth him, and will cast him awaye for euer, as one thrust downe into hell. When the same tempter prouoketh thée wt such lyke temp∣tations, take héede thou stand fast. There is no cause why thou shouldest feare, there is no cause, why thou shouldest tremble. Let the thing, which he offereth, and presenteth vnto thée, nothing moue thée at all, bée it neuer so gréeuous. Put out of thy minde, and banish awaye farre from thee, as well sinne, as death, and hell. They haue no po∣wer ouer thée, if thou fasten thine eies vpon Christ. Take holde on him, and commend thy selfe wholy vnto him. Christ is thine, and he bestoweth himselfe wholy vpon thée. He hath redéemed thée from the tirannie of the diuell, and euerlasting damnation by an inestimable price. This Christ is thine innocencie, thy lyfe, and thy righteousnesse. Take héede onely that thine hart be neuer withdrawne from Christ crucified, by any temptations. If thou cleaue fast vnto thys
Christ, yu shalt be safe, against all the gates of hell, as one that is placed vpon an high, most sure, and inuincible rocke, that thou mayest crie out with Christ:Psal. 16. I haue set God alwaies before me. He is on my right hand. Therfore I shal not fal. Wherfore my hart was glad, and my glorie reioysed, my fleshe also shall rest in hope. Thou hast shewed me the pathes of lyfe. In thy presence is the fulnesse of ioye, and at thy right hande is pleasure for euermore. Thou art become, through such a faith in Christ, the childe of God, the brother, and felow eire wt Christ,Rom. 4. Gal. 4. Rom. 3. Gal. 3. Ephe. 2. and partaker of eternall lyfe. This fayth iustifieth the righteous, that is to saye those, which beleue in Christ. For this faith, thou shalt be reputed the blessed child of God, thy heauenly father, and when thou depar∣test hence, thou shalt enter into the king∣dome of heauen,Math. 25. prepared for the elect chil∣dren of GOD, from the beginning of the worlde. But if so be that thy fayth wauer, and be doubtfull in temptations, and when thou doest not suffer moderately, and paciently ynough ye wil of thy heauenly father, when thy loue towardes God is somewhat colde,
when thy hope is weake, and slender, and for this cause fearest, lest thou shouldest not well accorde with God, or lest he will be of∣fended with thée. Truely, this is a most gree∣uous, most painefull, and hard temptation. But thou shalt thinke in thy minde, and perswade with thy selfe, that Christ suffered for thée moste intolerable,Inuinci∣ble touch¦ing mere māhood. and inuincible temptations, wherein there appéered no helpe, comfort, ayde, or defence, any where, wherein God, and the whole world séemed to be his most cruell, & malycious enimies, when that he cryed aloude: My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? Oh horrible, and most cruell temptation, oh good God, how sharpe, how greeuous, how cruel, how bitter was the death, which he suffered for vs, that he might make the way of the crosse easie for vs. Therefore se∣ing that Christ willingly put himselfe in subiection, and dipped himselfe in those so horrible, and intolerable sorrowes, and calamities, our most louing heauenly fa∣ther wylling the same, out of doubt, he also vnderstandeth, and knoweth our infirmity, out of doubt, he taking compassion on vs, will not extréemely deale with vs, but will
rather beare with our imbecilitie, & weake∣nesse. Doth not he himselfe calling all men vnto him say: Come vnto me,Math. 11. al ye that la∣bor, and are heauie laden, and I wil refresh you? what more plentifull, what greater comfort, I pray you, can be giuen vs? Truly many, & very gréeuous things, do molest, & trouble mā. For what thing can more grée∣uously feare, what thing can more cruelly vexe, and torment his conscience, ouerwhel∣med with sinne, then when he doubteth of the mercie of God, when he dreadeth least God be his aduersarie, and will reiect him, when he is not able to conceyue this fayth of his mercie, and doth imagine himselfe to be cast awaye, as a drie member that is cut off? Be present here O Iesus Christ, with thine aide and helpe, here we haue néede of thy comfort, let not this black, violent, and horrible tempest of troubles ouerthrowe, and drowne wretched man. But there is no cause why we shoulde doubt. Christ is true, he will make his promises to appéere, he will helpe vs, and refreshe vs. Therfore, where as thy fayth is not strong ynough, where as thy hart is striken with feare, and trembling, where as thou féelest thy selfe to
doubt of Gods mercie, and hast well néere no faith at all: straight wayes call vppon God, bewayle thy miserie, and lack of be∣léefe before him, seeke for his ayde and suc∣cour by feruent prayer, and hée will both helpe and refreshe thée, and by this meanes thou shalt glorifie him. He hath taken vpon him thus to do, and he will bring it to passe. But take héede especially thou cease not to call vpon God.1. Cor. 1. Beséech thou, without all ceassing, the father of all consolation, and comfort, with sighes comming from the bottome of thine hart, that he turne not his face from thée. Laye thy weakenesse vpon him, and poure out into his bosome al other things, which trouble, and torment thée. Crie out with his disciples,Luc. 17. Math. 9. O lord increase my faith. Lykewise, say thou with the father of the lunatike childe: Lorde I beleue, help thou mine vnbeléefe. Make hast O lorde to helpe me, before that I, oppressed with this weight, be drowned. Thy mercie is aboue all thy workes, O most mercifull, O most bounteous father, O lorde God of my sal∣uation,Psal. 143. my succour, and refuge, enter not into iudgement with thy seruant. Christ is my righteousnesse, redemption, and inno∣cencie,
which suffered most bitter, and cruel death for my sake. Let those things moue thée O father of all compassion. Haue mer∣cie on me, for this thy sōnes sake. Confirme and strengthē mine hart, by faith in Christ. Comfort mée with the consolations of the holy ghost, that I may enioy the true ioyes in Christ for euer. If thou after this maner laboring, stry∣uing, and fighting with thine imbecillitie, and weakenesse, accusing, and bewayling thine incredulitie, and faint courage, doe take holde vpon Christ, and sticke fast and sure vnto him once taken, desiring, and be∣séeching his ayde with continuall and ear∣nest prayers, yt he will vouchsafe to fulfill all things lacking in thée, substituting him∣self in thy roume, if (I say) yu thus doe, then all shall be in good case, all things shall go well with thee, and there shall be no perill. For truely these two things, to beléeue in Christ, and to cal for faith by earnest praier, doe not much differ one from the other. Al∣though thou be weake, and endued with a féeble minde, let this thing notwithstan∣ding comfort, and aduaunce thée againe, that God hath commaunded, and wylleth
that we shoulde call vpon him, and that he hath promised to héere beneuolently,Psal. 45. and to helpe vs when we call vpon him. Further∣more, as nothing is more iustly desired of God, than true fayth: euen so he héereth no prayer sooner, & more wyllingly, than that wherein man finding no goodnesse in him∣selfe, acknowledging his infirmitie, hys weakenesse, and miserie, accuseth his vnbe∣léefe, bewayling, and lamenting the same, desiring to haue faith with plentie, and wo∣full sighes, & earnest prayers. These sighes, these prayers, this smale faith, be it neuer so little, is in déede a godly, and a bright sparkle, and the séede of God, which neuer riseth, without the efficacie, and working of God in vs, which speaketh of Christ, by the prophet Esay:Esay. 42. A brused réede shall hée not breake, and the smoking flaxe, he shall not quench. Wherefore see that thou beleue constantly on Christ, or beséeche him at the least wise with hartie prayers, that thou mayest beleeue, bewayling thine vnbeléefe, before God. If thou doe those things, thou shalt nothing doubt, but thou art reckened righteous before God, and to be his childe, which not without consideration, nor in
vaine, did laye our weakenesse,Esay. 53. and all our sinnes vppon Christ, his onely begotten sonne.Math. 5. Christ himselfe sayeth in saint Ma∣thew: Blessed are ye pore in spirit. For theirs is the kingdome of heauen. Blessed are they that mourne. For they shal receiue comfort. Blessed are they which hunger, and thirst after righteousnesse. For they shall be filled. These wordes were spoken vnto thée also, they doe well agrée, & accorde in thée. Thou doest mourne, and art sorie for thy wicked lyfe, it gréeueth thée from the bottome of thine hart, thou doest thirst, and hunger af∣ter righteousnesse, haue a good hope, and be of good comfort, and thou shalt obtaine the things, which thou doest desire, and nowe thou art reputed iust before God through Christ. For that cause,Rom. 4. thou shalt commit thy soule into the hande of God the father, after the example of Christ, and saint Ste∣phan saying these wordes:Acto. 7. O most mer∣cifull father, I giue, and commit into thine handes my spirite, yea, rather thy spirite, seing that thou hast giuen it me, ioyned vn∣to my body for a season, seing that it is thine owne ymage, & lykenesse,Gen. 1. &. 2. made after thine owne similitude, seing that thine onely be∣gotten
sonne did shed his moste precious blood, for ye redemption thereof. O most fa∣uorable father, O God of all mercie, & com∣passion, I eftsoones commend this my spirit into thine handes. I am thine, whatsoeuer I am. Receiue thine, I beséech thée, preserue him, and giue him eternall life through our Lorde Iesus Christ, thine onely begotten sonne. Amen. Of the making of a testament, and confession of sinnes vnto God. THe testament is to be made of all them, that may law∣fully make a will, and giue legacies, when there yet cō∣sisteth and remayneth per∣fite minde, and memorie in the body. Least if they prolong that busi∣nesse vnto the last moment of lyfe, they bée preuented by death. Therfore, it shal be wis∣dome for him, that hath lawfull heires, to referre all the care of making his testament vnto them. If so be that he haue borowed money, and be indebted to any man, he shall
openly declare it, and prouide for the pay∣ment of that he oweth. This being done, let him remoue and put from him all them, which trouble hym wyth matters of this worlde. Wherein many men doe offende, which bring in doubtes vnto him, which is now at the point of death, of his testament, and other externall things, and sometimes doe compell him to subscribe, & that against his will, being readie to dye, refusing, and detesting there importunitie, which will not suffer him quietly to die, then the which fréends, what thing cā be more vnfreendly? After this, if the maner, and kinde of his disease will suffer him, let him endeuor ra∣ther to cure his soule, than his bodye, by a shorte confession vnto God, but simple, and without dissimulation, and let the elders standing by, put him in remembrance of re∣pentaunce, grounded vpon a sure faith, and deuotion, and let him call for Gods mercie from the bottome of his hart, and purpose, and entende the amendement of lyfe, if hée happen to escape. But if so be that happily no elder, or coūsell giuer may be had, let not the sick straight waies fal into desperation, as some presumptuous people are woont to
doe for the lacke of a priest, but let him de∣clare his vnrighteousnesse, and open his conscience vnfainedly vnto God himselfe, which according to his clemēcie, wil vouch∣safe, to accept the desire of the minde, in the steade of the fact, and will of his peculiar grace, fulfill of himselfe that, which lacketh in the outwarde signes of the sacraments of the Lordes supper, which he desireth to re∣ceyue. For through him, the sacramentes are made effectuall, which after a fashion are seales of his diuine beneuolēce towards vs.The sa∣craments are seales of Gods mercye towardes vs. But he saueth man, when néede doth re∣quire, without these signes, onely so that there be no neglecting, or contempt of the sacrament, but faith, and a readie good will is therevnto. Of the sacrament of the lords supper. LEt the sicke body earnestlye desire to haue the most royal sacrament of thanks giuing to bée brought,Eucha∣ristia. and ministred vnto him, after ye his minde is purged by a true, and a
perfite confessiō, made vnto almighty God, as is aforesaide, and let him especially be∣ware, that he come not to that banquet, or heauenly table with iniurous handes, and spotted conscience. For we may not thinke, that those gréeuous threatnings are vaine, and of none effect,1. Cor. 11. which saint Paule ma∣keth mention off. Therefore after that hee hath examined, and prepared himselfe for that purpose, according to his power, and capacity, let him deuoutly record and speake these wordes. O lorde thou art the wayfaring cottage of our pilgramage,A prayer. wherewith we are re∣freshed, and nourished, as long as we host in the deserte of this worlde, and runne in this course. Bring mée therefore, O lorde,Psal. 27. into the lande of the lyuing, into the region of the quick, by the receyuing of this thy body, whereas I may beholde thée face to face, in the glory of the father. When we haue thus prayed, let him with a sure fayth, receyue the sacrament of Christ his body, in the re∣membrance of his death, and passion. And when the communion is ended, if it be perceiued, that no skil of phisick may cure his disease, then let the elders pray ouer the
sick body,Ioan. 5. not vsing any magicall prayers, as the heathen were woont to doe, but ear∣nestly calling vpon ye name of Iesus Christ, wherevnto there is no kinde of inchaunt∣ment comparable, or lyke effectuall, and sée that he haue a confidence and affiance in your prayers, then will God héere you, and preserue him that is sicke, and he shall not onely haue the health of his body, restored vnto him againe, if it so be good, & expedient for him:Bodily sicknesse do spring out of the wic∣kednesse of the minde. but if he haue happily committed sinne, as commonly the sickenesse of the bo∣dy doe spring out of the enormyties, and naughtinesse of the minde, they shall be forgiuen him, at the prayers of the elders, if that both they, which praye, and he for whom they do pray, bée of a stedfast and constant fayth.
The sorow which many take, more then is requisite for the death of there pa∣rentes, and friends, ought to be tempered by the right rule of reason. IT is the parte of an heathen gentile, rather than of a chris∣tian man, to giue himselfe onely vnto teares, refusing all temperance, and modera∣tion of reason in sorowing, the which thing is conuinced, and mani∣festlye reproued by thys reason especially, bicause that they, which are sorowed for, cannot be reuoked, and called backe againe vnto lyfe by wéeping, be it neuer so much, or neuer so long continued, and vsed. Ther∣fore those teares are vaine, and of none ef∣fect, bringing no fruite or commoditie with them.2. Reg. 12. The which thing king Dauid hath declared vnto vs, by an example, worthie of memory, which fasted, and wept abundant∣ly. As long as the childe, borne vnto him of Bersabe was sicke, and languished, he gat himselfe alone, and lay flat on the grounde,
praying vnto the lorde, for the health of the childe. But as soone as he vnderstoode by his seruauntes, which whispered togithers, that the childe was deade, he casteth off his sadde, and mourning garmentes, and ap∣parelled himselfe in freshe aray, hée washed his face, and when the table was layed, he did eate chéerefully. Whereat his seruants marueyled, and thought, that when hée had vnderstoode of his childes death, yt he would the more afflict himselfe, which, whilest the childe was yet lyuing, did pine himselfe, with fasting, and weeping. He said vnto his seruantes, demaunding why he did so. I haue fasted, and wept for the infant, whyle he yet lyued. For I said: Who can tell if the lorde peraduenture will giue me the infant, that he may liue? But now, seing that he is dead, wherefore should I fast? What, can I call him againe? I shal rather go vnto him, then he shall reuerte and come againe vnto mée. By the which wordes truely, Dauid wisely declared, that we ought not to lamēt, and sorrow for him, which cannot be reuo∣ked, and called back againe vnto lyfe. ¶This sermon of saint Cyprian, is alrea∣die translated into english, by the famous
learned, and worshipfull knight, sir Tho∣mas Eliote. Wherefore I did ommit the same, least happily the prouerbe shoulde be verified on mee: Cornicum oculos configere, to endeuor to prick out the crowes eyes. And saint Cyprian in his sermond entituled of mortalitie testifieth, that he was often ad∣monished by diuine reuelation, wherin God commaunded him, that he shoulde openly warne all men, and should teache them by preaching, that the breathren which depart out of this worlde by Gods calling, ought not to be lamented, and that such wayling is lothsome and hated of God. Yet notwithstanding, it is méete that we should sometime participate our teares, cō∣ming of a naturall zeale of the minde, and the syncere affect of compassion, but mode∣rated by the right rule of reason, least we should séeme to haue an hart as hard as an adamant stone, & to haue looued our fréend little, or nothing at al. For Christ our lord, the absolute, & perfite figure of all vertues, louingly lamented dead Lazarus. And Ma∣rie, and Martha, were highly commended, for that they lamented their brothers buri∣all. And those fréendly women,Ioan. 11. which dili∣gently
stoode by Christ,Luc. 23. Math. 27. when he suffered his passion vpon the crosse, were therefore worthily praised, bicause they wept for him, when he was deade and buried. We reade also in the actes of the apostles,Acto. 7. of S. Ste∣phan, the first martyr, that godly men pro∣uided for him all that appertained vnto the funerall of his buriall. Yea, and further∣more, Ecclesiasticus doth admonish vs, to wéepe for the deade, but not immoderately, or any long time,Eccle. 22. saying thus: Wéepe o∣uer him that is deade, bicause the light fay∣leth him. Make but little wéeping for the deade, bicause he is come to rest. Also verye many epistles of the holy father saint Hie∣rome, comforting vs vpon the death of our fréendes, are of great efficacie for the same purpose, whereof I now entreate. For they perswade by the authority of holy scripture, & strong reasons, that they ought not im∣moderately to be lamented, which chaunge their life with death. As that epistle which he wrote vnto Heliodorus, vpon the death of Nepotianus, that, which he wrote vnto Paula vpon the death of hir daughter Ble∣silla, and that, which he wrote vnto Tyra∣sius of the death of his daughter, and the
rest of that most reuerende father his epi∣stles, touching the like matter & argument. A precept containing an exhortati∣on vnto all them, which pro∣fesse the name of Christ. I Now humbly desire,Parae∣nesis. & har∣tily beséech you, by the mer∣cie of God, as manie as are called by ye name of Christi∣ans, that once in the ende, yée forsake your olde darke∣nesse, and horrible errors, and returne vnto better proofe of lyfe, and to harken vnto the wholesome receiued worde of God, wt great desire of a pure hart, and deuotion, knock∣ing without ceasing, and that ye call vpon the father of heauen through Christ, that he wil instruct vs, and lighten vs with the true knowledge of Christ,Tit. 2. that we may liue so∣berly, righteously, and godly in this pre∣sent lyfe, refusing the wickednesse, and con∣cupiscence of the worlde, looking for that blessed hope, and appéerance of the glorie of almightie God, & Iesu Christ our sauiour, which gaue himselfe for vs, that he might
redéeme vs from all our iniquities,1. Petr. 2. & clense vs to be a peculiar people vnto himself, and folowers of good workes. That worde of grace, light, and all com∣fort, hath shyned vnto vs, by the excéeding benefite of God. We haue verie many no∣table examples in holy scripture, testifying the abundant goodnesse, long suffering, and clemencie of God towards vs, whereby we maye easily perceyue, how that hée woulde not haue vs to be cast awaye,EZech. 18. but that we should be conuerted and lyue, how soone his wrath, be it neuer so iust, waxeth colde, how soone be letteth passe the punishment, which we deserue, when we thinke on the amende∣ment of our lyfe, earnestly repenting. Let vs also, déerely beloued, flye vnto God in all our afflictions, being moued therevnto by these things. Let vs desire him with conti∣nuall prayers, that he will vouchsafe mer∣cifully to forgiue vs all our sinnes, for that his welbeloued sōne, Iesus Christ his sake, and that he will vouchsafe to preserue, nou∣rish, defend, and comfort vs, and to be briefe, he will vouchsafe to be our present aide, and succour in all necessities. 2. Reg. 14.As soone as Dauid, being cast into ex∣treme
perill, when there died thrée score and ten thousande, within fewe dayes, by the fiercenesse of the pestilence, did flye vnto God, confessing his sinnes, desiring pardon for them, earnestly calling vpon the mercy of God, & building an aulter in the threshing floure of Arefnath the Iebusite, and offered vp burnt sacrifice, and peace offerings, God tooke compassion on the lande, & the plague ceassed from Israell. After this example call you also vpon the grace and mercie of God, confessing your sinnes, offering vp vnto God an acceptable sacrifice of a penitēt and contrite hart, and he will be present with you, and helpe you, and will neuer forsake you. Likewyse God sent the prophet Ionas,Ionas. 3. and threatened to ouerthrow, & destroy that moste famous, and populous citie Niniue. But as soone as the Niniuites did repent at the preaching of Ionas, GOD tooke mer∣cy on them, forgaue their offences, and did withholde his punishment. Follow their example, and mistrust not ye mercy of God. His arme is not yet abreuiated, & shortned. He both can, and will helpe vs, so that wée call for his ayde, and succour, and will not
refuse his grace, when it is offered vnto vs. Doth he not cry out by S. Paule,Rom. 10. & plainly testifye, that he is rich vnto all them that call vpon him? Peroratio. I Hartily desire you, déerely belo∣ued brethren in the Lorde, to take this my simple tretise in good part, whereby I, a weake member of yours, am desirous to doe you good, being other members in the lorde, as farre foorth as I might, both for breuitie of time, & also the health of my body not being perfite. I had léeuer comforte you face to face, if it might so be. But séeing it may not be so, I will somewhat make amendes, in shew∣ing my ready good will and charity towar∣des you, by prayer. Wherefore, I beseeche Iesus Christ, that true, and most approued meane, the most plentifull apothecary, that he will vouchsafe to make this phisick for the soule, collected, and atchyued out of his apothecaries shoppe, that is to wit, out of the riche storehouse of holy scripture, to be effectual in your harts, that true fayth may encrease in you, the loue both towardes
God, and your neyghbour may be feruent in you, that ye may be pacient in all trou∣bles and aduersitie, that ye diligently following Christ his example, may cleaue and sticke fast vnto him, euen to the yéelding vp of ye last breath, in sure hope of eternall life tho∣row Iesus christ. Amen. The ende of the Booke entituled, Physick for the soule.
A fourme and methode, or right order to com∣fort the sicke. THou muste for a surety determine with thy selfe, O Christian, which art troubled and gréeued with sicknesse, that thou art not afflic∣ted by hap, or chaunce, but by the purpose, and permission of God. Whatsoeuer disease there be, calamitie, heauinesse, or infelicity, which happeneth vnto the godlye, it com∣meth all by the determination, and will of God,Act. 17. Psal. 99. which gouerneth all things. For in him we liue, moue, and haue our being. He made vs, and not we our selues. And doubt not, but he sendeth this sicknesse, whatsoe∣uer it be, of his good, and fatherly loue, not to the entent that he would thereby destroy thée, but that he myght call thée to repen∣tance, and that he myght stirre vp, and ex∣ercise thy fayth.Afflicti∣ons are the to∣kens of Gods fa∣uour. For afflictions are the sure, and vndoubted signes, and tokens of Gods great mercy, and fauour towards vs. Salo∣mon
sayth:Prouer. 13. Eccle. 30. Hebr. 12. Whom he loueth, him doth he correct, he scourgeth euery childe whom he receyueth. Thy most mercifull heauenlye father, which loueth thée earnestly accor∣ding to his good purpose, and zeale towards thée, doth withholde, brydell, and mortifie thine olde man by this sicknesse, like as it were tyed with chaynes, that thou mayest the more gladly, and with the better good will, as it were fasten thy body vppon the crosse, as a sacrifyce offered vp with Christ. Therefore this thy disease, wherewith thou art troubled, is a fatherlye correction sent vnto thée, not for that purpose, that thou shouldest be lost, or cast away, but that thou shouldest be made the better, and be quick∣ned. God thy father peraduenture doth sée, that thine olde Adam waxeth vntractable, immoderate, and vnruly, and ouermuch gi∣uen to affections, not able to gouerne, ney∣ther to inhabite, or withhold himself. Ther∣fore he layeth this band or collar vpon him, he bindeth him fast with these fetters, and chaynes, he shutteth him into this pryson, and dungeon, he tyeth him with this clog, that he may bridel, that he may kepe down, and restreiue him, that he do not seduce, and
cast thy most déere, and precious soule into perill. The flesh, and blood doe resist, & are more strong in thée, than the spirite, & here God is present with thy spirite, & doth ayde him against the fierce, and vnbrideled will, and rebelling fleshe, that he maye subdue, vanquishe, and bring it in subiection. If so be that thou shouldest haue good, and perfite helth of body, perchaunce the fleshe, as it is prone, and ready vnto nothing but euil, had brought, and seduced thée into many, & grée∣uous sinnes against GOD, whereby his wrath stirred vp, & prouoked against thée, should make a waye for thy soule vnto hell, and malediction. Thy heauenly father pre∣uenting this dammage, and peril, carefull, and prouident for thée, and thy saluation, doth kéepe downe, and restraine, as it were with putting on a bridell vpon thy fleshe, & leadeth it away captiue, raging, & rebelling against ye spirite by all meanes possible, that it be not tumbled into the sinck, & puddle of sinne, but that it be brought vnder, and be∣come obedient vnto the spirite. Seing that this is the will of thy moste louing father, and seing that all things shall redownde vnto thy profite and saluatiō, take very good
héede that thou striue not against the good will of God, and that thou be not contrarie to him, but suffer thou paciently, and pray, that his fatherly will bée done, that hée vse thée at his pleasure, and that thou wilt no∣thing, but that shall séeme best vnto him, that al things may bée done vnto the lande, and glorie of God, & that thou mayest haue his grace quietly and moderately to suffer his crosse, layed vpon thée.Rom. 5. For pacience bringeth experience, experience bringeth hope, and hope maketh not ashamed. Here thou hast matter, and occasion to learne, and exercise pacience in all afflictions, and troubles. First, thou doest learne, that God afflicteth, and punisheth thée with a fatherly correction, and that thou learnest by experi∣ence. For except thou shouldest knowe by proofe, & experience how wholesome a thing it is for man wholy to commit himselfe vn∣to GOD, and to be obedient vnto his good will, and pleasure. Euen as Dauid sayeth,Psal. 119. it is good for mée that I haue béene in trou∣ble, thou were not able to conceiue certaine, and sure hope of him, thou shouldest not know his fatherly loue, & good will towards thee, which is hidden in secret, if thou did∣dest
not proue it before, by this crosse and rodde. But when thou hast learned it before by experience, and hast now some tast of that matter alreadie, thou doest not faint, and fall into desperation by any afflictions, but thine hope moreouer encreaseth, when thou hast oftentymes tyred Gods present ayde, and helpe. And although he sometime for a season, as it were winking at the matter, doe suffer thée to sticke fast, and sinke in∣to daungerous places, yet at the length not withstanding he reacheth thée his helping hande, he taketh thée vp and doth preserue thée. He suffereth thée sometimes to swim and to be ouerwhelmed with waues of this lyfe, but he will not suffer thée to be vtterly drowned. Hereby thou mayst ascerteine thy selfe, that he will not forsake thée, or cast thée awaye, seing that he hath so often pre∣serued thée, when thou wast in daunger. Therefore by afflictions thou doest learne to conceiue, and nourishe sure, and vndoub∣ted hope of God, that thou mayest trust vn∣to him in most gréeuous diseases, & punish∣ments, where there appéereth no succour at all, being now instructed after what mea∣nes he delyuereth, & preserueth his seruants.
Thou hast learned that God sendeth afflic∣tions vpon thée, not in his wrath, but in his fatherly loue. The which thing when thou art thorowlye perswaded, and art taught by experience, thou mayest pacient∣ly looke for Gods ayde and succour, and not dispaire, but constantlye trust, that in the ende he will help thee, although he hide himselfe, prolonging, and deferring thine ayde, and deliuerance neuer so long. And by this meanes thou shalt perceyue and vn∣derstande at the last, that disease, or af∣fliction is not sent vnto thée for that pur∣pose, that thou therby shouldst be destroyed, but that the glorie of God mought be mani∣festly shewed, and that all things mought turne vnto thy saluation. He that can after this maner commit, and giue himself wholy vnto God, beleuing, & trusting in his promi∣ses, shall neuer die. The which thing euen Christ himselfe affirming wt an othe, least happily we should somwhat doubt, doth say: Verily, verily, if a man kéepe my worde,Ioan. 8. he shal neuer sée death. And in an other place he saith: I am the way, ye verity, and the life.Ioan. 14. Ioan. 21. He that beleueth on me, shall lyue, although he were dead. And whosoeuer lyueth, and be∣léeueth
on mée, shall neuer dye. Sée that thou diligently kéepe these words of Christ, fastened in the bottome of thine hart, and herewith thou shalt lift vp, and strengthen thy wauering minde. He that beleeueth on Christ, shal not taste of death. He that bele∣ueth on me (sayth Christ) hath eternall life, and this is eternall lyfe,Iohn. 17. that they acknow∣ledge thée, to be true God, and him whome thou hast sent Iesus Christ.Eternall lyfe be∣ginneth in this worlde. Eternall lyfe first beginneth in this worlde.Ioan. 14. For he, that hath Christ, hath the true life. For Christ is lyfe, and is the victoritie it self. Therfore he will not deceyued vs,2. Corin. 1. but all the promises of God in him are yea, and are in him. Amen. And to the ende, that thou shouldest no∣thing doubt, but that God wil performe his word, and make his promise good, he hath assured, and bounde himselfe vnto thée, by a certeine peculiar league, and signe, put, and added vnto thy body. For he coueted, and de∣sired thy saluation,Iohn. 3. when he sent his sonne into the world, to the intent he should offer himselfe, vnto death for thée. He did fore∣make, and assure a league of grace through Christ, that he would fréely giue thée euer∣lasting lyfe, if thou beleue, and art baptised,
that he woulde neuer forsake thee, that he will be thy father, that he will crowne thee with grace, and mercie.Baptisme is a seale of salua∣tion. And thy baptsime is the seale, and token of this league, wher∣vnto his promises being added, it is requi∣site, that thou stick fast vnto them. For he gaue this singe, that thou shouldest nothing doubt of his couenant, and promised grace. Thou art baptised into the death of Christ, as saint Paule sayeth,Rom. 6. that his death should be made thine, and that he should make sa∣tisfaction in all things for thée, and thou hast put him on in thy baptisme,Gala. 3. that thou shouldest wholy be in him, and hée in thée. Therefore baptisme is a league, lifting vp, making merie, and quieting thy conscience before god, as saint Peter beareth witnesse,1. Pet. 3. that hee wyll neuer condemne thée for thy sinnes. For thou iustified by fayth,Rom. 5. art at peace with God. A quiet, calme, and paci∣fied conscience, is the true peace.The true peace. And thou hast receiued baptisme as a most sure token, and certeine seale of this iustification, and remission of sinnes, that thou shouldst sted∣fastly beléeue, that God will haue mercye on thée, that hée will preserue and delyuer thée.
Now therefore, seing that God fauoreth thée, and will be thy father, and will neuer forsake thée, and seing that thou hast recey∣ued an infallible token, and testimony here∣of, commende, and vtterly giue all the mat∣ter, and thy selfe also wholy vnto him, and be thou obedient vnto his good will & plea∣sure, and thou must paciently abide, and suf∣fer his hande, whether he will haue thée to dye, or lyue, so that his owne blessed will may be done, vnto his owne praise, & glory. Albeit it is not possible, that thou canst be damned, if thou consecrate, and dedicate thy selfe wholy vnto him, surely trusting in his mercie, promised for Christ his sake. For he hath condicioned, that he will be thy father. And bicause he is true, when thou doest ac∣knowledge him to be thy father, and doest looke for, and hope to receyue all goodnesse of him, he cannot but be thy father, and pre∣serue thée, by what meanes soeuer he sharp∣ly vseth thee for a little space. Seing there∣fore, he hath promised to be thy father, & thou trustest vnto his promises: without all que∣stion, he taketh earnest care of thee, and all thine. Wherefore thou shalt commend vn∣to him, not onely thine owne body, but also
thy wyfe and children, thy kinsfolkes and fréendes, and to be short, all that thou hast, and doubt not, but he will be vnto thée, in the steade of a verie father, a wyfe, a true fréend, and cosine. For hitherto he hath vsed thée, as a dispensatour, and steward in those things. But now séeing that he will haue thée to lay aside the function of this office: he wil appoint in thy roume an other steward for them, which shall diligently, and faith∣fully take care of them. If thou hope for this of him, and looke for it with a ful confidence of hart, there is no doubt, but he will do as I haue tolde thée. Wherefore put out of thy minde all care of them, and commit it vnto God. Be rather carefull for thy selfe, pro∣uide for thy soule, and thinke how to yéelde it vp vnto God. And seing that God hath fréely forgiuen thée all thy sinnes for Christ his sake, he will require nothing of thee at all for this his great, and inestimable benefite, but that thou againe forgiue, from the bottome of thine hart all them, which haue offended thée. And he doth promise,Math. 6. that he wil remit all our trespasses, if we forgiue other men there misdéedes. Therefore when thou hast
so forgiuen all offences vnfaynedly, yt thou neuer reuiue them, nor call them vnto me∣morie againe, praye also for them, which haue done thée harme, according to the doc∣trine, and example of Christ, and if thou re∣couer, help them néeding thine aide, as much as thou mayest. If thou haue such a minde voyde of strife, enuie, malice, and wrath, thou hast also a signe and token, that God hath forgiuen thée thy sinnes. For fayth whereby thine hart is purified, and clensed, exercising hir selfe, and bringing forth hir fruits, according to Gods infinite benifits, cannot choose but likewise forgiue, and doe good vnto hir neighbour. This fruit of loue, and charitie testifieth, and doth ascerteine thée,A liuely fayth, bringeth foorth true fruites. that thy faith is a true, & a liuely faith, seing that she bringeth forth good, and true fruites.2. Petr. 1. This is the thing, that saint Peter would haue, whereas he biddeth vs to giue the more diligence, to make our calling, and election sure by good workes. For he mea∣neth that those workes are witnesses, and signes, that thou art chosen, and adopted of God, to be his sonne, vnto the ioyes of e∣ternall saluation. But thou shalt not hope, déerely beloued,
that God will forgiue thée thy sinnes,Payne cannot merite, the re∣mission of sinnes. for the payne and gréeuousnesse of thy crosse & sicknesse.Act. 4. Ioan. 1. For there is none other saluatiō, ther is none other recompēce for thy sinnes, then the onely death of Christ. God truely respecteth none other thing in this case, hée accepteth none other thing, but his déerely beloued sonne. This is the lambe of God, which taketh away the sinnes of the world. And this thy sicknesse and paynes cannot make satisfaction vnto God so muche as for thy least offence, muche lesse, can it deserue saluation. As S. Paule testifyeth saying: I suppose that the afflictiōs of this lyfe,Rom. 8. are not worthy of the glory, which shall be she∣wed vpon vs. No creature,Peter sai∣eth. Act. 4 there is no salua∣tion in anye o∣ther than in Christ. neyther in hea∣uen, neyther in earth, no Angell coulde mi∣tigate, and pacifie the wrath of GOD the father, then this thy disease and tempo∣rall affliction, is much lesse able to aswage it. And farder it was requisite, yt he, which should pacifie that wrath, and reconcile god vnto man, should be both God and man, as one ready to pleade, and make intercession betwéene God being offended, & man con∣demned. Therefore it behoued the sonne of God to be made mā, that he might appease
and satisfie the wrath of his father, & deliuer vs from it, as ye prophet witnesseth saying: Hée taketh away our infirmities,Esa. 53. & beareth our paynes. God hath layd our iniquities v∣pon him, I haue smitten him (sayth god) for the sinnes of my people.1. Petr. 2. And s. Peter fayth: By whose stripes we ar healed. Thy sinnes therefore are forgiuen thée for this thy lord Christ his sake, and for none other thing in all the world. For none afflictiōs, be they neuer so bitter, and gréeuous, can helpe vs. Christ is our only iustification,1. Cor. 2. redemptiō, satisfaction and saluation. 2. Cor. 5.God hath made him to be sinne for vs, that knew no sinne, that we by his meanes should be righteous. Wherfore, if thou be∣léeue,Ioan. 1. Rom. 8. Gala. 3. Rom. 6. thou art nowe becomme the sonne of God. If thou be the sonne of God, thou art also the heire of God, and the fellow heyre with Christ. If so be that eternall lyfe be the inheritaunce, and gift of God, as saint Paule doth call it, thou canst not deserue it by the paynes, and gréefe of thy sicknesse. But God woulde haue thée punished wyth this disease vnto this ende, & purpose, that thou shouldst therby keepe downe, breake, and mortifie this thine olde man, that at the
length he maye cease from committing of sinne,1. Cor. 15. the ende whereof commeth onely by this corporall death. And for this cause wée muste dye, that our soules may depart vnto euerlasting saluation. For death is ye gate,Death is the ente∣rance vn∣to eter∣nall lyfe. and entraunce vnto eternall lyfe, where, in the ende we are deliuered from all cala∣mities,Apoc. 21. myseries, and wretchednesse, from all errours, and deceytes of the diuell, that we shall no more be defiled with the moste filthy spottes of sinne, neyther shall we be seduced into heresies, or errours, neither be cast headlong into desperation.1. Cor. 15. Then there shall be an ende of all euills, of all aduersi∣ties, and discommodities. Then shall we rest in the lorde, and shall obtaine lyfe, and euerlasting ioyes. Death therfore is not to be detested, and abhorred, yea, rather it is earnestly to be desired, and imbraced, seing that we passe thorow it into eternall ioyes. And that is a most true saying, which saint Paule speaketh:Rom. 8. That all things vnto the godly, shall turne vnto good. Truely death vnto the worlde séemeth to be a thing most odious, most horrible, and cruell, but vnto the beleeuers it is moste swéete, pleasant, and acceptable. Although our olde Adam
doth tremble at hir comming, abhorreth, & escheweth hir. Our inward man notwith∣standing is readie, chéerefull, quick, and wil∣ling to die, seing that he vnderstandeth and knoweth, that he shall be deliuered from al filthinesse of sinne, wickednesse, vice, and wredchednesse by hir, and shall go forth vn∣to eternall ioyes. How those are to be comforted, which lye in the daunger of death. GOD thy good and moste lo∣uing father, hauing compas∣sion on thée, déerely beloued, doth call thée out of this most miserable and wretched lyfe, wylling to translate & bring thée vnto himselfe, into the perpetuall ioyes of the celestiall life. Therfore giue and com∣mende thy selfe and all thine, wholy vnto him, and whatsoeuer he will haue done, will thou the same also.Math. 26. Mark. 14. Luc. 22. Io. 6. Lu. 23 And say, thy wil be done O God my father, and not mine. Cry vnto Christ as the théefe did, which hanged on the crosse: Remember mée O lord when
thou commest into thy kingdome. Crie wt the publican:Luc. 18. O lord be mercifull vnto me a wretched sinner. Crie instantly with the woman of Cana, that heathen gentile: Oh sonne of Dauid, haue mercie on mée.Math. 15. And doubt not, but Christ will heare thée calling vnto him, and haue compassion on thée. He will forgiue thee thy sinnes, and thou shalt be with him in paradise. There∣fore, take thou holde by this Christ, sticke fast vnto him, and sée that thou commit thy soule vnto him. Crie thou with this Christ crucified vnto GOD, which is father vnto you both: In thée, O lorde, I put my trust,Psal. 31. let mée neuer bée put to confusion, delyuer me in thy righteousnesse. Bowe downe thine eare to mée, make hast to delyuer me. Be thou my strong rock, and house of de∣fence, that thou mayest saue mée. Thou art my strong rock, and my castle, be thou my guide also. Into thy handes I commend my spirite. Crie thou with Dauid also: O lorde thou art my strength, the lorde is my stony rock, and my defence, God is my sa∣uiour, and my buckler, the horne also of my saluation. Vnto thée, O lorde,Psal. 18. Psal. 25. haue I lifted vp my soule, my God I haue put my trust
in thée. O let me not be confounded. Leade me forth in thy truth. For thou art the God of my saluation. Call to remembraunce, O lorde, thy tender mercies, and thy louing kindnesse, which hath bene euer of olde. Oh remember not the offences of my youth, but according to thy mercie, thinke thou vpon me O lord, for thy goodnesse. For thy names sake O lorde bée mercifull vnto my sinne, for it is great. Turne thée vnto mée & haue mercy vpon me, O bring thou me out of my troubles. Forgiue mée all my sinnes, O keepe my soule and deliuer mée. Let me not bée confounded. For I haue put my trust in thée. If thou call for Gods ayde, and succour after this maner, God will helpe thée in a conuenient time, and will say, as it is writ∣ten in the psalme:Psal. 91. Bicause he hath set his loue vpon me, I will therfore delyuer him, I will set him vp, bicause he hath knowne my name. He shall call vpon me, and I will heare him, yea, I am with him in trouble, I will deliuer him, and bring him to honor. Wherefore, O thou christian, here fight a good fight, fight thou valiantly, stoutely, & constantly, as it becommeth a true christi∣an to doe.
Beware thou giue no ground, nor go back∣wards, there is no perill. Thou fightest not here alone. But the king Iesus Christ is thy captaine in this agony. Follow him go∣ing before thée in this conflict. This thy ca∣pitaine shalbe thy reuenger, & he shall saue, and defende thée in this battell from all thē enimiys of thy soule, from all perill, & from al calamitie. He is not a king as others are, but he is of infinit, and vnspeakable power. He hath vanquished, and subdued for thy sake, death, sathan, and hell.Esa. 25. Oscae. 13. 1. Cor. 15. Death is swa∣lowed vp into the victorie. Christ died for thée. Therefore eternall death, hath no po∣wer on thée. Christ descended into hell, that he might deliuer thée frō this eternall dark∣nesse. Be thou therfore of a valiant, & stout courage, runne into the front of the battell with a bold hart, put away all feare, here is no daunger. There is no cause why thou shouldest feare the seuere, & streight iudge∣ment of God.1. Ioan. 2. 1. Timo. 2. 1. Petr. 2. Rom. 5. Iesus Christ is thy mediatour before God. He is thine aduocate, & patrone. He is both thy bishop, & priest. He hath re∣cōciled thée vnto God, and hath restored vn∣to you his fatherly loue, which was aliena∣ted from thée, for thy sinnes sake. God now
is now thy father for Christ his sake.Esay. 63. Iohn. 14. He ta∣keth care of thée. He entéerly loueth thée, as his most tender childe. Now séeing that this so mighty a king standeth on thy side: who shall be able to trouble thée? Who shall be able to assault & inuade thée? Who, I pray thée, shall be able to doe thée wrong? What daunger can there be? Harcken what saint Paule sayth:Rom. 8. If God (sayeth he) be on our side, who can be against vs? Which hath not spared his owne sonne, but hath yéelded him vp for vs all, howe can it be, that he al∣so will not giue vs all things wt him? Who shall go about to laye anye crime against Gods elect? It is God that iustifieth. Who is he then that can condemne? It is Christ that died, yea rather, which is raysed vp a∣gaine, and is at the right hand of God, and there maketh intercession for vs. Who shall separate vs from the loue of God? I am thorowlye perswaded, that neyther death, neither life, neither heigth, neither depth, neither any other creature, can be able to se∣parate vs from the loue of God, which is in our lord Iesus Christ. Séeing that therfore, Christ is giuen thee, with al his riches, with all his righteousnesse, innocency, and salua∣tion.
Eternall life is giuen thée also. Sainct Paule testifying the same, vnto the Corin∣thians, sayth:1. Corin. 1 That Christ is made of God to vs, wisdome, and also righteousnesse, and sanctifying, and redemption. Therefore, sée that thou haue all thy hope, and confidence placed and fixed vpon this Christ, and vpon this corner stone. This stone is a sure, soūd,This stone is Christ. 1. Petr. 2. Esay. 28. and firme foundation, wherevnto thou mayst leane, and safely commit thy selfe. No tempest, be it neuer so black, and boysterous, no shower, no stormes, are able to throwe downe, and ouerturne this foundation. Let all thy hope and aide (I say) be placed, and set on this Christ, cast thy selfe vpon him, sticke fast vnto him, let no temptation, or calami∣ty be able to withdrawe, and pull thée from him, although all things seeme to happen vnto thée very absurdly, and ouerthwartly. Although fleshe, and blood, doe interprete it farre otherwise, and reason thinke it contra∣ry, although the deuill doth nowe and then whisper in thy minde, saying: That thou art vndone, that God is highly offended with thee, that thou hast deserued the paine of hell fire, and that thou muste be damned. For faith is a substaunce, that is to wit,Hebr. 11. an
expectation of things hoped for,Hypo∣stasis. that is of promises, and , that is as much to say, as a sure argument, and knowledge of things that are not séene.Rom. 4. Gen. 15.17. Thou muste be∣leue with that holy Patriarch Abraham in hope, ouer and aboue hope. Thy faith, and hope muste resist, and set it selfe against all those things, which eyther blinde reason suggesteth, either that  our most subtile, and by all meanes most crafty enimy, going about to worke vs de∣ceyt, and our destruction, doth instill and poure into vs. Wherfore thou must learne well the maner and custome of God, which he vseth in preseruing those that are his. Looke whome he will lift vp into heauen, him will he first seeme to bring downe vnto hell.1. Reg. 2. Looke whom he entendeth to quicken, him will he first mortifie and kill. Vppon whom he mindeth to shew his notable mer∣cy, and fauor, he first maketh semblance, tri∣ing him, as though he would cōdemne him. Wherfore whē thou perceyuest none other thing, but present death, when God sée∣meth to be gréeuouslye offended with thée, when that thou thynkest that he is gone most fardest from thée, and that he hath vt∣terly
forsaken thée, as one refused, and con∣demned: then is he most néerest vnto thée, ready to defend, and deliuer thée, he then lo∣ueth thee most especially, then thou art chief∣ly regarded of him. For when trouble, and affliction commeth vpon vs, then doth he re∣member his mercye, according to the pro∣phets saying:Psal. 30. For his wrath endureth but the twinkling of an eye, he will not be an∣gry for euer. For like as a father pitieth his owne children:Psal. 103. euen so is the lord merciful vnto them, that feare him. For he knoweth wherof we be made, he remembreth that we are but dust. But the mercifull goodnesse of the lorde, endureth for euer, and euer. The lord is full of compassion, and mercye, long suffering, and of great goodnesse. Wherfore submit, put vnder, giue, and commend thy selfe wholy vnto Christ, closing thine eyes, & reiecting the iudgement of thy senses, & rea∣son, take it in good parte, howsoeuer he in∣treateth thée. Thou must not estéeme, and consider death, and horrour, or the dolours of death, according to the iudgemēt of thine eyes, sense, and reason: but according to the worde of God. Dauid sayeth:Psal. 116. Right déere in the sight of the lorde is the death of his
saints. Lykewise he sayeth: Blessed are the dead,Apoc. 14 Ioan. 8. which die in the lorde. Christ also say∣eth: He that beléeueth on mée, shall not tast of death. If any thing therefore come into thy memorie, which attempteth to turne thée away from Christ, and to cast thée into desperation, put all that out of thy minde, and stick thou fast vnto the liuely worde of God, meditate, and ponder thereon, print it in thy minde, repeating it now and then a∣mong. For thou canst neuer vnderstand by the consideration, and sharpnesse of reason, how it may be done, that by death thou shalt passe vnto the true lyfe, how thou yéelding vp thy ghost mayest depart here hence, how thy soule maye be preserued, and rest in the lorde, euen vntill the last day, and how also thy body being rotten, consumed, and de∣uoured with wormes, maye come forth at the last iudgemēt, with a new, and a beaw∣tifull shape. Reason cannot comprehende this, faith onely can. Therefore, often∣times thinke thou vpon the articles of thy beléefe, diligently consider, and attentiuely examine euery particular thereof.
After what sort he is to bee called vpon, which lyeth at the point of death. NOw sée, déerely beloued in Christ, that thou fight a good fight. Sée that thou cōstant∣ly, and valiantly defende thy self, throughly fastē in thine hart, the promises of Christ thy redeemer. I am the resurrection,Ioan. 11. and the lyfe, sayeth Christ. He that beléeueth on me, shall lyue, and shall neuer sée death. Christ taking vpon him the nature of man, subiect to the infirmities of our estate, did offer vp himselfe to be a sacrifice for our sinnes, dy∣ing vpon the aultar of the crosse. He by his blessed blood, did purge, and clense the sinnes of all mankynde. This Christe will not forsake thée, he taketh a regarde of thée. Thou canst suffer no iniurie, or calamitie, seing that Christ doth preserue, and defende thée.2. Timo. 2. Ioan. 10. The sure foundation of God standeth fast hauing this seale, the lorde knoweth which are his, my shéepe héere my voice, and I know them, and they folow mée, and I
giue vnto them eternall lyfe, and they shall neuer perishe, neyther shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My father, which gaue them me is greater then all, and no man is able to take them out of my fathers hand. And I and my father are one. Wherefore, O déerely beloued in Christ, commend thy soule vnto God thy father, which loueth thée singularlye. Crie out with thy brother Christ,Math. 27. Luc. 27. hanging on the crosse: Into thy handes, O father, I giue and commend my spirite. God the father of all mercie, bring thée vnto euerlasting lyfe, and preserue thée vnto ye most ioyfull resurrection of his last iudgement. Amen. The ende of the fourme and me∣thode, or right order, to comfort the sick.
¶ A prayer to be sayde vn∣to God for the sick. ALmightie, euerla∣sting, and most merci∣cifull God, which art woont amōgst thy sun∣dry disciplines, and ma∣nyfolde chastisements, wherewith thou doest prouoke, and allure vs vnto thée, to bridle our fleshe with diuers diseases, the securitie thereof taken awaye by perillous sicknesse, and doest both admo∣nishe vs of the ende of oure naughtie lyfe past, and also of ymminent death through paines, which are hir fore messengers, and likewise of thy iudgement in the last daye, and of the eternall lyfe to come, which shall be reserued for the good, and godly vnto glo∣rie, and felicitie, but for the euil vnto shame and condemnatiō of hell fyre. Of the which things, fleshe being let runne at hir owne will, hath no remembrance. But now we perceyue, this seelye man is layed on his bedde, by his impayred health, vnto whome
is stirred vp the féeling of his sinnes, and the ymage of death often flyeth, as it were before his eyes. We wretches therefore, which looke for the lyke houre of aduersitie, acording to the condition of our nature, doe beseeche, & desire thée togither with him, that thou practise not righteous iudgement with him for his deserts, for our lord Iesus Christ his sake, which hath made satisfaction on the crosse, for the offences of this sicke body, and vs all. But rather graunt hym, as to one redéemed, grace, and strength of mind, that he maye quietly take this thy fatherly discipline, and visitation, paciently beare it, and that he may suffer wyllingly with per∣fite obedience himselfe, to be subiect, and o∣beysant vnto the good will, and pleasure of thée, his punisher. Succour him in all his aduersities, and be thou vnto him a refuge, and a defence against this instant daunger, wherewith he is now in perill, especially of his reueled conscience, the secret sinnes of his hart doe accuse him vnto thée. Therefore set thou against it for his preseruation, the moste bitter torments, and voluntarie sacri∣fice of thy sonne Christ, which did beare our infirmities,1. Pet. 2. and accomplished the paine
due vnto vs, beeing made sinne for vs,2. Cor. 5. Apoc. 1. Rom. 4. whilst that he died for our sinnes, which he washed away, with his precious blood, and rising from the deade for our iustification, was made our perfite redéemer. Let him perceiue through faith, ye force of these fruits and benifites. Let him being oppressed in this misery, féele thine aide, and let him tast, in this moment of time, some fruite of suche benifits, and gifts in Christ. Bring to passe euen nowe by true fayth, that there maye be offered vnto him so great a treasure of fe∣licitie, that is, I meane the forgiuenesse of his sinnes for Christ his sake, which by the misterie of the preaching of his worde, as is before saide, and the vse of his sacramentes frequented in ye church, is offered vnto him, that he maye effectually, and of a suertie re∣ceiue it to his comfort, ayde, and defence, a∣gainst the troubles of his conscience, grée∣uously accusing him, and the subtiltie of the deuill. And also that the same faith maye be vnto him, an armour, wherewith he being defenced may enter through death into lyfe, n he taking hold, may enioy the same for euer. Therefore, O heauenly father, we doe wholy commit him vnto thée, for thou
shalt heale him, bicause he is sicke. Hée is weake, thou shalt strengthen him, he lyeth a long, thou shalt set him vp, he acknow∣ledgeth his spottes, and vncleanesse, thou shall washe him, he is wounded, thou shalt cure him, he is feareful, thou shalt giue him courage. And for bicause thou knowest all things, and canst bestowe according to thy wil, thou shalt satisfie him. For he is great∣ly gréeued with hūger, and thirst after thée. Imbrace him. For he straight waye flyeth vnto thée, and make hym constant to fulfill thy commaundements. And to be briefe, for∣giue him all things, wherwith he hath pro∣uoked thy heauie displeasure against him. Graunt him in the steade of death, life, with thée in glorye. But if we shall néede him, in thy vineyarde, in this mortall life, and that he maye be imbettred vnto the example of Christ, then preserue him, vntill that he be increased with more ample benifites. Thy will notwithstanding, which alwayes is best, be euer fulfilled. Graūt all those things vnto vs, and this sicke body, through Iesus Christ only, thy sonne our lord, which is our only redeemer, & helper, and which brought the théefe on ye crosse with him into Para∣dyse,
for the example, and great comfort of al sinners, which liueth, and reigneth with thée, in the vnitie of the holy ghost, one God world without end. Amen. ¶ A prayer to be sayd vnto Christ. O Lorde Iesu, which art the on∣lye health of all men liuing, & the euerlasting life of them, which die in faith, I giue, and submit my selfe wholy vnto thy moste blessed will, whether it pleaseth thée, that this my séelie soule shall tary any longer in the mansion of this my wretched bodye to serue thée, or whether thou wilt haue it to depart out of this world, being as∣sured, that the thing cannot perish, which is cōmited vnto thy mercy. Willingly now I leaue this fraile, and sinfull flesh, in hope of the resurrection, which shall restore it vnto me againe far better than now it is. I besech thée, that thou wilt strēgthen my soule, with thy grace, against all temptations, and that thou wilt compasse me about, and defende me with the shielde of thy mercy, against al the assaultes of sathan, wherewith in time
past, thou madest thy martyrs inuincible a∣gainst horrible torments, and moste cruell deathes. I sée, and confesse, that in my selfe there is no help of saluatiō, but all my hope, and confidence is in thine vnspeakable good∣nesse. I haue no merites, or good workes, which I maye alleage before thée, of sinnes, alas, I sée a great heape, but through thy mercy, and righteousnesse, I shall be recke∣ned in the number of the iuste: Thou wast borne for my sake: Thou didst suffer both hunger, and thirst for my sake: Thou didst preach, and teache, fast, and praye, for my sake: Thou didst all good works in this life for my sake: Thou gauest thy most precious bodie vnto death vpō the crosse for my sake. Let all these things profite me, which thou hast fréely giuen mée, which hast giuen thy selfe for me. Let thy blood washe awaye the spots of mine offences. Let thy righteousnes couer, and hide mine vnrighteousnesse. Let thy merites make me acceptable before the most high Iudge. Increase thy grace in me, as peril encreaseth, least faith should wauer in mée, least my hope shoulde stacker, least my charitie should ware cold, least humaine weakenesse should be ouercome, by the ter∣rour
of death. But after that death possesseth my bodilye eyes, yet let not the eyes of my mind be turned away from thée. And when death hath takē away the vse of my tongue, yet let my hart instantly cry, and say vnto thée:Psal. 3 Into thy hands I commend my spirite (O lorde) to whom be all honor, and glorye, worlde wtout end. Amen.
❧ A Sermon of pacience, of the consummation of this world, of the second comming of the lorde, the euerlasting ioyes of the righteous, the paines of the wicked, and of other things, written by saint Iohn Chrisostome, patriarch at Constantinople. Iohn Theo∣phylus, being the expo∣sitour thereof, out of Gréeke into Latine, and translated out of Latin into Englishe, by H. Thorne. THe lyfe of godly men, is verie nota∣ble, and bright. And by what meanes should it shine, but through pacience? Therefore imbrace pacience,Pacience is the mother of Forti∣tude. Psal. 27. as the mo∣ther of Fortitude. For the Psalmist giueth vs admonishment saying: Tarry thou the lords leasure, and kéepe his wayes. And saint Paule, to the ende thou shouldst
possesse this vertue sayeth:Rom. 5. Affliction wor∣keth pacience, which if thou exercise, thou shalt finde hope, the fountaine of all good∣nesse. For hope maketh not ashamed. Be thou therefore subiect and obedient vnto the lord,Psal. 37. 1. Petr. 2. Iaco. 4. and pray vnto him, & thou shalt there∣by find that thing, which is not to be con∣temned: that is to wit, he will giue thée all thine harts desire. Who is more happy than he, which hath in possession the beneuolent eares of so mighty a king? Who wisheth not to haue the iudges eares opē vnto him, & at his commaūdement.1. Cor. 3. Thou (déerly be∣loued) art the workman & laborer of vertue. Christ hath hyred thée into his vineyarde.Math. 20. Gala. 6. Whiles thou hast yet time, do good works. Harken what sainct Paule sayeth: Looke what a man soweth, euen the same shall he reape. Sow in the spirit, and thou shalt reap eternal life.Gala. 6. For he that soweth in his body, reapeth corruption of his bodye. And heare what another counsell giuer sayth: Sowe righteousnesse for your selues, and you shal gather the fruite of righteousnes. Let it not lothe thée to take paines. There is an hope of haruest, and fruite time. For where con∣flictes are, there are rewardes. Where there
are contentions, there are honours.1. Timo. 4 Where battell is, there is a crowne also. Haue thou a regard herevnto, and arme thy selfe vnto pacience. Let him alwayes sounde in thine eares, which crieth with the sainctes: Be of good courage, that thine hart maye be com∣forted, abide the lords leisure,Psal. 27. vse and exercise thy field. This life is thy field, take vnto thée a good toole, I meane the old and the new in∣strument. Hedge thy ferme, wt the brembles of doctrine, prayer, and fasting. If thou haue such a hedge, the beast (I saye the diuell) can not enter in. Toile thy soule as a good vine∣yard. And euen as the keepers of vineyards, doe clap with their handes, crie with their voice, and with such like noises, do kéepe off the wayt layers: So cry thou out also with praiers, sing wt the melodye of psalmes, and thou shalt put to flight that foxe and wicked beast, as who sayth the diuell. Of the which foxe the scripture maketh mention, saying: Take ye the foxes. &c.Cant. 5. Alwayes watch thyne enimy, if he shoot at thine hart, with vnlaw∣full concupiscence. If he sling into thy soule, filthye cogitations,Ephe. 6. 1. Tessa. 5. put foorth the shielde of faith, turne about the helmet of hope, take vp the sword of the spirit, that is the worde
of God. And thou being thus armed, shalt be able to defende thine enimy, and sée that thou he not faint harted in the conflict,1. Petr. 5. 2. Cor. 2. but in al things be sober, and wel aduised, & say thus with thy selfe. We be not ignorant of his subtilties.Phil. 4. Reioyce always, as it is writ∣ten: Let your softnesse be knowen vnto all men. Let the feare of God shine in thine hart, that thou become not a fugitiue soul∣dier, that thou be not a fearful, and sluggish labourer, least thou happily léese thy crown. This life is short. But the sentence of gods iudgement, is permanent, & endlesse. Thou considering this, mayest boldlye tell thine hart, and saye with the holye prophet: Be strong,Psal. 27. and tary thou the lords leysure, and he shall comfort thine hart. Follow Dauid his example,1. Reg. 17. and slea thine enimy by the ca∣sting of one stone. The angels stād by thée, beholding thy life.1. Cor. 4. For s. Paule sayth: We are become a gasing stocke vnto the worlde, both vnto angels, & vnto men. If they per∣ceiue that thou hast the vpper hand, they wil reioyce in thy well doing. But if yu bée sub∣dued, they will sorowfully depart, not being able to looke on thée, & in the contrary part, the deuils wil scorne thée. Therfore take vp
the feare of God in the stead of a sword. For the feare of God is like a two edged sworde, cutting off all euill concupiscence, & desiers. And also haue thou alwayes in minde the last day,The last day. when the heauens set on fire shalbe dissolued. For the burning elements shall melt. The earth, & all that is thereon made,Math. 24. Luc. 21. Ioel. 2. EZech. 32. Esay. 13. Ioel. 3. Psal. 97. 1. Tes. 5. 2. Petr. 3. shal be brent, when ye starres shal fal down, as leaues, and the sunne, and moone shall be darkned, and shall not giue their light, whē the sonne of God shall be séene, and shall come downe from heauen vnto the earth, and the powers of heauen shall be moued, when the aungels shall runne hither, and thither, the sound of trumpets shall be hard, fire shall burne before him, and he wan∣dring about shall purge all the world with fire, and in his circuite there shalbe a migh∣ty tempest. There shal be such earthquakes,Psal. 50. and lightnings, as neuer shall be the lyke, nor haue bene euen vnto this daye, in so much that the very powers of heauen, shall be taken with great trembling.2. Petr. 3. What ma∣ner of men, deerely beloued in Christ, then ought we to be, at that time? What feare, and what horror, will there then come on vs? Thinke with thy selfe, how the Israe∣lites
in the wildernesse, were not able to a∣bide the dimnesse and darknesse of the ayer, and the voyce of God speaking out of the middle of the fire,Exod. 20. but willed that he should no more speak vnto them, for they were not able to abyde him, when he did hyde the greatest part of his maiestie, althoughe he came downe not offended with them, nor spake he vnto them wrathfully. Therefore consider this, if they were not able to abide his comming, which comfor∣ted them, when that neyther the burning heauens were dissolued, neyther the earth, and that is in it, was burnte, when that neyther they which sounde the Trumpet did blow, as that trumpet shalbe sounded, which shall rayse vp al them, that haue slept from the beginning of the world, neyther any other of the terrible things to come, did then happen: how shall we do when he shal come downe with intollerable wrath,The se∣cond cō∣ming of the lord. Psal. 50. & fu∣rye, and shall sit vppon the throne of hys glory, and shall call the earth. Euen from the East, vnto the Weast, and from all the costes of the earth, that he may discerne, and knowe his people, and giue to euery man, according vnto his deserts, what men (alas)
behooueth vs to be, when that we shal stand stripped and naked, readie to bée brought foorth vnto the iudgemēt seat? Where then shall that painted colour, and the force and strength of the fleshe become? then where shall that deceitfull and vnprofitable beau∣tie, the pleasantnesse of mans voyce, impu∣dent & shamelesse babling become? Where then is the trimming, and decking vp with clothes, and the delight & pleasure, of most foule and filthie sinne? Where then are they which drinke wyne with pyping and singing, and haue no regarde or respect vn∣to the workes of GOD? where then is the contempt, & despising of them, which nowe lyue without feare. Then where is delica∣sie and nysitie. For all those things shall passe away, and shall be dissolued as the cor∣rupt ayre?Loke for this mat∣ter. Sapi. 5. Where then is the gréedie desire of money and riches, and vnmercifulnesse, hir continuall companion? Where then is pride, which disdaineth all men, & thinketh hir selfe to be somewhat? Where then is the vaine and vnprofitable glorie of man, the great might & tirannie? Where then is the king, the prince, the capitaine? Where then are the puffed vp magistrates, contemning
God, in comparison of their owne riches? When they shall perceyue, that this saying must bée spoken of them: They maruailed, they are moued, they are troubled, feare is come vpon them:Oscae. 13. Iere. 50. Psal. 48. 1. Cor. 1. there shall be sorowes, as of a woman trauailing with child, they shal be consumed with a vehemēt spirit. Where then shal be come the wisedome of the wise, with all there newe inuentions? Wo bee vnto them. They are moued, they are trou∣bled, as a dronken man, and all there wise∣dome is swalowed vp.1. Corin. 1. 2. Petr. 3. Where then is the worldly wise, the scribe, and the treasurer, of this vaine world. Way, and consider, déere∣ly beloued, what maner of men, we ought to be, when yt we must yeelde an accompt of all, that we haue ne, as well small, as great things. For vntill that we according to iust iudgement, fully make satisfaction: what shall our estate, and condicion bée in that houre, and how carefull shall we bée, that we maye obtaine fauour, in the sight of God?Math. 25. And what ioy shall we haue, which shall be placed on the right hande of God? How then shall we féele our selues, when that all the saintes of God shall gréete vs? Abraham shall salute thée, Isaac, and Ia∣cob,
Moyses, Noe, Iob, Dauid, and all the holy prophetes, apostles, and martirs, and all good men, which haue pleased God, in the lyfe of there fleshe. And how many shalt thou there heare, whose lyfe thou shalt haue in admiration, whome thou wouldest euen now wyllingly sée? They will there come vnto thée, reioysing at thy saluation. After what sort shal we then be affected? How in∣estimable shall that ioy bée, when the glad∣some king shall say vnto them, which stand on his right hande:Math. 25. Come ye blessed of my father, & take to your inheritance, the king∣dome, which was prepared for you, from the beginning of the worlde? Then shalt thou receyue a most decent kingdome,Sapi. 5. and crown of beautie at the lordes hand, and after that shalt raigne with Christ. Then shalt thou inherite al these eternall things,2. Timo. 4. which God hath ordained for them, that loue him. Then shalt thou euer afterward be without dread, and heauinesse. Ponder, and consider, what it is to raigne with Christ in heauen. For as I haue tolde thée, thou shalt receyue a diademe, at the hande of the lorde, and shalt euer after raigne with Christ. Thinke with thy selfe, what a thing it is, to beholde the
face of God, for euer, what a brightnesse hath it? For then there shall be no sunne to giue the day light,Esay. 60. as Esay sayeth, and the rising of the Moone, shall not lighten the night:Apoc. 21. Esay. 64. 1. Cor. 2. But the lord God shall be thine eter∣nall light, and thy glorie. Beholde what ioyes are layed vp in store for them, ye feare the lord, and kéepe his commaundements? The per∣dition of the wic∣ked.Consider againe also, the perdition of sin∣ners, when they shall be brought foorth, vn∣to the terrible iudgement seat of God, with how great confusion then shall they be ta∣ken before the iust iudge? hauing not one worde to aunswere, how shall they be asha∣med,Psal. 2. when the lorde shall speake vnto them in his wrath, and vexe them in his sore dis∣pleasure:Math. 25. saying, depart from me ye wicked into eternall fyre, which is prepared for the deuill, and his Angels. Alas what miserie, and affliction shall there spirit suffer, when that all men shall crie out aloude, saying: Let the sinners be turned into hell,Psal. 9. and all nations which forget God. What time wil they howle out, wayling and lamenting, when they shall bée caried awaye, that they maye be cruelly tormented, world without ende? what place (alas) is that, where is
wayling and gnashing of téeth, called hell, the which sathan himselfe abhorreth, what is that (Gehenna) fyre vnquenchable,Esay. 66. Marc. 9. Math. 22. what is that worme venimous, & neuer ceasing? howe greeuous are those vtwarde darke∣nesse, alwayes continuing, what are the ministers appointed for tormentes, which lacking mercie, and without compassion re∣prooue and punish? Then they that are tor∣mented, will gréeuously crie vnto the lord,Pro. 1. and he wil not héere them. Then shall they vnderstand, that all things, which they had in this lyfe are vaine, and transitorie,Read for this Ec∣clesiastes. and such things as they supposed here to be plea∣sant, to be founde more bitter than gall, and poyson. Then where is the pleasure of the fleshe, so termed falsely?To feare God is true plea∣sure. Psal. 63. For there is none other pleasure, but to feare the lorde. This is the pleasure, this replenisheth the soule, as it were with marrow, & fatnesse. Then shall they be in desperation of themselues, and of the workes, which they haue done, then shall they confesse and saye, that the iudgement of God is true, and righteous, saying: did we not héere of this, and yet woulde we not be conuerted from our wic∣ked déedes? But then they shall nothing
preuaile. Alas yt euer I was borne, which am compassed about with sinnes innume∣rable, aboue the number of the sandes. I haue sinned, but I turne away from them, as frō many yron chaines. For my hope is, that I shall not see my sinnes aboue in hea∣uen. Vnto whome then shall I flie, but vn∣to thée, Oh mercifull God, vnto thée I say, which forgettest, and art not mindefull of iniuries?Psal. 51. Haue mercie vpon mée, O God, after thy great goodnesse, according vnto the multitude of thy mercies, doe awaye mine offences. Wash me thorowly from my wic∣kednesse, & clense me from my sinne. For I acknowledge my faultes, & my sinne is euer before mée. Against thee onely haue I sin∣ned. I flie vnto thée, for thy great mercie and goodnesse sake. I haue prouoked thée, and yet I runne vnto thee, for thy méere pla∣cabilitie. I haue reiected thée, and nowe I come vnto thée, for thy great goodnesse, and kindnesse sake. And I hartily beséeche thée to turne away thy face from my sinnes, and blot out al mine offences. Make a cléene hart in mée, O god, & renue a right spirit within mée, for thy names sake onlye. For I haue nothing, yt I maye present vnto thée, not so
much as one good worke, not a pure hart,1. Cor. 4. but I trusting in thy mercies do wholy commit my self vnto them, yt thou mayst stirre vp in me a prick of conscience, yt I may not lightly fal againe into sinne, but yt I may from this time forth, serue, and please thée,Luc. 1. in holinesse & righteousnesse all the dayes of my lyfe. For thine is the kingdome, & the power for euer. I beséech thée therefore, déerely beloued, which hopest to obtaine the forgiuenesse of thy sinnes, that thou endeuour thy selfe to be found in peace, cléene, and without spot. If any euill thought come in thy mind, take vp this swoorde, that is to wit,The feare of God is a sworde. be mindefull of the feare of God, and thou shalt cut off al the power of the enimy. And take the holy scrip∣ture in the stead of a trumpet. For as the trumpet gathereth the souldiers togither: euen so ye holy scripture crying vnto vs, doth gather togither our thoughts, in ye feare of ye lord. For our thoughts are euen like soul∣diours, which wage warre agaynst ye kings enimies. And againe, euen as the trumpet sounding in the time of warre, stirreth vp ye courage of the yong men, battailing against their enimies: likewyse the holy scriptures, do rayse vp thy promptnesse to vertue, & do
make thée valiant against affections. There∣fore enforce thy self, as much as in thée lieth, oftentymes to apploye the scriptures, that they may gather togither thy cogitations, which the enimy hath scattred abrode, by his wicked subtilty, ministring vnto thée nough¦ty appetites and concupiscence, or oftentimes also bringing aduersitie, or somtimes giuing prosperitie, making thée carelesse. For he woorketh these things by his deceite & guile, that he may seperate man from God. For oftentymes it hapneth, that when we can not ouercome and subdue one, by concupis∣cence, then after he offereth vnto him other temptations, thereby to blind his mynd, that he may after find it, an apt ground, to plant in it such things, as pleaseth him, and in the end, beginneth to minister such thoughts vn∣to men, that they will say with an othe: At what tyme I doe good, I haue infortunate dayes.Rom. 3. Let vs therefore doe euill that thereof may come good. Then if a man be not well aduised, he will swallow him vp as hell a∣liue. If so be that he cannot thus ouercome him, then will he offer vnto him felicity, and securitie of lyfe, and craftily extolleth him, bringing in deceit: an effect of all other most
greeuous, and troublous, which is, that he may make him proude, and without feare. This draweth the minde into the boe of pleasures. This causeth the mouth to speak blasphemie against heauen.Psal. 73. For it is writ∣ten: They haue set, & bestowed their mouth against heauen. This maketh man to bée ignoraunt of God, and not to vnderstande his owne infirmitie, neyther to thinke vp∣on the daye of death, and iudgement. For this truely is the way of all wickednesse. He that reioyseth to walke in this waye, that is to wit, of prosperitie, and cockering, shall in the ende come into the storehouse of death. This is the waye whereof the lorde sayed: Wyde, and broad is the way,Math. 7. which leadeth vnto destruction. Beholde thou hast heard, wherefore the enimie endeuoreth sometime to bring vs prosperitie, sometime aduersity. For as he proueth the minde of man, which struggeleth, and striueth against him, to be affected: euen so by his malignitie, doth he furnishe his hoste against him. Therfore be sober, and warie, and alwayes giue thy selfe vnto reading, that thou mayest learne, how it behoueth thée, to eschue the snares of that enimie, and to take hold on euerlasting
lyfe. For the reading of holy scripture, ma∣keth the wandring minde to stande fast, and giueth hir the knowledge of God. God is knowne out of the scrip∣tures. Read for this mat∣ter the second epistle to Timothi. The holy ghost speaketh in the Scrip∣tures.Thou hearest how that he, which with an vnfained hart ymployeth ye holy scriptures, receyueth the knowledge of God. Nelect not therefore thy selfe, but ymploy reading, and prayer, that thy mind may be lightned, that thou mayest be made perfite, and ho∣nest in all things, wanting in no point. Let others boast of the fréendship of honorable men, princes, and kings. But reioyce thou before the angelles of God, speaking vnto him, and to the holye ghost, by the sacred scriptures.Math. 10. For the holye ghost is he, that speaketh by them.2. Petr. 1. Doe thy diligence there∣fore constantly to be occupied in holy scrip∣ture, and prayers. For looke how often thou art conuersant with God by them: so of∣ten is thy bodye and soule sanctified. Then take this for certeintie, that when thou hap∣penest to reade the scriptures, thou art sanc∣tified. Therfore do thy good will, oftentimes to imploy them. Although thy handes be oc∣cupied: yet mayest thou praye in thy minde. For blessed Anne,God is to be praied vnto with the mind. 1. Reg. 1. Samuell the prophet his mother, prayed, and moued but hir lippes
onely, yet hir prayers entered into ye eares of the God of Sabaoth, & she obtained ye thing shée desired. Therefore although  hands be otherwise busied, yet praye thou, at the least wise with thy minde. For God heareth euen the silent. If thou haue no skill to read,He that cannot reade, or vnderstā∣deth not what he readeth, must re∣sort vnto some wise man. yet resort where thou mayst heare, and take profite thereof. For it is written:Sirach. 6. If thou sée a wise man, go thou vnto him early in the morning, and let thy foote tread the path vnto his gate. For this counsell is not only good for them, that cannot reade, but also for them that can. For many there be, which read, and know not what they read. Take héede therefore, that thou doe not little re∣garde, the2. Cor. 6. grace bestowed on thée by ye frée gift of Christ: but be thou carefull to séeke, how thou mayest please the lorde, that thou mayest procure, and get vnto thée, the blis∣fulnesse of his saintes. For it is written: Blessed are they,Psal. 119. which keepe his testimo∣nies, and seeke him with their whole hart. See that the enimie let thée not, that when thou wouldst read, he make thée slouthfull, and put other businesse in thy heade, which shall pull thée awaye, saying: First finishe thou these small affaires, and so shalt thou
reade without trouble of minde. For howe often sendeth he in those things, that maye encourage thée vnto handie labour: And he obiecteth such matters, that he may ye sooner withhold thée from reading, being the grea∣ter profite. For as much as, the deuill per∣ceyuing man to be disposed to reade, setteth against him by these, and other lyke occa∣sions, seeking if he may by any meanes pos∣sible, let him: yet coent thou not vnto him, but be euen as the Hart,Psal. 42. which thirsteth, and desireth to come vnto ye water springs, that is to say, vnto the holy scriptures, that thou mayest drinke out of them such things, as are méete and profitable for thée, as for ex∣ample. When it is giuen thée to know any sentence, let it not escape thée, but pouder vpon it in thy minde, write in thine hart, and thou shalt kéepe it, neuer able to bée rased out of thy memorie. For it is written: I will thinke vpon thy righteousnesse.Psal. 119. And againe: I haue hidde thy words within my hart, that I shoulde not sinne against thée. And in an other place: Wherewith shall a yong man clense his waye? Euen by ruling himselfe after thy worde. For who is he, that is mindefull of the worde of the lorde,
and amendeth not his wayes? Is not hée alwaies a reprobate, & a cast awaye caytife, which remembereth nothing, but rather forgetteth that, which he once knew? True∣ly, God sayth vnto such an one.Psal. 50. Wherefore talkest thou of my righteousnesse, and ta∣kest my testimony in thy mouth? Whervpō he commaundeth that thing to be takē from him, which he séemeth to haue.Math. 25. And what was there commaunded to bée taken from him, which he séemed to haue? Faith. For he calleth himselfe a christian,Tit. 1. but denyeth it in his déedes, and he is worse than an in∣fidell. And therefore he commaundeth the holy ghost to be taken from him, which he receyued in the daye of his redemption, and that he séemed to haue also. And such a man shal become like vnto a wine vessell, thorow the which the wine is spilte and lost, & they that sée him know it not, supposing him to he full, but when wine shoulde be drawen out of him, then he appéereth vnto all men to be emptie. Therefore euen so, such a man shall appéere emptie in the daye of iudge∣ment, and his déedes shall be manifest vnto all the world. And such are they, which wil saye vnto the king in that day:Math. 7. Lorde haue
not we prophesied in thy name? and haue done many great things in thy name? And the king will answere, and saye vnto them: Verily I saye vnto you, I knowe you not. Thou seest, déerely beloued, that such a man hath nothing at all. Be thou therfore mind∣full of the worde of God, and amende thy lyfe. Beware thou suffer not the birdes to descende, and deuoure the seede of the sonne of God. For he himselfe saide, that the séede is the worde which ye haue heard.Math. 13. There∣fore hide thou the séede in the sorowes of thy lande, that is to wit, hide the worde in the middell of thine hart, that thou mayest bring forth some fruit vnto the lord in feare. And when thou readest, read diligently, and boldly, and handle eche lyne, moderatly considering thereof. Endeuor not to reade ouer many leaues, but if any obscure sense happen vnto thée, let it not gréeue thée to pervse the verse twice or thrice, vntill thou vnderstande the meaning, and force thereof. Furthermore, when thou preparest thy selfe to sit downe, and read, or to heare an other: first praye vnto God saying thus:Scripture is attent∣tyfely to be reade with pra∣yer. Psal. 119. O lorde Iesu Christ, open myne eyes, and the eares of my hart, that they may heare thy words,
and vnderstande them, and may, O lorde, fulfill thy wyll, hide not thy commaunde∣ments from me, bicause I am a straunger on the earth, but open, and discouer mine eyes, and I will consider the maruellous things of thy lawe. For in thée, Oh my God, haue I trusted, that thou shouldst ligh∣ten mine hart. Also I beséeche thée so praye vnto God alwaies, that he will illuminate thy minde, and open vnto thée the effect, and force of his worde. For many haue erred,Rom. 1. counted themselues wise, they became fooles, not vnderstanding what was written, and falling into blasphemies, haue therein peri∣shed. Therfore, if thou in reading finde any thing hard to be vnderstoode, take héede the enimy teach thée not to say within thy selfe, it is not so, as this word expresseth (for how should it be so?) and suche lyke. But if thou beléeue God, beléeue his word also, and say vnto the enimie: Come behinde me sathan. For I know thée not. The worde of God is a pure worde, as tryed siluer, clensed,Psal. 11. and purged from the earth seauen folde, and in it, is no peruerse matter, other else haulting, as the prouerbe is, but all things therein séeme good in the wise mans sight, and are
righteous before them, that finde know∣ledge, and I truely am a foole, and knowe not the scriptures, but well vnderstande, they are spiritually written. For the apostle sayeth:Rom. 7. that the lawe is spirituall. Then looke vp towardes heauen, saying these wordes: Lorde I beleue thy worde, and doe not gaine say it, but I trust in the worde of thy holy spirite. Preserue me therefore, O lorde, that I may finde fauour in thy sight. For I séeke none other thing, but only to be saued. Oh mercifull father, that I maye ob∣taine thy grace, and fauour. For thine is the kingdome, and mercie for euer, and euer. Amen. Peroratio. I Beséeche you therefore brethren, déerely beloued in the lorde, that ye endeuour your selues to haue these things daylie in memorie, I meane, faith, hope, charitie, and humilitie, that they may be sealed vp by prayers vnto God, and meditations of holy scriptures. For if you haue those things, and doe abound in them, they will not leaue you emptie, and barren touching the knowledge of Iesus Christ.
For the  man, which hath not those things, but neglecteth his owne saluation, is blind, groping the waye with his hande,2. Petr. 1. forgetting that he is cleansed from his olde sinnes, and it shall happen vnto him, as it is sayde in the true prouerbe:2. Petr. 2. The dogge is returned againe vnto his domite, and the washed swine vnto his durie puddle. They therefore,2. Petr. 2. that haue escaped the pollutions of the worlde, as it is written, and haue re∣nounced them in there baptisme, and are come vnto the knowledge of our lord Iesus Christ, and are afterwards againe entang∣led with them, there ende shall bée worse, than there beginning. For it had bene bet∣ter for them, not to haue knowne the waye of truth, then when they haue knowne it, to returne backe againe vnto the things, which were forsaken. Let vs therfore, being the déere and faythfull seruauntes of God, and his christian chosen souldiours, diligent∣lye, and earnestly take vp the foresaide ar∣mour in oure hartes, and not haue them in minde by an outwarde showe, that we battayling well, and treading downe al the power of the enimie,Ephe. 5. Collos. 3. may be deliuered from the curse to come vpon the children of vn∣beléefe,
and that we maye finde grace,Hebr. 4. and mercie in that horrible daye, before the iust iudge,Rom. 1. which will rewarde euerie man, ac∣cording to his déedes, to whome, with the almightie father, and the holy spirite, belongeth honor, and glory, now, and for euer, world with∣out ende. A∣men. FINIS.
The Table. PHisick for the soule, verie necessarie to be vsed in the agony of death, and in these extreme and most perillous seasons. &c. folio. 1. Faith is chiefely necessarie for the sick, to abide the paines of the bodye, and the temptations, wherwith he is peste∣red. folio. 3. The articles of our faith are diligently to be considered of the sick. folio. 5 Wherefore sicknesses are sent vnto vs from God. folio. 5 There be three things, which torment vs most greeuously, and cruelly, and doe trouble oure mindes in the agonie of death, that is to wit, sinne, death, hell, or damnation. folio. 8 ¶A prayer for the same. folio. 8 What is to bee done, when sinne doth vexe, and stirre our consciences. folio. 9 The testimonies of scripture for the re∣mission of sinnes through Christ, must be diligently repeated vnto the sick. &c. folio. 11
Whether the sick may lawfully seke the phisitions helpe, and vse phisicke, or no. folio. 18 What is to be done, when death bring∣eth terror, and feare vpon vs. folio. 18 The testimonies of scripture, for the re∣surrection of the dead. folio. 20 We will adde also, other sentences of scripture, conteyning plentifull com∣fort. folio. 23 What is to be done, when hell, or eter∣nall damnation, cōming in our minds, doth feare vs. folio. 25 Of the making of a testament, and con∣fession of sinnes vnto God. folio. 34 Of the sacrament of the lords supper. folio. 35 The sorow, which many take, more then is requisite; for the death of their pa∣rents, and frendes, ought to be tempe∣red by the right rule of reason. folio. 37 A precept contayning an exhortation vnto al them, which professe the name of Christ. folio. 39 Peroratio. folio. 40 A fourme, and methode, or right order to comfort the sick. folio. 41
