20866 S119790 99854996 20466
Two very lamentable Relations: The one, The grieuance for Religi∣on, of those of Stiria, Crinthia, and Crayne, vnder FERDND then Duke of Gratz, now Emperour. The other, The now present most humble S∣plication, of certayne of the States of lower Austria, vnto the said Emperour. Wherein is shewed the most terrible, inhu∣mane, and barbarian tyrannies, committed by the Emperours Souldiers, specially the Csockes and Wallons, in the said Countrie. Done out of the Dutch, and Printed. 1620.
The grieuances for Religion of those inhabi∣ting in the Prouinces of Stiria, Carinthia, and Crag∣; not onely in their Bodies outwardly, but also in their Consciences inwardly, for the Testimonie of the true Gospell; most cruelly persecuted, by the enemies of the Truth, and their Commissaries: Vn∣der FERDINAND, now Emperour, then Duke of Gratz &c. TO declare to the World the hourely and minutely griefe of Conscience and grieuances for the Religion which wee haue had, were almost impossible and also vnnecessary, since it is, alas, too well knowne to this Land, to the Em∣pire, and to a great part of the World; yet ne∣uerthelesse we will rehearse a few. 1. First, by priuiledge, and good will of the illustrious Arch-Duke Charles of Austria, of famous memory, our gracious Lord and Prince, was granted to the professors of the Gospell, many speciall Ministers in principall Townes as in Gratz, Indenburgk, Clagenfourt, and Labach. 2. Item, their Colledges and free Schooles of learning, for instructing Noblemens, and others Children, were admitted and granted them, in the foresaid Townes of Gratz, Cla∣genfourt, and Labach, all which priuiledges are most violently taken from them.
3. Item, in the Countrey of Stiria, were many Cathedrall and other Parish Churches also violently taken from them. 4. Also many priuiledged Churches, pulled downe, and blowne vp with Gunpowder. 5. One hundred Preachers and Ministers commanded vpon paine of death to depart the prouince of Stiria. 6. A great many more Schoole-masters, and Teachers of the Youth, most pittifully banished. 7. Item, many Church-yards, and resting places for the dead bodyes of the faithfull, being walled and paled about, were most bar∣barously pulled downe, and made leuell with the ground. 8. The bodies of the faithfull digged vp, and giuen to be deuoured by Dogs and Hogs; as also the Coffins taken and set by the high∣way side, some burnt with fire; a worke both barbarous and inhumane. 9. Also vpon the buriall places of the faithfull, were erected Gibets and places for execution of malefactors. Also vpon those places where Protestant Churches stood, or where the Pulpit stood, or the Font-stone, were erected alwaies most filthy spectacles most vg∣ly to behold. 10. Item, many thousand of godly and re∣ligious bookes, among which were many hun∣dred
Bibles, the witnesses of Gods most holy Word, vtterly burnt with fire. 11. Moreouer, (a griefe aboue all griefes) many thousands that professed the Gospell, were most cruelly and shamefully tormented and tortured, and by the same torments com∣pelled shamefully, to denie and renounce the truth of Christs Euangell. 12. Compelling those of the Religion to sweare vpon their saluation neuer to renounce that damnable Popish Idolatrie, the which they were now forced to by torments. 13. The poore distressed people, were also compelled to their extreame cost and char∣ges, to vphold and maintaine a strong gard of Souldiers, for those cruell Commissaries owne obedient mancipia and eùotoria. 14. The constant Confessors and Profes∣sors of Christs most holy Word and Gospell, together with their Wiues, and innocent Babes, were most cruelly compelled to leaue their dwellings and habitations (whether it were in Cities, Townes, or Villages) at the pleasure of those barbarous Cōmissaries; and the longest terme of their abode was, six weekes and three dayes, sometimes but eight dayes, and sometimes they must be gonne be∣fore Sun-setting, and sometimes in the coldest time of Winter, in Frost and Snow: although it be manifest by the peace of Religion, gran∣ted
in the yeere of God 1555. (as appeares by the Formalia) that all Subiects or Tenants vn∣der Prince, or Noble-man, who were perse∣cuted for Religion, might freely choose the time of their departure out of the Countrie. 15. They were not admitted time and lei∣sure, to make sale of their Lands and Goods, but (as may appeare by that cruell Edict spe∣cialis) they were constrained shamefully to sell them, to their vnspeakeable losse, yea, and sometimes compelled to giue them; notwith∣standing, that it most manifestly appeares also, by the foresaid peace of Religion, that there should be no compulsion, in selling or giuing of Goods or Lands, excepting only, in amore Christianae Religionis. And if they did sell their Goods or Lands, they were compelled to giue the tenth Penny thereof, as by way of taxation; alledging that in Electorall Princes and States Lands of the Empire they did the like. But, as it appeares plainely by the aforesaid peace of Religion, it is said, those Countries shall pay the tenth Penny, who formerly did doe the same; but these our Countries haue euer beene free of those taxations. We omit to remember that those Iewes who were iustly expelled not long since, were freely pardoned this taxation. 16. Notwithstanding, those Iewes were bound by bond, to pay the tenth Penny, at
their departure out of the Land per modum Compensationis; but those poore Christian Ex∣iles must be banished & troubled, and forced not only to quit their Countrey, Friends, al∣liance & acquaintance; not only debarred the fruits of their labours, but also must be bereft of that little money appointed for their main∣tenance, in this their wofull banishment. 17. And this was not a banishment with moderation to those deuout and most faithfull Christians and our beloued Patriots, but they were exiled vnder paine of death neuer to re∣turne. A banishment most infamous and most lamentable, that a man must bee constrained neuer to returne to the place of his natiuitie, there, where so many yeeres he had dwelt with honor and respect; there where are the sepul∣chers of his dead predecessors. Although it be expresly set downe in the often spoken of peace of Religion, that it shall not be preiudi∣ciall for any man, freely to visite his Countrie, and friends, from whom hee is banished for Religion. 18. Also the Noble-men, and others of those Prouinces being Protestants, were not exempted this infamy, but were put by their hereditary offices of State, onely because they were of the Religion; and others were placed in their offices, being men of no qualitie or merit, and only because they were of Romish
Religion. Our Protestant Noble-men, were al∣so hindred from being Administrators, or exe∣quutors to their friends or their children, al∣thoug they deale neuer so faithfully: Which shewes most plainely, that these wrongs done vnto them, was not for the insufficiencie of their persons, births, or qualities, but only because they were Protestants. 19. Also the Noble-men and Gentrie of those Prouinces being Protestants, were most grieuously taxed and caused to pay great and grieuous summes of money, ouer & aboue the tenth penny; notwithstanding that they had quitted their Churches, Schooles, Preachers, and Schoole-masters: yea, euen those that wil∣lingly would sometimes goe out of the Coun∣trey for deuotion, to heare a Sermon, or com∣municate, were constrained to pay the tenth penny, being out of his Highnesse Countries; although it be manifest de iure, that nemo ex∣tra territorium suum can punish any man. All these iniuries are directly against his High∣nesse (now Emperour) owne Edict, giuen to those of the Religion the last of Aprill, 1599. 20. These great and grieuous troubles and tyrannicall vexations, which wee haue beene and are plagued withall, were not so much to be pittied, if there were any hope of our ease, or reliefe. But alas! the vnmercifull answer and resolution of his Highnesse (now
Emperour) giuen to the Protestants the eighth of December 1609. which was plainely told those of the religion, That he would ne∣uer yeeld to their demandes, and that hee would continue in this his resolution euen till his graue; and that before he would yeeld for any of the least of their demands, concerning their Religion, he would rather aduenture the losse of all that euer he had of God, and with a white Staffe, goe barefooted out of all his Countries. Also his Highnesse (now Empe∣rour) did threaten mightily the Protestant E∣states, vowing that he would be reuenged on them, for seeking any tolleration; alleadging that it was against his princely Authoritie. 21. To conclude, this last is the worst of all, that his Highnesse (now Emperor) will not heare his Nobility & Gentry, nor one of those of the Religion, but he oftentimes cōmanded them vpon paine of their liues to keepe per∣petuall silence: as in Anno 1598. the thirtyeth of September; the fifth of May 1599. the fifth of March 1601. and this last time, the eighth of December 1609. Also it is most manifest in that Edict, in the yeere 1599. hee absolutely forbids vnder the paine of death, that no man of what degree or qualitie whatsoeuer, should entertaine any Preacher or Minister of the Gospell; vowing also that hee will not heare any more of their grieuances: Which is, dura
& acerbavox regnantis, non velle audire & scripta accipere, contrà quàm Vetula illa obijciebat Regi Macedonum Philippo audi∣entiam recusanti: Si non vis audire, noli er∣go Regnare. The abuses in Religion is no new thing, especially of the spirituall sort, but if the Spiritualitie did commit any ex∣cesse, or gaue any euill example, it was to be seene into by their temporall Princes and Lords, as we haue a fine example in the Hi∣story of Stiria (fol. 81,) in the yeere of God 1518. When Doctor Luther had gotten the vpper hand, he gaue in a long Catalogue of Complaints and abuses of the Clergie to the Emperour Maximilian, complayning of the abuses of their Benefices, their neglect of Gods Seruice, the insolencies commit∣ted in their Diocesse, the carelesnesse of their saluation, of the euill gouerning of Church liuings, and of the too many idle persons, that were maintained to the heauie burthen of the Countrey, as sundry sorts of Abbots, Canonicats, Prebendes, Commendats, and many others: his Imperiall Maiestie graci∣ously did promise a redresse, giuing com∣mand to all Dukes and Lords, to see a re∣formation. But at this time there is greater cause of redresse of abuses, since it is to bee plainely seene, that wickednesse hath gotten
the vpper hand, and alas! there is no hope of helpe, or redresse. If this Prince deales so hardly with his owne, much more cruelty is to be looked for at his hands, if he can haue the vpper hand of o∣thers.
The most humble Supplication of cer∣taine of the States of lower Austria made vnto the Emperour: Wherein is shewed the most terrible, inhumane, and barbarian tyrannyes, committed by the Emperours Souldiers, by the Casockes and Wallons in the said Countrie. MOst gracious Prince, the vnspeakeable spoyling, destruction, miserie, trou∣ble, calamitie, and subiection of these countries, wrought and effected by the accur∣sed Cosackes and others your Maiesties Soul∣diers brought into the same, together with the robbings, murtherings, sackings, bur∣nings, massacrings, and other barbarian cru∣elties vsed and committed therein, mooueth and prouoketh vs in the name and behalfe of our principall Lords & the whole Countrey, to take and haue our recourse, next vnto God, to your Emperiall Maiestie, with sighes and teares to renew our former complaints. In regard that the same (in the least degree) are not yet redressed, neither hath your Imperi∣all Maiesty, nor you Generals granted any message, nor Mandate in writing for their safe conducts; and to obtayne some reliefe therein for your poore subiects. For although your Maiesty hath heretofore oftentimes beene certified and aduised, how and in what manner
the Countrie in generall is spoyled and de∣stroyed, both the Gentil-men and Commons rob'd and ransackt, some of the Pesants kild, and some of them driuen from house & home into the Woods, and Mountaynes; Vines and earable Lands spoyled and laid waste, huma∣nitie set aside; vertue, modestie, honestie, po∣licy, law and right hindred and neglected, and an innumerable company of sinnes, and shame∣full and horrible actions are daily committed, and cruelly exercised by the Souldiers. Your Maiestie hauing most graciously granted and promised, to take speedy order for the redres∣sing and preuention thereof; and to that end vouchsafed your Gracious Commission to the Generall of your army, for the ceasing and stay of the same: being compelled thereunto by meere necessitie and force, your poore and humble Subiects are againe vnited to renew their said complaints, and to let your Maiesty know, that the said insolencies are not by any meanes ceased, nor yet lessened, but rather from day to day, and continually, are still com∣mitted, and more and more encreased and wax stronger, yea, and in such barbarian, vnchri∣stian, and inhumane manner, that we are asto∣nished and abashed to thinke thereon, and in a manner haue a detestation to name them to certifie your Maiesty thereof. Therefore sith the vnruly Souldiers, specially the Cosackes,
stil persist in such their strange, feareful, and detestable actions, and that there is no forbea∣rance nor distaste thereof in any sort, as also being certified, that the same is to be continu∣ed and practised by others of your Maiesties troops. Wee, being vpon more then a sure ground, for that we are certainely perswaded in our consciences, that it cannot be answe∣red before God, together with the States, whose Officers are respectiuely to maintaine the Countrie, moued with no small griefe and inward vexation of mind to behold the mise∣rable state of the country-people, & being go∣uernours and fathers of the same, (as the du∣ty of euery Gouuernor and States-man bind∣eth him) most heartily and earnestly desiring and wishing to see a remedie therein. Hoping that your Imperiall Maiestie, will not in any wise be offended, nor take it in euill part, that in some sort we make the same knowne vnto your Maiesty, only to the end, that your said Maiesty, as a Christian Potentate, and a most gracious Prince of the house of Austria, may the rather with all speede seeke to remedy, and take ayde for the diuerting of these great, most enorme, and mischieuous proceedings. So it is, and it pleased your Imperiall Ma∣iesty, that for as much, as the Wallons, and o∣ther strange Souldiers, brought into this Country, cease not continually, to make a common practise to waste, spoyle, burne, mur∣ther,
and massacre the Countrie and the Com∣mons thereof, whereby there is not any feare∣full, vnspeakeable, and inhumane action what∣soeuer, which they, and other of your Maie∣sties souldiers with al cruelty, and bloud-thir∣stinesse, haue not effected, exercised, and com∣mitted; sparing not to burne whole Villages, Hamlets, and Market-townes, and in them Store-houses for the prouision of Widdowes and Orphans, (among the which we also that are Ambassadors, and haue a speciall protecti∣on from your Maiesty for our defence against all oppressions, are not spared) seised vpon, spoyled, and burnt their Castles, houses, and their prouision for their houses, being taken from them; the poore subiects that are employ∣ed about necessary defences, cannot get a bit of bread to relieue themselues withall, but are constrained to starue and die for hunger. Boys and Women being fearefully violated & ra∣uished, are carried prisoners away, both young and old men and women, most cru∣elly and terribly martired, torterd, prest, their flesh pinsht, and pulled from their bodies with burning tonges, hangd vp by the necks, hands, feete, and their priuy-members; wo∣men, gentlewomen, and young wenches vnder yeeres rauished till they die, women great with child, layd so long vpon the fire, vntill which time as that men may see the fruit in their bodies, and so both mother and child
die together, old and young, high and low states, spirituall and temporal persons, without any dif∣ference, oppressed, and many thousands of inno∣cent people fearefully murthered. Some in their castles (and yet such as haue deserued wel at your Maiesties and the house of Austrias hands, as be∣ing old & good friends to the same) notwithstan∣ding their Letters Pattents of assurance and pro∣tection, (because they professe the Lutheran Reli∣gion) pitifully murthered. Some of them with their wiues and children being brought forth in their shirts and smocks, and wholly bereft of all reliefe, and such as flie out into the fields, not suf∣fred there to be free from their cruelties, but run∣ning after them, haue beene most pitifully slaine, and hewed to peeces. And many men of great account haue beene glad to take Pasports from their owne seruants, with many other such like vnspeakeable and inhumane insolencies, and hor∣rible, and cruel actions that are practised; which although, now (as loth to make them knowne vnto your Maiesty) we forbeare to write it as much as in conscience we can, and wil answere for the same before God, we wil hereafter not spare to declare. Therefore, sith we know, that your Maiesty takes no pleasure in these feareful and horrible excesses, and intolerable abuses, & much more in respect of your Christian charitie & Princely minde, cannot but conceiue a great disliking thereof; and that it is to bee feared, that your Maiesty hath not yet, or may for a long time refraine from resoluing vpon
an answer to be made, & order to be taken touch∣ing these our obedient & humble supplications, and therefore the same wil haue no end nor be re∣strained, whereby the whole Country will bee in danger to bee laid waste, the Lords and subiects of the same brought and reduced into extreme miserie and affliction, to the great preiudice, not only of your Maiesty, but also of the whole fa∣mous and worthy house of Austria, and an vnre∣couerable damage vnto the Empire. Wee most humbly, once againe beseech your Maiesty, in the name of our principall States, for the mercy of God, in the bleeding wounds of our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, that you would be pleased, according to your naturall commendable Au∣strian, and Imperiall clemencie, to haue compas∣sion vpon the necessitie, miserie, and pitifull esta∣tes of your faithfull States, Subiects, and inhabi∣tants, whereby your Maiesty shall not only bee a furtherance to your owne desiring of peace, quiet∣nesse, and prosperitie, and procure your most gracious satisfaction, but also obtayne immortall commendation of all posteritie. Which your faithfull and bounden subiects wil endeuour with all dutie and obedience to deserue at your Ma∣iesties gracious hands, wherewith we referre our selues to your most Princely pleasure and dispo∣sition. The true neather Austrian Euangelicall Committees and Ambassadours.
