23749 99853418 18801
Drinke and welcome: OR THE FAMOVS HISTORIE of the most part of Drinks▪ in use now in the Kingdomes of Great Brittaine and Ireland; with an especiall declaration of the potency, vertue, and operation of our English ALE. With a description of all sorts of Waters, from the Ocean sea, to the teares of a Woman. As also, The causes of all sorts of weather, faire or soule, Sleet, Raine, Haile, Frost, Snow, Fogges, Mists, Vapours, Clouds, Stormes, Windes, Thunder and Lightning. Compiled first in the high Dutch tongue, by the painefull and industrious Hvldricke Van Speagle, a Grammaticall Brewer of Lubeck, and now most Learnedly enlarged, amplified, and Translated into English Prose and Verse. By IOHN TAYLOR. LONDON, Printed by ANNE GRIFFIN. 1637.
THE FAMOVS HISTORIE of the most part of Drinks, in use now in the Kingdomes of Great Brittaine and Ireland; with an especiall declaration of the potency, vertue, and operation of our English ALE. Compiled first in the high Dutch tongue, by the painefull and industrious Huldricke Van Speagle, a Gramaticall Brewer of Lubeck, and now most Learnedly enlarged, amplified, and Translated into English. By IOHN TAYLOR. I Huldrick Van Speagle, doe inge∣niously confesse my boldnesse, and crave pardon of the Brittains and Irish Nation; for that I (being a stranger) have presumed to write of such Drinkes as are Potable in their Climates and Countries; with such particularities of their Origi∣nals and vertues, as I have by expe∣rience and practise, with my colle∣ctions out of divers learned Authors gathered. I purpose not to insist in a methodicall way, but accor∣ding to my quality in a plaine and briefe Relation.
It is not unknowne to men of any reading, that this Iland which hath now regaind it's ancient name of Great Brittaine, was by Brute inhabited by the remainders of some scattered and dis∣persed Trojans: the drinkes they used in their best and worst of fortunes after their plantation here, are observed to bee these; Syder, Perry, Metheglin, Mead, Bragget, Pomperkin, and chiefely, though lastly, Ale, with its appendix Beere. Of which in order. Syder. SYder (whose Anagram is Desyr) desires and deserves the first place, as being the most ancient: it is made of Apples, and is of that antiquity, that it is thought by some to have beene in∣vented and made by Eve, and afterwards practised by Cain, who by the making of it in the time of his vagrancy, got a very com∣petent estate. Certainely it was a most frequent and usuall drinke amongst the Trojans, and was with the remainder of that Nation, first brought into this Iland: It is called Syder a Sydera, (as the Dictionary tels me) of the Starres, whose influence in those Hea∣thenish times was much invoked in the composure of that most excellent liquor, whereof my native Country of the County of Glocestershire most plentifully flowes; It doth much refrigerate and qualifie the inward heat of man, it is also very purgative, and cleanseth the small guts of all viscous humours, and is much me∣liorated by the addition of Sugar, in which way being taken the poorest cottage in Wales that affords it, outvies the Sollyard, and the men of that Countrey may without blushing (their ordi∣nary vertue) paralell it with the glory of the Rhine. Perry. PErry is more Aromaticke, being made of Peares, from whence it seemes to have its Appellation: there is much disagreement amongst ancient and moderne Writers about the antiquity, origi∣nall, and derivation of the name of it; Gorbonus the Lacedemonian sales, it was first made in Syria by one Pericles. Trappoza (a most learned Theban) ascribes it to one Periander: Nimpsbagg will have it from Persepolis a City in Persia: but some Brittains will, that de∣sire to vindicate the Antiquity of times, of one Parry, a Nephew to Cadwallader the great, the last King of the Brittains, who was most ious in the composure of liquids of this nature.
Others would seeme to derive it from Perrue in America, who in regard of the luxuriant soyle, and salubrious ayre abounded wonderfully with Peares; alleadging that Mangotapon one of the seven that hid themselves in a cave, called Particumbo, at that great deluge of the world, was at his comming forth (for he liv'd to come forth) the first compounder of this drinke, which in ho∣nour of his Country he then called Perrue. Amongst all these various opinions of forraigne Authors, com∣mon experience tels us, that Worcestershire is our Brittish Magga¦zin, or plentifull store-house for Perry; nor will I seeke further to dispute the poynt, the drinke being usuall and equall with what hath beene said before of Syder. It is very availeable in quen∣ching of thirst, good against obstructions of the liver and spleene, and most effectuall against contagious diseases, by the opinion of the Brittish Doctours, to whose treatises I referre the learned for larger instructions. Metheglin and Mead. MEtheglin, and Meade in regard of the coherence of their conditions, I may very well handle them together, with∣out any disparagement to either; how ever there bee some pre∣portion in their severall compositions, yet the maine Ingredient being Honey stands allowable to both. The common appellation of the first by the name of Mathew Glinn, (although it seeme a Nick't name to the world) is generally received by the History of Monmoth, to be the Authours name of this Mellifluous mix∣ture: for this Mathew dwelling in a Valley (for so the word Glinn imports Englished from the Welsh) being master of a very great stocke of Bees, and wanting vent for the issue of their la∣bours, in an abundant yeare betooke himselfe wholy to his study, and being most ingenious in things of this nature, in a short time he profited so well, as out of his maternall or mother-wit, of him∣selfe he perfected this rare composure. This name being now in∣geminated by the quotidian calls of his well disposed Countrey∣men, renders it vendible in the most municipall Townes of those parts, at the rates of six pence the quart, which is the most predo∣minant price of any of our homebred liquors. Concerning the vertues of it, it is to be held in most extraordi∣nary
regard, for it is purgative in respect of the Mell (or Honey) and of singular efficacy against Tremor Cordis; indeed the over∣much taking of it is to a melancholicke man in the nature of an Opiate, and therefore to be refused (if not taken with caution) by men of that constitution. Mead or Meath. FOr Meade or Meath (as some will have it) there are diverse un∣warrantable Authors that would wrest the originall and deri∣vation of the name from Medusa, the inchantresse, some there are that the crewell Media was the inventor of it: but Padesh shellum Shagh, a learned Gimnosophist (whose opinion I most leaue unto) in his ninth booke of Hidromancy, faith, that it was a drinke in use and potable by the Medes and Persians in the first erection of that Monarchy (from whence most significantly it hath the name) and that a Brittish Lord, a favourite of a Soldan there, first brought it to these parts, the Receipt being freely bestowed upon him, for his especiall service; in the beliefe of all which, I must crave pardon, that I am not guilty, but I rather thinke it as an abstract from the former, however it hath some severall vertues, but in regard of the cheapnesse it is now growne contemptible, being altogether ecclipsed by the vertue of Metheglin. Braggot. THe next to be handled is Braggot, a drinke in my opinion, not much beholding to antiquity, although some extant wri∣tings of the Barley avouch the receipt for the making of it to be sent over from the Emperour of the East, to Liolin the great Prince of Wales. This drinke is of a most hot nature, as being compos'd of Spices, and if it once scale the sconce, and enter with∣in the circumclusion of the Perricranion, it doth much accelerate nature, by whose forcible attraction and operation, the drinker (by way of distribution) is easily enabled to afford blowes to his brother; it is hot in the third degree, in which respect it is held medicinable, against all cold diseases of the Stomacke. Pomperkin. THe sixt sort of Brittish drinkes is Pomperkin, a drinke whose originall was from Pomeranea (a Province in Germany) as some writers relate. Some derive it from the Pomponii (a Noble
Roman family) however Authors differ about it, it is not much materiall; most certaine it is that it is made of Apples, as the name of it imports; being nothing but the Apples bruised and beaten to mash, with water put to them, which is a drinke of so weake a condition that it is no where acceptable but amongst the Rusticks and Plebeyans, being a heartlesse liquor much of the nature of Swillons in Scotland, or small Beere in England, such as is said to be made of the washings of the Brewers legges and aprors; and I doe most yeeld to their opinions that the first Authour of Pomper∣kin was Perkin Warbecke in the raigne of Henry the seventh, who in his private retirements and Iurking holes, had occasion to pra∣ctise the thrifty making of this infusion. It is of an Hidropicall and Aquarian operation, the vigour of it doth seldome evaporate upward or ascend to the braine, and being it is likewise of a coroa∣ding condition, yet the Brittish bodies being well antidoted with their compounded Creame, Whig, Whey, and Butter-milke; in their constitutions it becomes matter of nutriment. Ale. HAving gone thus farre, it remaines that I speak something of what hath been, and now is used by the English, as well since the Conquest, as in time of the Brittains, Saxons, and Danes, (for the former recited drinks, are to this day confin'd to the Principa∣lity) so as we enjoy them onely by a statute called the courtesie of Wales. And to perfect my discourse in this I shall onely induce them into two heads, viz. the unparaleld liquor called Ale, with his Abstract Beere; whose antiquity amongst a sort of Northerne pated fellowes is if not altogether contemptible, of very little e∣steeme; this humour moved the scurrilous pen of a shamelesse writer in the raigne of King Henry the third, detractingly to in∣veigh against this unequal'd liquor. Thus For muddy, foggy, fulsome, puddle, stinking, For all of these, Ale is the onely drinking. Of all Authours that I have ever yet read, this is the onely one that hath attempted to brand the glorious splendor of that Ale-beloved decection; but observe this fellow, by the perpetuall use
of water (which was his accustomed drinke) he fell into such convulsion and lethargick diseases, that he remained in opinion a dead man; however the knowing Physicians of that time, by the frequent and inward application of Ale, not onely recovered him to his pristine estate of health, but also enabled him in body and braine for the future, that he became famous in his writings, which for the most part were afterwards spent with most Aleoquent and Alaborate commendation of that Admired and most superexcellent Imbrewage. Some there are that affirme that Ale was first invened by Alex∣ander the Great, and that in his conquests this liquor did infuse much vigour and valour into his souldiers. Others say that famous Physician of Piemont (named Don Alexis) was the founder of it. But it is knowne that it was of that singular vse in the time of the Saxons that none were allowed to brew it but such whose places and qualities were most eminent: insomuch that we finde that one of them had the credit to give the name of a Saxon Prince, who in honour of that rare quality, he called Alla. Some Aleadge that it being our drinke when our Land was called Albion, that it had the name of the Countrey: Twiscus in his Euphorbium will have it from Albania, or Epirus, VVolfgang Plashendorph of Gusten∣burg, saies that Alecto (one of the three furies) gave the receipt of it to Albumazer a Magician, and he (having Aliance with Aladine the Soldan at Aleppo) first brewed it there, whereto may be Aleu∣ded, the story how Alphonsus of Scicily, sent it from thence to the battell of Alcazor. My Authour is of Anaxagoras opinion, that Ale is to be held in high price for the nutritive substance that it is indued withall, and how precious a nurse it is in generall to Man∣kinde. It is true that the overmuch taking of it doth so much exhile∣rate the spirits, that a man is not improperly said to be in the Ale∣titude (observe the word I pray you, and all the words before or after) for you shal finde their first syllable to be Ale, and some wri∣ters are of opinion that the Turkish Alcaron was invented by Ma∣homet out of such furious raptures as Ale inspir'd him withall; some affirme Bacchus (Alias Liber Pater) was the first Brewer of it, a∣mong the Indians, who being a stranger to them they named
it Ale, as brought to them by an Alien; in a word, Somnus alt signifies dead sleepe: Quies alta, Great rest; Altus and Alta noble and excellent: It is (for the most part) extracted out of the spirit of a Graine called Barley, which was of that estimation amongst the ancient Galles that their Prophets (whom they called Bardi) used it in their most important prophesies and ceremonies: This Graine, after it had beene watred and dryed, was at first ground in a Mill in the Island of Malta, from whence it is supposed to gaine the name of Malt; but I take it more proper from the word Matteolus, which signifies a Hammer or Maule, for Hanniball (the great Carthaginian Captaine) in his sixteene yeeres warres against the Romanes, was called the Maule of Italie, for it is con∣jectured that he victoriously Mauld them by reason that his Army was daily refreshed with the spiritefull Elixar of Mault. It holds very significant to compare a man in the Aletitude to be in a planetarie height; for in a Planet, the Altitude is his motion in which he is carried from the lowest place of Heaven or from the Center of the Earth, into the most highest place, or unto the top of his Circle, and then it is said to be in Apogaeo, that is the most Transcendent point of all, so the Sublunarie of a stupified Spirit, being elevated by the efficacious vigour of this uncontroleable vertue, renders him most capeable for high actions. I should be voluminous, if I should insist upon all pertinent and impertinent passages in the behalfe of Ale, as also of the re∣tentive fame that Yorke, Chester, Hull, Nottingham, Darby, Graves∣end, with a Toaste, and other Countries still enjoy, by making this untainted liquor in the primitive way, and how VVindsor doth more glory in that Composition than all the rest of her spe∣culative pleasures, which is dayly strengthened by the Agitive endeavours of the most pregnant spirits there, whose superlative issue affords us a quotidian expectation, and questionlesse cannot but succeed with generall applause in regard of the undertakers; Also there is a Towne neere Margate in Kent, (in the Isle of Thanett) called Northdowne, which Towne hath ingrost much Fame, Wealth, and Reputation from the prevalent potencie of their Atractive Ale. I will onely now speake somewhat of its vertues, and in the
weakenesse of my expressions shall crave pardon, of those many and learned Doctors of our Time, whose daily and gustave Ap∣probation addes to the glorious Splendour of that unequall'd Element. Concerning the fructifying or fruitfulnesse of Ale, it is almost incredible, for twice every yeere there is a Faire at a small Towne called Kimbollon, or Kimolton in North-hamptonshire, (as I take it) in which towne there are but 38. houses, which at the Faire time are encreased to 39. Alehouses, for an old woman and her daughter doe on those dayes divide there one house into two, such is the operation and encreasing power of our English Ale. First then, it is a singular remedy against all melancholick dis∣eases, Tremor cordis, and Maladies of the spleene, it is purgative and of great operation against Iliaca passio, and all gripings of the small guts, it cures the stone in the Bladder, Reines or Kidneyes, and provokes Vrin wonderfully, it mollifies Tumors and swel∣lings in the body, and is very predominant in opening the obstru∣ctions of the Liver. It is most effectuall for clearing of the sight, being applied outwardly, it asswageth the unsufferable paine of the Gowt called Artichicha Podagra, or Gonogra, the Yeast or Barme being laid hot to the part pained, in which way it is ease∣full to all Impostumes or the paine in the Hippe called Sciatica passio; Indeed the immoderate taking of it (as of the best things) is not commended, for in some it causes swimming in the head and Vertigo, (but I speake still of moderation) in which respect it is not onely availeable for the causes aforesaid, but for all defluxions and Epidemicall diseases whatsoever, and being Butter'd (as our Gallenists well observe) it is good against all Contagious disea∣ses, Feavers, Agues, Rhumes, Coughes and Catarres with Hernia Aquosa & vertosa. I might proceed to nominate the Townes of the Kingdome that have their happinesse to enjoy their names from Ale, Ales∣foord, in Hampshire, and Alesbury (or Aylesbury) in Buckingham∣shire, Where the making of Aleberries so excellent against Hec∣ticks was first invented. As also of many Sirnames of great worth in this Kingdome, as these of Ale-iff, Ale-worth, Good-ale, Penny-Ale, and in Scotland, the generous and antient name of Lamsd-Ale,
but not to insist further, in this straine, I make no question, but the Capacious apprehension of a free understanding will spare me that labour. I will therefore shut up all with that admirable conclusion in∣sisted upon in our time by a discreet Gentleman in a solemn As∣sembly, who, by a politick observation, very aptly compares Ale and Cakes with Wine and Wafers, neither doth he hold it sit that it should stand in Competition with the meanest Wines, but with that most excellent Composition which the Prince of Physitians Hippocrates had so ingenuously compounded for the preservation of mankinde, and which (to this day) speakes the Author by the name of Hippocras, so that you see of Antiquity, Ale was famous amongst the Troians, Brittaines, Romans, Saxons, Danes, Nor∣mans, English men, VVelch, besides in Scotland, from the highest and Noblest Palace to the poorest or meanest Cottage, Ale is uni∣versall, and for Vertue it stands allowable with the best receipts of the most Antientest Physitians; and for its singular force in ex∣pulsion of poison is equall, if not exceeding that rate Antidote so seriously invented by the Pontique King, which from him (till this time) carries his name of Mitbridate. And lastly, not onely ap∣proved by a National Assembly, but more exemplarily remon∣strated by the frequent use of the most knowing Physitians, who for the wonderfull force that it hath against all the diseases of the Lungs, Justly allow the name of a Pulmonist to every Alebrewer. The further I seeke to goe the more unable I finde my selfe to expresse the wonders (for so I may very well call them) operated by Ale, for that I shall abruptly conclude, in consideration of mine owne insufficiency, with the fagge-end of an old mans old will, who gave a good summe of mony to a Red-fac'd Ale-drinker, who plaid upon a Pipe and Tabor, which was this: To make your Pipe and Tabor keepe their sound, And dye your Crimson tincture more profound, There growes no better med'cine on the ground, Than Aleano (if it may be found) To buy which drug, I give a hundred pound.
Ale is rightly called Nappy, for it will set a nap upon a mans threed bare eyes when he is sleepy. It is called Merry-goe-downe, for it slides downe merrily; It is fragrant to the sent; It is most pleasing to the taste; The flowring and mantling of it (like Che∣quer worke) with the Vendant smiling of it, is delightfull to the sight, it is Touching or Feeling to the Braine and Heart; and (to please the senses all) it provokes men to singing and mirth, which is contenting to the Hearing. The speedy taking of it doth com∣fort a heavy and troubled minde; it will make a weeping widow laugh and forget sorrow for her deceased husband; It is truly ter∣med the spirit of the Buttry (for it puts spirit into all it enters,) It makes the footmans Head and heeles so light, that he seemes to flie as he runnes; It is the warmest lineing of a naked mans Coat, (that's a Bull) It satiates and asswageth hunger and cold; with a Toaste it is the poore mans comfort, the Shepheard, Mower, Plowman, Labourer and Blacksmiths most esteemed purchase; It is the Tinkers treasure, the Pedlers Jewell, the Beggers Joy, and the Prisoners loving Nurse; it will whet the wit so sharp, that it will make a Catter talke of matters beyond his reach; It will set a Bashfull suiter a woing; It heates the chill blood of the Aged; It will cause a man to speake past his owne or any others mans capa∣city, or understanding; It sets an edge upon Logick and Rheto∣rick; It is a friend to the Muses; It inspires the poore Poet, that cannot compasse the price of Canarie or Gasenigne; It mounts the Musician bove Eela; It makes the Balladmaker Rime beyond Reason, It is a Repairer of a decaied Colour in the face; It puts Eloquence into the Oratour; It will make the Philosopher talke profoundly, the Scholler learnedly, and the Lawyer Acute and feelingly, Ale at Whitsontide, or a Whitson Church Ale, is a Re∣pairer of decayed Countrey Churches; It is a great friend to Truth, for they that drinke of it (to the purpose) will reveale all they know, be it never so secret to be kept; It is an Embleme of Justice, for it allowes and yeelds measure; It will put courage into a Coward, and make him swagger and fight; It is a seale to many a good Bargaine. The Physitian will commend it; the Lawyer will defend it, It neither hurts, or kils, any but those that abuse it unmeasurably and beyond bearing; It doth good to as
many as take it rightly; It is as good as a paire of Spectacles to cleare the eyesight of an old parish Clarke; and in Conclusion, it is such a nourisher of Mankinde, that if my mouth were as bigge as Bishopsgate, my Pen as long as a Maypole, and my Inke a flowing spring, or a standing fishpond, yet I could not with Mouth, Pen, or Inke, speake or write the true worth and worthinesse of Ale. Beere. NOw, to write of Beere, I shall not need to wet my pen much with the naming of it, It being a drinke which Antiquitie was an Aleien, or a meere stranger to, and as it hath scarcely any name, so hath it no habitation, for the places or houses where it is sold doth still retaine the name of An Alehouse; but if it were a Beere-house, (or so called) yet it must have an Inferiour stile of hous-roome than An Alehouse; for An is the name of many a good woman, and the name An cannot be properly given to a Beere-Brewer, or Beere-house; for to say An Beere Brewer or An Beere house is ridiculous; but An Ale-Brewer or An Alehouse is good significant English; or to say An Beere brewer or An Beerehouse or (by your favour An Taverne) is but botching language in great Brittaine; but to say A Alebrewer or A Alehouse, is more im∣proper than to bid a childe A A in his Chaire, when there is nei∣ther Chaire or stoole. This comparison needs a Sir Reverence to Vsher it, but being Beere is but an Upstart and a foreigner or Alien, in respect of Ale, it may serve in stead of a better; Nor would it differ from Ale in any thing, but onely that an Aspiring Amaritudinous Hop comes crawling lamely in, and makes a Bitter difference betweene them but if the Hop be so cripled that he cannot be gotten to make the oddes, the place may poorely bee supply'd with chop'd Broome (new gathered) whereby Beere hath never attained the sober Ti∣tle of Ale, for it is proper to say A Stand of Ale, and a Hogges Head of Beere, which in common sense is but a swinish Phrase or Appellation. Indeede Beere, by a Mixture of Wine, it enjoyes approbation amongst some few (that hardly understand wherefore) but then it is no longer Beere, but hath lost both Name and Nature, and is called Balderdash, (an Utopian denomination) and so like a petty
Brooke running into a great stream looses it selfe in his owne cur∣rent, the legges being wash'd with the weaker or smaller sort of it, is contemptuously called, Rotgut; and is thought by some to be very medicinable to cure the Scurvie. The stronger Beere is divided into two parts (viz.) wild and stale; the first may ease a man of a drought, but the later is like water cast into a Smiths forge, and breeds more heartburning, and as rust eates into Iron, so overstale Beere gnawes auletholes in the entrales, or else my skill failes, an what I have written of it is to be held as a jest. I have now performed my promise, yet cannot so cease, being much desirous to speak something of a forraigne Element, which in some sort seemes to obscure the glory of all the forenamed drinks; and is knowne to us by the name of Sack, which appellation was archieved by derivation from Donzago, a Spaniard of the Province of Andalowsia, who was the first discoverer of this Castilian El∣lixar. But herein (as before) I shall but loose my selfe the subject be∣ing most excellently handled, tasted, and well rellished both in verse and prose, especially in that late Illustration of Aristippus, in which respect onely it is held fit that Cambridge should precede Oxford. Sack. SAck is no hippocrite, for any man that knowes what an Ana∣gram is, will confesse that it is conta1ined within the litterall letters and limmits of its owne name, which is (to say) a Cask. Sack then containes it selfe, (except it be drawne out) within its inclo∣sed bounds, like Diogenes, in his Tun; yet Sack (overmuch drawne and excessively abused) hath drawne the abusers of it into many abuses and dammages, for Tangrephilax, a learned Lybian Geogra∣pher of our time, affirmes that it sumes into the head, though it well pleases the palate, yet neverthelesse that it helpes the naturall weaknesse of a cold stomacke more than any other wine whatsoe∣ver. The old ancient Poets onely write of Helicon, Tempe, Aga∣nippe, the Pegasean fountaine, the Thespian spring. The Muses well and abundance of other unknowne rich invisible blessings; But our age approves that Sack is the best lineing or living for a good Poet; and that it enables our moderne writers, to versifie most
ingeniously, without much cud gelling their headpieces (a thing very much used in the pumpers for wit) whereby they get some portion of credit, a great proportion of windy applause, but for money, &c. For mine owne part, I do not, nor will drinke any of it, which is the reason that my verses want vigour, but if I could but endure to wash my midrisle in Sack, as the most grave Musehunters Hexametrians, Pentametrians, Dactylians and Spondeians doe; I should then reach with my Invention above the Altitude of the 39. sphere, and dive 50. fathom below the profundity of the de∣pest Barrathrum: The troth is, I have no reason to love Sack, for it made me twice a Rat in Woodstreet Counter-trap: besides where other wines have scarce strength to make me drunke (as I may take them) Sack hath the power to make me mad, which made me leave it. Yet for the vertues that are in mine enemy, I must and will give due commendations; therefore I will give a touch at some things which is praise worthy in this Iberian, Castilian, Canarian, Sherri∣an, Mallaganian, Robalonian, Robdanian, Peterseamian. Is any man opprest with crudities in his stomacke, so that it takes away all appetituall desire, insomuch that the sight of meat is a second sicknesse to him? let that man drinke Sack, the cure fol∣lowes beyond beliefe: Is any man Ingurgitated, so that he is in the condition of a strong surfeit? let that man drinke Sack too; the remedy is sudden indeed to a poynt of wonder or admiration. Is any man so much out of the favour of Elous, that he is short-win∣ded, or that his voice or speech failes him, let him drinke Sack, (as it may be taken) it shall make him capable to vent words and speake beyond measure: Doth any man (for the clearing of his sto∣macke) desire a vomit? let him take a quantity of Sack, and by the operation of the same it shall be effected; So that we may justly say that Sack is a second nature to man, and that the Physicians well knew, when they confinde it to the Apothecaies shops (which was not till neere the end of King Henry the eights Raigne, about the yeare 1543, and in King Edward the sixts first and second yeare 1548.) till which time none but the Apothecaries had the honour to fell Sack, and that was onely for medicine, and for sicke folkes: but though now it be more dispersed into Great mens houses and
Vintners cellars, yet it hath obtained no absolute freedome to this day, for in the mansions or dwellings of many that keepe the fai∣rest houses, the Mannagement and tuition of Sack is to some lewd (ill natur'd, or nurtur'd) yeoman of the Winecellar, whereby it is too often adulterated, and also brought to such an astringencie, brought to such points of mortification, that it is impossible it should ever be worthy to gaine the approbation of a Wine-vinegar man, and it were heartily to be wish'd that this enormious abuse were punished by the vertue of a Dog-whip. A word or two for example, and I shall conclude: Lucius Piso that great Generall that conquered Thrace, was wonderfully gi∣ven to the drinking of Sack, insomuch that he was oftentimes car∣ried from the Senate house; and it was so farre from being an im∣peachment to his honour, that neverthelesse Augustus Caesar committed to him the charge, care, and trust of the most secret af∣faires of State, and never had any cause to be discontented with him: the like we read of Tiberius and Cassus; and as faithfully was the plot and purpose to kill Caesar, (in the Senate) committed unto Cimber (who dranke nothing but Sack,) as unto Cassius who dranke nothing but Water; and certaine I am that the Persians, after their drinking of Sack, were wont to consult of their chiefest and most serious state-businesses: and Cyrus, (that so farre and fa∣mous a renowned King) among his other high praises and com∣mendations, meaning to preferre himselfe before his brother Ar∣taxerxes, and get the start of him, alleageth the cause of his being victorious over him to bee chiefly because he could drinke more Sack than he. I commend not intemperance in all these allegations, the Rea∣der may please to Remember my former test for moderation, and Sack, being so taken, will be to the moderate taker a comfort a∣gainst cares and crosses, and so with Iuvenals words in his foure∣teenth satire I shut up all; Thou shalt be from disease and weaknesse free, From mone, from care, long time of life to thee Shall by more friendly fate afforded by: Drinke Sack therefore if you'l be rul'd by me.
Here followeth, a laborious and effectuall discourse, in praise of the Element of all Waters fresh and salt, with their opperation; with a touch of the causes of all sorts of weather, faire and foule. I That of Earth was made, yet no earth have, No not so much as may afford a grave: For when that death my lives thred shall un∣twine I have no buriall in a ground that's mine: Of all the Elements, the Earth is worst; Because for Adams sinne it was accurst: Therefore no parcell of it will I buy But on the VVater for reliefe relie. When as mans crying crimes in volleyes flew To Heaven, and Heavens high vengeance downeward drew: Then Water all the World did overrunne, And plagu'd th' abuses that on Earth were done. From showres of Water, rain'd from Skies to Earth, Spring, Sommer, Harvest, Winter have their birth. For VVater is the Milke of Heaven, whereby All things are nurs'd, increase and multiply. The oldst and most grave Astronomers, The learned'st and most sage Philosophers Doe hold, that in the highest Altitude A spheare of Water is, in Amplitude Envelloping all other Orbs and Spheres, With all the Planets swift and slow careares, Even as the Sea the Earth doth compasse round, The Water so the Firmament doth bound. Should I of Water write, but what it is,
I should be drowned in my Theames Abysse: And therefore I'le but dabble, wade, and wash, And here and there both give, and take a dash. In blest Records it truely is approv'd, That Gods blest Spirit upon the Waters mov'd: Then All things were involved in the Waters, All earthly, Airie, and all firie matters: Vntill th' Almighty (whose workes all are wonders) With saying (Let there be) the Chaos sunders. Of a confus'd lump, voyd of forme and fashion, He spake, and gave the world its faire creation. And as at first the Waters compast all The Chaos, or worlds universall Ball. So still, of all the workes of God, most glorious The water was, is, and will be victorious. It doth surmount the Ayre, the fire it quenches With Inundations it the Earth bedrenches: The Fire may burne a house, perhaps a Towne, But water can a Province spoyle and drowne: And Ayre may be corrupted, and from thence, A Kingdome may be plagu'd with pestilence: Where many die, old, young, some great, some small, But water flouds plaies sweep-stake with them all. Earth may be barren, and not yeeld her store: Yet may she feed the rich, and starve the poore. But Earth in triumph over all ner'e rid, As in the Diluge once the Waters did. Warre may make noyse with Gunnes and ratling Drums, But Water, where it comes, it overcomes. Thus Earth, nor Ayre, nor Fire, nor rumbling Warre, Nor plague, or pestilence, nor famine are Of powre to winne, where Water but commands, As witnesse may the watry Northerlands. Concerning Merchandise, and transportation, Commerce and traffique, and negotiation, To Make each Countrie have by Navigation The Goods, and Riches of each others Nation.
Commodities in free community, Embassages for warre or unity: These blessings, by the Sea, or some fresh River Are given to us, by the All-giving Giver. And in the vasty and unmeasur'd roome Of Neptunes Regiment, or Thetis wombe, Are almost shapes and formes of all the things Which in the Earth, or Ayre, or dies, or springs. Ther'e Fishes like to Sunne or Moone, and Starres, Fowles of the Ayre, and weapons for the Warres, Beasts of the Field, and Plants and Flowers there, And Fishes made like Men and Women are. All instruments for any Art or Trade, In living formes of Fishes there are made. This is approv'd, if any man will seeke In the first day of Bart his first weeke, Heaven hath ordain'd the warry Element To be a Seale and sacred Sacrament, Which doth in Baptisme us regenerate, And man againe with God doth renovate. And as it in the Laver (mysticall) Doth cleanse us from our sinne originall: So for our corp'rall uses 'tis most meete To wash our cloathes, and keepe us cleane and sweet. Wer't not for Water thus we plainelie see, No beast on Earth more beastly were than wee. Our selves with nastinesse our selves should smother, Or with our owne sterich poyson one another. It keepes our vessels cleane to dresse our meate, It serves to cleanse and boile the meate we eate. It makes our houses hansome, neate and cleane, (Or else the mayd is but a sluttish queane) Thus Water boyles, parboyles, and mundifies. Cleares, cleanses, clarifies, and purifies. But as it purges us from filth and stincke; We must remember that it makes us drinke, Metheglin, Braggot, Beere, and headstrong Ale,
(That can put colour in a visage pale) By which meanes many Brewers are growne Rich, And in estates may soare a lofty Pitch, Men of Good Ranke and place, and much command Who have (by sodden Water) purchast land: Yet sure I thinke their gaine had not been such Had not good fellowes vs'de to drinke too much; But wisely they made hay whilst Sunne did shine, For now our Land is overflowne with wine: With such a Deluge, or an Inundation As hath besotted and halfe drown'd our Nation. Some that are scarce worth 40 pence a yeere Will hardly make a meale with Ale or Beere: And will discourse, that wine doth make good blood, Concocts his meat, and make digestion good, And after to drinke Beere, nor will, nor can He lay a Churle upon a Gentleman. Thus Bacchus is ador'd and deifide, And We Hispanializ'd and Frenchifide: Whilst Noble Native Ale, and Beeres hard fate Are like old Almanacks, Quite out of Date; Thus men consume their credits and their wealths, And swallow sicknesses, in drinking healths, Untill the fury of the spritefull Grape Mounts to the braine, and makes a man an Ape, A Sheepe, Goate, Lion, or a Beastly swine, He snores, besoyl'd with vomit and much Wine. At Good mens Boords, where of I eate good cheere, I finde the Brewer honest in his Beere. He sels it for small Beere, and he should cheate, In stead of small to cosen folks with Greate. But one shall seldome find them with that fault, Except it should invisibly raine Mault. O Tapsters, Tapsters all, lament and cry, Or desp'rately drinke all the Tavernes dry: For till such time as all the Wine is gone, Your are bewitch'd, and guests you shall have none.
Then to the Tavernes hye you every man: In one day drinke foure Gallons, if you can, And with that tricke (within a day or twaine) I thinke there will but little Wine remaine. Your hopes to hoppes returne againe will be, And you once more the golden age will see. But hold, I feare my Muse is mad or drunke, Or else my wits are in the wetting shrunk: To Beere and Ale my love hath some relation Which made me wander thus beyond my station. Good Reader be my Priest, I make confession, I pray thee pardon me, my long digression. From Beere and Wine to water now a while, I meane to metamorphose backe my stile. Wer't not for Water, sure the Dyers would die, Because they wanted where withall to dye. Cost would be lost, and labour be in vaine, 'Tis Water that must helpe to die in Graine. They could then feare no colours, it is cleare, Want water, and there will be none to feare. The Fishmongers, (a worthy Company) If VVater did not still their Trade supply, They would be Tradefalne, and quite downe be trod, Nor worth the head or braine-pan of a Cod. Then Lent and Ember-weekes would soone be shotten, All fasting daies would quickly be forgotten: Carthusian Friers, in superstitious Cloysters VVould want their stirring Cockles, Crabs and Oysters: And Catholicks turne Puritanes straight way, And never more keepe Lent or fasting day. But leaving Neptune, and his Trumping Triton, Of other VVaters now I meane to write on, (Exhal'd by Phoebus from the Ocean maine) Of Clowdes, of misty Fogs, all sorts of Raine, Of Dew, of Frosts, of Haile, of Ice of Snow VVhich falls, and turnes to water here below, Of Snow and Raine, as they together meet
VVell mingled in the Ayre, are called Sleet. Of Springs, of petty Rils, of Chrystall Founts, Of Streamelets here my merry Muse recounts; Of Foordes, of Brookes, of Rivers, Lakes and Bournes; Of Creekes, of Ebbes and flouds, and their returnes, Of Gulphs, ponds, Whirlpooles, Puddles, Ditches, Pooles, Of Moates, of Bathes, some hot, and some that cooles, Of Waters, bitter, sweet, fresh, salt, hot, cold, Of all their operations manifold; These (if I can) I'le mention with my Pen And last of Urin and strong Watermen. Of Clouds.A Cloud's a Vapour, which is cold and moyst, Which from the Earth, or Sea, the Sunne doth hoyst Into the middle Region of the Ayre, And is (by extreame cold) congealed there, Untill at last, it breake and fals againe, To Earth, or Sea, in snow, sleet, Haile or Raine. Of Mists.Mists are such clouds, which neere the earth doe lye, Because the sun wants strength to draw them high. When radiant Sol displaies his piercing Beames Of Raine.Into a cloud, it Thawes, and Raines, in streames: And as the cloud is distant neere or farre, So, great, or small the showrie droppes still are. Some men ('gainst Raine) doe carry in their backs Prognosticating Aking Almanacks: Some by a painefull elbow, hip, or knee, Will shrewdly guesse, what wether's like to be: Some by their cornes are wondrous Weather-wise, And some by biting of Lice, Fleas, or Flies: The Gowt, Sciatica, The Gallian Morbus, Doth oft foretell if Tempests shall disturbe us; For though these things converse not with the start, Yet to Mans Griefe they are Astronomers; In Spring time, and in Autumne Phoebus Ray From land and sea drawes vapours in the day, Which to th' Ayres lowest Region he exhales, Dew.And in the night to pearly dew is fals.
Here oft fall Meldewes, sweet as Hony; And Dew oft turnes Manna in Polonia land. Twixt Dew and Hoare-frost,Hoare frosts all the ods, I hold One comes from heate, the other from the cold. Hayle.Hayle is an Ice which oft in flawes and stormes In spring and Harvest fals, in sundry formes; For in the Autumne, Winter, or by night Scarce any Hayle within our land doth light. And last comes Snow,Snow. the cold of Winters Weathers, Which fals and fils the Ayre with seeming feathers. These from the land, and from the Ocean Maine, The Sun drawes up, and then lets fall againe. Thus water universally doth fly From Earth and skie to Sea, from them to Sky: For 'twixt the Firmament, the land and Ocean, The Water travels with perpetuall Motion. Now, from the Airy Regions I descend, And to a lower course my study beside He that of these things would know more, may please To looke them in some Ephimerides. Springs,Springs. (in the Earth) I doe Assimulate To veines of Man, which doe evacuate, And drop by drop through Cavernes they distill. Till many meetings make a petty Rill: Which Rill (with others) doe make Rivolets, And Rivolets, Brookes, Bournes and foords begets, And thus combined, they their store deliver Into a deeper trench, and make a River. Then Rivers joyne,Rivers. as Isis doth with Tame, And Trent with Owse, and Humber doth the same. Those altogether doe their Tributes pay Unto their soveraigne Ocean night and day. These make Dame Tellus wombe to fructisie, As blood in veines of men doe life supply, Lakes in low vallied Grounds have Generation,Lakes Or from some severall Rivers Inundation. Some Lakes seeme Oceans, amongst which are these
The Dead-lake, Hircan, and the Caspian seas. A Whirpooles like unto state policy Not to be sounded, but with jeopardy. Hot Bathes doe spring from Brimstone veines, whose heat For many cures have opperation great. Some minerall earth is bitter, and doth make The water issuing thence, that taste to take. In Scicily, they say, there is a VVell VVhose water doth for Vinegar serve well. A VVell neere Bileu in Bohemia lies VVhich (like burnt VVine) the Countrey there supplies. And divers springs in Germany there be, VVhose taste with Vinegar, or VVine agree. For there the Brimstone mines, and Minerals VVith Fumes infuting vapours up exhales And with the waters doe incorporate Hot, cold, sweet, sowre, as they ennaccuate. Some Rivers are of such strange working might, VVhich dranke (by sheepe) doth change them black from white, Some that with bathing cure, blind, dease, and lame, And makes mens haire red that doe drinke the same, Some are at noone key-cold, at midnight hot, Some makes a man mad, some a drunken sot, Some are in summer cold, in winter warme, And some are banefull, full of poysn'ous harme. Some (do with lost) make mens affections burne, And some (through coldnesse) wood to stones will turne, Some will quench burning torches straite, and then Dip'd in the water they are light agen, I read that in Silicia one may finde A well which if Thieves drinke of, are strucke blinde, My selfe, and many thousands more than I Would (rather then to drinke thereof be drie.) If Brittaines waters all were such, I thinke That few of us would dare thereof to drinke: I could write more of strange wells opp'tatious: And waters of our owne and other Nations.
But Doctour Fulk of late hath writ a booke, Of Met'ors, and who lists therein to looke, May read, and reading may be well suffic'd, So learnedly he hath Epitomiz'd. There are two Springs, which women (when they mump) Or lumpish lowring from their eyes can pumpe, And in those pearly streames the foole, and witty, Hath oftentimes beene duck'd or sous'd with pity: Kinde hearted men are drown'd in sorrow deepe When they doe see a handsome woman weepe. But Aprill like, soone dry and quickly wet (As anger, love, or hate doe rise or set,) But as for those that truely spring from griefe, I wish them consolation and Reliefe. Now (to ecclips the vigour of the Vine) We have strong waters, stronger much than Wine: One with a quart of water drunke may be, When (of the best wine) he may hold out three, The sellers of these waters seldome row, And yet they are strong-water-men, I know. Some water-men there are of sight so quicke, They'l tell by water if a man be sicke, And (through the urinall) will speedily Finde out the cause, the griefe and remedy. These men deserve much honour, love and thankes. But hang base pispot cheating Mountebankes. 'Twere fit the Ratcatchers with them should be, Combin'd in one, and at one Hall made free. I could speake why the sea doth ebbe and flow, And why 'tis salt, but Doctour Fulke doth show Compendiously, as I have said before; And therefore her I'le touch these poynts no more. Month changing Luna, hath the government O're all the various watry element, And as the Moone is mutable even so The waters still are turning to and fro: 'Tis smooth, 'tis rough, deepe, shallow, swift and slow,
Whose motion doth perpetuall ebbe and flow: Most weake, most strong, most gentle, most untam'd Of all the creatures that were ever nam'd: It is so weake that children may it spill, And strong enough millions of men to kill: As smooth as Glasse, as Rugged as a Beare, Weake, and yet greatest burthens still doth beare, And as the waters from the Moone doth carry Her inclination, and like her do vary: So I (a Water-man) in various fashions, Have wroate a hotchpotch here of strange mutations, Of ancient liquors, made by Liber Pater, Of drinkes, of Wines, of sundry sorts of Water: My Muse doth like a Monkey friske and frigge, Or like a Squirrell skip, from twigge to twigge: Now sipping Sider, straightway supping Perry, Metheglin sweet, and Mead, (that makes her merry) VVith Braggot, that can teach a Cat to speake, And poore Pomperkin (impotent and weake) And lastly (as the chiefe of all the rest) She tipples Huff-cap Ale, to crowne the feast. Yet now and then in Beere and Balderdash Her lips she dips; and cleane her entrailes wash: And ending, she declares Sack's mighty power, VVhich doth time, coyne, wit, health, and all devoure. Not by the mod'rate use, but by th' abuse Which daily is in universall use. For Rhenish, Claret, White, and other Wines They need not the expression of my lines: Their vertue's good, if not commix'd impure, And (as they'r us'd) they may both kill or cure. Through drinks, through wines, and waters, I have run, And (being dry and sober.) I have DONE.
