23774 99853433 18816
CAROLUS STUART. Koningk van Engelandt. Schotlandt, En Irlandt, Gebooren Ao. 1600. Binnen Londen onthalst, Ao. 1649. in't 24 Iaer zyner Regeeringe. Ant van Dyck pinxit. Ioost Hartgers excud. S. Savery ftt
A MEMORIAL OF ALL THE English Monarchs being in number 151, from BRVTE to King CHARLES. In Heroicall Uerse by IO. TAYLOR. LONDON Printed by IOHN BEALE, for Iames Bowler, 1630
❧ TO THE RIGHT Honourable, LIONEL Lord Viscount Cranefield, Earle of Middlesex, &c. MY humble Muse, in lofty manner sings The 7 Kingdomes were, 1. Kent. 2 South-Saxons, Sussex and Surry. 3 East-Angles, Norfolke, and Cambridge-shire. 4 West Saxon, Barkshire, Deuonshire, Somersetshire, and Corne∣well. 5 Mertia, Glostershire, Herefordshire, Worcester, Shropshre, Scafforshire, Cheshire, Warwike, Leycester, Noreb, Oxford, ∣ingham, Bedford, and halfe Hartfordshire. 6 East-Saxon, Essex, Middlesex, and halfe Hartfordshire. 7 Northumberland diuided to two Kingdomes,  nd Bernicia, all brought to one Monarchy by Egler:  West-Saxons, and called England, 196 yees after . A Catalogue of Englands mighty Kings: At first I do begin with Troian BRVTE, And following Chronicles I do dispute, Proceeding briefely with their Raignes and Names, Till these blest dayes of our best Monarch IAMES,
Tis but an Argument thats written here, That in such time such and such Princes were: But he that meanes their Actions more to know, May read Boetius, Hollinshed, or Stow, Or our true labouring Moderne Master How, Which Authors, Learned Iudgement do allow: Or if youle see how former times doe runne, Reade the laborious paines of Middleton. We haue had Kings since Brute, of royall Blood, One hundred forty sixe, some bad, some good, Foure Queenes in all, this time did only Raigne, Whose Memories in Histories remaine. So in two thousand and seuen hundred yeeres, We had thrice 50 Princes it appeares. This Kingdome here was fiue times won and lost, And Kings (as God decreed) oft chang'd and tost. Sometimes one swaid the Scepter, sometime twaine, And sometime seuen at once did rule and raigne, Till sixe (by bloudy warres) lost life and throne, And valiant Egbert ioyn'd them all in one. But since (through Heauens high prouidence) I see, Tis growne more great, and greater like to be: Long may He liue, by whom in one 'tis guided, And may they sinke that wish't againe diuided. Then (Noble Lord) with good acceptance take This Poem, for the Royall Subiects sake, And though it be not compleate as it should, Beare with it, and accept of what I could,
The matter's worthy, though the manner poore, VVhich makes me heere your Patronage implore, And may you be externall and internall, Blest and aduanc'd to happinesse eternall. Your Honours in all obseruance to be commanded, Iohn Taylor. Yeeres before Christ.
Medulla Historioe Anglicanoe
BRVTE, THE FIRST KING OF BRITTAINE, began his Reigne, 1. BRVTE. Anno mundi, 2858. Before Christ, 1108. AENEAS from subuerted Troy exilde, In Tuscan wedded King Latis childe: By whom the Realme of Italy he gain'd, And after he had 3 yeeres fully raign'd, He died, and left Ascanius in his stead: To whom Sils Posts did succeed.
From which Posthumus Royall loynes did spring, Brute being of the age of 15 yeeres, as he shot at a wild beast, the arrow glanced vnfortunately and slew his Fa∣ther Siluius Aeneas, for the which he was exilde, and came into this Land, then called Albyon. I follow the common opinion: for many Writers doe nei∣ther write or allow of Brutes being here, accounting it a dishonor for our Nation, to haue originall from a Paride, and one that deriued his descent from the Goddesse (alias strumper) Venus. Howsoeuer, Histories are obscured and clouded with ambiguities, some burnt, lost, defaced by anti∣quity; and some abused by the malice, ignorance, or partia∣litie of Writers, so that truth is hard to be found. Amongst all which variations of Times and Writers, I must con∣clude there was a BRVTE. Great Brutus, Brittaines first commanding King: The people then were (here) all voyd of pride, Borne Naked, Naked liu'd, and Naked dy'd. Three Sonnes Brute left, Locrinus was his Heire To England, Cambria (Wales) was Cambers share, To Albanact (the youngest) 'twas his lot, To sway the Scepter of the valiant Scot. Thus 'mongst his Sonnes this Ile he did diuide, And after twenty foure yeeres Reigne he dy'd.
Locrine 20. yeeres, 1084. LOcrinus, Eldest of old Brutus Sonnes, By Valour vanquisht the inuading Hunnes: He chas'd them, & their power did quite confound, And their King Humber was in The Riuer of Humber tooke the name from the drow∣d King of the Huns, now Hungarians. Humber drownd: This Locrine had a Queene, faire Guendoline was daughter vnto Corineus, Duke Cornewall. Estrild was a beautious Lady of King umbers, whom Locrinus tooke prisoner. Guendolin, Yet folly led him to the Paphaean sinne, esotted sence, and blood with lust inflam'd, He lou'd a beautie, Beautious Estrild nam'd, y whom he had a Daughter, Sabrin hight, whome the King had whole and sole delight: or which the Queene made war vpon her Lord: nd in the Fight she put him to the Sword; nd after a reuengefull bloody slaughter, Queene Guendoline tooke Estrild and her daughter, nd drownd them both (to quēch her ielous flame) nd so from Sabrine, Seauerne got the name.
Q. Guendoline, 1064. About this time Saul was King of Israel. VVHen 15. yeeres this Queen had wisely raign'd, She dy'd, & then her Son the kingdome gain'd. Queene Guendoline was allowed the gouernment in her Sonne Madans minority, whose pdent reigne is ap∣pfully recorded in histories. Madan, 1009. VVHen forty yeers this King had rul'd this Ile, (As Stories say) he died a death most vile: The wide-mouth'd Wolfe, and keene-tusk'd brutish Bore Did eate his Kingly flesh, & drinke his gore. Madan was a vicious and wicked Prince, the Sonn
of Locrine and Guendoline. Hee was a great Tyrant. H built the Tone of Doncaster. Hee had two nes, Mempricius and Mannus. Mempricius raigned 20. yeeres, 991. MEmpricius base, his brother  slew, And got the Crowne, by murder,  as de: Maids, wiues and widdowes, hoby  deflowr'd: He liu'd a Beast, and dy'd, by a Beast, duour'd. Hee killed his elder brother tre sly as ee was parlying with him. Hee was eaten of Wolues as hee was hunting. Hee was so beastly, that he was tadin histories to be a Sodomite with Beasts in his time.
Ebranke, 989. King Da∣uid reigne ouer Israe AT Edinburgh the Castle he did found, Alcluid & York, he built new from the ground He builded Bambrough, and reigned sixty yeeres, Belou'd, as it in Chronicles appeares. Ebranke had 21. wiues, by whom he had 20. Sonnes and 30. Daughters; hee inuaded Gallia, now France He was the Sonne of Mempricius. In his Reigne reigne King Salomon. Alcluid is Dumbreton in Scotland. Brute the second, 929. IF any noble act Brute Greeneshield did, Hee's wrong'd, because from Histories th'are hid:
Twelue yeeres he rul'd, that's all I of him read, And how at Yorke, hee Iyeth buried. This Brute was the Sonne of Ebranke and some histo∣ries write doubtfully, that he conquer'd France, and that after he receiued a great foyle in field by Brinchild, or Brinchillus, Prince of Henoway, or Henault. Leil. 917. LEil Carleile bt, and raignd yeeres twenty fiue, And as Fame still keepes dead mens acts aliue: So Leil (though dead)  euer liue by Fame, He lyes at Carleile, which himselfe did frame. Leil was the Sonne of Brute Greeneshield. It is also written that he bu the  of Chester. Lud, or Rud∣hudibras was the Sonne of Leil, a religious Prince in s superstitious way of Paganisme, for in these 3. Townes ich he built, hee erected 3. Temples, and placed 3.  or Pagan Bishops in them.
Rudhudibrasse, 892. THis King built Canterbury, Winchester, And Shaftsbury, he from the ground did reare: And after twenty nine yeeres reigne was past, At Winchester sore sicke, he breath'd his last. Bladud reign'd 20. 863. BAathe was by Bladud to perfection brought, By Necromanricke Arts, to flye hee sought: As from a Towre he thought to scale the Sky, He brake his necke, because he soar'd too hig This Bladud had beene a st in Ather id: whence hee brought ny learned men: hee bui elue ford, a Colledge I thinke, the first in England:
play the fowle or the foole, he brake his necke on the Tem∣ple of Apollo in Troynouant. Leire, 844. LEire (as the Story saies) three daughters had, The youngest good, the other two too bad: Yet the old King lou'd thē that wrong'd him most, She that lou'd him, he banisht from his Coast. False Gonorel and Ragan, he betweene Them gaue the Kingdome, making ach a Queene. But young Cordeilla wedded was by chance, To Aganippus, King of fertile France: The eldest Daughters did reiect their Sire, For succour to the young'st hee did retire, By whose iust aide the Crowne againe he gain'd; And dyed when he full forty yeeres had reign'd. Leire built Leicester and was a good Prince. At Ley∣cester he built a Temple to Ianues Bifrons, or Ianues with two faces.
Qu. Cordeilla, 805. MAd Morgan, and vnmanner'd Cunedague, Their Aūt Cordeilla with fierce war did plague: They vanquish'd her, and her in Prison threw: And hauing reign'd fiue yeeres, her selfe she slew. She reigned with her Husband Aganippus till he dyed, and then in her widowhood her cruell kinsmen opprest her. Shee stabb'd her selfe in prison, being tyrannously vsed, in despaire of her liberty. Morgan Cunedagu, 800. THen Morgan did 'gainst Cunedague contend, And at Glamorgan, Morgan had his end.
Then Cunedagus sole King did abide, Full three and thirty yeeres, and then he dyed. Morgan was the Sonne of Gonorel, Leires eldest Daughter, and Cunedagus his kinsman, was the Sonne of Ragan. The Prophet Esay prophesied about this time. Riuallo, before Christ, 766. THree daies it rain'd blood, when Riuallo reign'd, And great mortalitie the Land sustain'd; Hee forty six yeeres rul'd in Kingly State, And then surrendred to all humane Fate. This Land in this Kings reigne was almost vnpeopled with dearth, death and desolation. In his time Rome was builded, 356. yeeres after Brute: Innumerable multi∣tudes of Horse-flyes or Hornets sprung out of the blood that raind, which flyes stung many people to death. Riual∣lo was buried at Yorke.
Gurgustus, 7. Scicillius, 684. A Common Drunkard was this wicked King, Which vice did many other vices bring, Yeeres thirty eight, the Diadem he wore, Scicillius next raignd nine and forty more. Gurgustus and Scicillius were brethren. I finde little mention of any good they did, though they reigned long: They were both the Sonnes of Riuallo. Iago, 636. , 612. OF these two Kings, small mention I doe finde, They left bare Names (for me hori) behinde; One twentie fiue yeeres:  other fifty foure, Had in this Land Commanding Regall power. Iugo was a kinsman to Gurgustus, and by his vicious
life, he got a sleepy disease called the Lethargy, whereof he dyed. These two Kings were both buried at Yorke. Gorbodug, 559. GOrbodug next did in the Throne succced, Was sixty three yeeres King, and ast decreed, 'Twixt his two Sonnes this Kingdome to diuide, At Yorke hee's buried, where in peace hee dy'd. Some write that he reigned but 42. yeeres, and that he was buried at Troynouant. Ferex, and Porex, 496. POrex, in Fight his brother Ferex kil'd, For which their mother, Porex heartblud
These murthers mercilesse, did quite deface, These Princes, last of Royall Brutus Race. Ferex and Porex were the sonnes of Gorbodug. Their mother and her maides chopped Porex in pieces, in reuenge of her sonne Ferex: they reigned fiue yeeres: after whose death the Land was a long time diuided into fiue Kingdomes. Mulmutius Donwallo. 441. THe Land vnguided, Kinglesse did remaine, Till great Mulmutius did the Wreathe obtaine: He builded Temples, made Lawes, Ploughs, high∣waies, And 40. yeeres he liu'd in fame and praise. Mulmutius slew Pinnar, Slater, and Rudack, three Kings of seuerall parts of this Ile, and at last brought the Kingdome to his sole obedience. He was the Sonne of lotten, Duke of Cornewall: He was the first of all the Kings of this Land that wore a crowne of Gold.
Bellinus and Brennus reigned 26. yeeres. 401. THese brethren did diuide the Realme in twaine, But Kings can brooke no partnership in reigne; They fell at oddes, and Brennus fled, subdude With slaughter of his warlike multitude. To France he scap'd, and was receiu'd in State, In London, Belline builded Bellins-gate Braue Brennus conquer'd Italy and Rome, Bellinus lies heere in an honour'd Tombe. Brennus slew himselfe with the sword, at the fiedge of Delphos in Greece. Bochas. They were the sonnes of Mulmutius Donwallo. Belinus brought Denmarke to be tributary to Brittaine: they were a paire of worthy bro∣thers.
Gurguintus, 373. GVrguintus, was Belinus first-borne sonne, Victorously e Denmarke ouer-runne: He the vnpeopled Ireland did supply, Reign'd nineteene yeeres a King, and then did dye. This King gaue leaue to a company of stragling distressed Spaniards to possesse themselules in Ireland, hee lyeth buried at Carelion. Guinthelinus, 456. HE married Mercia a renowned Dame, From whom the iust, wise, Mercian Statutes came:
He sixe and twenty yeeres the Scepter swaide, And then with honour in his Tombe was laide. He was the sonne of Arguintus, he builded Warwick and lyeth buried at London. Cecilius, 330. Kimarus, 223. Seuen yeeres Cecilius kept the Regall Chaire, Three yeeres Kimarus rul'd as his sole Heire; The Syre with loue did well and iustly reigne, His sonne Kimarus was a hunting slaine. About this time, a sauage people called the Picts, beg'd habitation of the King of Scots, and liued in the Mar∣shes betweene England and Scotland. Kimarus was a vicious Prince, and killed by wild Beasts as hee was hunting: he was the sonne of Cecilius. Cecilius was buried at Carelion.
Elanius, 321. ELanius (as most Histories agree) Was King of Brittaine yeeres iust three times three: What Acts he did, or what Lawes he decreed, They are vnwrit, and therefore are vnread. Elanius was the sonne of Kimarus. Morindus reigned 8 yeeres. 311. THis King Morindus, valiant more then wise, A ran'ning Monster from the Sea did rise: Which many people to destruction brought, Who kil'd this braue King as he brauely fought. He killed the Monster, after the Monster had deuou∣red
him, for he was in the belly of it liuing, and found dead with his dagger in his hand. Gorbomanus. 303. THis King eleuen yeers wore the Brittain crown. He founded Cambridge, & built Grantham Town; His subiects peace, past Kingdomes he prefer'd, Lou'd and bewail'd, at London was inter'd. He built the Townes of Cambridge and Grantham. Archigalo, and Elidurus. 392. THese brothers were not Kings both at one time, But for extortion (an vnkingly crime,
The Eldest hauing gaind his Subiects hate) Depos'd, and Elidurus got the State. But he (not greedy after worldly reigne) To Archigalo gaue it vp againe. Rul'd tenne yeeres more: thus twenty yeeres in all, His State Maiesticke, did twice rise and fall. Archigalo put away from him and reiected the true and  Nobility and Gentry: and in their roomes was pplyde with the counsels of flatterers and parasites, which was his downefall. Elidurus, 272. Vigenius, Peredurus, 270. THen Archigale beeing dead and gone, Good Elidure two yeers kept Brittaines Throne. Vigenius, Peredurus two yeeres more, Thrust Elidure from all the sway he bore, But they both dy'd the third time he was crown'd, Elidurus, 261. And reigned foure yeeres more, belou'd, renown'd. Once subiect, twice a slaue, and thrice a King; Thus Fortunes fauours vp and downe did fling. In these often changes of Princes estates, this Land was miserably vexed.
Heere because Hystories make little or no mention of any the doings of the Kings, from the reigne of Elidurus to King Lud, I thinke it fit, onely to insert their names, and the times of their reignes, with their yeeres before Christ. 258. Gorbonian reigned ten yeeres. 248. Morgan foureteene yeeres. 234. Emerianus seuen yeeres. This King was deposed from all Re∣gall gouernment for h tyranny.
227. Iuall twenty yeeres. This King was a iust and prudent Prince. 207. Rimo sixteen yeeres. His reigne was blest with abundance of Peace and Plenty. 191. Geruncius twenty yeeres. 171. Catillus ten yeeres. Catillus caused all the oppressors of the poore to be hanged vp: but since his time they are doubly increased.
161. Coylus twenty yeeres. A peaceable King, and a quiet reigne. 141. Porrex fiue yeeres. A good Prince. 136. Chirimus one yeere. Chirimus through excessiue drin∣king gat his death. 135. Fulgon two yeeres.
133. Eldred one yeere. 132. Androgius one yeere. 131. Varianus o re. Varianus giuen to lust, purchsed himselfe a short reigne and it may bee perceiued, that all these Prince: either by treason, or their ow bad liues, were soon brought to their ends, for 25 of them did not reign aboue 62 yeeres. 129. Fliud fiue yeeres.
120. Dedamius fiue yeeres. 118. Gurginius three yeeres. 115. Mercianus two yeeres. 113. Bladunus two yeeres.
110. Cupenus three yeeres. 108. Quinus two yeeres. 106. Sius two yeeres. 94. Bledgabredus ten yeeres. A great louer of Musicke, and a good Patron to Musician.
92. Archemalus two yeeres. 90. Eldolus two yeeres. 88. Rodianus two yeeres. 86. Redargius three yeeres.
84. Samullius two yeeres. 81. Penisellus three yeeres. 78. Pirrhus two yeeres. 76. Caporus two yeeres.
74. Dinellus foure yeeres. A Noble and vertuous Prince. 70. Hellius one yeere. The Ile of Ely tooke the nomina∣tion from this Prince. There hee built a Palace, and there he dying was buried. Lud reigned 11. yeeres, 66. A Long time after Troynouant was fram'd, It was by Lud, Kair-Lud, or Lud-stone nam'd, He made  strong with Battlemens and Towres, Defensiue against foes inuasiue pow'rs. Of free Stone for Free-men Ludgate hee founded, Where freemen (wanting freedom) are confounded.
He dy'd and left two Sonnes, too young for reigne, Wherefore his brother did the Crowne obtaine. Some Writers doe affirme, that this King bilded on∣don from Ludgate to London-stone, and that the stone in memory thereof was called Luds stone. Cassibelan, 17. yeeres. 58. LVd deed, the Nobles crown'd Cassibelan, In whose reigne her the Romane conquest an, Great Iulius Caesar sailed out of France, And in this Land his Eagle did aduance. But Brittaines bold scorn'd base at first to stoope, Twice Caesar fed, before their warlike troope. The iuill warres, this Kingdome ouer , Betwixt Cassibelan, and Luds two Sonnes, Whilst they (vnnaturall) sought each others fall, The Romanes tooke aduantage, conquer'd all: Where Caesar, by his high Imperiall doome, Made Brittaine Tributary vnto Rome. Nennius a valiant Duke of this Kingdome, receiued his deths und of Caesar: Yet after that he tooke Caesars
Sword from him, and with the same kild Laianus a Ro∣mane Tribune, and lastly, ma the fild and . Caesar built the Castles of Dou, Canterbury, and the Tower of London. Theomantius, 37. THen Theomantius (  all blood) The  Sonne  o his Father : Reign'd three and twenty yeeres, a King in Whose Picture stands on Luds  gate. Cimbelinus. IN this Kings reigne, (the glorious King of Kings In person came, and mans saluation brings)
When through the world all bloody wars did cease, (For our soules peace) then came the Prince of peace. Our Sauiour Iesus Christ was borne in his reigne, in the 42. yeere of Augustus Caesar, then being Emperour of Rome: Cimbelinus was the Sonne of Iheomantius, Yeeres after Christ. Guiderius,  , 21. THis King and Subcts, brauely, nobly ioyne, To hold from Rome the tributary Coyne: But Claudius Caesar with an Army came, The Bt bold rebellious hearts to tame; One Hamon there (a Romane) di , Himselfe like to a Britaine to , Guiderius brauely chade his fos amaine, Was by disgifed Hamon falfely slaine. When Guiderius was King of Britaine, our Redee∣mer suffered vnder Claudius Tiberius Caesar, being the Romane Emperour. Guiderius was a valiant Prince.
Aruiragus, 44. STout Aruiragus being in the fight, The Kings death added fury to his might: Perceiu'd the Britaine Host, almost dismaide, In's brothers Armour hee himselfe array'd, The Souldiers thought the King againe suruiu'd. With corage new through euery veine deriu'd, Braue Aruiragus, like a Tempest goes, And pell mell topsieturuy throwes his foes. Grear Caesar with his Romane army fled, The King tooke Hamon, and cut off his head, And more, with sharp reuenge his wrath t'appease, Hew'd him piece-meale, and cast him in the Seas, The place long time, this name did then allow, Of Hamons hauen, or Southampton now. The Emperour would quite the tribute free, If Brittaines King his Sonne in law would be. Then Aruarigue did faire Genisse marry, And Claudius Caesar heere a while did tarry, He builded Gloster, whil'st he heere remain'd: The King dyed hauing twenty eight yeeres reign'd.
Marius, 73. IN this Kings reigne the lawlesse proling Pict, (A Nation strange) did the North part afflict: But Marius, in a battell slew their King, And all their power did to subiection bring. The Picts from Scythia, into Scotland came, Rude, barbarous, ingratefull, hard to tame: For by the Scotsh Kings fauour hauing got Possession, they oft warr'd vpon the Scot. And more and more that Kingdome they annoy'd, Till Kennith Scotlands King, them all destroy'd: Yeeres fifty three reign'd Marius iust and wise, Dyed: and at Carleile his Corps royall lies. Much about this time, Ioseph of Arimathea, after he had buried Christ (being hated for it of the mis-beleeuing Iewes) came into this Land, and first planted Christia∣nity heere, built a Chappell at Glastenburgh: Some wri∣ters say, that he repaired Chester, and was buried there.
Coylus, 124. IN Rome this King was fostred all his youth, He lou'd Peace, Iustice, Fortitude and Truth: He builded Colchester, and did suruiue, Till he had reign'd a Kings yeeres, fifty fiue. Coylus was the Sonne of Marius, hee was buried at Yorke. Lucius, 179. THe first of Kings that was a Christian nam'd, Was Lucius (with the spirit of God inflam'd) The Bread of life he did receiue with ioy, The Pagan Idols hee did all destroy, The Flamines and Archflamines he downe cast, And Bishops and Archbishops here he plac'd,
He lou'd and fear'd th'eternall Three in one, And dyed when he had 12 yeeres kept the Throne. This was the first Christian King of Brittaine, he cau∣sed twentie eight Idolatrous Temples of the agan gods to be made Cathedrall Churches, for the seruice of the  God; Elutherius was then Bishop of Rome, King Lucius was buried at Glocester: hee dyed leauing no , so that this Land was in a burly-burly 15. yeeres, through want of a King. Seuerus, 194. THis was a Romane Emperour, and was slaine At York the eighteenth yeere of his proud reigne Hee was an Alien and a stranger heere, And therefore bought his vsurpation deare: Seuerus was 60. yeeres old when hee tooke the crowne, and caused a wall of Turfe to be made betwixt England and Scotland to kepe this Land from the incursions of the Scots and Picts: the wall reached from Tyne to the Scottish Seas, 112. miles.
Bassianus, 212. SEuerus here did wed a Brittish Dame, By whom this King (their Son) the Crowne did claime. But after sixe veeres time, he left this Land, And had the Romane Empire at's command. Bassianus was brought from Rome by his Father Seuerus. Carausius, 290. When Carausi reigned, Dio∣clesian was mperor. Alectus, 292. THis King (of meane birth) did the Crown attain After seuen yeeres, was by Alectus slaine: Thre yeeres Alectus did in state recide, Our Protomartyr then Saint Alban dyde. Dioclesian and Maximilian ruled the Romane Em∣pire,
when Saint Albane suffered; Alectus was sent from Rome against Carausius: this Alectus was a cruell Tyrant, and was also slame by Asclepiodatus. Asclepiodatus, 299. ASclepiodatus, (in a mortall Fight) Suodude the Romane Generall Gallus might, Kil'd him, and cast him head-long in a Brooke, Whence Gallus or Wallbrooke, for name it tooke, And as Alectus did Carausius kill, So did this King Alectus life bloud spill, And after two yeeres reigne in mortall strife, Asclepiodatus slaine lost Crowne and life. Gallus Brooke or Wallbrooke tooke the name from Gallus a Romane Captaine, slaine by Asclepiodatus, and throwne into that Brooke. Asclepiodatus was after slaine by Coil Duke of Colchester. Some write that Asclepiodatus reigned 30. yeeres.
Coil raigned 14. yeeres. 301. COlchesters Duke Coil in the Throne inuested, Was by Constantius Caesar much molested: Till Coil gaue's Daughter to him for his Bride, And paid Romes tribute, that was long denide. The Lady was of beauty most diuine, Faire Hellen, Mother to great Constantine. The King at Colchester, dead, laide in's Tombe, His Sonne Constantius did supply his roome. This Hellen reedified Ierusalem, and adorned it with oodly Churches. She also walle London and Colchester. Constantius, 305. SPaine, Italy, France, Britaines Emperor, Foure yeeres he raign'd heere, with Maiesticke power,
True Honour was the ayme at which he shot. Iust, Valiant, these reports his Actions got. This Constantius was Grandfather to Constantine the Great: he came from Rome to this Ile, and was bu∣ried at Yorke. Constantine, 306, GReat Emp'ror Constantine, surnam'd the Great: In all respects a worthy Prince compleate, The glorious Gospell, he ador'd, and fear'd, Constantinople famously he rear'd, Maxentius, Romes great Tyrant, (most abhor'd) He made him flie from his  sword. Belou'd, be wail'd, high honor'd and admir'd, In grace with God and men, his dayes expir'd. This worthy Prince Constantine was borne in this Land, the Sonne of Constantius and Hellen. After Constantius decease, our Land was molested by Octaui∣us Maximus and others for many yeers. These times are so diuersly written of in Histories, that a man knowes not which to beleeue most.
84. Constantinus, 337. 85. Constans, 340. THese two were Brothers of the Royall line, And Sonnes vnto the Emperour Constantine: Ambition and debate for Kingly Raigne, Was the vnnaturall cause they both were slaine. Kings and Louers can brook no partners: for these two brothers were each others destruction. 86. Octauius, 345. 87. Traherus, 349. OCtauius Duke of Windsor to oke the Crowne, Traherus came from Rome and put him downe:
The Land was ull with hurly-burlies fild, Traherus by Octtauius last was kild. Theodosius was Emperour of the East d Macri of the West: Some write that Octauius  54. yeeres Noncredo. 88. Constantius the third. 353. The Romane Empire he did closely sway, And as a King this Land did him obay: Th' Apostate Iulian was the Emp'rour next, By whom the Christians all were slaine, or vext. Constantius was a victorious Prince, and triumphed in Rome: yet a cruell oppressor, and an Arian hereticke. 89 Maximinianus. 375. NExt Iulian, raigned Valentinian, And after him, succeeded Gratian
Maximinus was of life depriu'd, 'Cause he with Gratian for the Empire striu'd. How like Bauius these tyrts confimed one another; these were all Emperours of Rome, & Kings of Brittaine, 90. Gratian. 376. THen Gratian claim'd this Kingdome as his right But hauing gain'd it, he was slaine in fight: Fierce warres the Romane Empire did deuide, And Caesars and their Viceroyes fought and dyde. Honorius Romes Tribunall did obtaine, Next after him did Theodosius raigne, Then did the Scot ioyne with the barbarous Pict, This headlesse, Kinglesse Kingdome to afflict. The Romane Scepter we had long obayd, Foure hundred eightythree yeeres Tribute payd; And now this land shook off their wrongd comand When Ciuill discord had neer spoyl'd this Land. In one battell the whole nation of the Piets were quite xtinguished about this time the Romanes guernement nded here. Gratian was a Brittaine Emperour but foure .
91 Vortiger. 447. THis King through murder did the Throne ascend, And had a troublous Raigne, and murdrous end: Constanes (Constantines) lawfull Heyre and Sonne, By Vortigers false meanes to death was done. For which (to keepe the Crowne vniustly gain'd) The Saxons for his ayde he entertain'd. Then Hengist, with his Brother Horsus crue, In Britaines best bloud did their blades embrew. King Vortiger with doting loue inthral'd, Match't Hengists daughter, beauteous Rowan cal'd: But Saxons troopes, on troopes came in so fast, That Britaines did depriue the King at last. Hee murdered his lawfull Prince, and vsurping the Throne, was enforced to haue ayd of the Saxons, who at the last almost ouer-ran this Kingdome, but the Brittaines deposed Vortiger, and crowned his Sonne Vortimer.
92. Vortimer. 454. THen On the Plaine of Salisbury at Stonehing (where the Stones are to be seene at this day.) Vortimer, the Sonne of Vortiger, Vpon the Saxons made successfull warre: Till he by Rowan was by craft o'r-ane, From whose false hands, he dy'd by poys'nous Deposed Vortiger (his Sonne once slaine) His ill gain'd, ill kept Crowne he gain'd againe: Hengistus with his Saxon fresh supplies, The Plaines of Salisbury did all surprize. The King tooke counsell of his Brittaine Lords, And all in generall to a Peace accords. The Saxons and the Brittaines did agree, That at this meeting all vnarm'd should be: But traitrous Hengist did a watch-word speake, Which did the Law of Armes, and Honour breake, The Saxons vnsuspected drew forth Kniues, Foure hundred, threescore Lords, all lost their liues, All Brittaine Nobles, then the Saxons there, Surpris'd the King, constraining him through feare To giue Kent, Sussex, Suffolke, Norfolke, and That Hengist, King should in those Lands command, But after nineteene yeeres were quite expir'd,
The King & Queene burnt to death. Vortiger married his owne daughter  his third wife. Reuenging Fire, the King in's Castle fir'd. And thus the Saxons, and Great Hengists Heyres, Won Shire to Shire, till Brittaine all was theirs. 93. Aurelius Ambrose. 466. IN honour of the Nobles basely slaine, This King set vp the Stons on Saru The Gospell with great zeale he dignifi'd, Raign'd thirty two yeeres, and by poyson dy'd. This King was a Romne, and brother to Vter Pendra∣gon that succeeded him.
94. Vter Pendragon raigned 18 yeeres. 498. THis King (by Merlins meanes a skilfull man) Igrene, the Duke of Cornewals Dutchesse wan: On her he got, (though illegittimate) The Christian Worthy, Arthur, stilde the Great. Vter Pendragon poysoned by the Saxons, after he had reigned 18. yeeres. 95. Arthur. 516. OF the nine Worthies was this Worthy one, Denmarke, and Norway, did y his Throne:
In twelue set Battels he the Saxons beat, Great, and to make his Victories more great, The Faithlesse Sarazons he ouercame, And made them honour high Iehonah's Name. The Noble order of the Table round, At Winchester, his first inuention found. Whilst he beyond Sea fought to win Renowne, His Nephew Mordred did vsurpe his Crowne, But he return'd, and Mordred did confound, And in the fight great Arthur got a wound, That prou'd lo mortall, that immortally It made him liue, although it made him dye. Full sixteene yeeres the Diadem he wore, And euery day gaind Honour more and more. Arthur the great was buried at Glastenbury. 96 Constantine, the fourth. 542. 97 Aurelius Conanus. 545. COnstantine was by King  kil'd: Aurelius ()   yeeres held, Seuen Kingdomes heere at once the Saxons held, And slaughter launc'd, when proud ambition sweld. This Constantine was kinsman to King Arthur, and
was slaine by Conanus. Constantine was a wicked Prince, and slaine in battell by his kinsman Conanus, when he had reigned neere 3. yeeres. Of the tyme of this Aurelius Conanus his reigne, there is much variation in Histories. Heere beganne the Heptarchy, or 7 Kingdomes in this Land, namely, Kent, South-Saxons, West-Saxons, East-Saxons, Northum∣berland, Mercia, and East-Angles: which diuision continued more then 600. yeeres, be∣fore it was all vnited into one Monarchy the names of the Kings, & times of their reignes, and limits of their Kingdomes, are hereunder expressed. 1 KEnt was only a kingdome which had 17 Kings, namely, 1 Hengist, 2 Eske, 3 Octa, 4 Ymerick, 5 Ethelbert, who was the first Christian King of Kent, hee was an ayde and helper of Sebert, King of the East-Saxons, in the famous and memorable buildings of St. Pauls Church in London, and Saint Peters at Westminster. 6 Eabald, 7 Ercombert, 8 Egbert, 9 Lother, 10 Edrick, 11 Withred, 12 Edbert, 13 Edelbert, 14 Alick, 15 Ethilbert, 16 Cuthred, 17 Baldred. These Kings reigned in Kent 372. yeeres, from the yeere of Grace 455. till the yeere 827.
2 The kingdome of the South-Saxons con∣tained the Counties of Sussex and Surrie, it continued from the yeere 488. vntill the yeere 601. being 113 yeeres: they had three Kings, namely, 1 Ella, 2 Cissa, 3 Ethelwolfe a Christi∣an King, 4 Berthrum, 5 Authum. 3 The West-Saxons kingdome, whose be∣ginning was in the yeer 519. and ended, Anno. 166. lasted 561 yeeres, hauing 17 Kings, namely, 1 Cherdick, 2 Kenrick, 3 Chequilin, 4 Cealick, 5 Chelwold, 6 Kingils, a Christian, 7 Kenwald, 8 Eskwin, 9 Kentwin, 10 Ceadwald, 11 Inas, 12 , 13 Cuthred, 14 Sigebert, 15 Kenwolfe, 16 Brightrik, 17 Egbert,: These Kings had vnder their gouernments, the Counties of Cornewall, Deuonshire, So∣mersetshire, Wiltshire, Hampshire and Bark∣shire. 4 The East-Saxons reigned 281 yeeres, beginning, Anno. 527, and ending in the yeere 827. Their bounds were Essex and Middle-Sex, and their Kings were in number 14, namely, 1 Erchenwin, 2 Sledda, 3 Sebert a Christian King, that assisted Ethelbert, King of Kent, in the building of the Churches of Saint Paul and Saint Peter afore∣said. 4 Seward, 5 Sigebert, 6 Sigibext, 7 Swithe∣line, 8 Sighere, 9 Sebba, 10 Sigherd, 11 Seo∣frid,
12 Offa, 13 Selred, 14 Suthred. 5 Northumberland was sometimes diui∣ded into two kingdomes. It contained the Coūties of Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, West∣merland, Cumberland and Northumberland: this Kingdome beganne in the yeere of our Lord, 547. and expired in 926. continuing 379. yeeres vnder 23 Kings, whose names were, 1 Ella, 2 Adda, 3 Theodwald, 4 Frethulse, 5 The∣odrick, 6 Ethelrick, 7 Ethelfrid, 8 Edwin, 9 Os∣wald, 10 Oswy, 11 Egfrid, 12 Alkfrid, 13 Ofred, 14 Kenred, 15 Oswicke, 16 Ceolnuph, 17 Egbert, 18 Oswolfe, 19 Edilwald, 20 Alured, 21 Ethel∣red, 22 Alswald, 23 Osrd. Amongst these, Edwin was their first Christian King. 6 The East Angles vnder 15 seuerall Kings, continued 353 yeeres, beginning in Anno, 575. and  III 914. their Territories were Su Norolk, Cambridgeshire and the Ile , Ely, thir Kings names were, 1 Vffa, 2 Tius,  Redald their first Christian King, 4 , 5 Sigebert, 6 Egrik, 7 Anna, 8 Ethelbert, 9 Ethwald, 10 Aldwole, 11 Aswald, 12 Beorn, 13 Ethelred, 14 Ethelbert, 15 Edmund. 7 The seuenth Kingdome were the Mer∣cians, who had 20 Kings and 17 shires vnder their command: their Kings were, 1 Creda, 2 Wibba, 3 Cheorle, 4 Penda, 5 Peada
their first Christian King, 6 Wolfere, 7 Ethelred, 8 Kenred, 9 Chelred, 10 Ethebald, 11 Offa, 12 Egfrid, 13 Kenwolfe, 14 Kenelme, 15 Chelwolse, 16 Bernulfe, 17 Ludecan, 18 Whitlafe, 19 Bertwolfe, 20 Burdred. Their bounds and dominions were 17 Counties, as of Northampton, Leister, Darby, Lincolne, Huntington, Rutland, Notingham, Ches∣shire, Oxfordshire, Staffordshire, Worcester∣shire, Glostershire, Shropshire, Warwicke∣shire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Hartfordshire. 98 Vortiporus. 578. 99 Malgo. 581. THis Vortipore from good Kings did decline, Kept his wiues Daughter as his Concine: And Malgo put his Wife to bloudy slaughter, To liue in ncest with his brothers Daughter. About this time Augustine the Monke, Mellitus, Iustus and Iohn, all learned men, came from Rome, and preach∣ed
the Gospell to the English men. Vortipore reigned 4. yeeres. Malgo, his raigne was short and wicked. 100. Careticus. 586. GVrmundus hither out of Ireland came, And with the Saxons ioyn'd with sword and flame: The King to Wales did flye, his life to saue, Whereas he chang'd his Kingdome for a Graue. He reigned 3. yeeres: and now the Saxons had all Eng∣land, the Brittaines and their Kings being expulsed and chased to the West sides of the Riuers Seauerne, and Dee. Cadwane. 613. THis Cadwane did the Saxon force withstand, Of Ethelfridus of Northumberland:
And made him to intreate and sue for peace: Raign'd two and twenty yeeres, then did decease. 102. Cadwallin. 635. CAdwallin slew King Edwin, Egfrids Sonne, He Penda Mercias King did ouer-runne: He neuer fought but Conquest home did bring, And eight and forty yeeres did raigne a King. Cadwallin was buried at London in Saint Martins Church neere Ludgate. 103. Cadwallader. 685. THis King renowned was both neere and farre, The last of Brittaines Kings, Cadwallader,
The name of Brittaine was quite alterd then, The Kings of England, subiects, Englishmen. Then in this Land, of Kings there raign'd so many, That Subiects knew not to obey all, or any: Their names and times of raigne I meane to tell, Should I write more, my Book too big would swell. Here the inhabitants lost the name of Brittaines, the land being called Anglia, or England, and the people Eng∣lishmen. 687. Cadwallader left his Crowne, went to Rome, and dyed there. These Kings following were of the West Saxons. 726 Ethelard was King of the West Saxons. 740. Cuthred succeeded him.
757. Sigebert next him, was slaine by a Swineheard. 758. Kenulphus was slaine by a kinsman of Sigebert. 786. Brithricus. In his time it rained blood. IN the 800. re of Christ, the Danes landed at Port∣land, but Brithricus beat them backe, and afterwards was poysoned by his wife Ethelburga. Eghricus, King of West-Saxons.
839. Adelnulphus ouercame  Danes, that came to inuade the king∣dome with 350. ships. 857. Athelbald. 860. Athelbrict. 866. Etheldrid.
872. Aelfred. 900. Edward surnamed Senior. Heere end the Kings of the West-Saxons, now fol∣low the Kings of Britaine. 104. Athelstane reigned 15. yeeres. 905. THis King did tame the Welsh, the Danes sub du'd, He conquerd Scotland and the Marches rude: The Danish Gyant Colebrand in Hyde-meade, By Guy the Earle of Warwicke was strucke dead. King Athelstane was crowned at Kingstone, hee brought this Land againe to one sole Monarchy, he was buried at Malmsbury.
105. Edmund. 940. 106. Eldred. 946. EDmond, reigned next his brother Athelstane, And after fiue yeeres was vntimely slaine: Nine yeeres was Eldred Englands King instd, Th'insulting Danes, he from this Realme exilde. Edmund was buried at Glastenbury. Eldred was brother to Edmund, he was crowned at Kingstone, he expelled the Danes, and was buried at Winchester. 107 Edwin. 955. 108 Edgar. 959. THen Edwin (as his right) obtain'd the Crowne, For Rape, and brutish Iust he was put downe, His brother Edgar a man iust and wse, By Edwin fall, vnto the Throne did rise.
The Church and Commonweale (long time deform'd) He by his Iustice and good Lawes reform'd. Raign'd sixteen yeeres, and then by death assail'd, As he had liu'd belou'd, he dy'd bewail'd. Edwin was Eldreds kinsman crowned at Kingstone: he defloured his owne kinswoman and slew her husband, for which odious acts hee was deposed of all Kingly dignity, and his brother Edgar was in his stead crowned at Bathe. Edgar had 3600 ships to withstand the inuasion of his enemies, hee founded and repaired 47. relligious houses, hee was buried at Glastenbury. 109 Edward. 975. 110 Etheldred. 978. EDward was slain by his accurst Stepmother, Ayded by Etheldred his cruell brother. This Etheldred caus'd all the Danes be slaine: And dyed the thirty eight yeere of his raigne. He was crowned at Kingstone: he reigned 3 yeeres, and was buried at Shaftsbury. Etheldred was buried in S. Pauls Church in Lon∣don.
111 Edmond Ironside. 1016. THe Danes came to reuenge with sword and fire, Both Kings to Combat single did desire: On equall termes, their valours both were tride, In loue the Realme betwixt them they deuide. Edricus a traitor murdered King Edmond Ironside, for the which Canutus the Dane caused him to bee tor∣mented to death grieuously as he deserued. 112 Canutus. 1018. THis mighty Danish King foure Kingdomes hel Danes, Norway, England, Scotland he compeld,
Taxes and toles he rais'd in England here, And dyed when he had gouern'd twenty yeere. In Canutus his raigne the Danes possessed all Eng∣land: he lies buried at Winchester. 113 Harold. 108. 114 Hardicanutus. 1041. HArold from England did exile his Mother, And kild Allured his King and his Brother: Hardicanutus then the Crowne obtain'd, Who quaffing died, when he 3. yeeres had raig'd. Harold was a Tyrant: hee was called Hartfoote for his swift running: he murdered Prince Allured hee raign∣ed three yeeres, and was buried at Westminster. Hee caused the body of Harold to be digged out of the graue, and ast into the Thames, in reuenge of his brother Allureds death: he was buried at Winchester.
115. Saint Edward. 1043. 16. Harold the second. 1066. SAint Edward from the Danes this Kigdom freed, And for he had no Heyre, he heere decreed, That William Duke of Normandy hou'd be Next King, but Harold seeming to agree, Assoone as Edward was laid in his Toombe, This hasty Harold mounted in his roome, But William came from Normandy amaine, By whom King Harold was vnking'd and slaine. The end of the first part.
The second part. William Conquerour. An. Dom. 1066. VVHen Britains, Romanes, Saxons, Danes had done, The Normans (fiftly) Englands glory won, w Lords brought in new Lawes incontinent, nd all were Conquer'd but the County Kent. King William (after he had all surpriz'd) lted, domineer'd, and tyranniz'd, Englishmen (like slaues) their doores must lock, paine of death, each night at eight of clocke. English from all Office were disgracd, in their places the proud French were plac'd. beating down the right, with wrong on wrong, aining men should speake the English tongue. so to bring or memory to naught, Grammar and the Lawes in French were taught, Sonnes, with Danes a mighty band, in umber to inuade the Land,
Then Yorke was burnt, the wealth away was borne And Danes on Composition home did turne. A dearth in England was so great, that heere Cats, Dogs, and mans flesh, was our wofull cheere. The Mercians and Northumbers they rebel'd, Strong warres the Scots within our Country held: The Ile of Ely did the King surprize, He caus'd the Rebels lose hands, feet, and eyes. The Normans did rebell and were subdu'd, Danes came and fled, with all their multitude. The Kings sonne (Robert) by the French Kings ayd, Did diuers parts of Normandy inuade. The Scots spoild England, with all might and maine, And Durhams Bishop in a broyle was slaine, Heere euery Acre of mens Lands were measur'd. And by a heauy taxe the King was treasur'd: Slaine by a Deere the Kings sonne lost his life, And Glassenbury Monkes were kill'd in strife. The English Nobles almost were decay'd, And euery place of rule the Normans swai'd. And all mens goods and lands, and coyn were rated Through England, and vnto the King related. The French mens pride did England ouerwhelme, And grieuous tributes did oppresse the Realme. Churches and Chappels were throwne down with speed, To make New Forrest as the King decreed: Who hauing rul'd in trouble, toyle and care, And tryannously pol'd this Kingdome bare, Neere twenty one yeeres, death was then his bane: He lyes in Normandy, enterr'd at Cane. William Conquerour was crowned on Christmas∣day, 1067. the yeere then beginning on that day. In the
Forrest in Hampshire called New Forrest, where this King had defased many Churches (wherein the name of God was called vpon) and placed wild Beasts for his disport: in the same Forrest two of his owne sonnes were slaine, Prince Robert killed by a Deere, and William Rufus by a Knight shooting at a Deere. William Rufus. An. Dom. 1087. WIlliam the cruell Conquerours second Sonne, With ease, got what his Fathers paines had won, Oppressed England he opprest and prest, And great Exactions wrongfully did wrest. For Symony, and base corrupting gold, The King most Churches and Church-liuings sold, And more, (his Subiects vilely to abuse) Against them he in armes did arme the Iewes, And swore if they the victory did gaine, That he their faithlesse faith would entertaine. Vpon his eldest brother hee rai'sd warres, His youngest brother troubled him with iarres. At London, such a furious winde did blow, Which did sixe hundred houses ouerthrow. The City Gloster was by Welshmen sack'd. Northumberland was by King William wrack'd: William de Oue, and William de Aluery,
In cruell torments dyed at Salisbury. Duke Robert laid all Normandy to gage Vnto the King, warres with the Turkes to wage. Westminster Hall was built, the Danes came in, And th' Orchades, and the Ile of Man did win. But as the King was hunting in Hampshire, Sir Walter Tirrll shooting at a Deere, The Arrow glauncing'gainst a Tree by chance, Th'vnhappy King kild, by the haplesse Glaunce. A Colliers Cart to Winchester did bring The Corps, where vnbemoand they laid the King. Rufus. In the 8. yeere of his reigne, the Christian Ar∣my went to Ierusalem vnder the conduct of Godfry Duke of Bulleine, in which warres serued Robert Duke of Normandy the Kings eldest brother, who pawned his Dukedome for 16666 pounds weight of siluer. In the 11. yeere the Lands of the late Earle Godwine sunk in the sea, and are to this day called Godwine sands. This King died the 2. of August 1100. he reigned 12. yeeres, 11. moneths, and was buried at Winchester. Henry the first. An. Dom. 1100. THis Henry (for his wisedome Beuclarke nam'd) Th'vnlawfull Lawes and measures he reclaim'd.
The Norman Duke, eld'st Brother to the King, To claime the Crowne a mighty Hoast did bring. Saint Bartholomewes was founded and Saint Gyles, And Henry stop'd Duke Roberts mouth with wiles. Then peace was made; but after, warres did rise, The King tooke's brother, and put out his eyes. Here Windsor Church and Castle were erected, And Wales (rebeld) most sharpely was corrected. All the King's Sonnes and eight score persons more, Were drown'd by tempest neere the Norman shore. Thus all his Ioy in Childrens losse bereft, Saue onely Maud, the Widdow Empresse left, Whom Geffrey Anioy's Earle to wife did get, From whom did spring the name Plantgenet. The King proclaim'd his Daughter, or her seede, After his death should in the Realme succeede, And after thirty fiue yeeres time was past, King Henry by a surfet breath'd his last. Much trouble in his dayes this Kingdome wearied, He dyed, and dead, at Redding he lies buried. Thus God that lifts the low, casts downe the high, Caus'd all the Conquerors sonnes vntimely dye. Henry the 1. He held the Crowne wrongfully from his elder brother Robert Duke of Normandy, and ouercom∣ming him in battell, most vnnaturally put out his eies: he reigned 35. yres, his braines, eyes and bowels were buried at Roane in France, and the rest of his body at Redding: his Phisician that opened his head, was killed suddainely with the stench of his braines.
King Stephen. An. Dom. 1135. STephen Earle of Bloign, (th'Earle of Bloys his son) From th' Empresse Maud this famous Kingdome won. Domestike, forraigne, dangerous discords, 'Twixt factions fctions, of the King and's Lords, Wars 'twixt the King and th' Empresse for the crown, Both tasted Fortunes fauours, and her frowne, Now vp, now downe, like balles at Tennis tost, Till Stephen gain'd the goale, and th'Empresse lost. And after eighteene yeeres were come and gone, The King not hauing any lawfull Sonne, He dyed, and chang'd his Kingdome & his strength, For a small Sepulcher of sixe foote length. King Stephen. He was noble, valiant, liberall, and poli∣tique, and almost in continuall trouble. In the 1. yeere of his reigne a fire burnt all the streete, from London-stone East, to Pauls, and West, to Algate, and within 2. yeeres after, the cities of York, Rochester, and Bathe, were burnt. Hee reigned 18. yeeres, 10. moneths, and was buri∣ed at Feuersham.
Henry the second. An Dom. 1154. THis King vnto the Empresse Maud was Heyre, And lawfully obtain'd the Regall Chayre, He was couragious, and yet most vnchaste, Which Vice, his other Vertues all defac'd. He lou'd faire Rosamond, the worlds faire Rose, For which his wife and children turn'd his foes. He made his sonne Copartner in his Crowne, Who rais'd strong warres to put his Father downe. Faire Rosamond at Woodstock by the Queene Was poyson'd, in reuengefull-iealous spleene. In toyle, and trouble, with his Sonnes and Peeres, The King raign'd almost fiue and thirty yeeres. Hee neere his death did curse his day of birth, Hee curst his Sonnes, and sadly left the earth, Hee at Founteuerard in his Tombe was laid. And his Son Richard next the Scepter swaid. Henry the 2. In the 12. yeer of this King an earthquake in Norfolk, Suffolk, and Elye, that made bels ring with shaking the steeples, and ouerthrew men that stood on their feete. Nicholas Breakespeare, an Englishman was Pope of Rome, and was named Adrian the fourth, hee gaue the Lord-shippe of Ireland to King Henry.
Richard Cordelion. An. Dom. 1189. THis braue victorious Lyon-hearted Prince, The foes of Christ, in Iury did conuince: Whilst at Ierusalem he wan Renowne, His Brother Iohn at home vsurp'd his Crowne. And as he home return'd, (his owne to gaine) By Austria's Duke the King was Prisoner tane. His ransome was an hundred thousand pound, Which paid, in England he againe was crown'd. Yet after nine full yeeres, and 9. months raigne, Hee with a Shot was kild in Aquitane, His buriall at  was hought meet, At his dead Fathers, second Henries feet. Richard the 1. he conquered the kingdome of Cypresse, and he tooke from the Infidels the Cities of Acon, & Iop∣pa, and deliuered them to Christians. In his 2. yeere, the bones of the renowned King Arthur were found at Gla∣stenbury. King Richards bowels were buried at Chalne Castle in Aquitane, his heart at Roane, and his body at Founteuerard.
King Iohn. An. Dom. 1199. John Earle of Morton tooke the regall Seate, His state, his toyle, his pompe, his cares, all great: The French, the Welsh, the Scotsh, all prou'd his foes, The Pope King Iohn did from his Crowne depose. His Lords rebel'd, from France the Dolphin came, And wasted England much with sword and flame. And after seuenteene yeeres were full expir'd. King Iohn being poysoned, to his graue retir'd. King Iohn. In the 8. yeere many men, Women, and cattell were slaine with thunder, and many houses burnt, and the corne was beaten downe with haile as bigge as goose egges. Some say, the King was poson'd by a monke, and others write that he died of a surfeit at Newark, but his life was full of troubles, and after his death he was by base villaines rob'd and left naked without any thing to couer the corpes, hee was buried at Worcester.
Henry the third. An. Dom. 1216. WArs, bloody wars, the French in Englād made, Strong holds, Towns, Towres & Castles they inuade. But afterwards it was K. Henries chance, By force perforce to force them backe to France. Great discord 'twixt the King and Barons were, And factions did the Realme in pieces teare. A world of mischiefes did this Land abide, And fifty sixe yeeres raign'd the King, and dy'd. Henry the 3. This King was born at Winchester, crow∣ned at Glocester, & buried at Westminster. In the 17. of his reigne on the 8. of Aprill 1233. there were 5 Sonnes in the firmament, and the naturall Sun was as red as blood.
Edward Long-shanks. An. Dom. 1272. THis was a hardy, wise, Victorious King, The Welshmen he did to subiection bring: He Scotland wan, and brought from thence (by fate) Their Crowne, their Scepter, Chaire, and Cloth of state, That Kingdome with oppression sore he brusde, Much tyranny and bloodshed there he vsde. When thirty fiue yeeres he the Crowne had kept, At Westminster, he with his Father slept. Edward the 1. In the 13. yeere his sonne Edward was borne at Carnaruan, who was the first sonne of any King of England that was Prince of Wales. An. 17. Wheat at 3. pence the Bushell.
Edward of Carnaruan. An. Dom. 1307. THe hard mis haps that did this King attend, The wretched life, and lamentable end, Which he endur'd the like hath ne'r bin seene, Depos'd, and poyson'd by his cruell Queene. Which when the poyson had no force to kill, Another way she wrought her wicked will. Into his Fundament a red hot Spit Was thrust, which made his Royall heart to split. In his 8. yeere such a dearth, that dogges and horses were good food, many ate their owne children, and old prisoners tore such as were newly committed in pie∣ces, and deuoured them halfe liuing. The King reig∣ned 19. yeeres 6. moneths.
Edward the third. An. Dom. 1316. IN Peace and warre, his King was right, & good, He did reunge his murdred Fathers blood: Hee, and the blacke Prince, his most valiant Sonne, The field at Cress and at Poytiers wonne, At first and lst in his victorious raigne, Of French and Scots, were six score thousand slaine. And more, (his glory further to aduance) He tooke the Kings of Scotland and of France. The noble order of the Garter, he At Windsor, instituted caus'd to be. When fifty yeeres this Land had him obaid, At Westminster he in his tombe was laid. In his 12. yeere he quartered the Armes of England and France, as they are at this day. Henry Pichard Vitner, in his Maioralty feasted at once, Edward King of Eng∣land, Dauid King of Scotland, Iohn King of France, the King of Cypres, the Prince of Wales, the Dolphin of France, with many other great Personages of Honour and Worship.
Richard the second. An. Dom. 1377. YOng King, rash coūsell, lawes & right neglected, The good put downe, the bad in State rected: The Court with knaues & flat'rers here did swarm, The Kingdome, (like a Farme) was let to Farme. The Commons rose in Armies, Roues, and throngs, And by foule treason, would  foule wrongs. In this Kings raigne, began the Ciuill warre, (Vnnaturally) 'twixt Yorke and Lancaster. Oppression on oppression, breedes Confusion, Bad Prologue, bad Proceeding, bad Conclusion: King Richard, twenty two yeeres raign'd, misse-led, Deposed and at Pomfret knock'd ith'head. This King was Grandchild to Edward the 3. and sonne to the black Prince, he was borne at Burdeux in France, and was but 11. yeeres old when he was crowned, so that all his miserable calamity may be imputed to his not ha∣uing or not regarding good counsell.
Henry the fourth. An. Dom. 1399. THe Crown wrong got frō the wrong' doing king, More griefe then ioy did to King Henry bring: France, England, Scotland, Wales, arose in Armes, And menac'd Henry, with most fierce Alarmes: Hot Percy, Dowglas, Mortimer, Glendwre, At Shrewsbury, the King orthrew their power, He fourteene yeeres did raigne, and then did dye, At Cantrbury buried, he doth lye. Henry the 4. Hee began his reigne the 29. of Septem∣ber, 1399. and the 14. of February following, King Richard the 2. being in prison at Pomfret-Castle, was murdered. The raigne of King Henry was a continuall warre and trouble.
Henry the fift. An. Dom. 1412. THis was a King Renowned nere and farre, A Mars of men, a Thunderbolt of warre: At Agencourt the French were ouerthrowne, And Henry heyre proclaim'd vnto that Crowne. ine yeeres raigne this valiant Prince wan more, I hena the Kings did after or before. Intomb'd at Westminster his Carkas lyes, His soule did (like his Acts) ascend the skies. Henry the 5. In his 3. yeere hee past the sea with 1000.  of Ships and Vessels into France. His tombe or statue was couered with siluer, but this yron age hath deuoured Henry the sixt. An. Dom. 1422. THis Infant Prince scarce being nine moneths old, The Realmes of France and England he did hold
But he vncapable through want of yeeres, Was ouer-gouern'd by mis-gouern'd Peeres. Now Yorke and Lancaster, with bloudy wars, Both wound this kingdome, with deep deadly scars. Whst this good King by Yorke oppos'd, depos'd, Expos'd to dangers, is captiu'd, 'd, His  xilde, his sonne and many friends, Fd, murdred, slaughtred; lastly, ate contends To crowne him once againe, who then at last Was murdred, thirty nine yeeres being past. King Henry the fixt, being 10. yeers old, was crow∣ned King of France in Paris, but with the strife betwixt the Nobility, and the Commons in England, the most part of France was lost againe, which was neuer recouered since. Edward the fourth. An. Dom. 1460. EDward, the 4 the house of Yorks great heire, By bloudy wars attain'd the Regall Chair, The poore King Henry into Scotland fled, And foure yeeres there was royally cloath'd and fed, Still good success with him was in the wane, He by King Edwards power at last was tane.
But yet before the tenth yeere of his reigne, Hence Edward fled, and Henry crown'd againe. By Warwicks meanes sixe moneths he held the same, Till Edward backe in armes to England came, And fighting stoutly, made this kingdome yeeld, And slew great Warwicks Earle at Barnet field. Thus Ciuill wars on wars, and broyles on broyles, And England against England spils and spoyles, Now Yorke, then Lancaster, then Yorke againe Quels Lancaster; thus ioy, griefe, pleasure, paine, Doth like inconstant waters ebbe and flow: Ones rising is the others ouerthrow. King Edward, twenty two yeeres rul'd this Land, And lies at Windsor, where his Tombe doth stand. Edward the 4. In the first yeere on Palme-sunday, 1460. there was a battell fought betwixt King Edward and King Henry, neere Todcaster, wherein were slaine of English-men on both sides 53000, 700, and 11. per∣sons: The bloudy victory fell to King Edward. In the 10. yeere of his reigne, he was forced to forsake this Land, whereby King Henry was restored againe to the Crowne. But shortly after, Edward returned, and Henry was urthered.
Edward the fifth. An. Dom. 1483. HIgh birth, blood, state, and innocent in yeeres, Eclips'd, and murdred by insulting Peeres: This King was neuer crown'd, short was his raigne: For to be short, hee in short space was slaine. Edward the 5. Within 3. moneths after the death of his father, hee and his brother Richard Duke of Yorke, were depriued both of their liues, and he of the Crowne, by their tyrannous Unkle Richard, Duke of Gloster. Richard the third. An. Dom. 1483. BY reason, mischiefe, murder and debate. Vsurping Richard wonne the royall state:
Vnnatnrally the children of his brothe. The King, and Duke of Yorke he caus'd to smother. For Sir Iames Tirrell, Dighton and Blacke Will, Did in the Tower these harmlesse Princes kill, Buckinghams Duke did raise King Richard high, And for reward he lost his head thereby. A fellow to this King I scarce can finde. His shape deform'd, and crooked like his minde. Most cruell, tyrannous, inconstant, stout, Couragious, hardy, t'abide all dangers out, Yet when his sinnes were mellow, ripe and full, Th'Almighties Iustice then his plums did pull: By bloudy meanes he did the kingdome gaine, And lost it so, at Bosworth being slaine. This Richard was neuer a good subiect; but wh he had got the Crowne, he striued by all meanes to be a good King, for in his short reigne of two yeeres, two mos, he made very profitable Lawes, which are yet in force: by which it may be perceiued how willing he was to  his mis-spent time. Henry the seuenth. An. Dom. 1485. VVHen Ciuill wars, full fourescore yeers & more, Had made this kingdome welter in her Gore:
When eightie of the royall blood were kild, That Yorke and Lancasters crosse faction held, Then God in mercy, looking on this Land, Brought in this Prince, with a triumphant band, The onely Heire of the Lancastrian line, Who gracously consented to combine, To ease poore England of a world of anone, And make the red Rose and the white but one, By Marriage with Elizabeth the faire, Fourth Edwards daughter, and Yorks onely heire. But Margret Burgunds Lancaster storm'd & frown'd, That th'heire of Lancaster in state was crown'd. A counterfeit, one Lambert she suborn'd, (Beign with Princely ornaments adorn'd) To claime the State in name of Clace sonne, Who in the Tower before to death was done. Wars' gainst the French King Henry did maintaine, And Edward braue Lord Wooduil there was slaine. Northumberlands great Earle (for the Kings right) Was slaine by Northerne rebels in sharpe fight. The King besiedged Boloigne, but a Peace The French king sought, and so the siedge did cease. Still Burgunds Dutchesse, (with inueterate hate) Did seeke to ruine Henries Royall state: She caus'd one Perkin Warbecke, to put on The name of Richard, Edwards murdred sonne, Which Richard, was the youngest of the twaine Of Edwards sonnes that in the Tower was slaine. The King at last these traitors did confound, And Perkin for a counterfeit was found. Sir William Stanley, (once the Kings best friend) At Tower hill, on a Scaffold had his end.
On Blacke Heath Cornish rebels were o'rthrowne, A Shoomaker did claine King Henries Crowne. The Earle of Warwicke lost his haplesse head, And Lady Katherine did Prince Arthur wed. But ere sixe moneths were fully gone and past, In Ludlow Castle, Arthur breath'd his last. King Henry built his Chappell from the ground, At Westminster, whose like can scarce be found. Faire Margret eldest daughter to our King, King Iames the fourth of  home did bring, Where those two Princes, with great pompe and cheare, In State at Edenborough married were. But as all Mortall hings are traory, So to an end came Hnrie arthly glory. Twenty three yeeres, and 8. months here he swaid, And then at Westminster, is Tombe was laid. He all his Life had variable share, Of Peace, Warre, Ioy Griefe, Royaltie and Care. In his 1. yeere in 7. weekes space, there dyed in Lon∣don 2. Masors, and 6. Aldermen, besides many hundred others of a strange sweating sicknesse, 1485. Anno Reg. 12. at Saint Needs in Bedfordshire, there fell bail-stones 18. inches about. King Iames the 4. of Scotland, married Margret, eldest daughter to Henry the 7. from whom our gracious Soueraigne is lineally descended.
Henry the eight. An. Dom. 1509. FRom both the Lines, and both the loynes did spring Of York & Lancaster, this mighty King: Katherine that was his brothers wife of late, He tooke to wife, and crown'd her Queene in state. Empson and Dudley lost their heads at Tower, For racking the poore Commons by their power. Warres, dreadfull wars, arose 'twixt vs and France, Lord Edward Howard, drowned by mis-chance At Brest, he was high Admirall in fight, Cast ouerboord, dy'd like a valiant Knight. In England Suffolks Duke did lose his head, The King to Turin dd an army lead, Turney he wonne with his victorious blade, King Iames of Scotland, England did inuade: But Surries Earle, the Scosh King ouercame, Who lost life there, but wonne immortall fame. Now Cardinall Woley, in the Kings high Grace, Was rais'd to honours, from great place to place, Lordship on Lordship laid vpon his backe, Vntill the burthen was the bearers wracke. The Duke of Buckingham, his head did lose, And Luther stoutly did the Pope oppose,
Blinde ignorance that long had look'd awry, Began to see Truth with a clearer eye, And then the King (inspir'd with feruent Zeale) Reformed both the Church and Common weale, Iehouah with his power Omnipotent, Did make this King his gracious instrument, T' vnmaske his Truth from Antichristian fables, And purge this wofull Land from Babel bables. This King at Boloigne was victorious; In peace and warre, Magnifique, Glorious; In his rage bounty he did oft expresse, His Liberality to bee excesse, In Reuels, Iusts, and Turnies he spent more, Then fiue of his Fore-fathers did before, His Auarice was all for Noble fame, Amongst the Worthies to inrole his Name, A valiant Champion for the Faiths defence, Was the great Title of this mightie Prince. Sixe wiues he had, 3. Kates, 2. Annes, one Iane, Two were diuorc'd, two at the blocke were slaine: One sonne and two faire daughters he did leaue, Who each from other did the Crowne receiue: The first was Edward; Mary next, whose death Left State, and Realme, to Queene Elizabeth. He thirty eight yeeres kept this Royall Roome, At Windsor hee's enter'd without a Tombe. Leeth, Edenbourgh, and diuers other parts of Scot∣land were spoyled by Sir Iohn Dudley, Lord Viscount Lisle, Lord high Admirall of England, with a Na∣uy of 200. tall Ships. Anno 1544. King Henry went to Boloigne, hee
entred France the 13. of Iuly, and into Boloigne the 25. of September, in which yeere were taken 300. French Ships for prizes. Edward the sixt. An. Dom. 1546. HAd this Kings reigne bin long, as it was good, Religion in a peaceable state had stood, What might haue his age bin, when his blest youth, So valiantly aduanc'd Gods sacred truth? At nine yeeres age, the Crowne on him hee tooke, And ere sixteene, he Crowne and life forsooke. Too good for earth, th' Almighty tooke his spirit, And Westminster his Carkas doth inherit. In his 5. yeere a strange Earth-quake did much harme in diuers places of Surry, and a sweating sicknesse gene∣rally ouer England, that dispatched those that were in good health, in 12. houres, or 24. at the most. In one weeke there dyed of it in London 806. the most of them being men of best strength.
Queene Mary. An. Dam. D AFter a while this Queene had worne the Crown, Idolatry was rais'd, and Truth put downe, The Masse, the Images, the Beades and Altars, By tyrannie, by fire, and sword and Halters, Th' vngodly bloudy Antichristian sway, Men were force, perforce forced to obey. Now burning Bonner, Londons Bishop, he Was from the Marshal-sea againe set free: Iohn Dudley, great Duke of Northumberland, And Sir Iohn Gates dyed by the Headsmans hand. With them Sir Thomas Palmer likewise dy'd. Hoping for heau'n, through Iesus Crucified. In Latine Seruice must be sung and said, Because men should not know for what they prai'd. The Emp'rors sonne, great Philip King of Spaine, A marriage with Queene Mary did obtaine: Against which match, Sir Thomas Wyat rose, With powers of Kent the Spaniards to oppose. But Wyat was or'throwne, his armie fled, And on the Tower hill after lost his head. Lord Gray the Duke of Suffolke also dy'd, An Axe his Corps did from his head diuide,
A little after, the Lord Thomas Gray, The Dukes owne brother went that headlesse way. A Millers sonne aslm'd King Edwards name, And fa sely in that nme the Crowne did claime, But he was tane and iustly whip'd and tortur'd, And claiming it once more, was hang'd & quarterd. King Pllip won Saint. Quintins with great cost. But after to our shame was Callice lost, Callie was lost, which threescore yeeres and ten, Had beene a Garrison for English men. Thus by Gods mercy Englands Queene did dye, And England gain'd much ease and rest thereby. Fiue yeeres and 4. months was her bloudy reigne, And all her glory doth one graue containe. Though of her selfe this Queene was well inclin'd, Bad-minded counsell alred much her minde. She married Philip King of Spaine, on Saint Iames his day, 1554. at Winchester. Callice was won by Edward the 3. in the 21. of his reigne, 1347. and it was lost the 1. of Ianuary 1557. after the English-men had possest it 210. yeeres. August 7. 1558 a tempest neere Nottingham, beat damne 2 Townes and Churches, and cast the Bels to the further side of the Church-yard, threw whole sheetes of Lead 400. foot into the fields, where they were crumpled together like burnt parchment: the streame and mud of the Ker of Trent was blowne a-land a quarter of a mile: a childe blowne out of a mans hand 100. foot and kild, there fell hayle 15. Inches about.
Queene Elizabeth. An. Dom. 1558. A Debora, a Iudith, a Susannae, A Virgin, a Virago, a Diana: Couragious, Zealous, Learned, Wise and Chaste, With heauenly, earthly gifts, adorn'd and grac'd, Victorious, glorious, bountious, gracious, good, And one, whose vertues dignifi'd her bloud, That Muses, Graces, Armes, and liberall Arts, Amongst all Queens, proclaim'd her Queen of hearts, She did repurifie this Land once more, From the infection of the Romish whore. Now Abbies, Abbots, Fri'rs, Monks, Nuns & Stews, Masses, and Masse-priests, that mens soules abuse, Were all cast downe, Lamps, Tapers, Relikes, Beads, And Superstitions that mans soule misse-leads, All Popish pardons, Buls. Confessions, With Crossings, Christening bels, Saints Interces∣sions, The Altars, Idols, Images downe cast, All Pilgrimage, and Superstitious Fast, Th' acknowledging the Pope for supreme head, The holy water, and the god of bread,
The mumbling Mattins, and the pickpurse Masse, These bables this good Queene did turne to grasse. She caus'd Gods seruice to be said and sung, In our owne vnderstanding English tongue. In Scotland and in France, fierce warres she held, The Irish she subdu'd when they rebeld, The Netherlands her name doe still admire, And Spaine her like againe doth not desire. When forty foure yeers reigne was past and gone, She chang'd her earthly for a heauenly Throne, At Greenwich she was borne, at Richmond dy'd, At Westminster she buried, doth abide; And as the fame of this Imperiall Maide, Is through the world, (by the foure winds) displaid, So shall her memory for euer grace Her famous birth, her death, and buriall place. At Teuxbury Anno 1574. the 24. of February, being a hard frost, the Riuer of Seuerne was couered with Flies and Beetles, so that it was thought, within the length of a paire of Buts, to be 100. quarters of them the ils were stopped with them, but from whence they came, is vnknown. 1582. A piece of Land of three Acres in Dorsetshire, in the Parish of Armitage, was suddenly remooued 600. foot from the place where formerly it stood.
King Iames. An. Dom. 1601. VVHen as Elizaes wofull death was actd: When this lamenting land was halfe : Whē tears ech loyall heart with grief had drownd, Then came this King and made our ioves abound, Ordain'd for vs by heauenly power diuine, Then from the North this glorious starre did shine, The Royall Image of the Prince of Peace, The blest Concorder that made warres to cease; By Name a S T E V V A R D, and by Nature one, Appointed from Iehonahs sacred Throne, And by th'almighties hand supported euer, That Treason or the Diuell should hurt him neuer: And as his Zeale vnto his God was great, Gods blessings on him were each way compleat, Rich in his Subiects loue (a Kings best treasure) Rich in content, (a Riches aboue measure) Rich in his Princely Issue, and in them, Rich in his hopefull Branches of his stemme; Rich in Munition and a Nauy Royall, And richer then all Kings in seruants Loyall. When Hell and Ro together did conspire, o blow him and his Kingdome vp with fire,
Then did the King of Kings preserue our King, And all the Traytors to confusion bring. And whoso reckons vp from first to last, The many hel-hatch'd dangers he hath past Through all his daies, he will beleeue (no doubt) That he with heauenly pow'rs was wall'd about. All Christian Princes held his friendship deare, Was fear'd for loue, and not belou'd for feare: And Pagan Monarchs were in Lague combin'd With him, as farre as is the Easterne Ind. And like a flame a midst a Riuer fix'd, So was his Iustice with his mrcy mix'd: He striu'd to imitate his Maer still, And clemency preseru'd where Law : He hath cur'd England and   wounds, And made them both great () Britains bounds All bloudy deadly fewds And canker'd hate he turn'd to Christian , The mouth of warre he muzzled mue  , He still'd the roaring Cannon and the Secure in peace, his people sup and dine, With their owne fig-trees shaded and Whilst in an vprore most of Christendome, One Nation doth another . Vnto the King of Kings let's praises sing. For giuing vs this appy peacefull King. None know so well how they should peace prefer, As those that know the miseries of warre: Tis true (though ) and must not be forgot, The warres are sweet to such as know them not. Peace (happy peace) doth spread tranqillity, Through all the bounds of Britaines Monarchy; And may we all our actions still addresse,
For peace with God, and warre 'gainst wickednesse. Vnto which peace of God this King's , To reigne in glory that shall ne'r be ended. His mortall part at Westminster enter'd, His soule and Fame immortally prefer'd. God did wonderfully preserue him (vpon two seuerall Tuesdaies) from 2 most dangerous treas, the one at the Towne of Saint Iohnston in Scotland, on Tuesday the 5. of August, 1600. where the Earle of Gowry attempted to kill his Maiesty. The her was in Eng∣land, in that fearfull treason and deliuerance from the Powder-plot, on Tuesday the 5. of Nouember. 1606. King CHARLES. TWo Williams, Henries 8. 1. Steuen, 1. Iohn, Sixe Edwards, Richards 3. and 1. Queene Mary: Elizabeth, and Iames, all dead and gone, Our gracious Charles doth now the Scepter carry; And may they liue and dye of God accurst, Who wish the predice of Charles the first. Iust 25. Kings and Queenes of England since the Norman Conquest. FINIS.
THIS AVTHOR HATH newly caused all his works (be∣ing aboue 60.) to bee printed into one Volume, the Names of all which Works are set downe in this following Cata∣logue. TAylors Vrania. The life and death of the Virgin Mary. The whip of Pride. Against cursing and swearing. The fearefull Summer. Christian Admonitions. The trauell of tweluepence. The Armado. The Begger. Taylors Goose. Iacke a Lent. Taylors peninlesse Pilgrimage, The Sculler.
The Dolphins danger. The Cormorant. A sea-fight by Captaine Wedall. The praise of Hempseed. Taylors Pastorall. Prince Charles his welcome from Spaine. An English mans loue to Bohemia. Three weeks and three daies trauels Taylors farewell o Bohemia. Sir Gregory Nonsence. A very merry Whiry voyage. The great O Tnole. A voyage to the West. The scourge of basenesse. Taylors Motto. Odcombs complaint. Coriats resurrection. Laugh and be fat. Coriats newes. A Bawd. A Whore. A Thiefe. A Hangman. The vnnaturall Father. Taylors reuenge. Fenners defence. A cast ouer the water. The praise of cleane Linnen. The Water-mans suit.
Wit and mirth. A Dogge of Warre. The world runs on Wheeles. The nipping or snipping of abuses. A Chronicle from Brute. A Briefe from the conquest. A Farewell to the Towre bottles. The marriage of the Princesse Elizabeth. An Elegie for King Iames. An Elegy for the Earle of Nottingham. An Elegy for the Earle of Holdernesse. An Elegy for the Bishop of Winchester. An Elegy for the Duke of Richmond. An Elegy for Iohn Moray Esquire. The summe of the Bible in verse. The sum of the Booke of Martyrs in verse. The Churches deliuerances. Archies making peace with France. The Acts and exployts of Wood the great Eater, in Kent. FINIS.
