24156 99853706 19100
TEMPE RESTORD. A Masque Presented by the QVEENE, and foure∣teene Ladies, to the KINGS MA∣IESTIE at Whitehall on Shrove-Tuesday. 1631. LONDON: Printed by A. M. for ROBERT ALLET, and GEORGE BAKEK. 1631.
TEMPE RESTOR'D The Argument. CIrce by her alurements inamo∣red a young Gent. on her per∣son, who a while lived with her in all sensuall delights vntill vpon some iealosie conceived, shee gaue him to drinke of an inchanted Cup, and touching him with her gol∣den wand transformd him into a Lyon. After some time shee remembring her former loue, re∣transformed him into his former shape. Which he reasuming tooke the first occasion by flight to quitt the place and comming into the presence of his Maiestie, whose sight frees him from all feare he relates the story of his fortune. When Circe had notice of her Lovers escape it,
put her into a furious anger and then into a la∣mentation or loue passion. But being consolated by her Nymphes; shee commands that all such delights be prepared as may sweeten her sorow: and presently all the voluntary beasts vnder her subiection are introduced to make her sport. After which the way being first prepared by Har∣mony, and the Influences; divine Beautie accom∣panied with foureteene stars of a happy constella∣tion, descends to the Musicke of the Spheares and ioyneth with heroicke vertue, where in presence of loue & Cupid, Circe knowing the designe of the destinies on this glorious Enterview, voluntarily delivers her golden rod to MINERVA. So all the inchantments being dissolued. TEMPE which for a time had beene possest by the volun∣tary beasts of CIRCES Court; is restored to the true followers of the MVSES. The description of the Sceane. IN the vpper part of the border serving for or∣nament to the SCENE, was painted a faire compartment of scrowles and quadratures, in which was written TEMPE RESTAVRA∣TVM. On each side of this, lay a figure bigger then the life, the one a woman with wings on her head like MERCVRIE and a pen in her hand: the other a man looking downe in a
booke lying open before him, and a torch lighted in his hand: that figur'd Invention; this Know∣ledge. Neere to these were children holding oug∣ly Maskes before their faces in action as if they would afright them; others riding on tame beasts and some blowing such wrethen Trumps as mke confused noyse, in the corners sat other Children hardning of darts in Lamps. But In∣vention & Knowledge seeme not to be diverted from their study by these childish bugbears. In the midst of the two sides of this border in short neeces sat two ougly figures, the one a woman with a forked tongue, and snaky lockes, and the vnder part of a Satyre, this Hagge held in her hand a smiling vizard crown'd with Roses, and was figured for Envie, vnder the Maske of friend∣ship. On the other side was sitting as horrid a man Satyre with a wreath of poppy on his head, and a Frog sitting on the fore part thereof; and a∣boue a Batt flying, this represented curions Igno∣rance. The rest of the Border was fild vp with severall fancies, which lest I should be too long in the description of the frame, I will goe to the picture it selfe, and indeed these showes are no∣thing else but pictures with Light and Motion. A Curtaine being drawne vp, the Lightsome Scene appear'd, shewing a delicious place by na∣ture and art; where in a Valley inviron'd with
Hils a farre off was seated, a prospect of curious Arbours of various formes. The first order of marble Pillasters. Betweene which were neeces of rocke worke and Statues; some spurting water received into vazes beneath them, and o∣thers standing on Pedestals. On the returnes of these Pillasters run slender Cornishments. From which was raised a second order of gratious termes with womens faces which beare vp the ornaments. Vnder this to a leaning height was a Ballestrata inricht. All this second story seem'd of silver worke mixt with fresh Verdures which on the tops of these arbours covered some of the returnes, in the forme of tipes with tender bran∣ches dangling downe: others were cover'd flatt and had flower pots of gold for finishing: be∣hind these appear'd the tops of slender trees, whose leaues seem'de to moue with a gentle breath comming from the farre off Hills. Out of this pleasant place comes in hast, a yong Gentleman, looking often backe, as if he feared a pursuit; and beeing come into the midst of the roome, looking still distractedly about him, hee wipes his face with an handkercher, and then ad∣vanceth towards the State, and speakes. The fugitive Favourite. Was I a Lyon! that am now afraid! I feare no danger; nor I feare no Death;
But to be Retransform'd, into a Beast: Which while I was, although I must confesse, I was the Brauest: What could shee doe lesse, That saw me Subiect, to no base desire: Yet was there in me, a Promethean fire, That made me covet to be man againe, Govern'd by Reason, and not rul'd by Sense. Therefore I shunne this place of Residence, And flye to Vertue: in whose awfull sight, She dares not come, but in a Maske, and crouch, As low as I did, for my liberty. Her Bowre is pleasant, and her Palace Rich; Her Fare Delicious; and her Language fine; But shall the Soule, the Minion of the Gods, Stoope to her Vassalls? Or stand by and sterue, While they sit swelling, in her Chayre of State? Tis not her Rod, her Philters, nor her Herbes, (Though strong in Magicke) that can bound mens minds; And make them Prisoners, where there is no wall. It is consent that makes a perfect Slaue: And Sloth that binds us to Lusts easie Trades, Wherein we serue out our youths Prentiship, Thinking at last, Loue should enfranchize vs, Whome we haue neuer, either seru'd or knowne: He finds no helpe, that vses not his owne. The further part of the Sceane opening, there appeares seated on the side of a fruitfull hill, a sumptuous Palace, with an open Tarras before
there appeares seated on the side of a fruitfull hill, a sumptuous Palace, with an open Tarras before it, and a great staire of returne, descending into the lower grounds; the upper part environ'd with walles of Marble, alongst which were planted, Cypresse trees. From the foot of the hill, Ciece at∣tended by the Nayades, and Dryades comes foorth in fury, for the escape of the young Gentle∣man, her Lover; and hauing traverst the stage with an angry looke, sings to her Lute. The Song of Circe, represented by Madam Comacke. Cir: Dissembling Traytor, now I see the cause, Of all thy fawning, was but to be free: T'was not for nothing, thou hadst teeth and clawes, For thou hast made a cruell prey of me. Her  Nympes. Ingratitude is apt, to slinke away, And shunne that bounty which it cannot pay. Circe: And he is gone (aye me) is stolne from hence, And this poore Casket of my breast, hath left Without a Hart: that should for recompence, Haue lockt in two: O most inhumane theft! Her foure Nymphes. Send not your sighes, after a fickle mind, That Sayles the faster for such Gales of wind.
Circe. Then take my keyes! and shew me al my wealth. Leade me abroad! Let me my subiects view! Bring me some Physick! though that bring no health! And feyne me pleasures, since I finde none true. Chorus. Yee willing servants! And ye Soules confin'd To severall shapes, by powerfull Herbes and Art, Appeare, transform'd each in your seuer all kind, And striue to temper the distemper'd Heart, Of sullen Circe, stung with Cupids dart. Her song ended, she sits, and before her are pre∣sented all the Antimasques, consisting of Indians, and Barbarians, who naturally are bestiall, and others which are voluntaries, and but halfe trans∣formed into beastes. Here come forth all the Anti-masques. 7. Indians adoring their Pagole. 1. Idoll. 1. Hare. 2. Hounds. 4. Lyons. 3. Apes.
An Asse like a Pedante, teaching them Prick-song. 6. Barbarians. 5. Hogges. The Last Anti-Masque. 2. Indians. 2. Hounds. 2. Apes. 1. Asse. 2. Lyons. 2. Barbarians. 2. Hogges. The Anti Masques being past; Circe and her Nymphes retire towards the palace from whence she came, and the Sceane returning into the vale of TEMPE. Harmony comes foorth attended by a Chorus of Musique, and vnder her conduct fourteene Influences of the stars, which are to come. Shee with the Chorus goes vp to the State and sings. Harmony presented by Mris Shep. Not as my selfe, but as the brightest Starre, That shines in Heaven, come to Reigne this day.
And these the Beames and Influences are Of Constellations, whose Planeticke sway, Though some foresee, all must alike obey. Chorus. Such a Coniunction, of auspicious lights, Meete but in Honor, of some Regall rights. Harmony and her Quire. Ladies! lend vs your eares. And let no Louers sigh be heard! Or Suite, (though iust) be now prefer'd A consort of the Spheres, Admits no whisper, nor no sound, But what is descant, to their ground: Nor can we hold ye long, For there are Stars to rise, That farre aboue, our song Are Musicke to all eyes. They retire. A Saraband. If any Beauty here, In her owne glasse appeare Or Louers eye, most cleere? Looking but vp, she may with smal adoe Perceiue that flatters, and her seruant too.
Her Song ended they retire with a Sarabant and the foureteene Influences fall into their daunce. Which being past they are placed on the degrees by the Lords and Ladies where they sitt to see the Masque. The Highest Sphere; Mr. Laneere represents When Divine Beautie, will vouchsafe to stoope, And moue to Earth: 'tis fit the Heauenly Spheres, Should be her Musicke: And the Starrie Troope, Shine round about her, like the Crowne she weares. Chorus. No mortall Brest, Can entertaine: So great a Guest, And such a Trayne. Mr. Laneere. I cannot blame ye if ye gaze, And giue small eare to what I say: For such a presence will amaze, And send the Senses all one way.
Chorus. The Musick that yee heare, is dull, But that y see, is sweete indeed: In euery Part exact, and full, From whence there doth an Ayre proceed, On which th' Intelligences feed, Where faire and good, inseparably conioynd, Create a Cupid, that is neuer blind. Then the Scene is changed into an orientall skye, such as appeares at the Sunne rising, and a farre off a Landscipt and a calme Sea which did terminate the Horizon; in the hither part was a Heaven with a Citadell, and opposite to that, were broken grounds and craggey rocks. In the midst of the ayre the eight Spheares in rich habites were seated on a Cloud, which in a circular forme was on each side continued vnto the highest part of the Heaven, and seem'd to haue let them downe as in a Chaine. To the Musicke of these Spheares there ap∣pear'd two other Clouds descending, & in them were discovered eight Stars; these being come to the middle Region of the skie, another greater Cloud came downe aboue them; Which by little and little descending, discovered other glistering
Stars to the number of sixe: and aboue all in a Chariot of gold-smithes workes richly adorned with precious lemmes, sat divine Beauty, over whose head, appear'd a brightnesse, full of small starres that inviron'd the top of the Chariot, stri∣king a light round about it. The eight Stars that first descended being by this time past the Spheares came forth, and the Clouds on which they sat with a swift morion returning vp againe, and the other still descending shewed a pleasing contention betweene them as they past. When divine Beauty and her atten∣dants were lighted, that great Cloud that bare them flyes vp againe, leaving the Chariot standing on the Earth. This sight altogether was for the difficulty of the Ingining and number of the persons the grea∣test that hath beene seene here in our time. For the apparitions of such as came downe in the ayre, and the Chorus standing beneath arrived to the number of fifty persons all richly attired, shewing the magnificence of the court of England. In the description of the severall habites of the maine Masques and Masquers and Chorus with all the persons imployd, would make a booke a∣lone as big as this, and aske more time in setting downe then can bee now spared; onely thus
much the Queenes Maiesties was in a garment of watchet Sattine with Stars of silver imbrodered and imbost from the ground, and on her head a Crowne of Stars mixt with some small falls of white Feathers. And the Ladies were in the same manner. The stuffe was rich and the forme No∣ble, and all suting to the Magnificence of so great a Queene. The Queene and the Ladies dance their Entry; after which Harmony, and the highest Spheare sing, assisted by all the Chorus together. The Song. Mirs Sheperd. How rich is earth? and poore the skies? Depriu'd of heauenly Beauties eyes? Whose Image men adore. Mr Laneere. Heroicke Vertue, is that kind Of Beautie, that attracts the mind, And men should most implore. The Spheres. Ianus was happy that could see, Two wayes at once: And happier he That round about him kept Watches, that neuer slept.
Cho: But we most happy, that behold, Two that haue turn'd this Age to Gold, Making old Saturns Reigne, In theirs, come backe againe. And since more, th'obiect, then the sight, Makes euery seer Blest; How are we rauisht with delight, That see the best. The Maskers dance their maine Dance, which done, and the Queene seated vnder the state by his Maiestie, the Scene is againe changd into a shady wood, and a new Heaven appeares diffe∣ring in shape and colour from the other. In the midst of which Ioue sitting on an Eagle is seene hovering in the ayre with a glory beyond him. And at that instant Cupid from another part of the Heaven comes flying forth, and hauing past the Scene, turnes soaring about like a bird, and at the same time Pallas, Circe and her foure Nymphes appeare on the Stage: the great Chorus consisting of fiue and thirty Musitions standing below to assist them. Cupid: It is but Iustice, to torment a heart, That tortured thousands: And my gentle reigne, So wrongd with acting of a Tyrants part, I must Restreyne,
My powre abus'd; And right my iniurd Treyne. Iupiter. Thou claim'st her Subiects: And I claime the Soyle, As Soueraigne Lord: The Hecatomes shee brings, Though great Oblations, yet deduc'd from Spoyle, Are sordid Things: And sent of Earth: Vertue pure Incense brings. Circe: The Gods, more freedome did allow, when Ioue turn'd Io to a Cow. Pallas: Are mortall Creatures, growne so proud To taxe the Skye, for euery Cloud: Circe: Man-Maide, bee gone! Pallas: Though I could turne thee, to a Stone Ile begge thy peace: Iupiter: Deare Daughter cease! Circe: Cease Dreadfull Ioue! Finding thy Drift, My Bounty, shall prevent thy Guift: This Machles Payre, I make, my Heire: All I possesse, I heere, Resigne,
Thou hast  And I haue Mine. Iupiter: Shee giues but what shee can not keepe. Cupid: Then was the wound I gaue her deepe. Both: T'was I whose power none can withstand, That open'd both her heart, and hand. The Valediction. How would they mourne, to loose yee quite! That are so loath, to say, Goodnight. Yet wee may pleade, in our Excuse, Should you, these Loanes of Loue forsake The Gods themselues, such Sommes would take And pay vs, vse. When this was past, the Eagle with love flew vp, and Cupid tooke his flight through the Ayre, after which the Heauens close. Palas and Circe re∣turnes into the Scene with the Nymphes, and Cho∣rus; and so concluded the last Intermedium. After which the Queene and her Ladies began the Re∣vels, with the King and his Lords, which conti∣nued all the night. The Allegory. In the young Gentleman, who Circe had first enamored on her Person, and after, through
Iealousie conceiued, Transformed into a Lyon. And againe remembring her former Love, re∣transform'd into his former shape, is figured an incontinent man, that striving with his af∣fections, is at last by the power of reason per∣swaded to flye from those Sensuall desires, which had formerly corrupted his Iudgement. Circe here signifies desire in generall, the which hath power on all living Creatures, and beeing mixt of the Divine and Sensible, hath divers effects, Leading some to Vertue, and others to Vice. Shee is described as a Queene, having in her service, and subiection, the Nymphs, which participate of Divinity, figuring the Vertues, and the bruite Beasts, denoting the Vices. The description of her person, of extraordinary Beauty, and sweetnesse of her voyce, shewes that desire is moved either by sight or hearing, to loue Vertue, or the contrary, and the Beautifull aspect of her inchaunted Palace, glistering with gold, and Precious Ornaments, that desire cannot bee moued without apparance of Beauty, either true of false. The Dryades, and Nayades, Nymphes of the Woods, and Waters, that is to say; the good spi∣rits defused through all the Vniverse, are servants to this Queene, and liue with her in all Liberty
and pleasure whose imployment is to gather the most exquisite Herbes, and Flowers of the earth for the service of their Mistres; Figuring the Vertues and Sciences, by which the desire of Mans Spirits are prepared and disposed to good, the beasts, in part transformed, who contrary to their Natures, make her sport, represents vnto vs that Sensuall desire makes men loose their Vertue and Valour, turning Parasites and Slaues to their Bruitish affections. That these Intemperate Beastes of Circes Court, should for a time possesse TEMPE. The happie retreat of the Muses and their followers, is meant, the inchantments of vitious impostures, that by false meanes, seeke to extirpate the true Louers of Science and Vertue, to whom of right only that place belongs. That divine Beauty accompan'ed with a troope of Stars of a happy Constellation ioyning with Heiroicke vertue should dissolue the inchant∣ments, and Circe voluntarily deliver her golden rod to Minerva, is meant that a divine Beame comming from aboue, with a good inclination, and a perfect habit of vertue made, by the Har∣mony of the Irascible and concupiscible parts obe∣dient to the rationall and highest part of the soule. Making man onely a mind vsing the bo∣dy
and affections as instruments; which being his true perfection, brings him to all the happinesse which can bee inioyed heere below. In Heiroicke vertue is figured the Kings Ma∣iestie, who therein transcends as farre common men, as they are aboue Beasts, he truly being the prototipe to all the Kingdomes vnder his Mo∣narchie, of Religion, Iustice, and all the Vertues ioyned together. So that Corporeall Beauty, consisting in si∣metry, colour, and certaine vnexpressable Graces, shining in the Queenes Maiestie, may draw vs to the contemplation of the Beauty of the soule, vnto which it hath Analogy. All the Verses were written by Mr. Aurelian Townesend. The subiect and Allegory of the Masque, with the descriptions, and Apparatus of the Sceanes were invented by Inigo Iones, Surveyor of his Maiesties worke. FINIS.
The names of the Influences represented by Lo. Herbert. Lo. Ellesmere. Lo. Rich. of Holl. Mr. Hen. Howard of Berk. Lo. Grey of Stam. Mr. Phil. Herbert. Mr. Ch. Cauendish. La. Ma. Villiers La. Eliza. Cecill. La. Al. Egerton. La. Eliza. Feilding. La. Fran. Howard of Berk. La. Eliza. Gray of Stam. La. Diana Cecill. The Names of the Masquers. THE QVEENES MAIESTIE. Coun. Oxford. Coun. Canaruan. La. Ann. Russell. La. Ann. Cavendish. La. Ma. Russell. Mrs. Vict. Cary. Mrs. Weston. Coun. Carlisle. Coun. Newport. La. Ka. Egerton. La. Ann. Feilding. La. Howard. Mrs. Padget. Mrs. Soph. Cary.
