24743 99846853 11847
A Continued September 1 IOVRNALL OF ALL THE PROCEEDING of the Duke of BVCKINGHAM his Grace, in the Isle of Ree, since the last of August. TEMPORE PATET OCCVLTA VERITAS LONDON Printed by A. M. for Thomas Walkley, and are to  sold at his Shop at the Eagle and Childe in Britaines-Bursse. 1627.
THE IOVRNALL CONTINVED TO THIS DAY. Receiued the 18. of September. FOrasmuch as report, that is seldome constant, is very different concer∣ning a Subiect which in time and place is so nere, I meane the Siedge of Saint Martins Cittadell, vnder the conduct of his Illustrious Excellency, the Duke of BVCKINGHAN. I thought it would bee an acceptable relation, to discouer, by way of a demonstratiue dis∣course, the state both of the Leaguer and Fort, according to that Intelligence
which I haue receiued from a Gentle∣man of worth and qualitie. You must therefore vnderstand, that the English Army now lying before the Cittadell, hauing intrenched themselues strongly, labour continually to drawe their approaches and batteries neerer, and although the earth is ill to worke in (as being altogether Rocky or Sandy) yet our men being encouraged with the presence of their Generall, haue at length (though not without sweet and danger) raised a new Reintrenchment and Bat∣terie. Besides, our Souldiers who supplie the place of Pioners, haue suncke a Mine of the Enemies, nere the Foundation of the vtmost Counterscarffe, by the blowing vp whereof, they hope to open a breach but they doe not spring this Mine as yet, expecting those Reinforcements, which are to come from England, vpon whose arriuall, we doubt not, but that the Ene∣mie (who is already much distressed for
want of necessary accomodations) will surrender vp the Fort without any fur∣ther inforcement. Our approaches are brought so neere vnto the Enemies, that wee are able to throw a Coite from our works to theirs, and the like may they doe, from theirs to ours. But if all other courses of Con∣quests should faile, we are assured by all probable aduertisements, and conie∣ctures, that the besiedged cannot hold out long, they being so much necessita∣ted for want of victualls, as hauing re∣ceiued no reliefe from the Continent, neuer since the beginning of the Siedge. Our men haue them so continuall in the eye, that they dare not looke ouer their workes for feare of our Canon, and Musket shot. Our Souldiers deliuer braue testimo∣nies of resolution and valour, so that by the very confession of the Enemie, they are reputed as daring men as any are in the World.
To which actions of Honour, they are not so much encouraged by the precept of Discipline, as by the Example of their Generall, who cheerisheth the valient, in∣courageth the wauering, and punisheth (though mildely) the slothfull and vn∣actiue Souldier; and besides his personall night-watches, and walking of the first round, hee doth personally present him∣selfe in the Face of all necessary dangers. Which motiues of president doe so strongly confirme the vertue of our Eng∣lish, that like men lauish of their liues, they aduenture themselues to all perrills, and hazards. So that if they were not restrained by the curbe of Military obedience, they could hardly be kept backe from assaul∣ting the Fort without command. Yet there are some maleuolent spirits who are luke-warme in affection, either to the Duke, or to the cause, haue main∣tained with an opinionatiue obstinacy, that the taking of the Fort is not seazable,
yet our men who are there ingaged, (amongst whom there are diuers solid iudgements) doe as confidently beleeue, as if they had displayed their Ensignes vpon the walles thereof already, that they shall bee masters of it vpon the first arriuall of the next supplies from England. The Fort (notwithstanding rumour hath blazed the contrary) is very ill pro∣uided of Victualls and other necessaries, for besides the want of water and fuell, (the want whereof is the interdiction of Mankinde) they are very much di∣stressed for want of Bread, Flesh and other necessaries; since the cutting off their Conducts, and poysoning of their Well, they haue no other fresh water, but what they make shift to receiue vp∣on Sheets hung vp in the ayre for that purpose of receiuing that vncertaine in∣fluence of the Heauens, which was a great refreshment vnto the Enemie.
Their Bread is allotted and allowed vnto the Souldiers that are in the Citta∣dell by small proportions, for each one of them hath lesse then halfe a pound a day for his nourishment. Also the like is done to their Water, for which they may thanke God that this Autumnall wett weather fell out so luckily. All their Horses (which being of the choisest breede of France, were ordai∣ned for the Saddle, & not for the Palate) are either killed for want of water, or eaten for the satisfying of the hungry Souldiers: so that they haue not so much as one Horse left aliue, nor any fresh Victualls to releeue themselues withall. They are onelie cherished with windie hopes of succour from the con∣tinent, which those of Angolisme and Poictowe promise, but this is like to bee meere winde without successe, without effect: for his Excellency knowing that
preuention is the spirit of pollicie and the life of offence and defence, hath vsed such prouisionall courses of interception, that in humane reason it is not to bee succoued. The French King hath beene most desperatly sicke at Villeroy and as we here he is not yet perfectly recouered. The Count of Soissons (who fled the last yeare into Sauoy, being discontented with the gouernement of France) is making newe leuies against the King, and as it is reported, diuers other Princes stand vpon theire guards and proper defence. The Rochellers receiue our sicke men willingly, and entertaine our Souldiers who come to the Towne, with all re∣spects of loue and courtesie. Notwithstanding the care of his Excellencie: some of our men (but those not many) haue fallen into fluxes and o∣ther diseases, by eating of Grapes and
drinking of Wine, which agrees not with English bodies as well as beere, that drinke being most agreeing with nature, which is first vsed from our In∣fancie, Those that are sicke and woun∣ded are carefully looked vnto by Physi∣cians Chirurgions, and if they want fresh meate his Excellencies care is such, that he causeth present prouision to bee made for them, so that very fewe of them dye, by meanes of these necessary and carefull helpes. His Excellence hath giuen a strict and speciall charge to all the Physitians and Chyrurgians to see their store well pro∣uided of all necessary medicinalls for a winter Leaguer. Likewise his Excellence hath caused a Proclamation to bee published of late, that no man should stirre out of his quarters vpon paine of a seuere penalty, for feare that the Enemie should make any desperate attempt or sally which as
yet they neuer attempted. The French King hath sent diuerse companies of Foote, and troopes of Horse into the Iland of Oleron, but by GODS assistance and the complying of our in∣dustry, we shall keepe them from suc∣couring the beseeged. The end of the Journall.
