24809 99846870 11865
The XII Aeneids of Virgil, the most renowned Laureat-Prince of Latine-Poets; Translated into English deca-syllables, By Iohn Vicars. 1632. Are to be sold by Ni: Alsop at the Angell in Popes head ally.
TO THE RIGHT HONOU∣rable and thrice noble, the Lord George, the Lord Ion, and the Lord Bernhard Stewart, sonnes of the gracious and illustrious princesse Katharine, Dutches of Lenox, Iohn Vicars wisheth all increase of true noblenesse and honour here, and eternall happinesse in heaven hereafter. RIGHT HONOURABLE, THe boundlesse bond of sincere gratitude, For savours multitude and magnitude, My self and second doth so firmly tie To you and your illustrious familie, That what I can or do, or speak, or write, Comes short of your demerits infinite. Yet that I be not totally ingrate, At least (at last) in minde to memorate, What I and mine to you and yours do owe, I long have longed, fitly forth to show. And thus at length my hopes being happifi'de, And kinde occasion caught, as soon as spi'de; My humble hand and thankfull heart accords, To you thrice noble and illustrious Lords, To dedicate and consecate, as due, My self, my service, and my all to you. In this translated prince of poets rare, Disrobed thus from's Latine vestures faire, Into a home-spun english gray-coat plain, Its vitall warmth, not worth, safe to maintain:
Yet in its self a princely poem sweet, For your true princely patronage most meet; Not for my manner, but its matters sake, Wherein much various pleasure you may take. Fully and fairely to affect and fit Your pregnant promising, faire sprouting wit, And cedar-like high growing noblenesse, In learning, vertue, grace and godlinesse. O as your yeares, so may these in you flourish, Your king t' affect, the church and state to nourish! So faire paire-royall of young nobles high, Here to adorn, in heaven to glorifie. Thus from his heart (best part) most humbly prayes He, who in him and his doth rest alwayes Your honours most humbly devoted servant, JOHN VICARS.
TO THE COURTEOUS not curious Reader. THou hast here (courteous and candide reader) the weak issue of my many nocturnall travells; a work fitter (I confesse) for one of Apolloes elder bay-browed sonnes: But thus you see, it hath plesed Vrania to make choice of one of the meanest and most unworthie younger brethren of Parnassus. In which my (though poore, yet painfull) travell, I must intreat thee, kinde reader, to take notice of two things touching the translation; namely the motives thereunto, and the manner thereof. The motives, whereby I first un∣dertook this task, were first, the instigation and initement thereunto, by a no lesse learned then loving friend. Secondly and especially the common good and publick utility, which I hoped might accrew to young schollars and grammaticall Tyroes. The manner, wherein I have aimed at these three things, Perspicuity of the matter, fidelity to the authour, and facility or smoothnes to recreate thee my reader. Now if any criticall or curious wit tax me with a Frastrà fit per plura, &c. and blame my not curious confinement to my authour line for line; I answer, (and I hope this answer will satisfie the moderate and ingenuous) that though peradventure I could (as in my Babels Balme I have done throughout that whole translation) yet in regard of the loftie majestie and gravity of this my authours stile, I would not adventure so to pinch in his spirits, as to make him seem to walk like a livelesse ghost. But thinking on that of Horace, Brevis esse laboro, obscuus fio, I presumed (yet still having an eye to the genuine sense as I was able) to expatiate with poeticall liberty, where necessiy of matter and phrase enforced. And so much the rather, being backt with so good a warrant therein, as the authority and direction of the foresaid auhour in his Arte Poetica: whose words runne thus; Publica materies privati juris erit, i Nec circa vilem patulúmque moraberis orbem; Nec verbum verbo curabis reddere fidus Interpres, &c. If then (gentle and ingenuous reader) these my poore endeavours may ei∣ther prodesse, or delectare▪ then give God the praise, his due deser, my true dsire▪ But if thou canst find neither of either, but canst finde in thy heart to finde fault withall, then I say to thee, or rather Martiall in his Epigrams for me, Carpere vel noli noa, vel ede tua. Thine JOHN VICARS.
❧ THE LIFE OF VIRGIL, written by Tiberius Claudius Donatus, as Servius in his commentarie upon Virgil relates it. PUblius Virgilius Maro was (as antiquity testifies) born of mean parentage, especially on the fathers side, whose name was Maro, who, as some say, was by pro∣fession a potter. He was (as many suppose) at first, servant to a certain wandring wizard or southsayer; and by his sedulous industrie in ruick affaires, husbandrie, keeping of cattll, working in woods, and tending of bees, raised up his ma∣srs small means to a good estate, and afterwards marrying his daugh∣ter, became his masters sonne in law. He was born the 15. day of October in a countrey village called Andes, neare Mantua, in the yeare of the consulship of Cneins Pompey the great, and Marcus Licinius Crastus, and was a citizen of Mantua, as saith Servius Murus Honoratus, a learned Grammarian. His mther Maa, being great with childe of him, dreamed that she was delivered of a  branch, which being set in the ground, grew up immediately into a great spreading tree, fairely fraught with variety of fruit and frgrant flowers: And the next day she and her husband walking in∣to the next neighbouring countrey, she stepping aside, was delivered of him in a ditch. It is said, that being born, he never cried; but was of such a sweet and amiable countenance, that he gave great hope of a mst flourishing future condition. His infancie, till the age of about seven yeares, was spent in Cremona. From Cremna he went into Millain, and from thnce shortly after passed over into Naples, where with great indurie and utilitie studying the Greek and Latine ongues, he addicted himself principally and most seriously to the stu∣die of Physick, and of the Mathematicks, and in both exceeded all others of his time, insomuch that he planted himself in Rome; where falling into fmiliaritie and acquaintance with the master of the horse to Augustus the emperour, he cured many of his horses disea∣ses, who rewarded him with a dayly allowance of bread, as to the rest of the officers of his stable.
Afterward the Cretonians presented to the emperour a gallant colt, which in the opinion of all the beholders was like to prove a nagge of rare spirit and pace: but when Virgil saw him, he told the master of the horse that it was bred of a very faultie mare, and would prove neither quick spirited nor nimble paced: which after∣ward fell out so indeed. Which the master of the horse relating to Augustus, he commanded that Virgils allowance of bread should be dayly doubled. Again, certain hounds being sent as a present out of Spain to the emperour, Virgil told both of what kinde they came, and how they would prove dogs of admirable use and swiftnes: which also being made known to Augustus Cesar, he again gave order that his allowance of bread should be re-doubled. Shortly after, Augustus growing doubtfull of himself whether Octavis were his father, and perswaded that Virgil, who so well knew the nature and kinde of hounds and horses, could also resolve this doubt, separating all other companie, and retiring into a private room, he taks Vir∣gil with him, and askes him alone, whether he knew who he was, and what power h had to make men honourable and happie. Where∣unto he answered, I know that thou art Augustus Cesar, and that thou hast power almost equall to the immortall Gods, and that thou cant happifie whomsoever thou pleasest. Surely, said Cesar, I have now a minde and purpose to make thee most happie and honourable, if thu canst give a full answer to my request unto thee. Sir, sayes Virgil, I wish it were in my power to tell you the certainty of whatsoever your majesty could demaund of me. Some men (sayes Ce∣sar) think that Octavius was my father, others think some body else: Whereunto Virgill with a smile, thus replied, Sacred sir, if I may freely and withut offence answer your majesties demaund, I am perswaded I shall easily resolve this doubt. Cesar hereupon assured him with an oath, that whatsoever he spake he would not take it amisse, and that withall, he would not leave him unrewarded. Now then Virgil fixing his eyes seriously on the emperours face, said; It is easie in other creatures (by rules of philosophie and the mathematicks) to discern the qualities and conditions of their prog∣itours and parents, but in man it is not so easie a matter; yet as touch∣ing your sacred majestie, I am able to make some probable conjecture what profession your father was of. Hereat Cesar began to liten the more attentively what he would say. Then sayes Virgil; So farre forth as I can collect and understand, thou wast a bakers sonne. The empe∣rour hereat amazed, presently began to wonder within himself how
that could be. But Virgil instantly interrupting his thoughts, said; Hearken sir, I beseech you, on what ground I build this my opinion: Your majestie knows, that when I formerly foretold diverse things which could not be seen into nor foreshown, but by men of great lear∣ning and understanding, that your majestie the great monarch of the world again and again rewarded me with a lot and allowance of bread, which surely is the propertie eithr of a baker or a bakers sonne. This facetious conceit pleased the emperour wondrous well: who thereupon said unto him, Thou shalt now be no more rewarded by a baker, but by a munificet and magnificent king: and ever after the emperour highly esteemed him and commended him to Pollio. He was big of body, and tall of stature, of a shallow complexion, hard favoured and of a sickly constitution, a moderate drinker, and of a spare diet. It is reported that he was given to the filthie and lufull love of boyes, but the honestest sort of men of his dayes were perswa∣ded he loved them no otherwise then as Socrates loved Alcibiades, and Plato his schollars: and that above all other he loved Cebetes and Alexander best, whom in the second Eclog of hi Bucoiicks he termed Alexis, whom Asinius Pollio gave unto him. And it is reported also that he kept Plotia Hieria, but Asconius Pedianus affirms the contrarie from Virgils own srious dniall thereof. In all other demeanours of his life he was both in speech and conversa∣tion so honest and upright, that throughout all Naples he was called Virginity; and if at any time (as that was but seldome) he walked the streets of Rome, and observed himself to be noted and followed by any in the streets, he would retire himself immediately into the next house he came unto. He in his moderation of riches refused the goods and estate of a banished man, which Augustus Cesar profered to him; having a good competent estate of his own, and a house in Rome in the Exsquiliae neare Mecoenas his gardens. He used much, and most frequently, to retire himself into Campania and Sicil. In any request to Cesar he never had deniall. He was annually helpfull to his parents in great measure, who died when he was himself grown to a ripe age; his father being blinde ere he died. His two brethren Silo and Flaccus being dead, he bewailed under the name of Da∣phnis. Melissus reports, that he was slow of tongue and sparing of speech, as if he hadbeen a very ignorant and illiterate man. When he firt addicted himself to poetry, he made this distich upon one Ba∣lista a master of fence, who fr report of robberies was covered with a heap of stones:
Monte sub hoc lapidum tegitur Balista sepultus; Nocte, die tutum carpe, viator, iter. This heap of ones, Balista's corps interre; Then night or day passe safely, passenger. After this he wrote Moretum, Priapus, Epigrams, Dirae, Cu∣lex, and other Poems, when he was but about sixteen yeares of age. He wrote Aetna also: and after that, writing of Romane af∣fairs, yet misliking the sharpnes and rigidnes of the matter and names thereof, he fell upon his Bucolicks: especially to celebrate the names of Asinius Pollio, Alphenus Varius, and Cornelius Gallus his great friends. Afterward he wrote his Georgiks in honour of Me∣coenas. Last of all, he tok these Aeneïds in hand, a work of a vari∣ous and multifarious argument, and in a manner, resembling both Homers works. When he wrote the Georgicks, it is reported, that every morning he was accustomed to write a certain number of ver∣ses, which he would all the day long overlook and so abridge, and re∣fine them into a fw, that it might not be unfitly said, that he brought forth verses ursino more, as the female-bere doth her young, bringing them into due form by licking. This his work called the Aeneïds, he wrote first in twelve books in prose (as some think) and afterward digested it into verse; and some think, that had he lived he would have enlarged it unto twentie foure books, even unto the time of Augustus. Of his Aeneïds (scarcely yet begun) there was spread such a fame, that Sextus Propertius doubted not thus to write of them; Cedite Romani scriptores, cedite Graii; Nesciò quid majus nascitur Iliade. Give place, give place Greeks, Romane writers wise; Some worthir work then Ilias now doth rise. When Augustus Cesar, who by chance was absent from the Can∣tabrick expedition, requested Virgil, partly by intreating, partly by merrily mnacing letters, to send him, if it were but a very little, or (as his own words are) some one perfect sentence of his Aeneids, he refused it: but afterward, when it was fully perfected, he recited to him three of the books, namely the second, the fourth, and the sixth, and this especially for Octavia's sake, who being there present at the re∣citall of those verses of her sonne, Tu Marcellus eris &c. Thou shalt Marcellus be, it is reported she fell into a swound with sorrow: and being with much adoe recovered, she commanded that Virgil
should have to the value of five pound for every verse. He read his book also to diverse, but not often, and those places onely, whereof he made any scruple or doubt; thereby to heare mens judgements of them. He fully perused his Bucolicks and Georgicks: and when he was about 52 yeares old, with a desire to finish his Aeneids, he resolved to have withdrawn himself into Greece and Asia, and there to have spent three whole yeares in correctig and perusing it, that he might bestow the remainder of his dayes onely in the studie of Philoso∣pie. But being in his journey, at Athens he met Augustus return∣ing out of the East-countreys towards Rome; whereupon he purposed to have returned home again with the emperour: but travelling to Megara, a town neare Athens, onely to see it, he took a sicknesse there, which with continuall travell by sea so increased till he came to Brundusium, that within few dayes after he there died, on the 22 of Septemb. Cneius Plautius and Quin∣tus Lucretus being Consuls. When he felt himself sick unto the death, he called often and very earnestly for his desk, that he might burn his Aeneids: which being denyed him, he notwithstanding▪ order∣ed by his last will and testament, that it should be burned, as a work both faultie and imperfct. But Tucca and Varrus told him that Augustus would by no means suffer it. Whereupon he bequeathed that work and his other writings to Varius and Tucca, upon this condition, that they should set forth nothing but that which he would have set forth; and such verses as were imperfect, to leave so still. He desired that his bones should be translated to Naples, where he had lived long and merrily; which at Cesars command was accor∣dingly performed, and he buried in the way to Puteoli. Vpon his tombe, at the second stone was engraven this distick, made by himself, Mantua me genuit, Calabri repuêre; tenet nunc Parthenope; Cecini pascua, rura, duces. Mantua gave life, Calabria death, a grave Parthenop: I sang fields, lands, captains brave. Plotius Tucca after Virgils decease (as he had requested) at Ce∣sars command, corrected the Aeneids; for no man judged them to be burnt; whereof these verses of Suspitius the Carthaginian, are extant. Jusserat haec rapidis aboleri carmina flammis Virgilius, Phrygium quae cecinere ducem. Tucca vetat, Variusque simul: tu maxime Caesar, Non sinis; & Latiae consulis historiae. Infelix gemino cecidit propè Pergamos igni,
Et penè est alio Troia cremata rogo. Virgil these verses vow'd to fires fierce flame, Which sweetly sang the Trojan princes fame. But Tucca, Varius, Cesar, to his glorie, The fact forbad, preserv'd th'Italian stori. Vnhappie Troy, twice (neare) with fire consum'd; Neare Pergame perisht had, to fire twice doom'd. There are extant also many other and most excellent verses written by Augustus Cesar himself, to the same effect: which begin thus; Ergóne supremis potuit vox improba verbis Tam dirum mandare nefas? Ergò ibit in ignes, Magnáque doctiloqui morietur Musa Maronis? And must so vile a voice of last-will stand, And such a foule nefarious fact command? Must Maro's marrow of pure poëtrie, Most learned lines in furious fire so frie? And a little after; Sed legum servanda fides; suprema voluntas Quod mand at fieríque jubet, parere necesse est. Frangatur potiùs legum veneranda potestas, Quàm tot congestos noctésque diésque labores Hauserit una dies, &c. But law, and what last-will doth will, must stand, And that must be obey'd which laws command: Nay rather we'le infringe laws awfull power, Then such rare nights and dayes toiles in one houre Suffer to suffer shipwrack, &c. Pedianus reporteth, that Virgil was very courteous, and a lover of all good and learned men, and so unspotted with the foot of envie, that if he heard or saw any thing wittily or worthily said or done by any others, he as much rejoyced therein, as if it had been his own: That he used not to dispraise any man, but ever praised good men; and that he was so courteous and affable, that there was none (except he were most rudely and barbarously inclined) but both much favoured, and most ardently affected him. He seemed utterly unglued from strict meum and tum; for his librarie stood still as open to the schollars, as to himself, and oftentimes used that old adage of Euripides, , Communia amicorum esse omnia, All things are common among friends. And therefore he so lovingly respected all the poëts of his time, that when they were emulously and enviously
jarring and snarling at oe another, yet they all with an unanime consent ever loved and reverenced him, as Tucca, Varius, Horace, Gallus, and Propertius. He so much despised glorie, that when some had ascribed and arro∣gated to themselves certain of his verses, and were therefore had in the greater reputation for their learning, he not onely shewed him∣self no way discontented therewith, but much rejoyced at it. For when once he made a couple of vrses containing the praise and pro∣speritie of Cesars emperie, which were set upon the gates without name, (these were the verses; Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane, Divisum imperium cum Iove Caesar habet. All night it rains, next morn sights glut the eye: Cesar with Jove hath equall emperie.) Cesar having made enquirie for the authour of them, yet could not know him, at length Bathyllus a certain plain poët (when none would father them) took upon him to be the authour of them; and was therefore both well rewarded and much respected by Cesar. But Virgil not taking this very well, set upon the same gates, this begin∣ing of his conceit fouretimes, Sic vos, non vobis, which Augustus Cesar would have had made up: but when many had fruitlessely e∣deavoured it, Virgil himself repyed thus to the foresaid distich: Hos ego versiculos feci, tulit alter honores. Sic vos non vobis nidificatis, aves: Sic vos non vobis vellera fertis, oves: Sic vos non vobis mellificatis, apes: Sic vos non vobis fertis aratra, boves. These verses I did make, Others my palm did take. So you not for you, birds, build nests in trees: So you not for you, sheep, wooll-fleeces beare: So you not for you gather honey, bees: So you not for you, beeves, plow-yokes do weare. This thus known, Bathyllus was for a long time an occasion of jest and laughter to the whole citie of Rome. Once Virgil having in his hand the works of Ennius, and being demanded by one, what he did with them, he answered, that he gathered gold out of Ennius his dung: for that author expressed worthy sentences and matter under homely words and phrases. Augustus Cesar asking him how a citie might be best governed, he answered, If the wisest men were placed
at the helm of government, and good men authorized to over-rule the bad; and that thus men of desert might have their due honour, and men of mean condition not oppressed wth injurie. Mecoenas also asking him what it is that procures least loathsomenesse and tedious∣nesse to a man, he answered, The multitude and similitude of all things offends every mans appetite and affection, except of understand∣ing. Mecoenas asked him again, how a man might conserve from ruine a faire and flourishing estate? To whom Virgil answered, If he excell others as much in liberalitie and goodnesse, as in riches and in honour. He was accustomed to say, that none of all the vertues was more laudable or more profitable for a man then patience; and that no estate or fortune could be so terrible or untoothsome, but that a wise man by discreet sufferance might overcome it. Which he excel∣ently urgeth in the fifth of his Aeneïds, thus; Nate Dea, quà fata trahunt, retrahúntque, sequamur; Quicquid erit, superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est. Fair Goddesse sonne, let's follow fates where sere; Worst state or fate by bearing let's o'rebeare. There are many other worthy and memorable things written by this authour, of this our poet, and his other excellent works; which, partly to avoid prolixitie, partly also as not being peculiarly pertinent to this work, I have of purpose pretermitted, and referre the reader, for farther satisfaction (if he require it) to Donatus himself in Ser∣vius his Commentarie upon that our Prince of Poëts, Virgil.
TO MY GOOD COUSEN Mr IOHN VICARS. GOod cousen, as farre forth as my other serious studies would give leave, I have read your Virgils Aeneïds translated into english de∣casyllables. Wherein (that I may be just, and give you your due) I know not whether you have performed better the part of a good poët or of a good interpreter. In my judgement, I will speak it without feare or flatterie (quorum causas procùl habeo) your great pains in transplanting this worthiest of latine poets, into a mellow & neat english soile (a thing not done before) deserveth great applause and good acceptance of all scholars, both such as are under the ferula in Gram∣mar schools, and such as have their brows bedect with laurell in the Universities. If I were of a perfect wit, or a poët but of an inferiour alloy, I would have sent you some verses as an encomiastick: but I must not mount above my sphere, nor step beyond my last. Invida me spatiis natura coercuit arctis, Ingenii vires exiguásque dedit. Nature, a shallow wit in narrow brains That pent, forbids me all poëtick strains. And therefore in plain prose I bid you heartily well to fare, and shall ever rest Your assured loving cousen Thomas Vicars. B.D. Ox.
TO HIS WORTHY FRIEND Mr IOHN VICARS. WHy dost thou (Maro) doom unto the fire Those loftie raptures, which all times admire, Hugging thy genius? Ah, unhappie verse! Must thou needs burn? No; Caesar doth re∣verse That fatall verdict; fitter farre to be In this, thy sire, than who gave life to thee. Let reverend sway and awfull majestie Of laws, before those high-flown poems die, Cries great Augustus: So, who ever reads Thy lines (thou best interpreter) must needs Cry, Live for ever such smooth strains as make The world to doubt, whether fam'd Maro spake The Brittish or the Romane language, best: How-ere, in one, then; now in both he's blest. Who scans, shall freely tell, Rome owes not more To his, then fairest Albion to thy store. Idem ad eundem. The soule (Pythagoras did teach) doth go From body unto body; and if so, The paradox may passe. Who reads will sweare The Romane Maro's soule inspired were Into thy breast; so smooth and sweet thy strains, So high thy language, full of sweat thy pains. Thomas Drant, M. A. Ca.
TO THE LEARNED TRANS∣latour of VIRGILS AENEIDS. LOftie was Maroes muse, feather'd his pen, Which rais'd so high the acts of Gods & men. Yet that but hover'd on the Romane sphere: Thine soares, as chanting, in the Brittish aire. The storie great, in both the lustre cleare. There shines the sunne, but the reflection here. What dayes were those, when Attick streams did swell Higher at Rome, then at the Thespian well? What dayes, said I? why 'twas Augustus reigne, When arts and arms advanc'd in equall train: When fate was acting fame: and then 'twas meet That such a poët such a prince should greet. But change the times: Is not the state as free? Doth art or nature faint in pedegree? No, pearch Romes eagles now, the quills are gone From them to us, and so the conquest won. Tongues have their severall orbs; that spangles bright, Whose flame is native, not a borrowed light. So spangled Homers, Maroes so: so thine With rayes embellisht splendid and divine. The author's crown'd before with Romane bayes, Then rob not the translatour of his praise. A matchlesse piece of such exact a frame Will envy hush, and criticisme shame. On then, if poëtrie pythagorize, Virgil in Vicars sacred breast survives. W. Sq.
THE ARGUMENT of the first Book. A man for valour, vertue, rare, Aeneas, prest with woe and care, By angry Iuno's unjust spight, To Italie taking his flight Through rocky rough Sicilian seas, At last in Libya found great ease. Where wandring with Achates kinde, By mothers guide themselves they finde I' th' kingdome of Elisa queen. Then closed in a cloud unseen, Aeneas to the citie bound, There his lost ships and fellows found. Whom Dido kindely entertains, And of Troyes wrack to tell constrains. I Who on slender oat-pipes once did sing My songs, and leaving leavy woods did bring Each neighbouring field to yeeld obedient gains (A countrey welcome-work) to greedy swains: But now I sing fierce warres, and that brave knight Who forc'd from Troy, came first by fatall might To Latium and Lavine, tost to and fro By angry Gods, with lands and seas much woe, And jangling Iuno's old remembred frown, Much warre-woe felt he ere he built his town, Or into Italie his Gods could bring, Whence Albane peeres, and royall Rome did spring.
Shew me, my Muse, why angry destinie, Or why the queen of Gods implacably Should force this pious prince such straits to see, Such woes to feel: Can Gods thus angry be? There is an ancient town, Carthage by name, By Tyrians built, and o're against the same Stands Italie, and Tybers mouth most wide, For wealth and feats of arms of peerelesse pride: Which onely Iuno held then all more deare, Even before Samo's self. Her armour here, Here was her chariot: This the imperiall throne (If fates were pleas'd) she mindes, maintains alone. O but she heard a Trojan plant would spring, Which once t'her Tyrian towres would ruine bring: That hence a potent people would arise, By Libya's losse: so pleas'd the destinies. She fearing this, and mindefull of th' old broile, Whereby for her deare Greeks she Troy did spoile: Nor had she yet quite quencht old angers flame, Forgot fierce griefs: to fresh remembrance came, Her beautie scorn'd, by Paris judgement base; That hatefull stock stole Ganymeds great grace: For these, all these, great Iuno all-displeas'd, The Trojans poore by tossing waves diseas'd, (Of Greeks and fierce Achilles the remains) Enforced farre from her Italian planes, Long times through seas by fates they driven were: So hard it was Romes empire up to reare. Scarce had they cheerly from faire Sicils fight Hoist sails, and plowd the foamy waves outright, When Iuno, stuft with ancient imbred ire, Sayes thus; Must I vanquisht vail my desire?
Can I not keep Troyes king from Italy? Cause fates forbid: Could Pallas potently Fire all the Grecian fleet, the Greeks all drown For one mans fault, even Ajax mad love known? Ioves nimble lightning she from heaven soon darted, The waves wound up, the ships disperst and parted: And him himself, heart wounded, spuing fire, With whirlewindes dasht on rocks she made expire: But I the queen of Gods, sister and wife To mighty Iove, have many yeares had strife With one poore nation: who'le henceforth adore Great Iunoes Godhead, or her aid implore? This Goddesse thus pumps forth her fierie spite, And to Aeolia swiftly takes her flight To Winde-land, full of furious Southern blasts: Where Aeolus their king most fiercely casts The blustring winds and tempests turbulent, Into vast caves, as slaves in prison pent. They rumbling make huge noise i'th' hollow pits, Where Aeolus enthron'd with scepter sits, And tames their tumults, over-rules their rage, Which if he should not powerfully asswage, Swiftly they'd sweep both heaven, earth, seas, and all, And whisk them through the aire without recall. But mighty Iove kept them in dungeons black, (This fearing) and main mounts laid on their back: Gave them a king, who being charg'd, should see To curb or loose the reins, by firm decree. To whom now gentle Iuno humbly said; Great Aeolus, (for so great Iove thee made, Potent to still the waves, to stirre the winde) On Tyrrhean seas do sail my foes unkinde,
Troy into Italie (in hopes) transporting, Their petty conquered Gods with them consorting. Strike strength into thy windes, their ships all scatter, Or drown, or on rocks, sands, their bodies batter. Foureteen faire lovely lively Nymphs I have, Of whom the rarest for her beautie brave, My Deïopeia, thy faire bride shall be, And in firm wedlock wedded unto thee, In lew of all thy love, eternally: Making thee ire of sweet posteritie. To whom thus Aeolus; Great queen, but say: For what you bid I'm bound straight to obey. By you I have this kingdome, whatsoe're, By you my scepter and Ioves favour deare I do enjoy, and with the Gods do feast, O're windes and storms by you's my power increast. This was no sooner said, but straight he stroke His speare into th' hills side; forth, forth with broke Huge blustring windes, as all in uproare rais'd, Through that small postern, making earth amaz'd. Then nestling on the sea, they rouse the waves Quite topsie turvie, East, South-east, outbraves: Yea, stormie Africk puffs upon the ocean, Making flouds flow to shore with strange commotion. Hence follow, straight, mens shreeks, and creaks of cable, Storm clouds from Trojans sight; day-light disable Claps up the sunne: black night the sea hugs o're, And all the heavens sound with Ioves thunder roare: With thick quick lightning flashes th' aire's repleat, And all things present death to th' Trojans threat. Forthwith Aeneas joynts with chilling feare Benum'd, he sighs, and's hands to heaven doth reare,
Venting these sad events; Blest, oh thrice blest Were they, whom 'fore friends face, home death gave rest. O Greeks great Diomedes, tell me why, Why by thy hands in Troyes camps died not I? Where by Achilles blade Sarpedon stout, And our warre-wondrous Hector with death fought. Where swift Simois did ingurgitate Helms, shields, and valiant corps inanimae. Whiles thus he spake, a whistling Nr hern puff Whiffs up the waves, gives his sails such a cuff, As brake their wingy oares, turn'd the foredeck, And layes the ships broad side to th' bllows check. Then follows, flows, a mountanous burst wave, These, turret like, on flouds tops station have; Those, 'twixt two gaping seas seem sunk to th'ground, Whom boyling, fomie, frothy flouds surround. A Southern blast three 'gainst hard high rocks mall'd, (Rocks which i'th' deep Italians Altars call'd; Huge swell'd up heaps amidst the sea:) and three East winde on shallows cast (wofull to see) And dasht on foards, engulft in thick quicksands: One which Orntes held, and Lycian bands, Was sorely shaken by a furious wave, Even in his sight, which the ship-master drave Headlong o're board: The ship it self at last, Thrice whirling round, was on a whirlepool cast, And so devour'd: Men, riches, writings, arms, Were here and there seen floating (helples harms) Above the waves, Ilion's and stout Achates, Brave barks, and that of Abas, old Alethes: All these the storm had torn; all leakt full sore, And at the leak suckt dangerous draughts in store.
Neptune meanwhile sees the seas huge commotion, Foule winter weather overspread his ocean, Waves upside down o'return'd: highly offended, With a calm countenance the main ascended: Looking about, sees all Aeneas fleet Disperst, his Trojans nought but wave-woes meet, Heavens hot combustion: Iunoes rage and guile Not being to her brother hid the while: East and West windes to him he call'd, and said; Proud windes, hath your high stock so stout you made? Thus heaven and earth without me to molest? To dare, my streams with such fierce flouds t'infest? Whom I: but first 'tis best the storm to stay: Then with unpattern'd plagues your pride I'le pay. Be packing quick, and tell your king from me, The three-tooth'd scepter, and seas soveraigntie, Are mine, not his: let him his hard rocks hold, Your dens, puft windes: let Aeolus be bold In that his craggy court to rule and reigne, His windes in that close prison to contain. This said, he swiftly swag'd the swelling streams, Dispell'd the cloddy clouds, clear'd Sols bright beams. Cymoth and Triton strenuously do strive The ships securely from hard rocks to drive. Neptune's self nimbly with his trident mace, Helps from the sands and seas all feares to chase, And o're the seas surface his chariot glides. And like as when sedition rudely rides Amongst th' ignoble madhead vulgar hindes, Then sticks and stones flie thick; wrath weapons findes: But if some grave great man they haply spie, Straight they stand husht, listning attentively:
Whose words their wills reform, their rage appease: So at great Neptunes sight all sea-storms cease: And being ceast, in's chariot cheerefully He turns his steeds, gives reins, to heaven doth hie. The tired Trojans now seek the next strand, And soon arrived on faire Libya's land. There is a place in a long creek, where th' ile, By cast-up banks doth a safe haven compile, Broke from the main, whence doth the stream divide Into safe creeks: here, there huge rocks reside: Two chiefly, whose high tops seem heaven to threat, Under whose hieght the sea makes still retreat. A shade there is with beauteous boughs o're head, Made by a well-grown wood, with leaves outspread: Under the hanging boughs a rocky cave, Wherein fresh waters were, and seats most brave, Of art-like stone, the wood-nymphs habitation; Where yet no fangy anchor made ship-station. Hither Aeneas seven of's barks had brought Of all his fleet; and now to shore (long sought, And by his Trojans ardently desired) They came, and rest their faint limbes quite sea-tired. And first Achates from a flint strikes fire, Leaves were for tinder; and, more strength t'acquire, Drie fuell added, kindles to a blaze. Then, hungrie, baking instruments they raise, And fit their sea-harm'd corn and balace grain To grinde and bake, their lost strength to regain. Meanewhile Aeneas an high clift ascended, And the vast sea in's sight farre comprehended, To see if he could spie Antheus stout, Or Trojan galleys weather-driven about,
Capys or Caicus flags. No ship he ey'd, But three tall stragling stags on shore he spide: The whole herd following fed upon the strand. Here he stood still, wih bow and shafts in's hand, Which his most kinde Achates for him held: And first their high-horn'd leaders soon he fell'd: Then all the rest o' th' horned troop he forced With his sharp shafts into thick woods; where coursed, He left not off till (shooting) he had got Seven stately stags, to his seven ships t'allot. To th' haven he hastes, them 'mongst his mates imparted, And wine, which kinde Acestes, when they parted From Sicils shore, most generous, frank and free In hogs-heads laded gave, divided he; And with these words their drooping hearts doth cheare; O mates, (for yet past-perills fresh appeare) O partners, in farre worse perplexities, God will at last end these our miseries. You Scylla's rage, rock-roaring dreads have past, You have Charybdis gulf escapt; at last Recall your courage, and let go faint feare, A time may come these things your thoughts may cheare. By divers dangers, various hard events, To Italie we sail; where sweet contents Fates will afford us: there Troyes throne we'le build. Hold out, with these hopes let your hearts be fill'd. Thus he with words: with cares his soule's deprest, Hope sat on's face, but grief his heart possest. They then to their good cheere themselves addresse; Some flay the skins, some do the umbles dresse; Some cut it into joynts, some the meat spit, Some set on pots, some make great fires for it:
Then on the grasse set down, they cheerly eat, And with old wine, fat ven'son are repleat. All hunger stancht, the tables ta'ne away, Long talk began of their lost friends decay: All anxious stood, betwixt much hope and feare, Whether fallen by fate, or yet alive they were, Or that the invocated Gods would heare. But good Aeneas chiefly did lament His brave Orontes fatall hard event, Valiant Amycus, and Cloanthus high, Lycus and Gyan, slain by destinie. And now it was that Iove from starrie skie Sail-bearing seas, neare neighbouring lands did eye, The ports and people all abroad commixt, On Libya's realm from heaven his sight had fixt. And as he thus did muse on mens affaires, Venus, wth eyes of teares, heart full of cares, Sayes to him, O great king of Gods and men, Whose datelesse laws, and lightnings hamper them, What so foule fact hath mine Aeneas wrought? What my poore Trojans to such ruine brought? From all the world for Italie thus driven. Surely from hence a promise great was given, That once times revolution forth should bring A Romane branch from Teucers stemme to spring, Which should be conquering Lords of sea and land: And why, great sire, does not this sentence stand? With these faire hopes Troyes hardest haps I staid, And with these fates I crossing fates repaid: But still their former turmoils them distresse: Great king, when wilt thou their great toiles redresse? Antenor could escape Greeks thickest strength, And piercing through Illyria, safe at length
Passe through Liburnia, and Timavus swift: Whence nine great streams issuing with headlong drift, And from the mount with mightie din descending, Make a burst sea, the banks and fields transcending. Yet he strong Padua built, and planted all His Trojans, and did them by's owne name call. In's temples thus advancing Troyes brave arms, In peace his people settled free from harms. But we thine ofspring, plac'd by thee in heaven, Our ships (most wofully) lost, from us driven For ones displeasure, are betray'd to wrack, And farre from Italy are forced back. Is this the palm, the prize of pietie? Are we thus rais'd to regall dignitie? On whom great Iove casting a courteous smile, With lovely looks, which heaven, earth reconcile, Kissing his daughter kindely, thus he said; Sweet Cytherea, cease to be afraid: The fates are firmly thine, and thou shalt see Thy promis'd Latine-cities built to be, Thy great Aeneas lifted to the skies: Nothing shall revocate these destinies. He (for since this thee grieves, I'le tell thee all, And our old hid fate-records will recall.) Shall wage fierce warres, th' Italians shall subdue, Build them strong towns, and make them statutes new, Untill Sol thrice the globe hath circled round, And three years king of Laties he be crown'd. But his Ascnius young, Ilus nam'd▪ (For Ilus 'twas, whiles th' Ilian state stood fram'd) Full thirtie yeares shall reigne, and from Lavine Transferre the throne, and Alba's strength combine.
Here shall great Hectors race to rule be seen Three hundred yeares: till Ilia priestly queen, With childe by Mars, two at a birth shall bring. Whence wolf-nurst Romulus shall reigne as king, Build martiall towns, and Romanes call by's name: Whose state no date, whose strength no time shall tame: A boundlesse empire I them give: Beside, Fierce Iuno, who molests the whole world wide, Shall reconciled be, and with me nourish The Romane gowned Lords o're all to flourish. Thus we decree, yea in times due processe Tro's sonnes Achilles race shall much distresse, To bondage brought, and conquer'd Greece suppresse. Then shall great Caesar spring from Troyes high race, Whose throne the seas, whose fame shall heaven embrace, Iulius so called from Iülus grave, Whom crown'd with Eastern spoils, thou glad shalt have In heaven, who shall with votes be invocated. Fierce warre shall then on earth be moderated. Pure Faith and Pietie, Remus and's brother Shall reigne, give laws, & warres rage smoothly smother, With bolts and barres lockt fast in Ianus gates, Base civil broiles chain'd in resistlesse straits: And shackled there with hundred fettering gyves Sits bound, with bloody mouth frets, fumes, and strives. This said, he sends from heaven swift Mercurie, To ope the earth and Carthage courteously To Trojan guests, le Dido of their cae Ignorant, should them from her confines chase: Through th'aire he winged glides, o're Carthage hovers, Gives Libyans tender hearts, and there discovers Great Ioves command: Chiefly the queen exprest
To th' Trojans her benigne and bounteous breast. But good Aeneas, full of thoughts by night, Goes forth next morn as soon as day grew light, To search new corners, see what shores he found, Who dwelt there (for 'twas all rude untill'd ground) Or men, or beasts; and to his mates made known What he found out. His ships tied safe; each one Under a concave rock, tall trees, did hide, With mighty boughs: Achates by his side, A brandisht lance in's hands with strong steel lin'de. Whom's mother Venus met i'th' wood most kinde, With Spartane virgins arms, coat, count'nance-grace: Or like horse-tiring Harpalace of Thrace, Or like swift Hebrus in its nimblest flight: For on her shoulders hung she (huntresse right) A comely bow, her haire dangling i'th' winde, Knees bare, breasts ope, her coat tuckt up behinde. And first she sayes; Sirs, saw ye, shew me, pray, Any of my sisters wandring by this way? Arm'd with their quivers, clad with leopards hide, The foaming boare with loud noise to outstride. Thus Venus: and thus Venus sonne, Faire dame, None of thy sisters by us this way came, Or hard, or seen. O whom may I thee deem? For by thy voice and face I thee esteem No mortall: but a Goddesse sure thou art: Ioves sister, or some nymph? O let thy heart Pitie our piteous toils; shew us, we pray, Under what clime, and in what parts we stray: (Of place and persons ignorant we be, By windes and waves forc'd hither as you see) Thine altars shall with offrings loaded be.
Then Venus; Sure such grace for me's too great, Our Tyrian damsels weare their quivers neat, High on their legs, they purple buskins lace. The Punick realm, Tyrians, Agenors place, Are these: but Libyan bounds, a warlike nation, Whereof Tyres Dido hath due domination, Fleeing her brother: long's the injurie, Long the discourse: but of the heads briefly. Her sponse Sichoeus was most rich in ground, To whom, poore soule, her love did much abound; To whom she soon a virgin pure was married: But (as his right) Tyres crown her brother carried, Pygmalion base, in ill surpassing all, 'Twixt whom great wrath and discontent did fall: Whence blinde with love of gold, he impiously Supine Sichaeus made 'fore th'altar die, Carelesse of's sisters love, this fact long hid: With base faire shews, and much false hope he fed Her love-sick heart: Till in her sleep by night Her deare unburied sponses gastly sprite To her appear'd, shew'd his thin death-pale face, Sword-pierced corps, the altars foule disgrace, And all his houses hid-ills known did make: Wisht her to take swift flight, her land forsake: Of unknown earth, hid treasures he her told, Way-helping wealth, much silver and old gold. Dido herewith provokt, for flight and friends Makes way: And all whom hate o'th' tyrants ends, Or savish feare kept down, combin'd, and preyd On ships found readie, where their wealth they laid, And fled with what Pygmalion hop'd to have: A lady foremost in this fact so brave.
Hither they came, where now strong towns thou seest, And Carthage kingdome new, now faire increast, And, whence 'twas first nam'd, Byrsa's well bought ground, So much as one bulls hide could circle round. But who are ye? whence came ye? whither bent? To whom he first a deep fetcht sigh did vent From's heart, then forc'd these words; O Goddesse faire, If I should all from first to last declare, And thou hadst time to heae our toils related, Ere I could end, day would be terminated. We from old Troy (if ere of Troy th' hast heard) Upon these Libyan shores by tempests rear'd, Through rigid seas are here arriv'd: And I, Whose fame transcends the skies for pietie, Am good Aenes: in my ships I have My countrey Gods, whom I from foes did save. I of Ioves race, Latie my land would finde, With twentie ships Troyes shores I left behinde, A Goddesse mother guide, following my fate, Scarce seven ships left from weaher-torn estae. I a poore pilgrim range through Libyan woods, From Europe, Asia forc'd. These plaintive flouds Venus here stops, and midst his moan sayes thus, Who ere thou art (for sure most gracious Thou art to th' Gods, who thus art come to Tyre) Go on, and for the queens faire court enquire: For all thy fleet and followers most kinde, I thee assure, ail safe with prosperous winde, Unlesse my heaven-aught angurie me blinde. Behold welve swans flu'ring their wngs with joy, Escapt from th' eagles swping claw annoy, I'th' open aire pursu'd, now downward bent,
Landed, or landing with a joynt consent. And as they (safe) sport with spread silver wing, And circular assembled swan-songs sing: Even so thy ships, and thy associates brave, With full sail neare, or now the haven have; Go on then, as the path leads, take thy way. This said, she turn'd, her roseall necks bright ray Glistred, sweet sents from her Ambrosian haire Distill'd, her robe hung down her feet most faire, And by her gate she shew'd a Goddesse right. He with these words follows his mothers flight. (Now known) Oh why dost thou thy sonne delude With oft false shapes? why might we not include Kinde hand in hand? and words for words have chang'd? Thus he her blam'd, thus to the town he rang'd. But Venus with a mist these trav'lers clad, And in a coat-like cloud o'respread them, glad That none might see them, urt them, force them stay, Or ask the reason why they went that way. Herself to Paphos flies, glad to revise Her mansions, temples, where, at sacrifice An hundred altars smoak with frankincense, And fragrant smell with garlands excellence. They the meanwhile presented paths pursu'd, And now they clim'd a hill, which over-view'd Most of the town, towres, turrets multitude. Aeneas wonders at the fabrick faire, Once cottages; the gaes, states, streetwayes rare. The Tyrians busie some thick walls to make, To raise strong forts, stones up in heaps to rake, To dig enclosures, house foundations fit, Magistrate making laws in counsel it.
Some shippy havens contrive, some raise faire frames, And rock hewen pillars, for theatrick games, Like busie-buzing bees in flowery May, Working most nimbly in a sun-shine day; When they thick swarms put out, with honey sweet, Their waxen combes to fill and furnish meet: Unburthning loaded bees, combining strong, To drive out drowsie droans, their hives which wrong. Hot grows their waxie work, sweet grow the smells Of their mellifluous odoriferous cells. Oh, sayes Aeneas, men most fortunate, Whose walls thus rise, whose town so full of state! Thus (strange to tell) cloath'd with the cloud he enters, And all unseen, midst the thick rout adventers. I'th' heart o'th' town was a faire shady grove, To which place first, windes, waves the Tyrians drove; And driven, set a signe by Iuno shown A horse-head found i'th' ground; they should be known A potent people, a most warlike nation, There therefore unto Iuno's adoration, Sidonian Dido rais'd a temple faire, Garnisht with gifts, and riches wondrous rare, Sacred to Iuno, with brasse steps ascending, Brasse-joynted beams, brasse doores on hinge depending. Here first i'th' wood new matter tempered grief, Here first Aeneas hop'd for hearts relief, And better learn'd to trust afflictions frown; For as he view'd the temple up and down, Finding the queen minding this cities state, Which curious Artists did delineate, He wonders; most, to see his Trojan storie, Their warres and woes, spread with world-wondrous glorie,
Atrides, Priam, and unkinde Achilles. He weeping staid, and said, See, kinde Achates, What place, what parts abound not with our woes? Behold king Priams pay; his praise here grows, These are materiall teares, crosses come neare. Cease feares: for from these palms doth hope appeare. Thus sayes he, and him gluts with pictures vain, Sighs deep; and flouds of teares his cheeks do stain. For here he saw how 'bout the walls of Troy, Brave Hector did fierce Greeks affright, annoy: There, how Achilles Trojans did destroy. Hard by he weeping, knew white Rhesus tent, Which soon i'th' night betraid by hard event, Cruell Tydides with much bloud did spoile, And his fierce horses forc'd to's camp recoile, Before they graz'd on Troyes unhappy grasse, Or Xanthus streams to taste cold safely passe. Young Troilus flying there, whose sword him fail'd, Unluckie lad, unequally assail'd By Achilles, soon shov'd out of's chariots chaire, Yet held the rulelesse reins: his comely haire And deadly wounded corps drag'd on the ground, And after him his speare he drailing found. Then how Troyes dames, with haire about their eares, With vailed heads, eyes full of brinish teares, Beating their breasts, to Pallas temple went: Who frowningly to th' ground her fixt eyes bent. How Hectors corps thrice 'bout Troyes walls were drag'd▪ And by Achilles sold for gold, upbag'd. Heart-breaking sighs he fetcht, to see the spoiles, The current chariots, and friends deadly foiles, And how king Priam pray'd with weak-rais'd hands:
Yea he himself saw, 'midst the Grecian bands, The Indians troops, and Memnons black aray, How that Virago, brave Penthesil'a Led her Amazones arm'd with moon-like shields, And bravely fighting in Troyes Martiall fields, Her breast laid ope, bound with a golden belt; Proud foes the blows of this fierce female felt. Whiles these rare objects Troyes Aeneas ey'd, VVith serious sight of them even stupifi'd, Unto this temple faire queen Dido came, Tended with many a stately youthfull dame, Most like divine Diana and her train, On Cynthus hills, or on Eurota's plain. About whom thousand Faries faire do cluster, About her neck a quiver; whose bright luster And stately pace all her Nymphs farre exceeds, And in Latona's heart prompt pleasure breeds. Thus lovely lively Dido seem'd to be 'Midst all intent her throne stablisht to see. Then (guarded) she, just at the Goddesse gate Sate down, high seated in a chaire of state. VVhere she made laws, and labours did requite, Allotting all, by lots or laws, their right: VVhen suddenly Aeneas saw a throng Approach to him, which was Cloanthus strong, Sergest, Anthea, and the Trojans all, VVhom raging seas forc'd on strange shores to fall. Amaz'd he stood, astonisht with him were Achates and the rest, with joy and feare, Longing for sweet reciprocall embraces, But, a hid hap, this from their heart first chases. They coucht it, and cloth'd in a concave cloud,
What fate their friends, what haven their ships did shroud, How they came thither then expostulating, They some selected, who themselves prostrating, Came to the temple pardon there to crave; Where entred, they to speak full freedom have. Then fluent faire Ilioneus sweetly said, Great queen, whom Iove this cities foundresse made, Whose justice proudest people makes afraid; We, weather-tyr'd, poore Trojans thee desire To spare our ships from fierce nought-sparing fire: Pity a pious race, propitious be To our affaires. For we are all most free From least intent to rob or spoile thy land, Or on faire Libya's Gods to lay foule hand. Poore captives cannot harbour hopes so high. But there's a place, which Greece call'd anciently Hesperia, ancient, powerfull, plenteous, known: Where the Oenotrians dwelt: by fame now shown, Italia nam'd, from Italus renown'd. Thither we all have our intentions bound. VVhen straight stormie Orion tympanizing, And surly Southern fierce blasts tyrannizing, Brought us upon black seas, seas overflown, Drave us on rocks unpassable, unknown: Hither we few have swumme. But what be ye? What rude conditions on this soile see we? To be debarred harbour on your land; From setting foot on shore warres countermand. If mortall men and earthly arms ye sleight, Yet feare the Gods, mindefull of wrong and right. Aeneas was our king, more just then he, More pious, potent prince there could not be:
Whom if the fates preserve, if yet alive, If gaping grave him not of life deprive, We feare not, nor need'st thou thy love repent, Primely exprest: In Sicils continent Are Trojans and Troyes arms, Acestes great, A Trojan born. Let us (we thee intreat) Our weather-beaten barks to harbour bring, Repaire our oares, fit masts i'th' woody spring; That so we lively may to Latium sail, Our king, companions, safe, if fates don't fail. But if they do, and thee, great prince of Troy, Libyan seas hold, withhold our hoped joy Of young Iülus: let's at least regain Faire Sicils shores, where king Acest doth reigne, From whom we hither came. Thus Ilion said, And all the Trojans humming, reverence made. Then Dido with grave count'nance briefly spake, And said; Brave sirs, false feares, vain cares forsake: Novell necessitie of our late reigne Doth us to this strict watch and ward constrain. Who knows not Troy, and brave Aeneas race? The men, their might, and dire warre-wracked case? Our Punick hearts are not so dead, so dull, Nor from our parts doth Sol his steeds so pull; But that ye may Hesperia faire enjoy, Timanus, or Sicilian plains employ, And go to king Acestes at your pleasure: I'le safely free you, furnish you with treasure. Or if you will in our dominions bide, Our citie's yours, our havens your ships may hide: Trojans and Tyrians I'le alike embrace. And oh that king Aeneas, whom storms chase,
Were present! Sure I'le send to search each shore, And Libya's utmost confines to explore, To see if haply in strange town he stray, Or in some uncouth woods have lost his way. Aeneas and Achates hearts reviv'd With these sweet words, to break the cloud long striv'd: And first Achates to Aeneas said; Great heaven-born prince, what thoughts thy minde in∣vade? All things are safe, our ships and mates all found. One onely's lost, whom we our selves saw drown'd: All things thy mothers words firm ratifie. Scarce spake he thus, when into th' open skie The cloathing cloud brake, and dissolved straight. When faire Aeneas in illustrious state Did shine, and shew like Phoebe in face and feature, His mother making him a matchlesse creature, For gracefull haire, and youthfull azure eyes, For count'nance sweet, which beautie happifies: Like damsels hands with ivorie braclets graced, Or sparkling stones with gold plates round embraced. Thus then, unthought on, quick to th' queen he spake; See here I stand, for whom such care you take, Trojan Aeneas, freed from Libyan floud. O thou, who onely Troyes true friend hast stood, Tendring our toiles, us, lands, seas, Greeks-remain, Drawn drie with woes, most poore, dost entertain In towns and tenements: O how shall we Repay condigne deserved thanks to thee? Faire queen, we cannot; nor hath Troyes spoil'd nation Ought left wherewith to make gratification. The Gods (if good men they a jot regard, If justice, or good conscience they reward)
Reward you worthily. What Halcyon dayes? What honoured stemmes so rare a branch could raise? Whiles flouds shall flow, while Sol gives mount-beams bright, While spangling stars in skie give twinkling light; Thy noble name and fame I'le glorious make In all parts, as I passe. As thus he spake, Aeneas in's right hand Achates took, With's left Serest, Gyan, the rest he shook. Dido at first astonisht with the states Of such brave men, thus them exhilarates: What churlish chance (faire Goddesse sonne) what might Hath thee on barbarous banks forc'd in such plight? Art thou Aeneas, whom Anchises old On Venus got, by Phrygian Simois cold? How Teucer came to Sidon now I minde, Forc'd from his state, hoping good help to finde, To be by Belus repossest of's crown, My father Belus then with high renown Warring on wealthie Cyprus, wonne the same, And from that time I knew Troyes fate and fame, Thy great renown, thy Grecian princes high, And how Troyes foe Troyes fame did magnifie, Wishing himself sprung from Troyes progenie. Go on therefore, faire Sirs, inhabit here; For I have not of such like woes been cleare: But forc'd by fate am setled in this place. Thus knowing wo, I pity a wofull case. This she recounts: and to her princely court Aeneas brings, and then she doth resort To th' temples sacrifice, sending by scores Twentie fat ox, an hundred rough hair'd boares, An hundred ews and lambes, to th' ships to's mates,
God-pleasing gifts, heaven-cheering delicates. But th' inner rooms with princely pomp were drest, And with a bounteous banquet love exprest, Rich hangings of most rare wrought tapestry, Cupboards of massy plate, where curiously Were graven the famous facts, continued storie Of potent peeres, and of her nations glorie. Aeneas (for paternall love now may No longer linger) swiftly sent away Achates to Ascanius, to the shore, To shew these things, and bring him them before. All fathers joy in's gemme Ascanius lay, And bad him bring Troyes rich sav'd garments gay: A costly coat embroidered thick with gold, A mantle wrought with flowres rich to behold, Faire Helens vestments which from Greece she brought, When Troy, and unchaste nuptialls there she sought: Her mother Leda's gorgeous gifts they were. Beside, the scepter which Ilion faire, King Priams eldest daughter us'd to hold, A neck-pearle bracelet, massie crown of gold. Achates, this rich present to present, Skips to the ships with joy and high content. But Venus new inventions, new plots findes: Her Cupids count'nance first to change she mindes, And him for young Ascanius to bring in, The love-sick queen with gifts to love to winne. For why? the Tyrians double tongues she fear'd, Their hollow hearts, and Iuno's wrath uprear'd. These nightly thoughts she thinks. Her winged childe Cupid she therefore calls, with terms most milde, And sayes, Sweet sonne, my sole, my soveraigne might,
Ioves darling deare, who thunder-claps dost sleight, To thee I flie, seeking thy sacred aid. Thou seest, my sonne, thy Trojan brother made The scorn of seas and shores, by them still chaste Through Iunoes wrath, which thou condoled hast. Him Dido has, and holds with speeches faire, Yet I, lest Carthage courtesies ensnare, Much feare: In active times delayes are vain, I therefore plot how first by some slie train To catch the queen, with love-flames her to heat, Lest Iuno change her love, which now seems great: Thus with me mine Aeneas still t'affect. Which how to do observe, I'le thee direct. The Princely boy, my joy, mine onely care, By's fathers will for Carthage doth prepare; Carrying rich gifts preserv'd from flames and flouds Of Troy. Him fast asleep in Cythers woods I'le hide, or on fierce Ida's holy hll; That none preview, and so prevent our skill. Assume his shape but for one onely night, And the childs childish face in's fathers sight; That when the joyfull queen shall thee embrace, And at her princely bounteous banquet place, Hugging thee in her arms, give kisses sweet; Loves poys'nous potion, hid-fire, her may greet. This love-lad straight his mothers minde obeyes, Goes like Iülus, wings away he layes. But Venus laid Ascanius fast asleep, And in her bosome tend'red did him keep, Laid him in Ida's grove, on shadie bed, With fragrant thyme and Marjoram o'respread. And now goes Cupid to discharge his charge,
Led by Achates, with his gifts most large, And princely presents. And now come to court, The queen on carpets rich in regall port Sate in the midst of her magnifique state. Next grave Aeneas, then conglomerate The Trojan troops, on purple carpets spread: Water for hands, faire towells, salt and bread, The servants brought. Fiftie faire maids beside Tended within, whose care was to provide And dresse the meat, and fires on altars make: An hundred damsells more, and men care take To set the banquet, and to see cups fill'd, And troops of Tyrians, as the queen had will'd, Sate on th'embroidred beds, wondring to see Aeneas gifts, Iülus raritie, His God-like shining face, words quaintly coyn'd, His coat and cov'ring richly wrought and lin'd. Chiefly Sidonian Didoes minde and sight On nothing else could muse, or take delight, Unsatiate to behold her after-bane, The lovely lad, and gifts which prov'd her pain. He having hung on fathers neck and arms, And fed, yea fill'd him with feign'd loving charms, Runnes to the queen. On whom she clasps her eyes, Clings to him in her heart, sometimes likewise She hugges him in her bosome, ignorant How great a God her Love came to supplant. But he now minding what his mother will'd, Makes her forget her good Sichaeus kill'd Slily and slowly: blows dead coals, fresh burning, Her love-dull'd heart to loves delights returning. Their first feast finisht, tables ta'ne away,
They bring huge bowls and wine-pots garnisht gay. VVith mirth their rooms all ring, and loudly sound, In golden lamps great lights are placed round: VVhich burn so cleare, that light doth night confound. Here the queen caus'd a wine-bowl rich and great Forthwith to be fill'd up with wine compleat. (The same which Belus us'd, and all his race) Then silence made, she said with comely grace; Great Iove, (for thou guest-laws, men say, dost frame) Do thou the day, on which the strangers came, To Tyrians and to Trojans happifie, And blissefull make to our prosperitie. Mirth-making Bacchus help us, Iuno deare, And you my Tyrians strive these guests to cheare. This said, the wine-bowl in her hand she took, Temp'rately toucht it (first) with princely look. VVith checking charge to Bitas she it gave, VVho quickly quaft off the whole cupfull brave Of foamy vvine: after him all the rest. Hairy Iopas also did his best VVith's golden harp to make them musick svveet, As ancient Atlas taught him songs most meet. He sang and plaid Moons monethly vagrant change, The Suns diurnall toiles, mans stock most strange, VVhence birds and beasts, vvhence fire and vvater vvere, How starres do rise and fall, and bright appeare, The stormie seven-stars, double plough-stars bright, VVhy Sol runs Southward in his VVinter flight, And vvhy the Summer makes so short a night. The Tyrians do their joy ingeminate, The Trojans echoing. And the night in prate Poore Dido spends: vvhose love-draughts deep her touch,
Much talk of Priam, and of Hector much She makes: and of Auroras sonnes brave arms, Of Diomedes horse, Achilles harms. Tell me good guest (ayes she) the totall storie, Greeks treason great, which quenched Troyes great glorie: Yea tell us all thy toiles, which (as appeares) Thou hast endur'd by land and sea seven yeares. An end of the first book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the second book. When all were silent, Troyes brave knight Troyes fates, friends, states, doth here recite: The guilefull Greeks, Minerva's gift, La'coons smart, sly Sinons shift, To ope the hollow horses side: I dream of Hectors death discry'd, Troyes fall, king Priams destinie: Aeneas forced thence to flie, With's father on his back he fled, And in his hand Ascanius led, His wife Creüsa following fast, But all in vain, was lost at last. He thus escapt, his fellows findes, Who flock to him with chearefull mindes. ALl silent sate, attentive heed to take. Then grave Aeneas from's high bed thus spake; Great queen, thou bidst me wondrous woes renew, How Greeks Troyes realm and riches overthrew: Which I most wofully distrest did see, And whereof I had share in high degree. O what hard-hearted Greek, Vlysses, could From teares, large flouds of teares his eyes withhold? And now being night, starres summon us to rest. Yet since you so desire to heare exprest
Troyes finall fall, our woes: though extream grief Makes me abhorre those thoughts, yet I'le be brief. The Grecian captains tir'd, retir'd from fight, With many a yeares fierce warre wearied outright, By Pallas art a mount-like horse they built, And with strong wooden ribs his sides they quilt. This fictious vow they leave: so flies the fame. In the huge concave belly of the same, Closely contriv'd, select brave youths they hide, And armed souldiers in its belly bide. In sight of Troy lies Tenedos faire isle, A wealthie place, whiles fates on Troy did smile: Now but a bay, sheep-shelter, unsecure, Here in a wood, retir'd, they hid them sure. We, thinking they were fled, for Greece all bound, And Troy from her late toiles refreshment found, Set ope our gates, let all go in and out, The Greeks forsaken camps to view about. Here Grecian troops, there fierce Achilles might: Here lay their ships, there armies us'd to fight. Some wondred at Minerva's gift accurst, The horses hugenesse: and Thymoetes first Would have it set i'th' citie, plac'd i'th' tower, Whether by fraud or force of fatall power. But Capys, and the part more provident, Wisht that those Grecians grins, gifts fraudulent, Were either sunk i'th' sea, or burnt i'th' fire, Or's hollow belly boar'd, truth to enquire. The commons carried were with crosse desire. La'coon first with troops attended then, Runnes from the tower, fiercely cries out, Poore men, What follie's this? think ye your foes are fled?
Or Grecian gifts want sly Vlysses head? Either this wooden pile doth Grecians hide, Or 'gainst our town some stratagem provide, Or some hid harm: Trojans, trust not these drifts: What e're it is, I feare Greeks bringing gifts. Thus having said, a strong speare with great force He strook into the ribs and side o'th' horse: Which trembling stood, and deeply pierc'd did sound, The hollow vault even groan'd with that great wound. And had the fates been friends, our hearts been wise, The speare had spide out Greeces treacheries: And Troy had stood, and Priams turrets high. But now, behold, Troyes shepherds hastily Brought to the king a young man with great shouts, His hands pinyond behinde, found thereabouts: VVho of set-purpose gave himself to them, Troy to destroy by this sly stratagem; A fellow bold of heart, for all feats fit To work his wiles, or to death to submit. Our Trojan lads do flock about him fast, To see his face, and scoffs at him to cast. Now heare and see Greeks grins, and by this on All other their slie juglings may be known. For as unarm'd 'mongst them he trembling stands, Glancing his eyes upon our Phrygian bands. Alas (sayes he) what seas, what shores me hold? VVhat tends me wretch, but mischiefs manifold? To whom nor Greeks permit poore habitation, And angry Troy in's bloud seeks expiation. VVith which sad sigh our hearts relented straight, Passion supprest, vve vvill'd him to relate Both whence he was, and vvhat strange news he brought:
VVhat hopes he had, being now thus captive caught. He, feare at last forsaken, thus repli'd, Great king, I'le tell thee all, vvhat e're betide: 'Tis true (sayes he) I am a Grecian born: This first: though fortune Sinon made forlorn, Yet fond and faithlesse shall she make me never. If by relation to thine eares came ever The name of Palamedes, of much fame, Against whom guiltlesse, Greeks a snare did frame Of treacherie ('cause he these vvarres forbad) To put to death, for vvhom now dead they're sad: His man and kinsman neare ally'd, am I; And of a childe, through parents povertie, VVaited on him i'th' vvarres; vvhiles in good state The kingdome stood, and he was fortunate. For then vve liv'd in fame and reputation, Till by Vlysses envious emulation, (I speak: but what I knovv) he dead, poore I VVas forc'd to live in obscure miserie, The losse lamenting of my guiltlesse friend. Nor could I, frantick fool, to silence bend, But vovv'd, if fates did me to Greece reduce, I'd be reveng'd on him for this abuse: Hence rose Vlysses envie, hence did spring First harms to me: hence he new crimes did bring Against me, and hence rash reports vvere spread, His guiltie heart rais'd broiles, not quieted, Till I by Calchas. But vvhy stay I you? VVhy things unsavourie do I thus revievv? You have the Greeks all in one condemnation, 'Tis enough you heare, take on me vindication. In this th' Atrides, Ithacus vvould joy
Hereat we ardently our thoughts employ To search the end, ignorant utterly Of so foule facts, Pelasgan policy. Faintly and falsely on he tells his tale. The Greeks (sayes he) from Troy oft sought to sail, Would have reti'rd, ti'rd with that wearie warre. O that they had! But bitter winters barre Debarr'd them, and fierce windes their flight deni'd, But chiefly when that high built horse they spi'd, And thundring skie-noise all the seas o're sounded. T' Apollo's oracle (our thoughts confounded) Eurypylus we sent, quick, to enquire: Who with these words of woe did soon retire; With Iphigenia's bloud, a virgin slain, You Greeks got windes, the Trojan shores t' obtain. With bloud you must obtain safe to depart, A Greek soule sacrific'd. This to the heart Strook the astonisht Greeks: as soon as heard, Through all their joynts was trembling terrour rear'd, To think, whom thus Apollo meant should die. Vlysses then pull'd Calchas forcibly, The southsayer, 'fore the Greeks, bad him disclose Whom 'twas the Gods requir'd: then forthwith rose Much mutt'ring, me to be this mischiefs aime, Some this fear'd-ill to tell me closely came. Calchas beside was silent ten dayes space, And would not shew the man must death embrace. At last Vlysses urging instantly, He purposely burst out, said I must die. All were unanimous, what all did feare, The weight of deadly woe ones back must beare. My dying day drew neare, deaths vestments sable,
My heads death-cof, fatall fruits deplorable, VVere all prepar'd. But I ('tis true) evaded, And death to scape, by night a mud-lake vvaded, And hidden, lay i'th' flags, till they did flee, If haply so. No hope yet left for me My soile to see, children, or parents deare, VVhom thus expos'd to punishment, I feare, For mine escape, guiltlesse to beare my smart. VVherefore by th' Gods, friends t' a truth-venting heart, By faith unfeign'd (if firm faith yet do stay 'Mongst mortall men) I thee submissely pray: Pity my grief so great, so unjust wrong. At these his teares our mercy staid not long, But Priam presently life freely gave him, Unbound his hands, and all offence forgave him: And said, Who e're thou art, (lost Greeks forgo) Thou now art ours: the truth then fairely show. VVhat means this huge horse? who did it invent? VVhat plot? vvhat pious end? vvarre-instrument Is coucht in it? He straight, instructed well VVith Grecian craft and guile his tale to tell, His loos'ned hands to heaven lifts up, and said; I you adjure, you quenchlesse shrine-fires made, Your Godhead great, altars, death-swords, (now fled) You fatall head-bands, vvorn when I seem'd dead: VVitnesse how justly sacred vows I break, How justly hatefull 'gainst my Greeks I speak, Opening their secrets, of all oaths now free. Thou then, faire Troy, keep promis'd faith vvith me; If truths I shew, if love I largely pay. All Greeces hope of warres, good hap still lay On Pallas power: since vvhich Tydides still,
And vile Vlysses, authour of all ill, Assay'd t' assail her temple, thence to take Minerva's image, and did slaughter make Of the towres guard, and desperately stole thence Faire Paas statue, with strange impudence Daring to touch, to take with bloudy hands The Virgin-Goddesses unstain'd headbands: From that time Greeks great hopes 'gan ebbe and end, Their force waxt feeble, Pallas not their friend, No shewing anxious issues by strange sights. Scarce had her statue station, but flash-lights Of glist'ring flames came from her angrie eyes; She swet all o're, and thrice with jumps did rise: (Fearefull to see) and shoke her shield and lance. Calchas quick flight advis'd them to advance: And told them Greece could ne're see Troyes shipwrack▪ Unlesse their Gods, and all else they brought back: Which they with them to sea in barks do beare. And now that they to Greece to sail prepare, To make the Gods their friends, arms, all things fit, Unseen sail back: thus Calchas orders it. Vision-advis'd, they fram'd this fabrication, Pallas t'appease, and make due expiation. And of so high, so huge skie-magnitude, Calchas contriv'd it with oak-fortitude: That through Troyes walls and gates it might not go, Left men their ancient superstition show. For if your hands should Pallas presents spoile, Much mischief (which heaven bring on him the while) Would light on Priam and his Trojan train: But if your helpfull hands do it sustain, And place i'th' town, Troy would all Greece subdue,
And make our children this fierce fate to rue. These Sinons snares, false fetches, perjuries, Troy trusts, being catcht, o'rematcht with false forc'd cries; Whom nor Tydides nor Achilles great, Nor ten yeares warres could tame, nor thousands chear. And, which made more, to make them yet more blinde, A fearefull object troubled their dull minde. La'coon, Neptunes priest, as 'twas the guise, Offring a bull in solemne sacrifice, Behold, two snakes (I tremble to declare) With wondrous wraths from Tenedos repaire, Gliding from silent seas to shore, extending Their speckled breasts, and flamy mains all bending▪ Above the main, their uglie odious tail, And backs with fearefull folds, do wrigling trail. The waves they shove to shore, with foamie dinne, And up the land to crawl and creep begin, Their gogling eyes flashing forth bloud and fire, Their hissing mouthes, sharp tongues do stench expire▪ This sight put us to flight: they joyntly crawl To La'coon, and two of's children small They first affront, and 'bout their bodies wound With clinging clasps and bites, their corps confound. Then him their fierce assailant they assail, With sword in's hand, and o're him they prevail: And twice about his body, twice his neck, They twine and twist and hist, with hideous check, Their scalie corps, long necks, his height excelling. And he with strugling hands stiffly repelling, Pulling their knots, with poys'nous filth besmear'd, Most horrid screeks and cries to th' skies he rear'd▪ Much like an altar bull, beat down, broke out,
To save his neck from th' ax, roares, roaves about. But the serpentine dragons thence did glide To th' temple, and to Pallas palace hide, Under whose feet and shield they lurking bide. New shivering feare our quivering hearts hence caught, For, all La'coon justly punisht thought, Because his speare had pierc'd the sacred oak, And's lance had lanc'd the horse with impious stroke. To fetch the fabrick (therefore) all consent, Into our town, Minerva to content. Then straight we brake the wall, a wide gap made. All with their helping hands bring nimble aid, By's wheely feet and stiffe stuft neck to draw it, And ceast not till o're walls ascent they saw it. The fatall foe-fill'd fabrick thus brought in, About the horse young boyes and girles begin To sing their holy hymnes, to touch the cable Delighted much. Troy (now) the horses stable, I'th' heart o'th' town, to th' town most formidable. (O countrey deare, Gods seat, victorious Troy!) Yet oft it stumbled, hazarded annoy, Entering the porch, arms oft in's paunch were heard; And yet blinde, blockish we were not afear'd, But in the sacred towre the horse thus hous'd. Yet we were by Cassandra's cautions rous'd. Whom we would never trust, by fates decree. Poore we, to whom this must the last day be, With festive flowres and boughs our temple strew. Meanwhile the skie 'gan change, the day withdrew, All darkning night her curtains black did spread, And heaven and earth and Greeks grins covered: Dreadlesse Dardanians silent, soundly slept.
And now the Grecian troops had slily crept Out of their ships from Tenedos, and soon Assisted by the still kind-shining moon, Closely they landed: then their Admirall Hung out a lanthorn-light, and therewithall Sinon, base Sinon sheltred by bad fates, Closely unclasps the wooden-belly gates, Wherein the Greeks lay lockt: this opened Jade Lets out his armed intralls, all's displaid: Tisander, Sthenelus, Vlysses sly, Athamas, Thoas, down by ropes 'gan hie, Ne'ptolemus, Achilles, Mach'on first, Menelaus, and Epeus the accurst Horse-enginer: The citie they surround, And set upon't with sleep and drink all drown'd. The watch they did destroy, set ope the gates, And thus rush in their arm'd confederates. Just now were men in their first dead sleep cast, Gods gratefull gift for mans most sweet repast. And now, behold, me thought in dream I saw Before me Hector weeping; whom foes draw Along in piteous plight, at's chariots tail Besmear'd (as once) with bloud and dust most pale, Under's wound-swelling feet his horse reins trail. Ah how he lookt! how chang'd from that brave Hector, Which wore Achilles spoiles, our States protectour, Or, darting Trojan-flames in Grecian barks! His beard now smear'd, haire glew'd with bloud-wound marks, And skarres seen plain, ta'ne at the siege of Troy. And I, me thought, condoling his annoy, Seem'd him to call, and sadly thus to say; O Dardanes light, O Troyes true staffe and stay,
Why hast thou lingred long? whence, Hector brave, Long lookt for, cam'st thou? that we, wearie, have Thy companie so late, so many slain, The citie spoil'd, the people put to pain? O what dire deed hath soil'd thy lovely cheeks? Why art so wounded? Not a word he speaks, Or stayes a jot, or answers what's desir'd. But when he had a deep fetcht sigh expir'd, Flie, heaven-born prince, he sayes, O flie this flame, Foes have our forts, fall'n flat is Troyes high frame. Our king and state were well, if Troy could stand: And stand it should, had strength been in our hand. But now her Gods and pious rites to thee Troy recommends, let these thy fates mates be, With these seek out those walls and turrets high, Which thou (seas voyage ceas'd) shalt edifie. This said, our countrey Gods, holy headbands, And altar-fire he put into my hands. Meanwhile much woe our town inhabited, And more and more (though trees surrounding hid My fathers house, which stood farre in) yet still Warres rumbling roaring noise did sound most shrill. I startled out of sleep, did soon ascend Our highest turret, listning eares to lend: Even as fierce blasts fling flames, and cornfields burning▪ Or mountain flouds with swift careere o'returning, O'reflow faire meads, o'respread crank corn, plow'd lands▪ Tumble down headlong trees, nought upright stands: Which the poore silly shepherd stupifies, When from's high hill this rumbling stirre he spies. Thus, O even thus truth shown, Greeks craft we knew▪ First Deiphobus faire house they o'rethrew
By flames represselesse; then they set upon His neighbours house, our kinde Vcalegon: Sigaea's shores glistred with fierie blaze. Mens screeks and cries trumpets shrill sound did raise. I raging run to arms; arm'd, rashly fought, Rudely rusht headlong into thickest rout, Ranne to the towre; hurried with wrath and rage, Held it true honour, life in death t'engage. But now, behold, Panthus, fled from Greeks power, Panthus Apollos priest, keeper o'th' tower, Frantickly ranne to sea, to flie the land, Our Gods, their sacred rites, his sonne in's hand: To whom I cry'd, O Panthus, where's warres worst? What towre may taken be? This said, he burst Into deep sighs, and spake thus as he past; Troyes fearfull fate is come, this day's our last: We once were Trojans, once this was faire Troy, And Trojans grace: now angrie Iove our joy Gives to the Greeks: Greeks lord it over us, Out citie fir'd, we most calamitous. The hiddie horse standing within our town, Hath armed men disgorg'd: fire up and down Sinon triumphant throws: some strongly stand To keep our gates wide ope:ne're did our land So many Grecian swarms behold: some guard Our narrow lanes; strong troups keep watch and ward With sharp drawn swords, to th' death to fight most stout; Our guards confus'dly fight, hardly hold out. Thus Panthus: straight my heaven-spurr'd spirit me threw Into the hottest flame, and fight; I view Angry Erinnys, noise, annoise me guide Rhipheus and valiant Iphitus, beside,
My Martiall mates agglomerate to me, Hypanis, Dymas, vvay by moon-light see: Great Mygdons sonne, young Choroebus most stout, VVho in those dayes by chance to Troy came out, Caught with Cassandras captive love: both he And his great Sire brought aid t' us Phrygians free. Unhappy, vvho the counsel vvould not heare Of his Cassandra prophetizing deare. VVhom when I saw boldly to battell bent, I thus bespake; Brave youths of high intent, O, but in vain, if flames of Martiall fire Kindle your courage, honour true t'acquire, Alas our cities fortune here you see: Our Gods, best goods, all quite extinguisht be, VVhich propt our state, a citie burnt you'd save: Let's die, and rush through thickest rank most brave. 'Tis captives comfort no helps hope to have. These vvords the Gallants hearts vvith rage did fire, And straight (as ravening vvolves at night desire, Their whelps being left, their paunch being hungerbit, To range abroad to finde a prey most fit) Through speares and spight of foes, fearelesse to die, VVe passe, and to the midst o'th' citie hie: Black night with sable shades doth us surround. O, vvho that nights great slaughter, vvoes great wound Can explicate? what teares equall those toiles? A town of fame is fal'n, long, rich vvith spoiles, Her streets are strew'd most thick vvith bodies slain, Troyes unreveng'd bloud, temples, all doth stain. Courage in conquered hearts vvas once made known, Now-conquering Greeks vve once had overthrown: But now vvhere e're vve look, vve nought can spie,
But feares and teares, and much mortalitie. Androgeos then, a Grecian captain stout, VVe first affronted, with his Grecian rout; VVho taking us for friends, thus friendly said; Make haste, brave Sirs, vvhat loytring hath you staid? VVhiles others sack and take all-fired Troy, You scarce your ships have left, help to employ. This said, he soon perceiv'd: (for no reply Fitting his minde vvas made) that th' enemie Had close enclos'd him unawares: afraid, VVith heart and heels he made swift retrograde. Like one that unawares teads suddenly On an earth-creeping snake vvhich close did lie 'Mongst pricklie thorns, he quick starts from (in feare) The rage-swoln snake, vvhich his blew neck doth reare. Feare-dampt Androgeos thus flevv from our sight, VVe follovved close, closely maintain'd the fight: On all sides fel'd our foes, strangers to th' place, And fill'd vvith feare: fates did our first facts grace. Choroebus courag'd vvith this good successe, Cries out, Brave mates, let's this faire path-vvay presse, Let's hold fast fortune by her friendly hand. Let's change our shields vvonne from this Grecian band, And vveare their arms: What courage can't, craft may. Slain foes vvill furnish us. This said, straightvvay Androgeos helmet faire, and shield he bare, And a brave Grecian blade by's side he vvare. The like did Dymas, Rhipheus, and the rest. And vvith Greeks spoiles themselves they joyfull drest. Then flew vve 'mongst the Greeks, not by self-guide, And in dark night vve many a skirmish tride, And many a Grecian soule vve sent to hell,
And some to ships and shores we did repell: Some with base feare to th' horrid horse retire, Reclimbe his back, known belly holes t' acquire. But fates displeas'd, alas, there's nothing stable, For now behold Cassandra amiable, A virgin pure, king Priams daughter faire, Drag'd out o'th' temple by her tender haire, Lifting her starrie eyes to heaven in vain, Yea eyes: for her soft hands bands did restrain. This spightfull spectacle Choroebus fierce, Hating to see, with love-rage straight did pierce Into the rout, resolved there to die: After whom we do all most fiercely flie. Here from the temples top by our friends darts We were confounded, suffered sorest smarts, By our chang'd arms, chang'd Grecian shields and shouts, And then the Greeks enrag'd, since from their routs The maid was freed, from all parts hither throng, And fiercely us assail: there Ajax strong, Th' Atridas twain, and Grecian bands among. Like adverse windes burst out with fierce crosse puffs, Eastern with West, West windes with Southern shuffs. Trees therewith tremble, Nereus foamie voice Makes tumbling waves rowl up with roaring noise. So they, and those whom we (by dark night vail'd With shieldie shades) ensnar'd, to death assail'd, And chac'd about the streets, appeare: first finde, Our changed shields and arms, yea then they minde Our different dialects. Straight numbers die: And first Choroebus, by Peneleus high, At th' altar of Pallas omnipotent, Did loose his life: next Rhipheus eminent,
One of the justest and the most upright Of all our Trojan peeres, fell in this fight. So destinie dispos'd: then Dymas di'd, And Hypanis, by friends (as foes) defi'd: Nor thee, good Panthus, could thy pietie, Nor Phoebean function save, but thou must die. I call to witnesse (here) the spirits of mine, And Trojan flames, that I did ne're decline (In their distresse) a Greek, a sword, a shield: But, had fates pleas'd, to death was prest to yeeld, As my Greek-slaying hand and heart did merit: Thence brake out I, and Pelias of stout spirit, And Iphitus with us; Iphitus old, And Plias, perisht by Vlysses bold. Straight friends loud cries did us to court incite, Where we did finde so fierce and furious fight As none had been before, as none had di'd In all the town, but what did there reside. There did we see unmastered Mars rush on, Bloud-glutted Greeks our houses leap upon, And block up fast, and scaling ladders set Against our walls, and scaffolds up to get, By posts and pillars striving to ascend, And with their shields in left hands them defend From darted shafts, their right hands grasp the tops Of highest holds, the Trojans seek strong stops, And from uncovered roofs pull tiles and slates, And, as last helps, hurle them down on their pates, A while to keep off death, which properates. Some guilded beams pluckt up do tumble down, VVhich were forefathers facts of high renown: Some with sharp brandisht blades their houses guard,
And in thick troops keep them with watch and ward: Those regall rooms resolv'd with hand and heart To save, and to tir'd friends best aid impart. There was a wall with privie doores and wayes To passe unseen, which Priam (in the dayes Of Troyes triumphant state) did use to walk, Unhappy now, and for sweet private talk Andromache did use alone to meet Her father in law: and where, with lovely greet, Astyanax her childe his gransire saw. I by this passage did my self withdraw To th' top of an high house; whence, all in vain, The conquered Trojans showred darts amain. A tower we then assail'd, plac'd on a hill, With skie-topt turrets built, with curious skill: Whence totall Troy, Greeks ships and camps we might Prospectively behold: this with warre spight We set upon with swords, and hack in twain The joyn'd crosse beams, and rais'd the ground-pins main From firm foundation, shaking it so sore, As that we forc'd it fall, falling to roare: Whose sudden ruine fiercely ruinated, Huge troops of Greeks about it congregated. But others us assail, nor stones for harms Are spar'd, nor any kinde of deadly arms. Before the porch, even at the doore without, In glistring brazen armour, Pyrrhus stout Insulting stood, a brandisht sword 's hand: Much like a snake, basking on Sunnie land, With poys'nous grasse full fed (late) lurking in The frozen-earth, cold-swoln, now his old skin Stript off, and he thereby made fresh and fine,
His slipperie rowling back breast high doth shine Against the Sunne, with's mouths three-forked tongue. Great Periphas, Antomedon among, Achilles page, horse-rider, present were, And all the lusty Scyrian youths were there. All thick do throng to th' house, and wildefire cast Up to the top. Himself first comes on fast, With a tough two-edg'd tool cuts doores in sunder, And pulls down brazen posts with Martiall thunder. Thus the beams broke, boards cleft, ruptures made bare The rooms within, great halls and parlours faire, Where Priam, and Troyes ancient princes rare Delighted were: all lay to open view, All were display'd. Thence feare and frights ensue, To see arm'd souldiers stand before the doores: Loud screeks and cries, tumultuous uproares Do fill the rooms within, which loudly ring With womens wailings: whose shrill clamours ding The golden starrie skies. The ladies faire, O'reloaded with laments, runne here and there, And clasped posts embrace and kisse in feare. But Pyrrhus vvith paternall power breaks in; Nor walls, nor warders can protection win: His battering ramme breaks open doores and gates, Pushing down pillars, all things devastates. The Greeks do finde, or force their way at will, Kill all they meet, all parts with souldiers fill. The foaming floud, when banks are open brast, O'rerunning obvious mounts, runnes not so fast, VVhen its resistlesse stream the field o'reflows, And swallows sheep and sheep-coats, as it goes. Thus did I Neoptolemus behold
Even drunk with bloud, and both th' Atridas bold Entring the entry, and faire Hecuba Her divers daughters, and king Priam gray, Defile the fires with bloud, once consecrated: His fiftie concubines accommodated With fiftie hopefull sonnes; columnes ore'laid With barbarie gold, with spoiles most specious made, All wofully laid waste; and Greeks do share Amongst themselves what ravening fire did spare. And now perhaps you'l ask how Priam fared, VVhen he beheld his citie so ensnared, His building burnt with fire, houses puld down, And in the midst of's palace foes fierce frown. The good old king his long left-arms resumes, And with age-feeble joynts, sword, shield assumes, Buckles all on, but all in vain, and so His dying self in midst of foes doth throw. I'th' heart of's court, just in the open aire, A mightie altar stood, a bay-tree faire Did by it grow, ancient, and ample spread, VVhose shade the shrine and carv'd Gods covered. Here Hecuba, and all her daughters milde Like doves driven headlong by a tempest wilde All in a heap; in vain the altar hold, And in their arms their helplesse Gods enfold. But when she▪ saw her aged Priam arm'd In youthfull arms, wherewith once foes he charm'd, O wofull, oh unhappie spouse, she said, What mood, what motive dire hath thee aray'd? Nay, forc'd to weare such weapons? why dost flie? Alas, grave sir, there's no necessitie Of such assistance, such a Guardian grave:
Chiefly if here we had my Hector brave. Oh then come neare: this shrine will shield us all, Or else we'le here together dying fall. Thus Hecuba; and to her him she takes, And in a sacred seat to sit she makes Her aged spouse. And now behold we heare, Polites, one of Priams sonnes most deare, Scapt from the slaughter, which fierce Pyrrhus wrought Through hostile fire and sword, some safegard sought, Flying the galleries and emptie places, Searching, sore wounded: whom so Pyrrhus chases, And prosecutes and executes most fierce His rage on him, and now o'reta'ne doth pierce His body with his lance, who new now fled Into his parents presence, fell down dead Before their face; and much bloud spilt, expir'd. Priam hereat, though hedg'd with death, yet fir'd With aged rage, could not abstain, but straight His wraths revenge doth thus evaporate: Ah, but the Gods (if heaven loves holinesse, And hates foule facts) for this thy wickednesse And daring deed, with condigne guerdon quit, And pay thee home with recompence most fit, Who thus hast slain my sonne before my face, And by such death wrought's parents great disgrace, But he did not do thus, whom thou dost lie, And sayest to be thy sire, Achilles high Was no such foe to Priam: but desir'd, Kept faith and promise in that I requir'd Humbly of him, and did restore to me Brave Hectors corps, interred for to be: And me into my state did re-estate.
This said, old Priam did ejaculate A feebly flying dart, which gave a clang, Yet did no hurt, but on his helmet hang. Whereat thus Pyrrhus; I'le thee recompense, And as my messenger dispatch thee hence, To tell my Sire Achilles this sad news, That Neoptolemus, of his issues The bastard was: so let him understand. Die therefore now. And with those words, with's hand He trembling Priam to the altar drew, And did his corps in his sonnes bloud embrew. Hs left hand wrapt up in his locks most gray, His right-hand with a naked sword made way Into his fide, to give his life last passe, Which up to th' hilts in's body sheathed vvas. This was king Priams end, this his hard fate, To live to see Troy fir'd, quite ruinate: Even he, who once was Asia's Keisar great, Mightiest in men, and spacious regall seat: A despicable trunk (now) dead on ground, His head cut off, his carcasse no name found. But I with hideous horrour thus begirt, Amaz'd, my thoughts began straight to revert Upon the visage of my father deare, As I beheld the king massacred here, Just of my fathers age: I thought upon My sweet Creüsa, from whom I was gone; On my forsaken house, and the fear'd fate Of young Iülus. 'bout me I lookt straight, To see what hope of libertie I had. But all had me forsaken, tir'd and sad, Some leaping down, themselves precipitate,
And some themselves in flames do conflagrate. And now I left alone, at last did spie, (Bright fires gave light to me, who wandringly Peep into every nook) I saw, I say, Faire lady Helen, how she closely lay In Vesta's temple, on the sacred staires, Her head and heart full of just feares and cares, Both for the Trojans vvrath, their citie spoil'd, And grudgefull Greeks, their marriage bed defil'd. She being Troyes sole firebrand, fierce flame, At th' altar therefore lay she hid for shame. Revengefull coals hence kindled in my heart, To vindicate my countreys vvofull smart; To pay her for her cursed wickednes: Shall she, said I, to Sparta have regresse In safetie? and her countrey Greece regain? There, as a queen, her triumphs to maintain? Her parents, children, husband, home to see? With Trojan lords and ladies there to be Attended on? shall she old Priam slay? And Troy by furious flames bring to decay? And make our shores so oft sweat streams of bloud? Not so: for though there be no true manhood, Nor glorious conquest in a womans wrack: Yet t' have extinguisht such a deed so black, To take so just revenge, is worthie praise: 'Twill be some ease to quit my countreys blaze, And my friends ashes by revenge to raise. As with mad mood these things I cast in minde, Ready to runne at her, my mother kinde Offred her self to my most joyfull sight, And glistring farre more gloriously by night
Then formerly she did, a Goddesse plain, Such, and so great, as with her heavenly train: And holding me by my right hand, she staid, And with her roseall lips she spake, and said; Deare sonne, what untam'd wrath boiles in thy breast? Why fretst thou? why's no care of us exprest? Wilt thou not first thy feeble father finde, Left in much woe? seek thy Creüsa kinde, And childe Ascanius? vvhom in Grecian rout I found (with wondring) wandring all about: And had not I peculiar care employ'd, Fierce flames and foe-mens swords had them destroy'd. Nor hated Helen, nor your Paris blam'd, Did Troy subvert: but fates with wrath inflam'd. Behold (for I'le all cloudy mists expell, Which dimme thy sight, and make men not see well) Feare not thy parents precepts to obey, Nor from their regulating rules once stray. Here where thou seest broad scattered heaps to lie, And stones by stones remov'd, and up on high A foggy fume to rise, mixed with dust, And Neptune with his trible fork to thrust, And shake the walls, and rouse up the foundation, And utterly subvert the cities station: Here chasing Iuno chiefly guards th' old gates, And, wrathfull, her choice ship-troops animates, And steel-arm'd souldiers to her congregates. Yea see how Pallas on the high towres walks, And with storm-brightnes Gorgons furie stalks: How Greeks great patron strength and spirit infuseth Into their hearts, and all his projects useth, To make the Gods Troyes foes. Therefore depart,
Fly hence deare sonne, cease here thy toiles of heart: I never will be absent from thy side, But safely in thy countrey cause thee 'bide. This said, she quick in nights thick mists was clos'd, The great Gods frowning face being plain disclos'd, And all their furie to poore Troy oppos'd. And now, me thought, I saw all Ilium flame, And quite o'retumbled Nerean Troyes faire frame: Like an old oak upon a mountain high, Which rustick clowns do labour lustily To hack and hew with ax and chisils strong, By frequent blows at last to lay along. The oak makes threatning nods, and tremblingly Doth shake and quake its leafie tops on high, Till chopping vvounds do make it give last crack, Which in its fall doth all about it wrack. Then I retreat, led by my Goddesse guide, And through both foes and flames away I glide: Weapons give way, and flames do back recoile. And now being come into my native soile, Unto my fathers ancient mansion faire, My father (for whom was my speciall care, To carry thence over the mountains high) Loathing to live, Troy lost, doth flat denie To go with me, and exile to endure: And said; O you whose bloud is fresh and pure, Who young and strong can of your selves subsist, Shift you for life, you may flie, if you list. But as for me, if fates would I should live, They (sure) this place would me for safegard give. But 'tis enough, more then enough, I see One ruine, and our citie lost, yet we
Survive: even thus, oh thus my corps laid well, Departing, give it a sad Vale knell, These hands shall finde out death: foes may be kinde, They'le take but spoiles, small losse, no grave to finde: Heaven-hated and earth-loathing fruitlesse me, My yeares till now too long protracted be, Since first the father of Gods, and mans great king, Did on my corps his blasting lightnings fling. Urging these arguments he fixt remains. But we with cheeks all wet, with tearie stains, I with my wife Creüsa and my childe, And our whole houshold with intreats most milde, Pray'd he would not all with himself o'rethrow, But yeeld to forcing fates. Still he said no. Who holding his intentions, sitting still, To arms again I flie with eager will, Willing to die a most perplexed wight. For what advise, what fortune help me might? Thinkst thou, deare father, I'le thee leave and flie? May a fathers tongue vent such indignitie. Iffates conclude, nought shall of Troy be left, And that to min'd Troy of help bereft, Thou art resolv'd thy self and thine to adde, The gate stands ope, death may be quickly had. Pyrrhus with Priams bloud all-soil'd, makes haste The sonnes bloud in his fathers sight to waste, The father at his sacred shrine to slay. For this, deare mother, hast thou been my stay, And refuge from all darts and deadly fire? That I should see i'th' heart and heat of ire, My father, wife, and my Ascanius tender, In one anothers bloud, their lives surrender
By furious foes? Arms, arms, bring arms, deare friends, This last day calls us, conquered▪ to our ends, Shew me the Greeks, set me afresh to fight, We will at least some of our deaths requite. Hereat I buckled on my arms again, And on my left-arm did my shield retain. But to the field I readie now to flie, Behold my deare Creüsa suddenly, Just at the doore about my heels hung fast, And in my presence my Iülus cast; Saying, If thou'lt flie and die, let's die with thee: Or if in arms, lest hope of help there be, Bestow thy strength, first to defend this place: To vvhom else dost thou leave us in this case? To whom thy father, thy Iülus deare? To vvhom me thy late vvife dost thou leave heare? Weeping these vvords, she fills the house with cries: When (strange to tell) there suddenly did rise A hideous chance: for even amongst us all, In my sad fathers sight bright beams did fall Upon the top of young Iülus head, Which lightly licks his locks, and hurtlesse fed, And grew about his brows. VVe much afraid, Frame burning haire to strike the flames, assaid To quench the sacred fire vvith vvater cast: But grave Anchises joyfull, lifts at last His eyes, his hands, and voice to heaven on high, Saying; O great Iove, if prayers do pierce the skie, And move thee ought, regard us in this thing: If pietie to mortalls profit bring, Great father, grant thy favour, stablish right All these so faire predictions, in our sight.
Scarce spake the old man thus, when sudden sound Of ratling vvelcome thunder did rebound; A streaming starre from heaven most nimbly fell, Whose lustrous brightnesse rarely did excell. Which from our houses top we saw to glide, Its shining self in Ida's wood to hide, Pointing our path: whose furrow with long streams, Shone all abroad, with sulfure fuming gleams. My father hence o'recome, the signe respects, Adores the starre, thanks to the Gods directs, Forthwith cuts off delayes, sayes, Here am I, Lead on the way, I'le follow readily. Deare Trojan Gods, my house and grandchilde save: This was your augur, yet you seem to have Some care of Troy. I yeeld, good sonne, with thee To go along. This said, we heare and see Upon our walls a more cleare flashing flame, And scorching heat more neare us rowling came. I therefore said; Deare father, take fast hold About my neck; for I with courage bold, Willingly on my back will beare you hence. How e're things hap, one common exigence, Ones welfare shall be boths: Iülus vve Will take with us, my wife may follow me. And you my servants, mark well what I say: Being out o'th' town, you'le finde a hll i'th' way, And now forsaken Ceres temple old: Whose ground an ancient Cypresse tree doth hold, Many yeares kept for our religions sake, Thither we'le all from all parts us betake. Our Gods and sacred things, father, hold you: But as for me that now this warre eschew,
Still stain'd with hot bloudshed, 'tis impious (sure) Them once to touch, till in some fountain pure I may me lave, and cleansing fit procure. This said, I with a lions skin arayd, Clothes on my neck and shoulders fitly laid, I took my burthen up: my right hand fast My young Iülus gript, and on he past; But not with equall pace to's fathers flight: My wife comes after, forc'd: through darkest night We thus are hurried on: and I, whom late No clouds of flying darts could trepidate, Nor swarmie troops of adverse Greeks could wound, Novv feare each puff of vvinde, each smallest sound. Most for my little mate, grandvveight, thus fear'd, And now to th' citie gate my way thus clear'd, Thinking all safe, I seem'd most suddenly To heare a thick quick noise of feet hard by: And straight my father through a glimmering shade Looking foreright, O sonne, deare sonne, he said, And hast'ly cride; Flie fast, our foes draw nigh, For I their shields and glittering arms do spie. Hereat, I know not what unfriendly fate Made me amaz'd, did me precipitate, Into strange by-wayes, lanes, and lawns untill, Whether by fate fetcht thence she lived still, Wretch that I am, I lost Creüsa kinde; Or whether, being wearie, left behinde, Or having lost her way, I am unsure, But sure no search her sight could reprocure. And e're her lost my mindes reflect respected, To Ceres sacred seat, the place directed, Even to the hill we came, where we all met,
One onely wanted, whose mistake did fret Her mates, her sonne, and me her husband deare. And whom herein did frantick I hold cleare, And not accuse? Or Gods, or men, or what In all Troyes wrack held I more harsh then that? Ascanius, and Anchises my deare sire, Our Trojan troop and Gods, with zeals hot fire, I to my mates commend, and did them hide In a deep vale: my self to th'citie hy'd, Appointed, with my shining shield and arms▪ I now resolv'd to reinforce all harms, The citie thorough to perambulate, My life in dangers to precipitate. And first I mount the walls, and as I past, I pry'd into the cities backwayes, fast, And back return'd: the way I came by night, And into every crook I cast my sight, Horrour my heart, silence my sense amaz'd; Thence to review my house, my thoughts me rais'd, If haply there I gladly might her see: But it I found by Greeks destroy'd to be, And whole possest. For why? devouring fire Blown by fierce windes did to its top aspire, Yea overtopt it, flames flying into th' aire: Hence then to Priams palace I repaire, The towre I did review, which all decaid, With emptie rooms: and by fierce Iunos aid I found Vlysses vile, and Phoenix fell, Guardians thereof; keeping their prey too well: Hither being brought, our Trojans treasures kept (Our temples burnt) from flames, which all quite swept The tables of our Gods, great cups of gold: Our captiv'd royall robes this tower did hold.
These, all these thither brought: and their young boyes And frightfull matrons making wofull noise, In heaps enhedg'd it. And though 'midst my foes, I with my voice adventured to disclose My heavie losse, and through the nightly shade I fill'd the wayes with woes, and swiftly said, Nay cride, Creüsa, O Creüsa deare, Once, twice and thrice (in vain) for she'd not heare. Thus as I ceaselesse, easelesse pri'd about In every nook, furious to finde her out, Me thought the wofull gastly ghost I saw Of my Creüsa neare mine eyes to draw, In bigger shape then wont: I stood agast, My haire did stare: my tongue to's roof stuck fast. And straight she seem'd to say, my plaints to end, What good is got, such fruitlesse pains to spend, Deare Pheere? these things fall out by fates decree: Nor may thy mate Creüsa go with thee: For so great Iove gainsayes: and sayes beside, That thou by sea long banishment must 'bide. And plowing Neptunes waves to Latium glide, And there arive, where Lydian Tybers torrent Through fertile soiles doth passe with facile current. There joyes attend thee, there's a crown, a queen Thy wife to be: then cease this sorrow seen For me thy lost Creüsa thus affected. For I the Grecian dames, all disrespected, Will neither serve nor see in their proud places, But I now go t'enjoy the joyfull graces Of Dardan Ladies, sacred Venus neece. Here now the mother of Gods plants me in peace. O then farewell, my love t'our sonne supply.
This having said, she weeping wofully, And willing to have said much more, departed, And into th'open aire quick from me darted. Thrice in my arms her neck to clasp I tride, And thrice her form from my hands hold did slide, Like a swift winde, or slippery dream by night. Night thus being spent, I went to take a sight Of all my mates: where such a confluence Of followers I found, since I went thence, As made me much admire their multitude Of men and women, youths and vulgars rude, From miserable exile there collected; With goods and good wills freely all affected To follow me wheres'ere by sea or land. And now the tops of Ida's woody strand Bright Lucifer with sweet Aurora's face, Began with dayes faire rayes to guild and grace: The Greeks our blockt up gates and houses held: And we from hope of help being quite expell'd: I therefore, on my back my father ta'ne, Departed thence, the mountains thus to gain. An end of the second book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the third book. Troyes kingdome thus quite ruinated, And they for flight accommodated, Aeneas first ariv'd in Thrace, And built a citie in that place, The death of Polydore him frighted. The kings great harbrous love recited, And Phoebus oracles declar'd, To sail to Creet he's now prepar'd. Where he again new fortunes found, And shipwrack did him sore surround. Whence fled, the Harpyes frights he shows: Helenus left, his fates he knows. He Achemenides befriends, His father dies: his tale so ends. AFter the Gods had ruin'd Asia's state, And Priams throne, unworthie so great hate, Neptunian Troy like blazing brands of fire: We were constrain'd, by signes of fatall ire Exil'd, to wander through strange woods and wayes, And on Antander and Ides banks we raise And build our navie, being all unsure Where fates would force us, where to sit secure. Our men we muster: Summer scarce comen on, My father bad us hoise up sail, be gon. I then my native countreys losse bewail, And planes where Troy late stood. I banisht sail,
With me my sonne, my mates, Gods small and great. Farre off thre lies a spacious Martiall seat, (Thracians it plant and plow) Lycurgus wise Once did it rule; Troyes ancient firm allies. Their Gods as ours, whiles fortune made us rise. Here I ariv'd, here first I built a town In a crosse crook, entering by fatall frown: And from my name, I did it Aeneads name. And to my mother Venus I the same Did dedicate, and offer sacrifice To my kinde Gods, that blest mine enteprize. And Iupiter great king of Gods t' adore, A fat bull I did offer on the shore. By chance hard by a woody hill I spide, Upon whose top white horny rods did bide, And tall thick shady mirtle boughs did grow. Thither to pluck off some of them I go, Our altars with green branches to bedeck: But as I pluckt, a fearefull chance did check My first attempt: for the first branch I tore, There issued thence thick drops of muddy gore, Which stain'd the ground with bloud. This did me fright, And chilling feare shook me in piteous plight. Again another tender sprig I pluck, Longing to know the cause and lurking luck: Straight from the bark more bloudy drops did sprout. Whereat much mov'd, the wood Nymphs (in great doubt) I did adore, and Mars great Thracia's king, To th'omen good, to th' sight delight to bring. Then when a third branch I more strongly tore, And with both knees to th' ground me strugling bore, (Speak may I, or be still?) A grievous groan
From bottome of the pit to heaven up thrown, Seem'd thus to crie. Aeneas, why dost teare Distressed me? my buried body spare, O spare, thy holy hands thus to bestain, For Troy did me thy kinsman know most plain: See how out from this stump doth gush my gore, O flee this barbarous land, this sharking shore. For I am Polydore; who here being slain, My corps a bush of sharp shafts doth remain. My heart was straight with dubious thoughts dejected, Speechlesse, amaz'd, my hair's upright erected. Unhappy Priam (once) this Polydore With store of gold did secretly send o're Unto the king of Thrace for education: Who when he saw Troyes troops in desperation, The citie round besieg'd, our valour vail, Our weal grow weak, our fortune us to fail, Following great Agamemnons conquering arms, He fled from us, burst out into base harms, Poore Polydore he slew, usurpt the gold. O cursed thirst of gain! what, uncontrould, Wilt thou not force mans minde to undergo? But now, feare past, this fatall signe I show To my choice Peeres, but to my father first, Pray'd them to say their mindes, or best, or worst. All were unanimous, 'twas best to flie, To save that hatefull harbour, instantly To sail away. A tombe we therefore made To Polydore, great heaps of earth up laid: About this wofull herse blew clothes were plac'd, With cypresse boughs, and sable garments grac'd: Our Trojan women (as we us'd) stood round,
Their haire about their eares hung all unbound▪ Then on it we warm pales of milk do throw, And bowls of sacred bloud: and e're we go, VVe at his herse do ring his soules sad knell, And with loud cries give him his last farewell. Thence when first fittest serene seas gave way, And gentle fanning blasts made dandling play Upon our sails, our troops the shores do fill. My mates put forth to sea with free good will, And past the port, the lands and towns us leave. Thus sailing, we aloof (at length) perceive I'th' sea a lovely land lie situated, To th' mother of the sea Nymphs dedicated, And to Aegean Neptune: which faire land Stragling abroad, pious Apollos hand Did with restrictive bands and bounds confine, VVith Gyarus and faire Myc combine, And thereby it most strong and stable made, Fearlesse when windes and waves did it invade. Here I ariv'd, here we our wearie state In a most pleasant port did recreate; And comen on shore, adore Apollos town, VVhither to meet us speedily came down King Anius, king and priest to Poebus great, And to those people, he with kinde receipt (His had with headbds and green laell deckt) Anchises his known friend doth much respect. Then hands we shake in lo, and home are had Into their houses▪ where I then ost glad In th'old rock-founded teple made obation Unto Apollo, with this supplication; Grant, Thymbrn Phus, to  Troj tied,
A proper place, an issuing race desired, And setled citie: yet preserve, I pray, Another Troy, the reliques which yet stay Of conquering Greeks, and of Achilles stout. Whom follow we? whither range we about? Where shall we seat our selves? Great father, say, Shew us some signes our anxious mindes to stay. Scarce said I thus, when all seem'd suddenly, The doores and bayes of Phoebus majestie, Yea all the mount about, to move and shake, Apollos private Tripos roares did make. Hereat to earth we prostrate fell, and heard A voice saying thus; Stout Trojans, be not feard: The land whence first ye sprang from ancients race, Shall safely you receive in copious case: Seek your old granmother. For surely there Aeneas house shall spacious empire reare; And all his childrens childrens offspring faire. Thus Phoebus: we with clamours joyfull are, Desirous all to know what towns he meant; Whither he'd call us▪ whither we wandring went. My father then old stories recollecting, Said; Heare brave peeres, your hopes I'm now detecting, Mark then: I'th' midst o'th' sea lies Creet, Ioves nation, There's Id, our countreys cradle of education; Whose large rich realm an hundred towns doth hold: Whence our great Sire king Teucer sprung of old. (If hearesay fail not) He on Rhtans shore Did first arive, a fit seat did explore To plant his throne: as yet no Ilium faire, Nor Pergams pinacles stood beauteou rare, But then low valleys they inhabited.
Hence was wood-haunting mother Cybel bred, Sage Corybantes bels, and Ida's wood: Hence sacred secrets found safe silence good, Goddesse-yokt lions hence their chariots drew. Go on then, and let's passe where Gods us shew, Let's calm the windes, and get to Candies land: The wayes not farre: if Iove do for us stand, Creet shall our fleet receive within three dayes. This said, he sacrific'd to th' Gods due praise, One bull to Neptune, one t' Apollo kinde: To storms a black, a white sheep to Southwinde. There flies a fame, that Idomeneus duke Forc'd from his native state his Creet forsook, That all his lands lay void, to foes a prey. To sea we flie, from Delos part away, Leave green Donysa; Naxon, Bacchus pride, Olearon, white marbly Paron wide, Sea-spreading Cyclads, passe those lands about. With various noise our mariners cries out. My mates me move for Creet, forefathers seat; And as we sail, rough windes our ships do beat; So that at last Candies old coast we held. Where gladsome I, long wisht for town-walls build, And Pergam nam'd: my glad mates Trojans call'd, Wisht them to grace the Gods, see cities wall'd, And houses fram'd: our ships in ports secure, Out youths new wedlock rustick works inure. I laws and lands allot: when suddenly Through corrupt aire a foule mortalitie Did on us seaze: a murrion miserable Our trees and plants did spoile most lamentable, A deadly yeare. For, or men quickly die,
Or sicklie languish in much miserie. The dog-starre burns our barren fields and plants, Denies us grain, complies our pain and vvants. My father hence to Delphos vvills us send, And back by sea Phoebs oracle to tend, Pardon to pray, these toiles and cares to cease, To know their course, and labours longed peace. Novv night vvas come, sweet sleep shut up mens eyes, And now me thought in sleep I saw to rise, Before my face the sacred images Of Trojan Gods, our countrey-Deities, Whom I, from Troyes fierce flames sav'd, brought with me: These by much light I seem'd most plain to see, Like Cynthia faire, vvhen vvindows open be. And thus they seem'd to say, to cheare my heart, VVhat Delian Phoebus means to thee t' impart, Behold by us sent to thee: thus he sings; VVe vvho, Troy burnt, thee and thy armies vvings Have followed, vve who through rough seas have past VVith thee, vvill thee and thine to th' heavens at last Exalt, and give thy citie soveraigntie: Prepare great vvalls for great posteritie. And leave not thy long labours progresse faire▪ Thou must seek other seats: Apollo's care Call'd thee not hither thus to rest at Creet. But there's a place for thee held farre more me. VVhich Greeks Hesperia call, of pristine state, Potent in arms, vvith fertile soiles ornate. Th' Oenotrians dwelt there once, now younger fame Doth it from Italus, Italia name. Here is our proper place, hence Dardan springs: Hence father Iasius, and our chiefest kings.
Rise then, and this, as sure as sweet relation, Shew to thy aged sire with exultation: Seek out faire Corits coasts, Italia's bay: Iove thee denies in Candie longer stay. This voice and vision of the Gods me frights, (Nor was't sound sleep, for I their perfect sights Did plainly know, their faces, haire bound neat I surely saw: whereat a chill could sweat O'respread my limbes) from bed I started straight, To heaven my hands and heart I elevate, And to the Gods give a pure sacrifice: VVhich honour done, I, as they did advise, Unto Anchises all the vision tell. Th' ambiguous branch, and fathers both, full vvell, He straightway knows, and sees his new mistake From places old: and therefore thus he spake; Deare sonne, long seasoned vvith our Trojan toiles, Onely Cassandra told me these turmoiles. That these things now our nations due portend, I right recount, and oft did apprehend, Hesperia spoke of, and faire Italie. But who'd have thought Trojans should e're come nigh Those parts? or who did then Cassandra trust? But to Apollo now submit we must, And follow better fortunes. This thus said, VVe all his words most joyfully obey'd. And parted from this place, few left behinde, Our ships do plow the seas vvith pleasant vvinde. As thus our vvingy sails through vvaves do flie, No land novv seen, all sea, all aire, and skie; Then o're my head a black blevv cloud did stand, Whereby i'th' floud nightstorms seem'd neare at hand.
VVindes quick winde up the waves, huge billows rise, Flouds make our fleet to float: day from our eyes Dark clouds rowl up, wet night takes skie from sight, And from cleft clouds flash out quick lightnings bright. We wander through blinde seas, our course crost quite. Yea Palinurus did himself denie: He could or day or night by heaven discrie, Or know his way i'th' sea. Three dayes together In foggy mists vve stray'd in stormie weather, And three nights never having seen a starre. The fourth day first vve land discri'd afarre, Mountains peept up, and chimney smoak ascended. Our sails we slack, our oares vve close attended: No stay vve make, our shipmen strenuously Slice up the foam, sweep the blew flouds on high. And first Strophadean shores from sea me save, The Greeks these isles Strophades named have, Isles in the great Ionick sea, vvhere dwell Celaeno fierce, and ravenous Harpyes fell: E're since Phinëus house vvas from them shut, And they from their first table-feares vvere put. Then these vvere ne'remore hideous monsters found, Then these the Gods great vvrath did ne're more wound, VVhen rais'd from Stygian pools. Birds of strange shape, Foule fowles vvith virgins faces, mouths which gape, Still hunger-starv'd, vvith most insatiate maws, Which filthily hang loose, hands vvith huge claws. Here now i'th' port vve safely set, behold, VVe saw great droves of lusty fat beefs bold, And flocks of goats feeding, no herdsman by. On vvhom vvith swords vve set, and instantly The Gods, yea Iove himself vve invocate,
Part of our prey with's to participate: Then on the ground, beds spread, we eat our meat. But from the mountains with a bluster great And horrid noise, the Harpyes on us light, And with huge din clap their wings in our sight: Snatch up our meat with filthie fists defilde, And make most odious smells and screekings vvilde. Again, in a remote most private place, Under a rock which shades and boughs did grace, Our table set, on shrines we sacrifice. Again, from hidden holes a crosse way flies Another troublous troop, with hooky claws, To catch the prey, and fill their filthy maws. Then straight to take up arms I charge my mates, And to fierce fight each one accelerates, Against that odious armie; as I bad, Their swords and shields i'th' grasse they hidden had. Thus when to th' shore to us with noise they grew, Misenus from an high hill did them view, And with brasse trumpet sounds th' alarum straight: My mates make head, thick blows reduplicate, Those foule sea-fowls to foile and profligate. But nor their wings nor backs our blows could hurt, For into th' aire they swiftly flie and flurt, Leaving the half-got prey and prints behinde, Of their foule feet. Onely alone I finde, Set on a steepie cliff, Celaeno fierce, Unluckie wizard, who, our hearts to pierce, Brake out into these words; Is't vvarre indeed? Perfidious Trojns, must fierce vvarre proceed For our slain beeves and goats? quite to expell Us harmlesse Hrpyes from our native cell?
Then heare me, and my words imprint in thee: What mightie Iove to Phoeb, Phoeb shewed to me, I chief of furies will reveal to thee: With winde and tide to Italie you go, To Italie (at last) you shall do so: But first, e're you your citie edifie, Fierce famine and our slaughters injurie, Shall cause you quite devoure your store of meat, And bring you to distresse, nought left to eat. This said, away into the woods she flies. Whereat bloud-chilling feare doth us surprise, Our hearts did faint: now not with powers, but prayers We labour to make peace, to cure our cares; Whether bad birds, or sacred fouls they be, And old Anchises, most devoutly he His hands stretcht forth, the great Gods invocates, And to them their due honours dedicates. Great Gods (sayes he) spare threats, avert these ills, Appeased, save good men that do your wills. Then straight he bids us loose the ship from shore, And hale the cables in. The windes up boare Our faire spread sails: and so we cut the seas, And make our way where puffs and pilot please. And first at sea we woodie Zacynth spie, Samey, Dulichium, rockie Nerite high: Ithaca's rocks we passe, Laertes strait, Vlysses native soile we execrate, As we it passe. To stormie Leucas hills We came, and to Apollo's point, vvhich fills Poore shipmens heart with feares. Here vve at last, Tir'd, at a little town ariv'd; and fast, To come to shore, our anchours out we cast.
Thus having found an unexpected land, To Iove vve expiated out of hand, Made vows and sacrifice, and manly sport On Actium shore, us'd in our Trojan court. Our nakd youths suppling their joynts vvith oyle, Our countrey-vvrastling use: o see our toile And danger past, passing so many towns Of adverse Greece, and midst of foe-mens frovvns, This joy'd our hearts. Now a full summer past, By Northern icy blasts flouds frozen fast: On a brasse shield, vvhich on a post I hung, Great Abas famous facts in verse I sung. Saying; Here Aeneas consecrates these arms, Wonne from the conquering Greeks most fierce alarms. Then from these shores to th' oares I bid them flie, And they the seas beat, brush, most Iustily. Soon vve lost sight of high Corcyra's towers, And bare up by Epirus pleasant bowers. VVhere entring Chaons port, our course vve bend, To brave Buthrotums citie to ascend. Here vve rare things of note did understand, Hovv Trojan brave Helenus did command The Grecian towns, vvho Pyrrhus vvife did vved, And vvore his crown, and after married Andromache, both of them Trojans bred. I vvondred, and my heart burnt vvith desire, To greet the man, and of these things t'enquire. So on I past, shores, ships, safe left behinde, When as by chance I saw (vvith mournfull minde) Before the citie in a grove most green, Neare Simois stream, Andromache the queen, Offring sad gifts, an annuall sacrifice,
To Hectors ashes, calling up likewise The ghosts to's tombe, 'bout which green turfs did grow, And two more shrines (her greater grief to show) She consecrated had. When me she saw, And Trojan troops with me neare her to draw, Distracted, straight she seem'd strangely afraid, At this so sudden sight she stood dismaid: All vitall heat her corps did quite forsake. And down she sunk, long first, at last she spake: Is't a true face? bringst thou true news to me? O God desse sonne, liv'st thou? or if thou be Rais'd from the dead, tell me; where's Hector deere? This said, a floud of teares from her appeare, And every place she fills with clamorous woes; Nor scarce could I (briefly) her rage oppose: But mov'd with grief, these abrupt words breath'd out; Indeed I live, through all straits born about. Thou seest a certaintie, then do not doubt. Alas! what chance thee chas'd from such a Pheere, Now resustains? what fate does thee recheare? Great Hectors Deare, art (still) stout Pyrrhus mate? Hereat with hung down head, words temperate, And submisse voice she said, O blest and best Priams faire daughter, happie 'bove the rest, Whom foes did force under Troyes walls to die: For whom no lots were ever cast, to tie Thee to the captive-bed of conquering foe! We, Troy destroy'd, have been tost to and fro Through divers seas, and travelling have tride, In bondage base, th' Achillean youths great pride: Who after lov'd and married Hermion brave, And me his maid to's man Helenus gave.
But then Orestes in fiecie jealousie For his stoln wife vex'd with his villanie, And rous'd with rage, did unawares him catch, And at his fathers tombe, of life dispatch: And by the death of Neoptolemus, Part of the kingdome came to Helenus: Which he from Chaon a brave Trojan state, Did totally Chaonia nominate: And this Troyes towre and Pergams walls erected. But what faire windes, what fates thee thus directed? What God did thee thus to our confines drive? Where's young Ascanius? does the lad yet live? Whom Troy to thee for future hopes did give. Of his lost countrey has the boy a thought? Or have the ancient noble vertues wrought In his young pregnant heart, of's father Aeneas, or of's uncle Hector brave? These words she spake, and speaking wept full sore, Though all in vain; and e're she could give o're, Trojan Helenus from the citie came, Attended with a train of Peeres of fame. His countrey-men he knew, acknowledged, And joyfull, us into his citie led: And as we went, spake much, as much he wept. Thus on to Troy-novant our way we kept, And to his Pergam patterning our great, Where was the drie-brook, Xanthus call'd, whose seat I knew, and hugd the posts of Ianus gate, My Trojans with me do participate In this kinde harb'rous town. The king also In royall rooms did them great kindnes show. In his great hall they drank full bowls of wine,
And with choice cheere, in golden dishes dine. And thus two dayes at least we there did spend, Now faire Southwindes our wingy sails did tend. Then to this kingly prophet humbly I With these beseeches, do my suit apply; Trojan-interpreter of Gods decree, Who Phoebus power, Delphick stools, starres dost see, Who Clarian bayes, birds chirps, swift flights dost know▪ I pray thee, plainly to us all to show, (For all religion hath my course made faire: And all the Gods advise me to prepare For Italie, that promis'd land to gain: Harpyck Celaeno onely seems to feigne New and nefarious frights, and doth us threat With a most foule and fearefull famine great) Shew us, I pray, what dangers first to flie, And how such toiles to vanquish valiantly. Helenus here, first, as he us'd, did slay His heifers, and to th' Gods of peace did pray: Loosning the fillets on his holy head, He by the hand me full of feare and dread, Unto thy temple, great Apollo, brings, And from his sacred mouth the priest thus sings: Great Goddesse sonne, (for'tis a truth most cleare, That thou shalt sail to th' sea by gods most deare: So Iupiter guides fates, so lots do light, So he the wheel of fortune orders right) I in few words 'mongst many things will show How thou through serene seas mayst safely go To Italie: Further to know, unfold, The fatesand Iuno have my tongue controld. First, Italie, which thou think'st neare at hand,
And ignorant, would rest in neighbouring land, Farre off, long wayes, long rigid reaches yet It doth contain: and first thou down must sit, And set thy bending oares smoothly to sail In Sicils seas; and after, with free gale Passe with thy ships through Italies salt seas, And through th' infernall floud, and isle Circes, Before thou canst secure thy citie build: Mark well, for I will thee some tokens yeeld: When carefull thou 'bout Tyberinus shore Hast that still silent stream quite passed o're, Thou on those banks a huge white sow shalt see, With thirtie white young pigges late farrowed be: And on the ground sucking the sows vvhite eats, There is the place for thy faire cities seats. Nor for the foretold famine be afraid, Phoebus vvill help, the fates vvill finde good aid. But see thou shunne these parts, our neighbouring land, Though neare some part of Italie it stand: For there the greedy Greeks all cities hold, There lie in garrison the Locrians bold, There Idomeneus on Salentine plains His Grecian armie musters up, and trains: And there duke Philoctetes safely sleeps, And in Petilias vveak vvalls closely keeps. Besides, the seas safe past, thy ships at rest, Thy altars built on shore, thou readie prest, Then pay thy vovvs, vvith purple-hood thy head See thou adorn, that no disordered Or adverse fact be found, i'th' sacred fire Made to the Gods due praise, t'incensetheir ire, And all molest. This custome thou and thine
Keep firm in sacred rites, at sacred shrine. After, vvhen vvindes to Sicil bring thee neare, And strait Pelorus banks smally appeare, Sail to the left hand sea, the left hand side, Steere, by a long circumference, the tide: Be sure to shunne the right hand sea and shore. These parts (they say) vvere by a tempest sore (Such a strange change makes long antiquitie) And rupture great, long since most vehemently Broke forth; both lands did once together lie: For with great force came a huge inundation, Whose overflowing stream made separation 'Twixt Italie and Sicil, tumbling down With swift represselesse rage each field and town: Yet running with a narrow furious floud, On whose right side pernicious Scylla stood; Implacable Charybdis on the left, The midst whereof so hellishly is cleft, That its deep gaping gulf with treble swallow Sups up huge waves, which broken in do follow: And thrice again disgorgeth them on high, Dashing its wavie vomit up to th' skie. But Scylla lurketh in his covered caves, And to his sharp-tooth'd mouth sucks ships from waves: Upward a man, downward a comely maid, His lower parts like a huge whale are made, All of wolves wombes and Dolphins tails are said To be engendred. But Pachynus point Is farre more safe for thee, at ease t'appoint Thy courses in and out, though farther it winde, Then formidable Scyllas fangs to finde, And rocky roares of his curst curres unkinde.
Beside, if any wit Helenus have, If him least faith or truth Apollo gave; This one thing, and but onely this for all (Deare Goddesse sonne) to thee I motion shall And mention, yea and move most ardently, 'Bove all adore great Iunos deitie: Make vows to Iuno with a willing minde, And overcome with sacrifices kinde That mightie Goddesse. Thus, thou victor may'st, Sicilia left, in Italie be plac'd To Cuma thou being come, and on that shore, Where sacred flouds, Avernus woods do roare; There thou the frantick prophetesse shalt see, Who in her deep steep rock doth prophesie. And all her notes and names in leaves she writes, And what in leaves she written leaves, indites In metre-modules, and locks in her cave, And there untoucht, they lie in order brave. But if, the doore being ope, the winde displace them, And out of doores the whisking puffs do chase them, She never cares to catch them in again, To recollect their strains, or place them plain, Rudely they runne, and Sibyls seat disdain. Nor think it losse of time there to abide, Though thy companions thee to ship may chide, And though to launch out thou have winde at will, Which with most prosperous gales thy sails may fill, Yet prove the prophetesse, her humbly pray Thy fates by word of mouth plain to display, She'le shew thee Latium lads, fierce future broiles, And how thou mayst forsake, or take thy toiles: Thy journeyes joyfull sacred-she will make.
Of these things I'd have thee chief note to take. Go on then, and to th' heavens Troy magnifie By famous facts. This said, most courteously The prophet gave him ivorie gifts, and gold, And made his ship huge massie silver hold: Dodonaean basons, and a coat of arms Richly beset with hooks, to save from harms, And treble-guilt with gold; a helmet faire, With a rich crest, and dangling plume, like haire: The arms of Neoptolemus they were, And to my father he great gifts did beare: He gave us horses, gave us captains there: Gave us new oares, and armour for our men. Achilles my old father bad us then To fit our ships with sails, for windes swift chace: To whom Apollos priest said, with great grace, Anchises, whom faire Venus to embrace With wedlocks royall rites, did kindely 'dain, Whom Gods regard, and twice did safe sustain From Pergams spoile, behold faire Italie, Then sail thou thither with celeritie, And needs thou must from these our parts depart. For very farre remote from whence thou art, Are those Italian plains, by Phoebus shown: Then go (he said) thou who art happie known In a most pious sonne: But why thus still Does my talk stay thee? winde blowing now at will. Andromache likewise at our farewell Most sorrowfull, brought gifts that did excell: Garments with gold embroidered, rich and deep, And a rare Trojan coat, which she did keep, She to Ascanius gave, equall to any,
And rarely woven gifts she gave him many, And said; Take these brave childe, and let them be Pledges of my hands and hearts love to thee, Let them Andromaches, great Hectors mate, Largely extended kindnesse demonstrate: Yea take them as friends gifts in last extent, O thou who onely much dost represent My deare Astyanax! for so had he His eyes, his hands, his countenance like thee; And, had he liv'd, he had been just thine age. Then parting, I with a sad carriage And many teares, said unto these my friends; O happy you, whose toile already ends: Whereas new and alternate fates us call, You sit at ease, no seas to sail at all: You seek no Latian retrograding plains, You Xanthus and Troyes figure safe contains, Which your own fingers fram'd: I trust, more blest, Then e're to be by Greeks again distrest. If ever I faire Tybers flouds and field Do enter, and my nations citie build, And kindred countreys and our neighbouring nations, Epirus and Hesperias combinations In amitie, who both from Dardane came, And both in bloud and fortunes were the same: Then both shall be one Troy in sweet affection, And our posteritie have one protection. By sea we to Ceraunia sail, hard by, Whence by short cut lies way to Italie. Meanwhile the Sunne goes down, shades hide the hills, We on the long'd for land with cheerfull wills Lie down and choose our oares, and scattered wide,
We for our wearie limbes on shore provide: And tired, quickly fell full sound asleep, Nor yet did midnight season from us creep, When Palinurus nimbly rose from rest, To watch the winde; his eare to th' aire most prest, He marks the gliding starres in serene skie, The Plow-starre, Wain, Hyades waterie, Golden Orion, full of tempests great. And finding all to be both faire and neat, From ship-board gives a signe: we change a station, And steere our way with sail-yards elevation. The starres now fled, ruddy Aurora smiles, And we dark hills discry'd some distant miles, And Italie lying low: when first of all Achates Italie aloud did yaull, Our mates do Italie salute with joy. And old Anchises doth himself employ, A bowl of wine brimfull to coronate, And all the Gods divine did invocate. And thus, advanc'd i'th' ship, did impetrate: You Gods of sea and land, who storms do cease, Prosper our journey with all joyes increase. And straight faire blasts do blow, the ports appeare To our approach, and we beheld most cleare Minervas temple in her sacred tower. My mates their ships to shore with all their power Put in, to land, and quick let down their sails, The haven hooks in, by Eastern seas avails, Much like a bow; and rockie banks cast up, The foaming-swelling salt seas waves do sup. The haven lies hid, the rocks, like turrets high, Stretch out two walley-arms, and back doth flie
The temple from the shore. Here did I see (The first omen) foure snow-white steeds to be About the field, and on the grasse to graze. Then grave Anchises thus his minde did blaze; O harbrous land, bringest thou battells great? By these warre-horses thou fierce warre dost threat. And yet these beasts chariots were wont to draw, And in kinde couples bits to champ and chaw. Here's hope of peace, sayes he: then submissely VVe pray to Pallas powerfull deitie, VVho us most glad receiv'd, before whose fires Our heads with hoods we vail, and Trojan tires: Holy Helenus charge we discharge now, Which chiefly he enjoyn'd us, and we bow And sacrifice to Greeces Iuno high. Without delay, our votes paid orderly, We turn about our cover'd crosse yards all, And from Greeks feared towns and fields we fall. And hence we saw Herculean Tarents bay, (If fame be true) 'gainst which in full sight lay Lacinian Iunos temple, Caulons towers, And shipwracking Scylacaeums stormie powers. Then farre from sea, Sicilian Aetnas hill We saw, and heard the seas huge roares most shrill, And battering stones clattering against the clift, And abrupt sounds at shore, waves loudly lift, And sands and seas boyling with furious drift. Here's that Charybdis (sure) Anchises said, Helen these rigid rocks, these clifts displaid. Hence then brave mates (sayes he) ply close your oares. Straight they what's bid obey, shove from those shores: First Palinure the stern steeres to th'lef side,
The whole fleet rows to th' left with winde and tide. Huge bow-backt vvaves do tosse us up to th' skie, They shrink, we sink to hells profunditie. Thrice threatning rocks i'th' clifts made clamorous jan∣gles, Thrice we the foam did slice, see dewy spangles. Meanwhile both winde and sunne us tyr'd forsake: Unknown on Cyclops banks a stay we make. The haven is huge, unstur'd by sturdy winde, But Aetna's horrid roares there (neare) we finde. Whence a black cloud sometimes is belched out, Whose pichy fume and fierie sparks about Vent flakes of flame, and seem the starres to lick, Vomiting up unbowell'd mount-mould thick, Working up rocks to th' skie, and heaps of stones, From's fierie-boyling paunch venting great groans. Encelads lightning-half-burn'd corps, 'tis said, Under this mightie mountain Aetna's laid, And through those chimney breaches breaths out fire, And when that vveight his vvearie limbes doth tire, All Sicil shakes vvith rumbling noise and cries, And mightie fogs and fumes do dimme the skies. That night in vvoods strange sounds and sighs us fright, Yet on the cause of them vve could not light. For neither vve the light of starres did see, No nor the starrie pole discern'd could be: But mungy clouds o'respread the skie most black, And the dark night made us moon-light to lack. But now the next dayes light sprang from the East, And Sols bright rayes nights devvy shades decreast: VVhen suddenly out of the vvoods vve spie A mans strange shape, hunger-starv'd, like to die, In piteous plight, his hands humbly stretcht out,
Whom we behold, see him soil'd all about, His wilde grown beard, his garments all thorn-torn, In all things else he seem'd a Greek forlorn, Who once in Grecian troops to Troy was sent, He spies farre off Troyes arms and vestiment; Which sight him somewhat startled, made afraid, And stopt his pace: at last he headlong made To us to shore, with wofull treats and teares. By starres, by Gods, life-breathing aire, he sweares, Take me hence, Trojans, to what parts you please: And this, this onely gives me ample ease: My self a Grecian souldier I confesse, That by that warre Troyes Gods we did distresse: For which, since so great harms our arms have wrought, Fling me to th' flouds, let sea bring me to nought. If so I die, by man to die I'm glad. This said, he staid, kneeling on knees most sad: We bad him tell us who he was: where born: And what dire fate did cause that state forlorn. Yea and my sire himself, Anchises old, VVithout delay the young-mans hand did hold In his right hand, a pledge of hope to's minde. VVhereat he thus began, feare cast behinde, Of Ithaca I am, Vlysses mate, My name is Achaemenides, and late I came to Troy from Adamast my father, A man (then) poore (and oh I wish much rather That state had stood) here, my unmindfull mates Fearefully fled, left me within the gates Of the huge Cyclops den, foule den indeed, VVherein they on dire bloudie daiies feed: As deep as dark within, the masters self,
An ugly, odious, tall, starre-touching elf: (Heaven grant, like plagues mortals finde never more) Fierce in his sight, furious to speak before, Fed with the flesh and bloud of wretches poore. For I my self saw him most slightly take, And grasp in his foule fist, and fiercely shake, Two of the bodies of my mates at once, And dash them both against the rockie stones, Sprinkling their putrid filth thick on the walls: Yea and I saw the beast, how close he falls To eat and gnaw their flesh and issuing bloud, How vvith their hot joynts 'twixt his teeth he stood. And yet not altogether unrewarded, Nor of himself Vlysses unregarded. For loathing life, Ithacus, in this feare, Whiles he was stuft vvith vvine and his good cheare, His head bent down to sleep, he laid on ground In his huge den, and in his sleep most sound, Disgorging guts and gobbets, bloud-mixt vvine, VVe all do call upon our powers divine, Each man in's turn, closing him round about, His gogling eye we vvith a club dasht out, His onely eye, fixt on his frowning brow. Like Sol, or Grecian shield in's au-all bow. Thus we our fellows deaths reveng'd at last. But flie, oh flie, poore soules, from hence full fast, Your cables cut, and loose, and quickly brast, From such, so huge, as Polypheme in's den, VVho men and beasts in's clutches close doth pen, Of Cyclops monstrous full an hundred more, Do rove and rage about this crabbed shore, And haunt about these hills. Novv Cynthia bright,
Had thrice increast, decreast her hornie light, Since we in woods and deserts vvilde did range, And wilde beasts dens: vvhen the huge Cyclops strange Descending the rough rocks, I saw in sight; Whose roaring voice and pace did me afright. Wilde stonie berries, rurall heps and haws They foulely fed on, roots, herbs, fill their maws. Sculking about, first I beheld this fleet Sailing to shore: which I (thus) vow'd to meet, What e're it vvas: enough I had that I Had scapt these barbarous beasts immanitie: By you more willing any death to die. Scarce had he done, when from a hill we saw, Much like a vvalking-mount, to us to draw Huge Polypheme himself amongst his sheep, And to the well-known shore his way to keep: Monstrous, misshapen, horrid, huge, stark-blinde. His hand a pine-tree grasps, firm vvay to finde, His flocks him follow, this his onely joy, His pipe ty'd at his neck, to ease annoy. Who entring now the deep, and come to shore, Of his boar'd eye he vvasht the running gore, Gnashing his teeth vvith rage; i'th' main he goes, And yet above the vvaves his sides he shows. We fearefull, quickly skudding thence do flie, Taking vvith us the vvretch, and vvorthily Slily our cables cut; with nimble oares VVe brush the floud, and glide from off the shores. VVhich so perceiving, follows our ships din, But seeing he no reach of us could vvin, To gripe us in his paw, finding likewise, Th' Ionick seas he could not equalize,
Us to pursue so huge a howl he rais'd, As earth, and seas, and shores vvere all amaz'd. All Italie stood trembling, Aetna's hill VVith hollow holes resounded echoes shrill. VVhereat huge troops of Cyclops from the vvoods, And mountains tall, flock to the shores and flouds: VVhom vvith their fruitlesse frowns vve safely eye, Those Aetnaean elfs, whose pates even touch the skie, A hellish heap: much like a forrest rude, VVhere grow old oaks and trees in multitude, Or cypresses tall boughs, on hills that stood In faire Diana's groves, or Ioves tall vvood. Feare forc'd us thence confusedly to sail, Wheres'ere the windes would blow with prosperous gale. But grave Helenus hests us countercheckt, 'Twixt Scylla and Charybdis to direct, And keep our course 'twixt both, as we could best, From being by least feare of death distrest: But, if not so, then backward to retire. But see, a happy Borean blast did spire From faire Pelorus parts, which brought us right Unto Pantagia's rockie mouth and sight, Of cape Megarus, and of Tapsus low. All these did Achaemenides us show, Vlysses mate, as by those banks we goe. Against sower Sicils bay an isle doth lie, Call'd foule Plemmyrium by antiquitie; But modern times do it Ortygia name. Alphean-Elis current (so sayes fame) Here undermines the sea by secret passe, Which now into thy mouth, Arethusas, Falling, confounded is in Sicils floud.
There vve (advis'd) adore those Gods so good. Thence from Elorus fruitfull plains we put, And through Pachinus rocks and crooks vve cut: And sailing, see unmov'd Camarina, Gelo's large towns, and torrent fierce Gla. Then ample Agragas struts stately high, Of prauncing horses (once) a nurserie. By thee, date-bearing Slinus, I sail'd, And Lilybeums hid rocks rough streams hail'd. And thence I came to Drepanus sad shore: Where having all my toiles at sea past o're, (Alas!) my father, cure of all my care, Anchises, here I lost: O father faire, Here dost thou thy poore tired sonne forsake? Alas! did heaven thee from such turmoiles take? And all in vain? And, nor Helenus vvise, Who many hardships to me did premise, Foreshew'd me this mishap, this sorrow great, Nor fierce Celaeno, vvho much fright did threat. Is this my labours, this my travells scope? Hath heaven me hither brought, for this poore hope? Thus grave Aeneas did himself relate To all their listning eares his God-given fate: And all his voyages at large exprest, And here did end, and ceast, and so took rest. An end of the third book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the fourth book. The queen incens'd with love-sick fires, Her sister Annes advise desires: Who blows the coals more ardently. Whereat to Juno's deitie They sacrifice: A hunting ride, And Venus to their votes applide. Fame spreads the fact: by fates decree Aeneas charged thence to flee, Prepares his shipping and his mates, And thence to part he properates. This Dido saw, his stay assayd, With teares and treats; but all denayd, On her built shrine, in sacrifice, With wofull words and wounds she dies. BUt all this while the queen with love sore wounded, Hugs her hearts harm, with imbred flames confounded. The mans rare parts she mindes much, much does trace His noble nation: and his words and face Engraves in heart: Care cuts off all sweet rest. Next morn, when Sols bright rayes the earth had drest, And Phoebus fair made moist mists heaven forsake, She love-sick, thus t'her siding sister spake; Deare sister Anne, what dreams me thus molest?
Who is this our so noble new-come guest? How faire he seems! how rare in power and grace! I think (nor vainly think) he's of Gods race. Feare shews a cowards heart: ah how hath he Been tost by fates? what warre-woes shew'd he me? Were he not in my heart fixt movelesly, With nuptiall bands none living should me tie. Since my first Love, deceasing, hath me fail'd, Had I not hence marriage-bed rites quite vail'd, I could perhaps this one love-slip embrace. I'le tell thee (Nan) since poore Sichaeus case, My spouse, slain by my brother at his shrines, This onely windes my will, my heart inclines To a forc'd fall: I feel loves old flames power. But may the earth gape wide, and me devoure, Or mightie Iove by lightnings force me die, Yea die to hells black nights profunditie, Before I thee, sweet chastitie, do blot, Or wrong thy rites. He which my love first got, He has it, holds it in his grave with him. This said, her eyes with teares stood full to th' brim. Anne straight replies; Sister, to me more deare Then lovely light, shall I thee onely heare Still to bewail thy youths continuance, Void of sweet sonnes, or Venus dalliance? Think'st thou that graves or ghosts will this supply? Say, though all suiters (once) in nicitie Thou didst put off, and Libyan lords neglect, And king Iärbas, whom Tyre did reject, And other princely Peeres, whom Africk land Enricht with spoiles: dost still sweet love withstand? Regard'st thou not whose land thou now dost hold?
Getulian towns, a warlike people bold, By proud Numidians hedg'd, and swallowing Syrts, Whereby unharbourous land thee round begirts, And barbarous Barceans blustring all about. Why talk I of our Tyrian warres burst out, And of thy greedy brothers threatnings stout? Truely I trust, fair fates and Iuno kinde Drave t'us those Trojan ships with prosperous winde. O what a citie (sister) shall wee see? How rare a realm, by such a spouse as he? If Trojans trimme our troops, what matchlesse praise Shall Tyrians to their noble actions raise? Onely get thou the Gods good will, then offer Thy sacrifice, thy guest all kindnesse proffer: And work out wayes him with thee to retain, While tempests rage at sea, while clouds drop rain, While ships are rigging, storms in skie remain: These words loves kindled fire highly enflame, Strengthen her stragling thoughts, dissolve all shame. First then to church they go, favour to finde By sacrifice: fat beasts to shrines they binde, As us'd to Ceres their law-maker sweet, To Phoebus, Bacchus, and (as was most meet) To Iuno first, Goddesse of Nuptiall rite. Here daintie Dido's self in beautie bright Holding in hand a cup of sacred wine 'Twixt the white heifers horns, upon the shrine Poured it out 'fore the Gods statues faire, At th' altars walks no gifts that day they spare: And the beasts inwards opened, inly eyes, And seeks i'th' smoaking intralls auguries. O shallow sight of priests, what good do votes?
To love-sick soules what good do temples notes? When all this while sly flames my pith consume, And creeping Cupid holds my hearts best room. Enflam'd is dolefull Dido, like one mad, And up and down the citie doth she gad. Much like a silly deere pierct with a shaft, At unawares by hunters cunning craft, And with quick arrows chac'd through Creets thick woods, Away (the huntsman knows not where) she skuds O're large Dictaean downs, and springs, her side The deadly arrow fixed fast doth hide: So Dido now with her leads to and fro Her deare Aeneas, shews him, as they go, Her Tyrian treasure, citie readie made. Readie to speak, yet stops i'th' midst she made. Now day declining, to like banquets great She him invites, and fondly doth intreat, Again to heare his Trojan toils related, And all the while her fixt affections waited Upon the speakers face. But Cynthia pale Upon their parting having but a vail Of darknesse o're day-light, and pendent spangles In skies, mens eyes with drowsie sleep entangles, In her void palace she alone laments, And his forsaken seat her now contents: Whom absent she as present heares and sees, And young Ascanius dandles on her knees, Catcht with the count'nance of the father right, If thus her lawlesse love she lessen might. She builds no towers, begun; no spirits brave Trains up in arms: and now, least care they have To raise strong forts for warre, faire ports to land;
All's interrupted, all laid out of hand; Their walls, for height threatning the skies, lie still, Now Ioves deare Iuno findes this festring ill, Not suffring fame her furie to restrain, She with these words to Venus doth complain; A proper piece of praise, and pompous prize To you (forsooth) and to your yonker rise! A goodly Godhead must you both hence clame, If you two Gods one silly soule do tame! Nor am I ignorant you feare our powers, And much suspect high Carthaginian towers. But to what end is this? vvhy do we strive? Let's rather practise peace, at long-love drive; And them in vvedlock joyn'd, make live, love thrive: Thou hast thy hearts desire. Poore Dido burns With extream love, which her to phrensie turns. Let's then this people into one unite, Let's rule them both with equall love, delight: Let her her Trojan true-love serve, obey, And totall Tyre to thee large dowry pay. To whom (for well she saw she subt'ly spake, Th' Italian kingdome frustrate thus to make, Th' imperiall throne to Carthage to procure) Thus Venus said; Who'd be so senselesse (sure) This to deny? or strife with thee t' endure? If that thou say'st the fates would ratifie. But by them I'm distracted diversely, If Iove to Tyrians and to Trojans grant, Themselves in this one citie safe to plant, To live together, like the combination. Thou art his wife, try thou by impetration What he will do. Go first, I'le follow thee
Straight sayes queen Iuno, Leave that work to me. Now how what I desire we may effect, Listen, I pray, I briefly will direct. Aeneas and poore Dido do intend Next day i'th' woods in hunting sport to spend: As soon as ever Titans lustrous ray Begins to beautifie the lightsome day, I on them both a black thick cloud of hail, And on his hastning followers will not fail With thunder to showre down, whiles in great feare They winde the woods, and search to chase the deere. Their gallants gone, enclos'd in clouds most black, The Trojan prince and Dido I'le bring back Into one cave: we'le both be present there, And if with me thou like good liking beare, She shall be Bride, and I'le them firmly wed. Here shall their nuptialls be, their marriage bed. To these desires faire Venus with a smile Gives her consent, glad to have found the guile. And now from seas arose Aurora bright, And Lucifer, dayes harbinger, in sight: Young gallants nimbly flock about the gates, And in their hands boare speares with iron plates, Their nets, gins, grins, troops of Massylian sparks, Kennels of senting hounds with loud-mouth'd barks, Prime Punick peeres at the queens chamber wait, Who there herself was dressing in great state: Her steed in stately trappings proudly stamps, And in his mouth his foamie bridle champs. At last the queen comes forth with tendance great, Adorned with a Tyrian mantle neat, Most richly wrought, a golden quiver hangs
Behinde her back, her haire ty'd up with spangs And knots of gold, buttons of beaten gold Her purple garments neatly clasp and hold: The Trojan troops do also follow neare, 'Mongst whom comes young Iülus with brave cheere: But yet the first and fairest of them all, This hunting-game doth prince Aeneas call, Them to associate, make the train compleat: Like faire Apollo, when his Delphick seat He glad revisits, leaving Lycia cold, And Xanthus streams, and sacred feasts doth hold With his Epirian, Cretian, Scythian rout Of lords and lowns, Parnassus round about: Himself on Cynthus tops doth stalk in state. His fragrant haire laid in a curious plate, He bindes with tender boughs, and wreaths with gold; At's back his quiver clattering shafts doth hold. Lovely like him was (now) Aeneas pace, Such sparkling splendour shone from his faire face, Thus when the high hills they ascended had, And search'd beast-couching holes and haunts most glad, Behold, a herd of wilde goats they espie Run down the tops of rocks, and fast to flie. From other parts he saw i'th' open plain A herd of deere to skip and skud amain, And with their thick quick race to raise the dust, Leaving the hills, themselves in thickets thrust. The lusty lad Ascanius, 'midst the plains, On's nimble courser races runs, maintains, Outriding all, ardently long to spie Some foaming boare 'mongst the mean beasts to flie, Some lusty lion from the mountains high.
Meanwhile the heavens with stormie clouds are cloy' Huge showers of hail the hunters soon annoy'd. Whereat the Tyrian troops and Trojan train, Yea Venus sonne himself, flock all amain, Disperst and scattered all, with feare to hide Themselves in what next shelter they espi'de: Great rainy flouds from hills do whirling glide. In one cave Dido and Aeneas meet: And first the earth and nuptiall Iuno sweet Work wedlock signes, conjugall fire and aire Shew forth, and wood-nymphs loud their loves declare▪ This day began first cause of death, of woe, For neither future fame, nor present show, Doth Dido move; nor to consulting came This surreptitious love, which she did name Wedlock, and under wedlocks name did hide This faulty fact, which soon o're Libya wide Fame blows about, even fame, that fluttering ill, Which thrives by flight, and as it goes, grows still. Small first, by feare, strait, stuft up, wondrous high, First goes on ground, then hides its head i'th' skie. Whose mother earth (men say) did her beget On extream fury, which the Gods did fret: Sister to Caeus and Enceladus, By light-fleet, quick wings, expeditious: Huge, horrid elf, with feathered corps so thick, Such unseen eyes (most strange) for sight so quick, So many tatling tongues, and railing lips, Such listning eares, such nightly nimble skips She makes i'th' aire, and in dark shades so squeaks, That rest she takes none, but sweet slumber breaks, By day strait watch she keeps on supream seats,
Or palace turrets, and towns fright and threats: More full of fiction, fraud, then faithfulnesse, With various voices, in meere wantonnesse, Stuffing the vulgar sort, tatling about Things done or undone, without feare or doubt. The Troyes Aeneas was arived here, That Dido faire wedded him as her Pheere; That now a winter long their lusts they nourisht, Carelesse of crowns, they filthy folly cherisht. This godlesse Goddesse spreads these mens mindes. VVhich to Iärbas king accesse soon findes. Wherewith he's vex'd, perplex'd, exasperated. From Ammon he by birth was generated, And the deflor'd nymph Garamantide; To Iove an hundred temples builded he Through his large realms, an hundred shrines beside, Where sacred unextinguisht fires did 'bide, For dayes and nights incessant sacrifice Unto his Gods, fraught with fat beasts likewise, For burnt oblations, all the doores throughout VVith flowers and garlands garnished about. He, mad with love with the harsh heare-say stung, Forthwith ('tis said) unto his altars flung, And 'midst his Gods, his hands high elevated, Iupiter (thus) he humbly invocated: All powerfull Iove, whom we black Moores adore, To whom we our Lenaean liquors poure On right embroidered beds; seest thou these things? Or, when (great Iove) thou on us earthly kings Dost flash forth lightnings, feare we this in jest? Do those cloud-hid flames vainly fright mans breast? Make but a skarre-crow sound? A woman (late)
Who stragling to these parts, did at a rate Purchase and plant a poore, a petty town; Whom, subject to the statutes of our crown, We license gave to plant and plow our land, Our princely wedlock (now) doth stiffe withstand, And in her kingdome kindly entertains One sir Aeneas, who her solely gains. This petty Paris and his stragling trains Of beardlesse boyes, effeminately gay With coifs and perfum'd haire, these steal the prey: But we who fill thy temples with oblations, Seem onely fame to feed with vain frustrations. Iupiter heares him venting these events Before the altars, views his discontents: And to the princely palace turns his eyes, Sees how these lovers fairer fame despise: Mercurie therefore straight he call'd, and said; Be gone, faire sonne, with wings and windes swift aid Haste to the Trojan prince (who now at Tyre Wastes time, and doth not fate-given crowns acquire) Haste through the aire, and tell him this from me: His sacred mother promis'd not that he Should such a person prove, nor for this cause Was he twice ransom'd from Greeks griping paws: But that he should once rule all Italie, Italie big with crowns, with conquests high: And should advance brave Teucers noble race, And the whole world under his orders place. But if these glories great him nought inflame, And that he's loath to labour for such, fame; Yet shall the father envie's sonnes renown? And must Ascnius loose his Romne crown?
What means he? vvhat's his hope in a foes lands? VVhy his Ausonian race, Lavinian strands Neglects he thus? Let him to sea: here's all, For this I thee my messenger do call. Thus Iove. His sacred sire he straight obeyes, His charge to discharge, shakes off all delayes: His vvingy shoes of gold he buckles on, Which with faire plumes, for expedition, Bare him aloft, quite over sea and land, VVith a swift gale. Then quick he takes his wand, VVith which he calls the hideous soules from hell, And others sends to Tartars dungeon fell: He gives, bereaves sweet sleep, from death preserves. Therewith he drives the windes, and with wing'd nerves Swims through the clustring clouds: and now in's flight, Of craggy Atlas tops and sides hath sight, Of Atlas, whose huge height the heavens doth prop, On whose pine-bearing head black clouds do stop, And daily's girt, oft dasht with winde and rain. Thick drifts of snow do on his shoulders drain: Then down his aged chin quick flouds do flow, VVith frosty ice his beard doth grisly grow. Cyllenius fluttering vvings first staid him here, And headlong hence to th' vvaves his corps doth beare: Much like a bird, vvhich 'bout the shores and sides Of fishfull rocks, vvith hoverings smoothly glides Above the vvaves, about the banks: even so Cyllenian Mercurie did to and fro Flutter o're sea and land, and vvindes did slice, And Libya's sandy shores toucht in a trice. His vvingy feet no sooner did alight On Tyrian towers, but straight he saw in sight,
Aeneas forts to raise, rooms to repaire: And he himself girt vvith a hanger rare, With yellow jasper stones like starres bedeckt, And a rich sword, in cloaths of rich respect: A mantle on his corps cast carelesly, Which rarely shew'd, of Tyrian purple die: VVhich gorgeous gifts rich Dido's self had made, And in the vveaving, threads of gold in-laid. Him he encounters thus; Dost thou build high Great Carthage towers? dost thou uxoriously Settle this citie faire? O carelesse minde Of thine affaires, a promis'd crown to finde! The king of Gods, vvhose power shakes earth and heaven, Sent me from skies to thee, this charge vvas given, Thus now to say; What buildings dost thou reare? What loytring hopes in Libya's land appeare? Though thou thy self neglect so glorious fates, Though so high honour thee nought animates, Yet for high springing young Ascni sake, Thy hopefull heire Iülus, some care take: To vvhom faire Iliums crown, Romes royall fear, As debt are due. This said, Cylleni great, Amidst these vvords, from mortals view departed, And farre from sight into the aire vvas darted. But yet this sight Aeneas mad amaz'd, Made him stand mute, his haire vvith horrour rais'd, In staring state, burnt vvith desire of flight, And quick to leave this land of high delight, VVith these fore-vvarnings and the Gods command Stunded. Alas, vvhat should he take in hand? VVith vvhat circumlocutions might he dare, This to th' enamoured queen now to declare?
VVhere might he first begin to break his minde? His thoughts now here now there vvere puft, like winde, In strict distractive parts turn'd all about: At last, these vvrastling thoughts thus end the doubt: Mnestheus, Sergestus, and Cloanthus vvise, He calls to him, and closely did advise, The fleet to fit, his mates to send to shore, Arms to provide, and this to colour o're VVith some prtext, himself in the mean while, Since his deare Dido knew not of this wile, Nor fear'd least fraction in such settled loves, Labours accesse to her, fit seasons proves, Kindely to treat vvith her, a gladsome end To gain to his designes. They all them bend Swiftly and gladly their due tasks to tend. But Dido found (oh, vvho can love delude?) Foresaw these guiles, and their first motions view'd; All stillnes still mistrusts: That impious fame Blabbed to her th' increase of furies flame: Told her the ships vvere rig'd, the voyage vow'd. Her deaded heart incens'd, she raves aloud, Doth madly through the citie drunkardize, Even as it is the Bacchanalian guise, VVhen at great Bacchus his trienniall sport Rude troops in drunken dances do resort, And so solemnize every sacred rite, Cithaeron echoning clamours loud by night. At last she thus, even of her own accord, Speaks to Aeneas; Faithlesse, oh, abhor'd, And didst thou hope to play the counterfeit? And couldst thou vvork so great, so grosse a cheat? VVouldst thou so slily hence have stoln away?
Could neither our love, nor plighted faith thee stay? Nor wofull Dido dying stop thy flight? But even in vvinter weathers dangerous plight Thou must to ship, and (oh hard heart!) set sail, Driven on vvith many a boystrous Northern gale? What though thou sought'st no other unknown place, Or forrain parts? or Troy stood in best case? Must thou thy Troy through furious vvaves procure? Fly'st thou from me? Ah, now I thee adjure By these my teares, and by thine own right hand, Since I poore soule have nought else at command. O, by our vvedlock nuptiall rites begun, If I have well deserv'd by ought yet done, Or ought of mine were ever sweet to thee, O of my tottering state now tender be. If yet my prayers may penetrate thy heart; Ah, change thy minde, oh do not hence depart. For thy sake Libyas land, and tyrants fierce Of Africa, vvould me vvith mischief pierce: For thee my Tyrians are vvith me offended, For thee, my shame, my fame's extinct and blended: My fame, by which I once was rais'd to th' skie. To vvhom dost thou me leave, now like to die? Ah unkinde guest. For now no more I may Thee husband call: Why longer do I stay? What? till Pygmalion all my towns destroy? Or till Iarbas captiv'd-me annoy? Oh yet at least had I before thy flight, Enjoy'd a childe by thee: oh if I might Have had a young Aeneas fathers face, To play withall in court, 't would ease my case. Then (sure) I should not altogether seem
So wofull, or my self forsaken deem. This said, she ceast. He on the other side, His eyes on Ioves command fast fixed tide; And strenuously did strive his hearts great grief Close to suppresse, and spake these words in brief: Faire queen, what e're thou canst recount, recall, Yea and much more, confesse I ever shall Thy merits infinite, nor shall I shame, Gladly to memorize Eliza's name: Whiles here I live, whilst I my self may know, The truth herein let me thee briefly show. I never hop'd to hide (feigne not) this flight Clandestinley, nor minded marriage rite, Nor hither came such vows and pacts to plight. Yet I, if friendly fates had so decreed, Aim'd at a life from all perturbance free'd, In sweet repose t' accommodate all cares, And chiefly to my Trojan towns affaires: To yet remaining friends to yeeld supply, Priam's faire towers once to re-edifie; And to my conquered kinne to re-advance Poore Pergams walls. But now such is my chance, Commanded, charg'd by Gods and great Apollo, That Latium I, faire Latium now must follow. O there's my love, there is my countrey kinde: And since thou bear'st to Carthage such a minde, Though a Phoenissian, yet dost Libya like, Why should pale envies dart thy heart so strike, At Trojans liking, loving Italie? For us to seek forth, 'tis like equitie. As oft as nights moist shades the earth doe hide, And fierie twinkling starres in skies abide,
Anchises my deare fathers ghost appeares, And in my dreams me much afrights and feares. Yea my Ascanius young, whose brows I wrong, Keeping Hesperia's crown from him so long, And fate-given lands call me to haste away; Yea now of late Ioves messenger, I say, Sent from himself, (all whom I here appeal) To me Ioves minde and message did reveal. And I the God in a cleare vision saw, E ntring thy town, and neare me quick to draw; And with these eares I heard his voice and words. O then forbeare to wound me with tongue-swords, And thou thy self with plaints: For Italie, Alas, I seek not voluntarily. Him answering she did all this while behold With discontent: Here, there her eyes she rold, View'd him throughout vvith sullen silent eyes, And thus at last she vvrathfully replies: Thou art no Goddesse sonne, perfidious thou, Nor e're did Dardan thee his childe avow; But thou on cruell Caucasus hard mounts Wast bred; or suck'st some Tygers milky founts. For vvhy should I dissemble now vvith thee? Or dream that better fates attend on me? Didst thou once sigh at all my flouds of teares? Didst thou vvith sorrowing eyes behold my feares? Shew'dst thou teare-passion, least compassion kinde, O'recome vvith sorrow at my love-sick minde? Which (first) may I say's vvorst? Nor Iuno faire, Nor father Saturn hath of me least care. Oh, vvhere's firm faith? I took him in adoores, A stragling beggar, out cast from his shores:
And like a frantick fool, my kingdome shar'd To unkinde him, his navy naught repair'd, And all his followers I from death set free. Alas, with furie he hath fired me. Now fate-saying Phoeb, now Lycian lots are cast, Now Iove commands, and thou must follow fast His messengers quick heels, in his harsh hest. What else? for thus the Gods do hold it best; This toile perturbs poore silly soules at rest. I hold thee not, nor do thy words withstand, Go with the windes, seek Italie thy land, Away through flouds to finde thy kingdomes faire. But sure I hope (if Gods yet able are) Amidst the rocks thou due revenge shall beare, And Dido's name invoke with frequent feare. Absent I'le thee pursue with frightfull fires: And when by chilling death lifes breath expires, In every place my ghost thy guest shall be: And thus (vile wretch) I'le be reveng'd on thee. This I shall heare below, fame will me show it, And hearing, I shall be most glad to know it. Abruptly here i'th' midst an end she makes, And male-content, to flight her self betakes: Out of his sight away she turns and windes, Leaving Aeneas in a thousand mindes: Stopping for feare, striving to utter more; Her damsels, her, faln in a sound, in bore: And laid in princely bed, with cloaths o're spread. But good Aeneas (though he laboured With consolation to allay her grief, And with kinde words to give her woes relief; Much sighing, much with love perplext in heart)
Yet mindes Ioves charge, fits his fleet to depart. The Trojans busie be, and hale to shore Their stately ships and barks, well pitched o're, Their leafy oares, and oaks from woods unwrought, Through haste to flie with expeditious thought. Thou might'st them see the citie skud about, And swarm in heaps much like a nimble rout Of prettie pismires, when with strenuous pain They prey upon a mightie heap ofgrain, (Mindefull of winters want) and up it pack, Quick goes and comes i'th'field this armie black: And through the grasse, by a straight path their prey They beare along, some the great grains assay To shove before them with their shoulders stout: Some from delayes correct their lazie rout: Their lustie labour heats each hole about. What thoughts hadst thou, poore Dido, at this sight? How didst thou sigh, when from thy turrets height Thou sawest farre off hot toiles the wharfs to fill, And 'fore thy face shores stuft with clamours shrill? Impudent love, what is't thou'lt not inforce? Sometimes to showre ou teares of much remorse, Sometimes to trie b'intreaties most demure, Sometimes again to yeeld to loves allure: That nought (though all in vain) before she di'd, Might be neglected, might be left untri'd. See (sister Anne sayes she) what haste they make About the banks, flocking us to forsake: And how their vessells wait but (now) for winde, Their tacklings fit, by marriners refin'd O had I at the first fear'd this great shame, I, sister, better could have born the same.
Onely this one thing (Anne) for my poore sake, Let me intreat thee now to undertake: For faithlesse he was wont to wish thee well, And his hearts secrets unto thee to tell, And thou alone in him know'st well to finde Fit time and flexibilitie of minde. Go sister, go, humbly tell this fierce foe; With Greeks at Aulis Troyes dire overthrow I ne're conspir'd, nor sent a fleet to Troy, Nor old Anchises ashes did annoy. Why then turns he deaf eares to my request? Where rashly runnes he? Let this last bequest Be given to his poore love; to watch faire flight, And windes to sail away with smooth delight. I do not presse or pray sweet marriage rite, Which he hath wrong'd; nor would I him bereave Of's long'd-for Latium, him of's crown deceive. I onely ask a little fruitlesse stay, Some small repose, repast, for loves allay, Untill my fate me vanquisht make to moan. Grant this last vote, in this request alone Pitie thy sister; which if thou me grant, My death shall bid this wretched life avant. Thus did she treat, intreat her sister sad, Who to and fro beares weeping errands bad. But none of all her treats or bitter teares Remove his thoughts, do move his dam'd-up eares: For fates forbade, and Iove his eares had clos'd. As an old oak most furiously oppos'd, Which Alpine pushing puffs now here now there Tossing and tumbling, strive to over-beare, The blast flies on, bends the high boughs to ground,
The stock sticks fast on a rock firm and sound; And as the more to th'winde top-branches bend, The more the root doth ground-hold apprehend: No otherwise with words and woes this prince Is tost, turmoil'd, here, there his heart t'evince: But he's unmov'd, teare-flouds flow out in vain. Whereat poore Dido, full of grief and pain, Desires to die; and hates the skies cleare sight, Fitlier to slay herself, and leave the light. Then laying gifts, on incense-smoaking shrines, She saw (fearefull to say) her sacred wines, And pour'd-out liquors turn'd to putred bloud: Which none, no not her sister, understood. Beside, there was within her palace faire, Her former husbands marble temple rare; Which she did honour with most high respect: And with white fleeces, and gay garlands deckt. From whence she seem'd to heare her husbands call; And that, when nights dark curtain covered all; Yea and to heare the scritch-owl all alone On houses tops, oft times to make strange moan, With fearefull fatall noates, long screeks and cries; Beside, feare-threatning ancient prophesies Her terrify'd: in nightly visions she Aeneas cruell self doth seem to see, Pursuing her enrag'd. She (still) alone Left to herself, not waited on by one, Is seen to stragle farre in deserts strange, To seek her Tyrians, seems abroad to range Much like mad Pentheus, scar'd with haggs of hell, And oftwo suns, two Thebes, feign'd (then) to tell: Or like Orestes, vext with furies dire,
When from his mother arm'd with ragefull fire, And stinging serpents, mad, he made away, Revengefull furies at the threshold lay: So she enrag'd, o'recome with grief and woe, Resolves to die; how to this work to go, Thinks with herself for fittest time and way, And thus to her sad sister doth she say; (Cheere in her cheeks, her fact hid in her face) I have the way, deare sister, (in this case Now joy with me) either to keep him here, Or from his love my self firmly to cleare. Neare th' oceans end, upon the Western side Lies Aethiopa, farre from us and wide: Where heaven-upholding mighty Atlas stands, And ardent sun-shine scorcheth up the lands. A grave Massylian priest came hence to me, His sisters temples keeper said to be; Who fed the dragons, kept the fruit divine, Whose humid honey doth to sleep incline, Even soporiferous poppie. She assures By charms to love-sick mindes, she cures procures In whom she lists; and whom she lists, makes love Extreamly; stops swift streams, yea starres above Turns retrograde; she nightly ghosts can raise, Can make the ground to groan with strange amaze, And trees to run down hills, she frights and frayes. Now by the Gods (deare sister) I protest, By thee and thy sweet soule, I am thus prest To use these magick spells against my will. Thou then, good sister, build up with best skill, A pile of wood in th'inner court on high, And lay thereon the sword, which impiously
He stuck up by our bed his garments all, Yea my bride-bed, where I took fatall fall: For so this priest bad me bring all I can, Belonging to that false nefarious man, And bad me burn them. This thus said, she ceast, And death-pale colour in her cheeks increast. Her sister Anne suspecting nought herein, That she new sacred death dues did begin, Nor could conceive she such rage did retain, Or greater grief then for Sichaeus slain, Does not therefore her sisters charge refrain. But now the queen (the pile in th'open aire In th' inner court erected, fitted faire) Great boards and billets, pitch and tarre layes on, Flowers, cypresse boughs and branches ties upon This fatall herse, his cloaths, sword, left behinde, His picture eke she to this bed doth binde, Knowing the issue. Altars stand about; And now the priest, her haire-spread loose, cries out On her three hundred Gods, Erebus deep, Chaos and threefold Hecates to weep, And triple-fac'd Diana, sprinkling wide The feigned liquors which in Styx abide. Then tender herbs are sought out by Moon-light, And cropt and cut with sithes and sickles might, And with white milk, black poisons pestilent; Andfrom a young Foals front incontinent They pluck the Mares pois'nous beloved bit, Before the mare from's brow devoureth it. Dido herself with sacred gifts in hands, One foot unbound, cloathes loose, at th'altar stands, Readie to die, the Gods she obtestates,
And powerfull planets, patrons of her fates: Yea whatsoever sacred power there were, That just and tender mindefulnesse did beare To lovers, which unequall yokes did weare. And now 'twas night, when weary limbes at ease Slept sweetly, woods were still, and calm the seas, And now starres course came to their middle height, And every field and bird and beast, by night, Yea every liquid lake, and whatso'ere The wide sharp thorny countrey coasts did beare, Lay still, all fast asleep, devoid of cares, Their slumbring hearts forgetfull of affaires. But wofull Didos heart no nap could take, Nor all the night one nod or wink could make. Her cares increase, her raging love reboiles, And with huge flames of furie her turmoiles. And thus she stands, and thus breathes out hearts wo; What shall I do? shall I derided go Back to my wonted wooers? meek must I Marriage desire with those whom scornfully I oft refus'd? or must I not apace Flie to the Trojans fleet, quickly embrace Their last and worst commands? will it not (sure) Do well, help to their helper to inure? Old favours ought with thankfulnesse be paid: But say I would, who herein would me aid? Or scorned me to their proud ships admit. Alas (fond fool) know't thou not fully yet? See'st thou not sensibly the perjurie Of Trojans? And what then? shall onely I Fly to those jocond sailours? shall I fall Upon them with my Tyrian armies all?
And cause them whom with me I scarce could force From their Sidonian city, take recourse To sea again? and make them sail with me? No rather die, as 'tis most fit for thee, Thy self from sorrow with thy sword set free. You sister, you o'recome by my first teares, My love-pierc'd heart now load with these fierce feares, And e expos'd unto my flying foe: Might I not well have liv'd unyoked, so As do bruit beasts, unstung with such sharp woe? Not having kept faith to Sichaeus plighted, With these complaints her heart she sore affrighted. Aeneas in's tall ship resolv'd to sail; Yet lies a sleep; all fit for his avail. To him in sleep appear'd the Gods form right That formerly he saw, the same face bright; In all like Mercurie, colour and voice, With yellow haire, his corps of youthfull choice. Who seemed thus him to advise again: Canst thou, O Goddesse sonne, asleep remain In such a state as this? Dost thou not see How many dangers do environ thee? O brain-sick man, seest thou not friendly blasts Breathing abroad? seest thou not how she casts In heart some impious part, resolv'd to die? And how she swels with furies tympanie? Fly'st thou not hence in haste, whiles thou mayst flie? Soon thou shalt see to sea her shps to hie. Bright burning brands, fierce flames on shore shall be, If morning sunne thee loytering here do see. Be gon, I say, shake off delay: for still Most light and loose thou'lt finde a womans will.
This said, i'th' dark he vanisht out of sight. VVhich vision did Aeneas much afright, Who starts from sleep, his mates in haste doth call, Saying, Rouse your selves, brave sirs, and closely fall To fluttering oares, hoise up your sails amain, The God was sent from heaven to me again. Quicken our flight, cut knottie ropes with speed, The God again urgeth me to proceed. Who e're thou art, great God, we follow thee, To thy recharge we glad obedient be. Be friendly with us, help us, O we pray, Grant us thy present aid, a pleasant way. This said, he soon unsheath'd his glistring sword, With his sharp blade he cuts each cutting cord. The rest, as hotly prest, do rush and run, And shove from shore, and leave not ought undone, Untill they see their barks the billows hide, Closely they winde the waves, and swiftly glide. Aurora now left Tithons broidered bed, And first with fresh faire light earth overspread. The queen as soon as through her glasse she spi'de Daylight cleare up, and all the fleet to slide With smoothfull sails, and saw the ports and shores Forsaken quite, emptie of men and oares; Her comely breast she strook, and strook again With herwhite hand, and in fierce grief and pain Tearing her tender yellow haire from head, Cries out, O Iove, and shall he thus be fled? And shall that stragler in my realm me flout? Shall not mine armies help, and all flie out? And prosecute, and persecute him flying, And teare their ships, nd burn them where th'are lying?
O follow, follow, bring, bring forth fierce fire, To ship set sail, row on with restlesse ire. What say I? where am I? what mad mood's here? Unhappy Dido, now th'art stung most neare By furious fates: then it had better been, When he was here, and thou didst rule as queen. See now his hand, his heart, of whom men prate, His countrey-Gods do him concomitate; That he on's back his aged sire did beare. O could I not his corps in pieces teare? And shatter them i'th' sea? his mates destroy? Yea even Ascanius that young Trojan boy Slay with the sword, and mince in mamacks small, And dish on's fathers board to feast withall? O but the fortune of a fight's unsure: What then? whom should I feare? since death t' endure I have resolv'd, I would have fire-brands cast Into their tents, and fil'd with flames (at last) Their hatches, and the father, sonne, and all Have burnt up, and i'th' flames my self let fall. O thou cleare sunne, which all mens facts dost view, And thou faire Iuno, sounder witnesse true Of these my woes! Hecate, who by night In crosse paths, howling noise dost make to fright, Revengefull furies, and you spirits all Of dying Dido, heare my dying call. Poure out your power, worthy such wicked men, And entertain this my request, that when (Ifthat vile wretch must needs) he doth obtain Harbour, and sails to land, if firm remain Ioves high decrees herein; then here's an end: Yet let fierce warres of furious foes offend
And vex him still, and him, an exile made, Pull'd from Iülus sweet embrace, beg aid, And see his friends ignoble dire decease: Nor when he stoops to yokes of forced peace, Let him enjoy or crown or joyes increase: And let him die untimely, lie untomb'd, In th' open aire, of birds and beasts consum'd. This vvish, these last words vvith my bloud I vent. And oh my Tyrians, let your wrath be bent, Even yours and all your future progenie, 'Gainst him and his: to my dead dust apply These pleasant presents: let there never be 'Twixt you and them love or confederacie. Let some vindicative revenger rise, Sprung from our loyns, those Dardan enemies With sword and fire to vex now, and full long Hereafter still, as time shall make them strong. O may lands strive with lands, vvaves warre with waves, Friends fight vvith friends, armies with arms outbraves. This said, her heart to thousands thoughts did rowl, From loathed life striving to snatch her soule. Then she Sichaeus nurse, Barce bespake, (For in her own hand hers did her forsake By death) O my deare nurse, call straight, sayes she, My sister Anne, bid her come quick to me; And vvater vvith her bring our limbes to lave, And beasts and cleansing offrings, as I gave Order therein. Thus let her come to me, And thou thy self, good nurse, attir'd must be With holy headbands on thy head: for I To sacrifice to Pluto, seriously Am minded, as 'tis fit, to end my vvoe,
The Trojans head in flames to burn up. So This said, with aged pace, yet eager bent, She hastens to climbe up the piles ascent. But trembling Dido mad, full mischief-minded, Her bloud-swoln eyes up and down rowld and winded, Her shivering cheeks with brinish teares are spread, And hastning death made her seem, living, dead. When through the doores to th' inner court she brake, And ragefull haste, to mount the fire, did make: And being up, unsheaths the Trojan blade, A gift, not for so wofull uses made. Here having view'd the Trojan garments gay, And well-known bed, a little pausing stay With teares and thoughts she made, laid on the bed, And these last words of woe she uttered: Sweet ornaments, whiles Gods and fates did please, Embrace this soule, me from these sorrows ease. I liv'd; now fortunes life-given course I end, And now my great ghost to earths cells doth bend. A brave town I have built, strong vvalls erected, Reveng'd my friend, due punishment inflicted On a false brother. Blest, ah too much blest, Had Trojan barks ne're on our banks took rest. She ceast; her face flat on the bed did lie; And shall we (sayes she) unrevenged die? Then let us die: Thus? thus to go fits vvell To obscure shades. And let that Trojan fell See with his eyes at ea this dying fire, And sail vvith all signes of our death most dire. Thus ended she, and ending (thus) this vvord, Her tendants saw her fal'n upon her sword, The sword all smear'd vvith gore, her hands spread out.
Whereat they rais'd loud screeks the court about: The fame vvhereof through the sad citie flies, And rudely ranging, fills each house vvith cries, With griefs and groans, and vvomanish sad sounds, Which th' echoing aire vvith yelling roares rebounds▪ Even as if foes let in had Carthage 'stroy'd; Or like old Tyre vvhose buildings faire, employ'd To use of Gods and men, vvith fires fierce flame Were quite conm'd. The noise vvhereof soon came To her death-daunted sister, vvho in fright With panting pace ran thither vvith fierce flight. Her nails her cheeks do teare, fists beat her breast, Amidst the rout rushing, screeks out (distrest) Her dying name. O sister, was this it? Hast thou me thus deceiv'd? And did I fit This pile for this? these fires and altars frame? For what should I forsaken, thee first blame? Why didst thou me reject for thy deaths mate? Thou might'st have me invited to like fate: That same smart, with the same sword, that houre Might both of us have griped in deaths power. These hands did also help to build this frame, I call'd upon our countrey-Gods great name; And yet could cruell I be absent hence, And not behold thy fates fierce violence? O sister, sister, thou hast quite undone Thy self, my self, and all renown, begun In citie, subjects, Carthaginian lords: O vvho me now some cleansing streams affords, That I may vvash her vvounds? And if as yet Any last breath there stray, that I may it Sup up at length. This said, she soon ascends
The steepy steps, and in her heart contends, And on her breast, to hug with many a teare The half dead body of her sister deare, And with her cloaths the black bloud wipes and dries. Whereat she seems to heave her heavy eyes. But down again the dead lids fall and fail, And at her heart the death-smart doth prevail. Thrice she her self rais'd up, and strove to rest Upon her arm; and thrice by pain opprest, She sownding rolled back upon the bed, And vvith her stragling sight endeavoured To see the skie-light, groaning when 'twas found; Then mighty Iuno pitying her deaths vvound, Protracted vvoe, difficultie to die, Sent Iris quickly from Olympus high, Her strugling soule, and fast bound life t' unbinde, (Because she not by fate, nor deaths due kinde Did die, but immaturely) she poore heart With sudden rage enflam'd, wrought her own smart. As yet, Proserpina took not away Her yellow locks, which on her head grew gray, Nor her designed to the Stygian lake. Dame Iris therefore from the clouds did take Quick flight to her, with vvatrie colour'd plumes, Which 'gainst the opposite bright sunne assumes A thousand various curious colours cleare: And lighting on her head, said; Charg'd, I beare Thy parted soule to Pluto dedicated, And free thee from thy corps excruciated. This said, she clipt her locks; at once doth slip All vitall heat, life into th' aire doth skip. An end of the fourth book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the fifth book. Aeneas sails, to Sicil hies, Where he his fathers obsequies Doth celebrate: Acestes kinde, About the grave brave games design'd, A prodigie, a fierie dart. Then Iris playes old Beroes part, In old-wifes weeds the fleet doth flame, But sudden showres doe quench the same. Anchises ghost in sleep doth show What warres his sonne must undergoe: And by whose guid to passe to hell. He builds a town, wherein to dwell He leaves the wives and men unfit: For Palinure, he'le steeres-man sit. MEeanwhile Aeneas half way keeps his course; His ships with soft windes cut the waves black source; Reviewng poore Eliza's walls on fire, The cause unknown of such combustion dire: But bitter grief he fear'd for abrupt love, Knowing how love-sick passions women move VVith these sad thoughts the Trojans forward sail, Least sight of land at sea their fleet doth fail. On all sides sea, on all sides onely skie: He o're his head a watry cloud doth spie, Full stuft with storms, whose blacknesse frights the seas,
And in his ship did Palnure displease. Whereat he cries, Aas, vvhat clouds o'respread The heavens? What means God Neptune by this dread? He bids them play the men, their oares to plie, Sails to the lee, and thus aloud doth crie; Dauntlesse Aeneas, though great Iove our guide, Should promise vve in Italie should 'bide; I could not in this case his words confide. Such counter-cuffs, crosse puffs us turn and vvinde, Such dark dim clouds arise, as th' aire quite blinde. Nor do our reluctations us avail: Since fortune forceth, let's vvith fortune sail, And go wheres'ere she guides; for sure think I, Thy brother Eryx trusty towns are nigh, And Sicils shores: for I have certain sight Of noted starres, if I remember right. Surely, sayes good Aeneas, so I see The windes require, thy labours all to be In vain I view. Then bend thy course that way: For a more pleasing place could I, I say, To rest our weary fleet, vvish to attain, Then whereas Troyes Acestes kinde doth reigne, And vvhere my fathers buried bones remain? This said, they fetch the haven, a Western blast Stretching their sails, the navie nimbly past The channell, and at length vvith joy each one Gets to the shore, unto them all well known. But from a loftie hill, aloof in's eye Acestes, wondring, did their fleet espie, Their friendly fleet: vvhich he runs down to meet Fierce with's beares hide and dart, them (thus) to greet: VVhose mother Troy him at Crinisus floud
Begat: He mindefull of's forefather good, Them safe t'enjoy much joyes, with countrey cates And friendly gifs, receives, cheeres, consolates. Next day, so soon as Eastern Sols bright face Had banisht starres, Aeneas from each place And part o'th' port assembles all his mates, And from a tombes top thus expostulates; Renowned Dardans, sprung from Ioves high race, 'Tis now a full and compleat twelve-moneths space, Since here our sacred parents bones were laid, And reliques left, and sad death-altars made. And this (if I mistake not) is the day, The dolefull day which I resolve for aye To solemnize, and sad to celebrate: (For so, ye Fates, ye do it destinate) Yea this, though Africk me an exile hel'd, Though Grecian seas or shores me captiv'd quel'd, With annuall votes and due solemnities, And altar-decking gifts, I'd memorize. Now are we gladly (and, as I conceive, Not without heavens direction and good leave) Come to our fathers bones and sacred dust, And in t' a faire and friendly port have thrust. Come on then, let's glad triumphs celebrate, Let's get faire gales; and when my cities state Is stablisht, I'le my sacred rites each yeare To him, in temples to him builded, beare. Troy-born Acestes two fat bullocks great Bestows on every bark throughout the fleet. Then at the feast our countrey-Gods let's place, And those which kinde Acestes holds in grace. Besides, if Sol the ninth day with bright rayes
His faire face o're the universe displayes. First, for our Trojans flying-fleets sea-fight I'le prizes have: for him, whose nimble flight Best runs a race: for him, whose courage stout Wrastles most rare: who best flings darts about: Or, fight with plummet-clubs doth best affect: Let all be prest, and purchas'd palms expect. Lend us your clamours loud, with bayes all crown'd. This said, himself his brows with laurell bound: The like Helymus, old Acestes doe, Lively Ascanius; all the youth so too: He leaves the parle; with thousand tendants brave Environed, he comes to's fathers grave. And here (as due) two bowls of wine most good He pour'd on ground, and two of sacred bloud, Two of new milk, and strew'd blew flowers, and said, Hail, sacred sire, once more all hail, safe laid, You sacred bones, sires soule, sav'd all in vain, Since Italie we could not both attain; Nor see those fatall fields, nor seek together Ausonian Tyber▪ flowing, who knows whither? This said, a mightie slipperie snake he spi'de, With seven huge wreaths and foldings forth to glide From under th' earth, and smoothly crawling by The altar, girts the grave, whose back like skie Was coloured right, and full ofspecks like gold, His glassie scales most bright for to behold; Much like the rain-bow plac'd against Sols rayes, Which thousand various colours then displayes. This sight amaz'd the man: the snake among The cups and platters crawling thus along, At last he tastes the dainties tenderly,
And back recoils to th'tombe most harmlesly, Leaving the full-fed shrines. Hence much the more He ply'd his father with oblations store; Uncertain whether it were the Genius faire O'th' place, or's fathers spirit did thus repaire. Five sheep, five hogs, five heifers black he slew, And bowls of wine upon them forth he threw, And invocates the soule of his great sire, And ghosts now rais'd from th' Acherontine fire. His mates likewise bring copious costly gifts, And lively each loads on the altars lifts, And kill their kine, and pots and pans they place, And, spread on ground, make fires to th' spits apace, And roste their midriffs, and to feasting fall. And now's the day long-lookt-for of them all: And Phäethons coursers drew Sols chariot bright Upon this ninth day, with resplendent light. When fluttering fame and brave Acests renown Call'd neighbours in from each neare neighbouring town: Whose joyfull troops fill'd all the plains about, To see the Trojan lads, and sport it out. But first faire prizes placed were on poles I'th' midst in open sight; faire three-leg'd bowles, And fragrant garlands bound in beauteous wise, And costly crowns, palmes for the victours prize; And glistering arms, wrought-coats, rich to behold, And many talents both of silver and gold. Shrill trumpets sound amidst those thick consorts, And summon them to those propounded sports. And first, foure choice barks of the fleet begin, With stiffe strong oares by sea-fight fame to win. First Mnestheus with his galleon, Pristis swift,
With his couragious master makes first drift. Next him Italian Mnestheus, from whom came The race of Memmius: Gyas, next for fame, Brought his huge bark, the fierce Chimaera nam'd, A town-like ship, with treble-oare banks fram'd, Which Trojan lads with three-rankt oares did guide. Next in's tall centaure Sergest forth did glide, From whom the familie of Sergeus rose, In skie-like Scylla fierce Cloanthus goes, Whence, Romane Cluent, thy great kindred grows. Farre off, i'th' sea, just 'gainst the foaming shore, There lies a rock, which oft is covered o're With swelling waves; when Western Corus blows, And hides the starres, a calm it plainly shows: And in still tides 'tis all a shelfie plain, Where sea-birds, basking in the sun, remain. Here grave Aeneas oaken boughs did place, To shew the mariners their pointed race: How farre to rove, and where to winde about: And now each one his station chooseth out. Each champion's on his hatches richly clad. Each youth on's head a poplar garland had; His shoulders bare, 'nointed with glistring oyle, Sitting on's bench, his arms prest to the toile Of tugging oares: to th'wisht for signe addrest, Whiles leaping joy and lumpish feare in breast Makes imbred broyles, striving for masterie, Prickt with the spurre of praise, by victorie. And now the trumpet sounds the shrill alarms, Straight all the ships start out to sportive arms, Hate least delay, loud sea-shouts dash the skie, Th'oares slicing strokes make folding waves run by.
At once all furrows plow, the strugling streams O're all the main gape wide, boile foamie streams, With flaly-oares and slicing foredecks fierce, Which through the bustling billows proudly pierce. The furious duellizing chariots swift Burst from their bounds, use not such headlong drift In field careeres: nor horseman half so fast Runs, jets, curvets, or shakes the loose reins cast On's horses main, nor loudlier jerks his whip. Then shouts, clapt hands, both from each shore and ship And siding partners acclamations shrill, The woods, fields, shores, with mightie clamours fill; Whose quick redoubling echoes answer still. Thus (first) flies out, before the rest, i'th' rout, Couragious Gyas, whom Cloanthus stout Follows at heels, with better oares indeed, But slow-pac'd pinie barks make no great speed. After them, nimble Pristis, Centaure, flie With equall struglings for prioritie. And now flies Pristis, Centaure gets the best, Now both are macht, and side to side addrest: With even foredecks, they brinish billows plough: And now their barges to the bounding bough, And regulating rock nimbly draw nigh; Which when i'th' floudie field victoriously Gyas first spi'de, he to his master cry'd, Menoetes, why to th' right hast thou so ply'de? Hale in this way, and quickly shove to shore, And to the left hand clifts winde in thine oare: Let others move i'th' main (sayes he) for us. But yet Menoetes too solicitous Of wave-hid rocks, his foredeck windes to th' deep,
Whiles Gyas still cries out, To land-ward keep, Pull back (Menoetes) why dost still go wrong? And now behold, he spies Cloanthus strong Close at his heels, and (next himself) the first, Who stiffly 'twixt the ratling rocks being burst, And the left inner way of Gyas ship; Passing the best, and bounds, to sea doth whip. Hereat deep rage young Gyas did so flame, That not without some chafing teares he came To slow Menoetes, and (regardlesse quite Of his mates welfare, or's own lustre bright) He casts him headlong o're th'board into th'deep, Himself as master at the stern doth keep, And cheeres his men, and steeres the helm to shore. But from the bottome (now) Menoetes poore, In sea-drencht cloaths, floating above the floud, Crawls up a rock, and on a dry cliffe stood, Whiles on the shore the Trojans him deride, And laught to see him swimme, and slip and slide, And how his stomack did salt water spue. Here the two hindmost gamsters gladly view, A spurre to prick them on, Sergestus stout, And valiant Mnestheus nimbly cast about, T'outstrip slow Gyas: Sergest gets prime place, And to the rock to get, now rows a pace. But he's not firmly first, though's barge go on, For perking Pristis nose lies close upon His foredeck: Mnestheus trudging to and fro About the ship, his men cheeres on to row: Now, now, Hectorean mates, rowe close (cries he) For you from Troyes last lot I chose to be My faithfull followers: now power forth that might,
That courage brave, which yerst in Grecians sight And Argine sturdie streams you have exprest. I strive not to be first, nor get the best: (Yet O!) but let them win and weare it well: Whom thou, great Neptune, wilt, shall beare the bell. Yet let it shame us to be last of all: Win this (brave lads) let not that shame be fall. Hereat they all most stiffely tug and pull, And with their oares strong strokes, thick, quick, & full, The brassy-poop they shake, no land they see, They gape for breath, all o're most sweatie be: And friendly fortune grants wisht victorie. For while Sergestus frets and fumes in minde, Whiles, inmost, his foredeck to th' rock's inclinde, Unhappie by desire of nearest cut, On unseen cliffes his vessell fiercely put; The rusht on rocks a ratling noise do make, While on sharp snags, cleft oares the foredeck strake. The boatmen bustle up, with clamour stand, And hooks and steel-tipt poles they snatch in hand, Gathering their split oares floating on the waves, Whiles Mnestheus happii'de, with bold out-braves For's good successe, with nimble oares, faire gales, And full sea-room, from sea to shore safe sails. Much like a dove soon startled from her nest, That in some house or hollow roof took rest, Flies forth to field, fluttering her wings full fast, Quick through the transient aire is nimbly past, And with smooth swooping flight doth glide along: So Mnestheus, so his Pristis, from among The utmost waves most clearely cuts his course, And seems to flie with rushing furious force.
And first forsakes Sergestus strugling hard Amongst the rocks, by shallows, shelfs, debar'd Of vain desired help, now taught to row With broken oares, and now he does outgo Young Gyas, and his huge Chimaera foil'd, VVhich soon gives way, being of his master spoil'd. And now at last none but Cloanth remains, VVhom to o'retake he duplicates his pains, Reduplicates loud clamours. All him cheere VVith their skie-cuffing votes, as he draws neare: Those strive to keep their purchas'd praise and fame, Vowing to loose their lives to keep the same: Good luck spurres these; there's hope therefore they'le win, And evenly matcht, they (sure) had victours bin, Had not Cloanthus fal'n to prayer devout, And thus with heav'd-up hands to's Gods cry'd out; Great Gods of sea, whose liquid soils I sail, If I be victour I'le without all fail On shore-built altars sacrifice a bull, And your due debter, forth his midriffe pull, And poure on these salt seas, with wine good store. This said, the sea-nymphs whom he did implore, All heard him from the bottome of the main; Phorci, Nereides, the Mermaides train: Yea, old Portunus self, with his strong hand Shoving his ship (like blast, bird-bolt) to land, She flies full fast, and safe i'th' haven doth stand. Aeneas then (as custome) congregates His troops, and by a crier demonstrates, Cloanthus victour, crowns his brows with bayes, And gives large gifts, true trophies of great praise: Three heifers to three ships, and wine great store,
And a large silver talent thence they bore. But to the chieftains he chief prizes gave, A golden mantle wrought about most brave With faire Meander-like rich purple plates, And crinkling folds, wherein art personates, In curious work, the princely lively lad Faire Ganimede, like a young hunter clad; In woody Ide chasing the skipping deere With dart in's hand, breathing with swift careere. Whom (thus) in's hooky claws the eagle swift Soaring swoops up, and quick to th' skie doth lift. His guardians grave to heaven heave hands in vain, And all his dogs bark at the clouds amain. But him, whose worth deserv'd the second place, He with a rich-wrought coat of arms did grace, Set with gold hooks, which he victoriously From Demoleus wan, in Troy, hard by Swift Simois: this he bestows most free, A grace, a guard to him in arms to be. VVhose pond'rous weight two servants scarce could beare, But Demoleus did it eas'ly weare, And with it chas'd the Trojans in great feare. His third gifts were two cauldrons brave of brasse, And silver bowls, whose workmanship did passe, For graven figures faire. Thus all rewarded, All pleas'd with prizes to their worths afforded, Their fronts with roseall headbands bound about, Along they passe, and passing spied out Sergestes, whose best skill and utmost strength, Hardly the hard rocks made him 'scape at length, His honour sharelesse ship full fraught with shame, His oares all lost, one rank of rowers lame.
Much like a snake which crosse the way doth lie, Crusht by a wheel suddenly passing by: Or by a passenger bruis'd with a stone, Sore battered and half kill'd, there left alone; Long wrigling wreaths doth force, in vain to flie, One half stares up, and puts forth furiouslie Its hissing neck: th'other half bruis'd with-holds, And in close knots and wreaths its members folds: With such weak work his slow ship forward past, Yet still sail'd on, and got to th' haven at last. Aeneas glad to see his ship and mates Comen safe to shore, Sergestus decorates With promis'd prize, also a maiden faire, Skilfull to spin, of Cretian linage rare, And 'twixt her paps of sucking twins a paire. These sea-sports finisht, good Aeneas went Into a grassie mead, on all sides pent With groves and craggy banks, i'th' midst of it A circled plain, for theatre most fit; Where he, with many thousand gallants tended, A rare erected throne prince-like ascended. Here all that could most swiftly run a race, Invited were, with praises, prizes grace: VVhereat Sicilians, Trojans, all about, Euryalus and Nisus first i'th' rout, Do thither flock: Euryalus most faire, A lovely lively youth; and Nisus rare, An honest modest lad: next comes apace Princely Diores, of king Pris race: After him Salius came, and Patrn good: Th'one of Epire, th'others untainted bloud Sprang from Tegeus. Then two striplings came,
Panopes and Helymus, of much fame For gallant huntsmen, peeres to old Acest: And many more whom fame hath not exprest. To vvhom i'th' midst of them Aeneas said; Heare me, brave youths, be sure, and well apaid▪ Not one of all this rout but gifts shall have. I'le give two glistring Cretian arrows brave, Headed vvith steel, a silver damaskt bill: You all with equall gifts reward I vvill; Save the three chief, vvho three choice palmes shall have, Their heads adorn'd vvith olive-branches brave. A gallant horse vvith trappings I'le bestow Upon the first: and on the next also An Amazonian quiver, furnisht faire With Thracian shafts, hung at a belt most rare, And richly wrought with gold, and buttened fast With a rich stone: The third reward and last, Shall be a Grecian helmet. This being said, They chose their stations, and the signe being made, They suddenly and swiftly forth do flie, Most like a furious storm, to th' goal they hie, And first most fast, leaving them all behinde, Runnes nimble Nisus, swifter then the vvinde, Or flashy lightning. And to him the next Ran Salius swift, but vvith large distance 'twixt. Euryalus vvas third, but with some space, VVhom Helymus pursu'd with rapid race. By vvhom, behold, Diores fiercely flies, And foot by foot close at his shoulders lies, And if enough space for the race remain, Is like, the best from all the rest to gain. And now vvell-nigh they to the goal were got,
And weary all, when Nisus with hard lot, (The grasse made slippery vvith an heifers bloud, Which had been slain there, and congealed stood) Suddenly slipt, just as he skipt for joy Of hoped prize, and could not right employ His staggering feet, but fell flat on the flore, Upon the slimy mud and sacred gore: Yet mindefull of the love he ever bore Euryalus, he Salius doth oppose, Trips up his heels, just as himself up rose. Who groveling on the sand, Euryalus Starts forward, and by's friend, victorious, Gat the prime place, vvith acclamations high, And joyfull shouts, and 'fore them all doth flie. After whom Helym hastes; and in third race Diores ran. Here in the open face And huge concourse of plebeians and of peeres, Supplanted Salius mightie clamours reares, And claims his prize, forc'd from him by deceit. But bashfull teares and partiall favour great, And vertue in faire forms most gracious, Plead and prevail for young Eryals: Diores also with loud exclamation Craves his reward, and feares his fames frustration, In the last prize, if Salius have the first. But grave Aeneas soon his feare off burst, And sayes, Brave youths, your prizes are your own, Your promis'd palmes shall altered be by none: Yet let me moan my innocent friends fate. This said, his Salius he did munerate With a faire lions skin, vvith haire most rough, And goldy claws: vvhich Nisus took in suffe,
And said; If vanquisht shall be thus rewarded, If foil'd be favoured; vvhat shall be afforded? VVhat proper prize to Nisus will you yeeld, VVho did deserve first honour of the field, Had not fierce fate, as Salius, thwarted me? And at these words he stoutly lets them see His dirt-bedawbed cloaths, besmeared face. VVhich made Aeneas loudly laugh apace. Then straight he called for the stately targe, VVhich Didymaon made, both rich and large, VVhich once the Greeks to Neptune consecrated, And was hung up: And then remunerated The noble youth with that most noble prize. The race thus run, the palmes dispos'd likewise, Now sayes Aeneas, If there's any here Strong and couragious, let him now appeare, And his club-armed arms advance and lift; To whom he did allot a twofold gift. The conquerour awarded was to have A bull aray'd with gold and garland brave: The conquered, a gallant hm and sword, To him vvell beatn comfort to afford. Delay laid by, Dares dars first come forth, A mighty man, whom for his strength and worth The people much applaud: for single h Antagonist to Paris us'd to be. And he victorious Buten gigantine, (Who from Bbryoian Amycus great line Deriv'd his race) him he at Hectors grave Did fell and foile, and's curelesse death-wound gave. Such dauntlesse Dares him i'th' forefront shows, Advancing both his big arms, as he goes,
And shoulders broad, jerking the aire with blows. His like they look for, but not one they finde In all the troops, to fight with him inclin'd, Or take the club in hand triumphant then, Hoping to beare the prize from all the men, Plac'd at Aeneas feet, scorning delayes, The bulls horn held in's left hand, thus he sayes; Great Goddesse sonne, if none dares fight the field, What means this stay? why to me don't you yeeld The prize? and bid me beare the palmes away? And all the Trojan troops the same did say. Then grave Acestes calls Entellus great, Who next him sate on a green grassy seat, And chides him thus; Entellus, once esteem'd The stoutest of our peeres, in vain so deem'd, Canst thou be patient, and without one blow Suffer such palmes so eas'ly hence to goe? VVhere's now great Eryx, our warre-master stout, Vainly renown'd? vvhere is thy fame, spread out Through Sicilie? and house adorning spoiles? To whom he said; No love of land recoiles In me, nor thirst of fame, enforc'd by feares: But my chill bloud and dull declining yeares, VVhereby my youthfull powers exhausted be. But were it now as it was once with me, And as 'tis with this Braggadocia bold, VVere I so young again, nought should with-hold Me from the fight, no prize should prick me on, No beauteous bull; gifts I'd not stand upon. This said, two clubs he threw down in their sight, Heavy and huge, wherewith in such like fight, Fierce Eryx us'd to combat with strong hand.
At sight whereof amaz'd they all did stand, To see them stuft with lead, and lin'd besides With iron plates, cover'd with seven bulls hides. Amongst the rest Dares being damped most, Stiffely refus'd them (maugre former boast) Yea great Aeneas poysed with his hands Their weight, and up and down rowl'd their huge bands▪ Whereat the aged champion thus did say; What if you all had seen that furious fray Fought in these parts, vvith great Alcides arms, And these our clubs? vvherewith in fierce alarms Thy kinsman Eryx formerly had fought, Stain'd still thou seest with bloud and brains dasht out. Wherewith he haughty Hercules vvithstood: Which I my self have us'd in youthfull bloud; VVhen yet gray haires in emulous old age Did not my head o'respread, nor valour swage. But if Troyes Dares these our arms denie, And good Aeneas and Acest complie Me to excuse, who me first mov'd thereto; Let's match our weapons, I remit to you Eryx his clubs: feare not, and lay you by Your Trojan clubs. This said, immediately He doffs his double coat from's shoulders wide, And his huge bodies bulk: all present ey'd His mightie bones, strong sinews naked be: Thus giant-like, most tall and stout stood he. Then grave Aeneas equall clubs chose out, And vvell-mach't vveapons; bound their hands about. Straight hand to hand, and foot to foot both stand, And fearelesse, each aloft lifts up his hand, And banging blows make each ones head bend back:
Fiercely they fight, and each gives thwack for thwack. He nimbler skips about in youthfull heat; This keeps his standing with his limbes most great: Yet moves his trembling legs, but faint and slow; And like one sick, he thick doth breathe and blow. Thus (though in vain) with might and main they fight, VVith toyling, foiling cuffes each other smite, And beat and bang about each others hides, And make redoubled thwacks sound on their sides: About their eares their hasty hands do flie, Whose thumps their chaps make chatter gnashingly. Thus great Entellus stiffely stands it out, VVith watchfull eyes observes the blows about, And viewing, voids▪ Dares industriously, Like one which scales a town with engines high, Or with stout troops begirt, a castle strong, Now this way, that way, every way doth long By fraud or fierce assaults a breach to make: But all in vain he all this toile doth take. For strong Entellus roused up doth lift Aloft his rough right hand, which Dares swift Foresees, and shuns the furious falling blow, And with a nimble skip avoids it so. Whereby Entellus, frustrate, beats the winde, Whose mark thus mist, his heavie corps inclinde, Prone to the earth with furie of the stroak, Much like a hollow, great, and o're-grown oak In Erymanth or Ida's wood most great, Even by the roots o'returned from its seat. The Trojans and Trinacrian lads in zeal Start up hereat, and raise a clamorous peal: Acestes first to's fallen old friend doth hie,
Grieves, gets him up. Th' old champion speedily Rear'd, nothing fear'd with this his sudden fall, Flies to the fight more fierce, rage feeds his gall. Disgrace gives fire to force, and foreknown might: And fiercely he doth Dares headlong smite, And bang about the field with both his hands, Redoubling boystrous blows; nor quiet stands, Nor takes least rest: but as thick showers of hail With ratling noise do houses tops assail: Even so this chafing champion thrashes out With both his hands young Dares stomack stout. Then grave Aeneas hastens to allay Entellus furious rage, his wrath to stay, And ends the fight, gives tired Dares rest, And comfort in kinde words he thus exprest: Unfortunate! what phrenzie blindes thy minde? Feel'st thou not mightier force and fates unkinde? Submit to God. This said, the combat ended, But him (alas!) his faithfull mates attended, Dragging his feeble feet, and to and fro His weak head dangling, vomiting also Much gore-bloud from his mouth, his teeth dasht out, Thus to the ships they bore him from the rout: Bidden to take the sword and helm away, Entellus had the praise and prize o'th' day. He victour, vanting of his bull for joy, Sayes thus, Faire prince, and you rare troops of Troy, Ye now may see what strength my young yeares had, And how ye sav'd Dares from death most sad. This said, against the bull, his prize he stands, Ties it, and takes his club in both his hands, And 'twixt the horns gives it a blow so fierce,
As made the broken bones the brains to pierce. The beast is slain, lies groveling on the ground. Whereat these words he vents from's heart profound: This fitter soule, then Dares death, to thee Great Eryx, I being victour, offer free, And now my club and art relinquisht be. Then straight, Aeneas those that would invites To shooting games, and them with gifts incites: In Sergests ship erects a mightie mast. To th' top whereof he ties a pigeon fast, Hung by a dangling rope, their mark, or white. The archers come, and int' a helmet bright The lots are cast, and with a joyfull voice, Hippoc'on had the first affected choice. Whom Mnestheus follows next, at sea-fight best; Mnestheus his brows with olive-branches drest. The third Eurytion was, thy brother kinde, Rare Pandarus; who biddden, with brave minde Didst first, once charg'd the truce to terminate, Through thickest Greeks thy dart make penetrate. The last and lowest in the harnesse-cap, Fell out to be noble Acestes hap; Even he himself would venture valiantly With those brave sparks this shooting-task to try. Then with stiffe strength they bend their crooked bows, And each for's use shafts from his quiver choose. Hippoc'on first made from his clanging string His arrow cut the aire, and flying, sing; And singing, pierce, and stick fast in the mast. The mast was shook, the fluttering foule agast, And through them all loud acclamations past. Next Mnestheus stout stood with his bow full bent,
His eye and arrow aim at high intent. But yet (good man) he could not hit the white, And yet the coard he did in sunder smite, Wherewith the dove by's feet was ty'd to th' mast: Straight with the winde through th' aire the dove flies fast. Eurytion then alreadie readie prest With bow and shaft, set to, to shoot addrest, His brother invocates for aid auspicious: In th' open aire spies the dove most conspicuous, Cheerefully sporting with her wings for joy, Whom his quick shaft did nimbly pierce, destroy. Under a cloud the dove i'th' aire thus dead, Falls down, and fallen, the shot-shaft rendered. Acestes onely fails of's palmes desert, Yet into th' aire he shot his whisling dart, Proud of his expert art, and clanging bow. But here behold, a most prodigious show And anxious augurie came soon in sight, As the strange issue did demonstrate right, And omens great which frighting prophets write. For ith' cleare aire the flying dart did flame, Which gliding on, a fire consumes the same, And wastes ith' fanning windes: just as we see The falling starres, when as they gliding be, To beare long fiery streams. Amaz'd they stand, Trinacrians, Trojans, lift up heart and hand: And wise Aeneas marks the omen right, And sweet Acestes greets with great delight, Loads him with love-gifts, and (thus) to him said; Receive, grave sir (for thee great Jove hath made By this strange signe, though prizelesse, worthy praise) Receive this gift, in old Anchises dayes,
Bestow'd on him by Cisseus king of Thrace, A pledge of his great love and friendly grace, A goblet great, engraven with figures faire. This said, he bindes his brows with garlands rare, And doth Acest prime conquerour declare. Nor did Eurytion kinde this honour grudge, Though he alone (as all might justly judge) The pigeon fell'd from skie: The next reward He therefore had, for he 'twas cut the coard: He had the last, whose dart the mast did cleave. But brave Aeneas, e're the sport they leave, Epitides Ascanius guardian there And mate, he calls, and whispers in his eare, And sayes, Go quick, bid my sonne come away (If all the childrens troops be in aray, And horse-race ready) with his bands to goe Unto his grandsire, and in Martiall show To shew himself: Aeneas self mean space Commands the folk, flocking about the place, To gather in a ring, the plain to cleare. And now the lively striplings all draw neare Before their fathers, on bright bridled steeds, Which in the Trojans and Trinacrians breeds Great admiration, exultation great. All had their haire (as custome was) cut neat, And helmets on their heads: in's hand each kept A paire of horny speares with steel well tipt. Some at their backs wore quivers, dainty, light, About their necks: gold chains their breasts bedight. Three coronets of horse three captains have, Twelve children glistring in their arms most brave, Attending them, and masters, them to guide;
One brave battalion, which with Martiall pride Thy noble sonne Polites, (Priam faire) VVho did his kingly grandsires sirname beare, And must the bounds of Italie advance; VVho on a stately Thracian steed did prance, All partly colour'dwith faire specks o white, His forefeet so, his proud head born upright, A white starre on his brow, a comely sight. Another band young Atys lively led: From whom the Romane Atyan race was spread: Young Atys, to Iülus young most deare. The last and best for beauty without peere, VVas faire Iülus, on a courser brave Of Carthage, vvhich to him queen Dido gave, A signe and symbol of her love to him; The rest being grave Acestes yonkers trim, Come on Trinacrian steeds. The Trojan rout Receive them, full of fame-affecting doubt, VVith great applause, and taking great delight In sweet conceipt of grave ancestours sight. Their stations (now) with joy all view'd about, And much affected vvith this friendly rout. Epitides seeing them all addrest, VVith a loud lash and sound the signe exprest. Straight all break out, and three by three disperse, And back again revoked their reverse: And at there breasts their nimble speares they set, Fetching careeres, and thence crosse courses met: And with crosse distance fetch crosse compasse round, Rushing on adverse rings, like vvarre profound In hottest skirmish; now turn backs to flight. VVhereat enrag'd, their darts they at them smite;
And yet (anon) in peacefull wise shake hands. Much like the Laborynthick maze which stands In Creet, enclos'd with walls most intricate, With thousand anxious wayes to ambulate, Whose unfound paths do wearie walkers tire, And in and out, Meanders all admire: Even so the Trojan striplings skip about, And flights and fights by sporting in and out Neatly contrive: like Dolphins in the main, Whose frisks and skips much sport i'th' waves maintain. These courses, combats, and this custome rare, Ascanius first did found, and new repaire, When spacious Alba he with walls did frame, And taught old Rome to celebrate the same: As he a childe, as Trojan lads had shown, The ancient Albanes they to theirs made known. This pretty sport from them the Romanes old, Long after did forefathers honour hold: This children (now) call Troy, Trojan troops name. And thus farre (now) unto his fathers fame, These pleasant sports perform'd and celebrated, Here fortune her faire face first transmutated. For whiles they sport about his fathers tombe, Iuno send Iris in a pelting fume, Unto the Trojan fleets, and gives her winde, Much mov'd, and (still) old grudges born in minde, Iris i'th' rain-bows thousand colours speeds, Unseen of any, virgin-like proceeds With expeditious haste, huge troops doth meet, Sees the forsaken shores, ports, naked fleet. But yet the Trojan wives farre off did keep In private banks, and for the losse did weep
Of old Anchises; weeping as they stood, They all beheld the mightie ocean floud, Crying, Alas! what sea-toiles yet remain To us tyr'd soules; all sighing, in one strain Wishing a citie, loathing more sea-pain. Dame Iris 'mongst them slilie thrusts in place, Suspectlesse of abuse, her Goddesse face, Gesture and vesture, from her laid aside, She's now Beröe, Doryclus old bride, Mother of children, late of note and fame: And thus amongst them, like a Trojan dame, Speaks to the Trojan wives: O wofull we, Whom Grecian power might not massacred see In bloudy warre under the walls of Troy! Unhappie nation! kept from more annoy. This now's the seventh yeare since our land was lost, Since we strange seas, lands, rocks, and sands have crost, And stormie starres have scapt, whiles through vast streams And tumbling waves, we follow flying dreams; We flie to fleeting Italie: yet here Our kinsman Eryx borders do us cheere, And kinde Acests. Who'le us then deny T'inhabit here, a town to edifie? O countrey, O in vain sav'd deities! Shall no town yet old Troy rememorize? O shall I ne're Hectorean rivers see? No Xanthus, Siois? no? come on with me, With me come burn these ships inauspicate: For I Cassandra's ghost in sleep saw late; Who gave me these incendiarie brands, And said, Here seek your Troy, here in these lands Fix your abode: now's time the work to ply,
Why stay we, since we see so great a tie? Foure flaming altars unto Neptune great, And fates themselves give fire, and valours heat. Thus speaking, she ran first, and snatcht a brand Of furious fire, which flaming in her hand, Into the fleet she flang it furiously: The Trojan wives much startled were hereby, And 'maz'd in minde: whereat one 'mongst the rest, Grave Pyrgo, Priams nurse, who had exprest Much loyaltie and love to's children deare, Said, Trust me (matrons) I dare boldly sweare This is not Beröe, our late neighbours wife: For I see signes of sacred Godhead rise: Mark you her glistering eyes, her spirit divine, Her looks, her voice, her state and gate most fine: And I my self left Berö sick of late, Much griev'd, that she was so unfortunate Not to be present, horrours due t'have paid To old Anchiss tombe. This though she said, Yet at the first the women doubtfull be, As blinde in eyes as minde, their ships to see, And held with deep desire of this lands rest, And fate-assigned realms, which should b best. But when they saw the winged Goddss fli, And flying cut the cloudie bow in skie, Provok'd by this prodigious accident, With rage transpoted, they loud clamors vent, And fires from orth ther  and chieys snatch: Some th' altars teare, some boughs and brnhes catch, And ought combusible, and firbrands throw Into their ships: Vulcan the flame doth blow Of fierce unbridled spoile on planks and are,
Hatches and painted decks. At these uproares Eumelus posteth to Anchises grave, To beare sad tidings to those bands most brave, Of this combustion: and the gamesters spie Black smoak and sparkling flames flie up to th' skie. And as first horse-careeres Ascanius led, So fiercely first to th'troubled tents he fled: Nor could the mzed masters make him stay, But on he comes, and thus to them doth say; O what strange wrath is this? what mean ye now, O wretched women? 'gainst whom do ye vow This mischief great? Here is no adverse foe, No Grecian tnts; your hopes you'le burn up so. O see me your Ascanius, your delight! Whereat he pulls off's helmet in their sight, Wherewith in field his Martiall sports he ply'd: To whom Aeneas, all the Trojans hy'de. But all the wives pursu'd with feare and dread, To th' woods and groves all straglingly were fled, And michingly to caves and rocks they run, Hating the light; sham'd of their work begun: And chang'd in minde, in grief their friends they know, And hate great Iuno, cause of all this woe. But what of this? hereby they quench no fire, For flames increase with most represselesse ire, And pitch and ow, kindling a smoothering heat, Sly fires increase, and raise combustion great. Through th' ships great bulks, nor by the peeres best power, Or force of flouds, do flames cease to devoure. Then good Aeneas rent his cloaths with grief, With stretcht-out hands implores the Gods relief. And thus he prayes▪ Great Iove, if Trojans all
Thou hast not yet quite cast off, left to thrall: If long devotion helps mens miseries, O free our fleet from flame-calamities: And now from ruine raise Troyes tottering state, Or else (great sire) if it be my due fate, Strike me (all left) to death with lightning fierce, And let thy hand my heart profoundly pierce. Scarce had he spoke, when mightie showres of rain Most thick, most quick, came powdring down amain: A mightie storm, and ratling roaring thunder, Making earths most obdurate creatures wonder: All o're the skie the furious tempest grows, And plenteous streams into the vessels throws, Which washt the half-burnt wood, stints all the flame, All's ships but foure being saved by the same. But grave Aeneas dampt with this dire chance, His thoughts now here now there in minde do glance; Musing, unmindfull of the fates decree, Whether 'twere best in Sicil still to be, Or bend his courses now for Italie. Then aged Nautes, whom most expertly Tritonian Pallas made an artist rare, Resolves him thus; both what great Iuno faire Enrag'd would act, and destinies dispose, He kindely thus t' Aeneas doth disclose: Faire Goddesse sonne, where fates us call, re-call, Thither let's go, what ever us befall: Fortune by sufferance best is overthrown. Trojan Acestes is thy kinsman known, Make him of counsel with thee, to him cleave, Thy burnt-ships surplusage of people leave Unto his care. Such as thy high designes
Do disaffect, whose heart to ease inclines, Feeble old men, sea-tyred maids and vvives, All that are faint, and fearfull of their lives, Select them out, a town here let them frame, And, from Acestes, it Acesta name. Encourag'd thus by his grave friends advise, Yet still one care doth on another rise, And now nights curtain black the skies did vail, VVhen from the heavens his fathers image pale, Anchises ghost, came down, and suddenly Said thus to him; Deare sonne, to me more nigh, More deare then life, (whiles life vvith me did last) Deare sonne, on various Troy-fates long time cast; I come to thee from Iove, who quencht the flame Of thy fir'd fleet, pitying thee in the same. Obey old Nautes wholsome exhortations, And take vvith thee in thy perambulations To Italie, choice youths of courage stout: For vvith fierce people thou must fight it out, A nation hard to tame. Yet before this, Thou must descend the dungeons dark of Dis: Yea thou, deare sonne, must passe Avernus lake To come to me: yet no abode I make In torturing Tartar, or in darknes sad: But in Elysium, where delights make glad Sweet troops of sacred soules: hither, I say, Faire Sibyll shall thee by much bloud convay Of sacrific'd black beasts. Whence thou shalt know Thy citie sought, and race from thee to flow. And now farewell, moist midnight hastes away, Sols puffing steeds begin to breath out day. This said, like smoak he flies i'th' fleeting skie.
To whom Aeneas; Whither dost thou flie? Why hastes thou hence? From whom dost thou take flight? Or, who does thee from our embraces fright? Which spoke, he stirres the embers, rakt up fire, And worships with a reverend hearts desire His Trojan Gods, and to them consecrates Pure floure and frankincense. Then calls his mates, But chiefly grave Acestes speedily, And Ioves command to them doth signifie, And his deare fathers charge, what he design'd, And now resolv'd. Whereto Acest inclin'd. And counsel straight they take, and measure forth Towns for their vvives, and men of meanest worth, Whose most ignoble mindes regard not fame. But they new sailing barks begin to frame, And half-burnt ship-planks, oares and ropes repaire; In number, few; in vvarre, for service rare. Meanwhile Aeneas vvith a plough sets out The cities scope, 'points houses round about: Here Iliums towers, there he sets Troyes faire gates: Thus his new realm Acest congratulates. Then courts and laws he gives the fathers grave, And neare the starres, on Eryx high would have A temple founded unto Venus faire, A sacred grove, and priest, vvhose speciall care Should onely be, Anchises tombe to tend: And novv the nations nine dayes feast had end; And on their altars offrings all vvere made, And fanning gales upon the ocean play'd, And fequent puffing blasts to sea invite. Then on the shore at their departing sight, Full flouds of teares are shed, and night and day
In mutuall kinde embraces still they stay. And now those wives, those folk effeminate, To whom the sight of sea was frightfull late, That toile intolerable; now most fain Away they would to sea, all toile sustain. Whom good Aeneas with kinde vvords doth cheere, And vveeping leaves t' Acest his kinsman deare. To Eryx then three calves he bids them kill, And to the storms a lambe he offer vvill. Bids them the cables loose, and order right, Himself with olive-boughs his head bedight, In's hand a bowl, aloof on ship-board stood, Flasht out pure wines, spread entralls on the floud. A whisking gale puffs on them as they sail: His men rowe close, and thrash the flouds with flail▪ Meanwhile faire Venus, full of tender care, To Neptune speaks, doth thus her plaints declare: Fierce Iuno's wrath, and quenchlesse indignation▪ Force me (great Neptune) to prest supplication. Which rage of hers no length of time, or dayes, Nor piety or pity stops or stayes: Nor Ioves command, or fates decree can still Her most unbrideled rage: nor Troyes great ill, Bespoil'd of towns and nation, vvith strange spight, Can satisfie, but with all rancourous might She plagues poore vvasted Troyes (as yet) remains; Yea their dead bones and ashes she disdains. The cause of so great wrath her self can tell, And how she lately rais'd, thou know'st it well, Strange sudden storms o're all the Libyan seas, Confounding heaven and sea with rough disease: All by her friend Aeolus puffs most vain,
All this she durst in thy vast realm, the main. Behold, beside the Trojan vvives (foule fact!) VVith rage enflam'd, foulely (by her compact) Fired their fleet, forc'd them, their ships decay'd, In a strange land to be detain'd and stay'd. This then remains; I pray thee let them sail Thy vvatrie soil in safety, with smooth gale Let them arive vvhere Tybers stream doth flow: If our desires thou grant, if fates also Grant us our promis'd realms, then speak, I pray. Then Neptune, seas great soveraigne, thus did say; Faire Venus, thou mayst in my bounds be bold, For thence thou dost thy bloud and linage hold: I alwayes also have been kinde to thine, And heavens and seas joynt wrath, vvhich did combine, And fury fierce, I have restrain'd for thee, Nor have I (Xanth and Simois vvitnes be) Of thine Aeneas had lesse care on land: But when Achilles fierce with furious hand Did prosecute and execute with might Troyes troops, and from safe vvalls forc'd them to flight; When thousands dead did fall, when flouds did groan, Fill'd vvith kill'd bodies; when no way was known For Xanthus course to sea, being dam'd with dead: I then in misty clouds quite covered Aeneas, chaed by Achilles strong, VVhen fates and force left him to hostile vvrong: Even then vvhen I could vvell have found in heart, Mine own built faithlesse Troy quite to subvert. Then feare not, for I have the same minde still: He and they all desir'd, shall safely fill Avernus port: one onely shall be drown'd,
VVho sought for in the sea, shall not be found: His life the rest shall ransome. Thus most kinde He stroaks and cheeres the Goddese cheerefull minde, Then yokes his horses to his chariots drift, And gives the foamy reins to's coursers swift, The bridle laid most loose: and thus he slides In his blew chariot o're the surging tides: Down winde the vvaves, ow the rough billows bend, Under his thundring wheels clouds quick descend. Then various troops appeare above the main, Leviathans most huge, old Glaucus train, Mankinde Palaemon, nimble Tritons thick, And foamy Phorcus his attendants quick. The left hand Thetis, and the Mermaids keep, Nisaeë, Spio, all sea-nymphs that sleep, And love to live in waves. Aeneas here His drooping thoughts with joy doth now re-cheare, And bids his men their masts to raise with speed, To stretch their sails. Whereto they all proceed, Their feet and force, their hands and heart conjoyn To th' larboard, or to th' starboard to incline: Their sail-yards then they winde, unwinde again: All things concurre to make them sail amain. But primely Palinurus guides them all: All bend their course to his least beck or call. And now was midnight neare, when all took rest, Spread on hard hatches thus, from toyling ceast; VVhen as soft sleeps slipt down from starrie skies, And glancing through th' aires darknes way discries To pitch on thee, poore harmlesse Palinure, On thee to force sad sleep who sat'st secure, Presenting to thee thy friend Phorbas face, And speaking thus to thee in dreaming case;
See Iasian Palinure, the very tide Makes thy ship sail, faire gales it friendly guide. Here's time to rest, lay down thy head and sleep, And I for thee thy stern will carefull keep. To whom vvith drowsie eyes sayes Palinure; Wouldst thou me make in calmie seas secure? And in faire streams fallacious dreams to trust? And great Aeneas on false blasts to thrust? With skies faire face have I so oft been gull'd? For this? This said, his helm more close he pull'd, Keeps fast his hold, on's starres fast fixt his eyes. But now behold, this God of sleep from skies Whisks a vvet branch of soporiferous dew, Whose Stygian strength he o're his eye-brows threw: Which soon his rowling eyes with sleep o'relaid. Whose first loose lids on sudden nod scarce made, When to himself the helm too closely stay'd, He pulls the poop aside, the rudder brast, And over-board i'th' sea he's headlong cast, Crying for help unto his mates in vain, And then this sleep-god flies to th' skies again. The fleet, for all this, sails in safety By Neptunes promise, in security. And now Sirenes rigid rocks drew neare, VVhich with huge heaps of bones did white appeare: And then farre off the rocks rough roares they heard, VVhen grave Aeneas from his sleep up-rear'd, Perceiv'd their master lost, the fleet to stray, Himself by night the pilots part did play, Lamenting much his old deare friends decay. Ah too too credulous of sea and skie! Deare Palinure in unknown sands must lie. An end of the fifth book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the sixth book. Aeneas safe at Cuma's lands, By Sibyll strange things understands: Misenus found, and buried there, From whom the hill its name doth beare. The Gods appeas'd, a branch of gold He beares along: His course doth hold, By Sibyls guide, t' Avernus lake; Knows Palmure, great care does take To comfort Dido, there being found. Sees Deïphobus cruell wound. Sibyll him shows the pains of hell, Anchises meets him, knows him well. Rare things of Rome to him relates: Which done, he thence returns to's mates. THose weeping words so uttered, swift he sails, And gets to Cumas coasts with prosperous gales. Foredecks they winde from sea, sharp anchours tie Their settled ships, which 'bout th shores do lie: Out leap their nimble youth, with high desire Of Latium land. Some seek for sparks of fire Hid in hard flints; some range the woods about, The wilde-beasts dennes, fresh springs and flouds finde out▪ But good Aeneas to the towers did hie,
Where great Apollo hath supremacie, The dungeon dark and cells of Sibyll grave, To whom a heart and minde Apollo gave Inspir'd with wisedome, future things to know; Then to Diana's groves, guilt rooms, they go. Fame sayes, when Daedalus from Creet did flie On wax-swift wings, he boldly flew i'th' skie, To the cold North gliding by uncouth way, On Cumas turrets he at last did stay. Here first ariving safe, great Phoebus, he Offered his wings, built temples faire to thee. Upon whose gates Androgeus death doth stand: And how (oh woe!) th' Athenians by command Seven sonnes and daughters yeare by yeare did slay: There pots for drawing lots behold we may. Above the sea, their Candy countrey's seen, And there was pourtray'd Pasiphäe the queen: And by her stood her loathsome love, a bull; With whom by art her lust was serv'd at full: Whose monstrous mixture foulely did produce A two-form'd Minotaure, of base abuse, A monstrous monument. That house was here, Whose Labyrinthick labour did appeare In its amazing maze. But Daedalus Pitying the queens love most notorious, Found out the houses sleights; Meanders strange, Led by a threed, through all the crooks did range. And thou, O Icarus, hadst had great share (Had not grief hindred) in this work so rare: Twice he assay'd thy fate in gold to paint, And twice i'th' work thy fathers hand did faint. Yea all those famous facts they had survay'd,
Had not Achates, sent before, them stayd, And with him Deiphobe brought, no lesse, Apollo's and Diana's Prophetesse: Who thus sayes to the king; This time requires No pleasing spectacles to th' eyes desires: But now out of thy droves seven heifers faire Go sacrifice, and seven good sheep prepare, According to old wont. This to him said, Her holy hests Aeneas straight obey'd. The Trojans then she to th' huge temple calls, Into a cave cut out o'th' mightie walls Of Cumas mount: an hundred wayes most wide Leading thereto, an hundred doores beside, Where hundred voices roare Sibylls replies. To th' porch they came, when as the virgin wise Sayes, Now's the time the fates decrees to know: Here's God, ah see the God! who saying so, Her visage straight was changed at the doore, And her complection was not as before: Her haire did stare, her heart did pant with feare, Strange extasies her swelling thoughts did reare; She greater personage seems, no voice humane She seems to have, since she did neare remain Unto the Gods great power, therewith inspir'd: And stand'st thou still (sayes she) when prayer's requir'd, Trojan Aeneas? stand'st thou still, I say? Shall not these fearefull rooms (till thou dost pray) Ope their wide mouths? This having said, she ceast. Straight on the Trojans trembling feare increast. Then thus the king humbly did supplicate; Great Phoebus, who dost still commiserate Troyes tedious toiles, who Paris hand didst guide,
And mad'st his shaft to pierce Achilles side; By whom so many land-enclosing seas I entred have, and passed with sweet ease; And through most farre remote Moroco lands, Through many deep and dangerous quick-sands; And now at last in shrinking Italie Have safe ariv'd, and hitherto past by The various fortunes which have us still tended: O now 'tis time, your indignation ended, Great Gods and Goddesses, whom Ilium brave, And glorious Dardan much provoked have: And thou, most sacred priest, which dost foresee Future events, grant (for I ask of thee But kingdomes due by destinies consent) Us Trojans rest in Latiums continent, And to Troyes wandring Gods, who with us went. Then I'le to Phoebus and Diana raise Faire marble temples, and t' Apollo's praise Make dayes of triumphs; and within our state, Thee as our God, we all will venerate. And here thine anxious oracles I'le place, Thy secret sacred rhymes, my nations grace. To thee, faire priest, choice men I'le consecrate; Onely in leaves do not thy rhymes relate, Lest puft with windes, they fluttering flie away. And thus he ends; Speak thou thy self, I pray. But here the priest pelting impatiently, Wrathfully rag'd at Phoebus deity Within the cave: if she could from her breast Shake off the Gods great power, which her supprest, And which so much the more did curb and tame Her madding mouth, her fierce heart fitly frame.
And now the temples hundred mightie doores Ope of themselves, by orizons; the roares Of Sibylls answers thus the aire do beat; O thou who hast escapt seas dangers great! Yet still on land farre greater thee attend. The Trojans shall (then let this care here end) Into Lavinus realms arive, but there They'le soon repent: warres, warres full fraught with feare, And Tyber foaming streams of bloud I see. Ah Simois and Xanthus there shall be, And second Grecian camps: there thou shalt finde A new Achilles of as fierce a minde, Born of a Goddesse great: yea Iuno fierce Will still the Trojans with much anguish pierce. When thou in straits shalt be, what nations great, What Latian towns shalt not thou lowly entreat? A nother harbour'd wife will cause this smart, A forrain wedlock on the Trojans part. Yet shrink not for these ills, but stouter be: For the first hope (thou'lt scarcely credit me) Of comfort, wherewith fortune will thee crown, Shall surely issue from a Grecian town. Thus from her cell Cumaean Sibyll sings Ambiguous ambages, the cloyster rings With the shrill sound thereof, in most dark strains Wrapping up truths with such o'reruling rains, Apollo's spurres her furious stirres restrains. As soon as ere her rage began to cease, And her mad mouth began to be at peace, Noble Aeneas thus begins to say; Faire virgin, no new stirres thou dost display, No strange unheard of change, unknown to me,
All these in heart long since I did foresee. This one thing I desire (since men relate, That hard by is th' infernall kings wide gate, And Acherontine darksome plashie lake) O may I enter, for my fathers sake, To see his lovely face. Open, I pray, Those dreadfull doores, and lead me the right way. Him I through flames and thousand fluttering darts Bore on my back, and sav'd from hostile smarts: With me he went, with me all seas he sail'd, All storms, where with skies, seas, shores, us assail'd, Beyond his strength, and lot he feebly bore. He when I hither came, charg'd me before, That humbly I should pray for free accesse Into thy courts: faire ladie, now expresse Compassion to the father and the sonne: For by thy power what ere thou wilt is done. Nor thee in vain hath Hecate set thus Over Avernus groves: If Orpheus With's Thracian harp and rarely sounding voice His wifes soule could regain, with longed choice: If Pollux could by death alternately His brother free, go, come most frequently: What talk I now of Hercules most strong? Of Theseus stout? even I my self belong To mightie Ioves high race. This being said, He held the altar: then the priestly maid Did thus reply; Brave Trojan, born most high, The way to hell is found most easily: Pluto's black gate stands open night and day: But to return, and thence finde heavens hard way, O here's the toile, this is a work indeed;
ew can do this, and they of heavenly breed, And such as are belov'd of Iove most just, Whose vertues rare to th' skies exalt them must: Dark woods, black flouds, the midwayes overspread: Yet if thy minde be with such longing led, To swimme twice over Styx, twice to behold Tartars dark dennes, and that thou art so bold, So hard a task, so free to take in hand: Then what thou first must do now understand: In huge wood shades there is a golden tree, Whose leaves and tender twigs all golden be, To faire Proserpina being consecrated, VVhich by the whole thick wood is obumbrated, And with dark dikes and banks immur'd about: But none can under earth get in or out, Till he a branch of that gold tree obtain, VVhich must to faire Proserpina remain, As her choice gift. A first branch pull'd away, Another sprig springs out of gold most gay: Then search it seriously, which when you spie, Carefully crop it; for if destinie Intend thee to befriend, 'twill follow faire, With a slight slip; if not, no toil or care Can break the branch, no ax it loose or lop. Besides, there lies upon the earths bare top, Thy friends unburied corps (alas, thou sure Knowest it not) whose smell none can endure Through all thy fleet: then whiles thou here dost stay To ask deep counsell, take his corps away, And lay him in his grave, and with thee take Fat beasts, thy first black sacrifice to make. So shalt thou Styn groves behold at last,
And hard-found courts, which (yet) no mortals past. This said, to silence she her lips confin'd. Aeneas, he goes on with carefull minde, His eyes fast fixt on ground, the cave forsaken, By thousand thoughts of strange events o'retaken. With whom his trustie kinde Achates went, To share with him in all hard straits full bent. Thus as they passe, much various talk they finde; What corps t'interre she meant; what dead friend kinde: And going on, they on dry-land did spie Misenus good, slain most unworthily: Misenus nobly born, then whom was none A braver bolder trumpeter ere known. With expert art t'inflame mens hearts to fight, In whom great Hector rarely did delight, Made him his mate; for in his battells brave With speare and trump he did him well behave. But when Achilles victour vanquished His Hector deare, he forthwith followed Trojan Aeneas, as his noble mate, To no lesse fame himself t' associate. But (once) when on an hollow rock, by chance, He unadvis'dly did his trump advance, And with shrill notes did seem to vindicate The sea-nymphs; Triton him did emulate, And (if we may beleeve it) in disdain Precipitately in the foamy main Drown'd him amongst the rocks. They all therefore A bout the corps his fatall end deplore, Chiefly Aeneas: then without delay They Sibylls charge to discharge haste away, And weeping went to work, to fell down trees,
A grave pile to erect, which by degrees Should touch the skies. To an old wood they go, Where fierce wilde beasts did lurk: there down they throw Firre-trees, and beech resounding hatchets blow, Ash-trees and oaks they cut and cleave with wedges, And from the hills huge elms they rowl on sledges· Aeneas chiefly all their works o'reviews, Prayes them to ply it, nor doth he refuse To work with them; yet whiles in his sad breast He ruminates these things, his eyes addrest To the huge wood, thus haply prayed he; O that in this wide wood, that golden tree So hard to finde, it self would to me show, For surely all the prophets said (I know) Is too too true of thee, Misenus deare! Scarce said he thus, when to him did appeare A paire of pigeons, flying 'fore his eyes, And on the grasse alighting from the skies. The noble prince his mothers birds did know, And joyfull prayes, O be my guides, and show The way if any be, and through the aire 'Point me a path by which I may repaire Into the wood, and finde the fertile ground, Which with that rare rich golden branch is crown'd. And thou deare mother, do me not forsake In such anxieties: as thus he spake, He steady stands, watching the doves aright, What signes they'd show, which way they'd take their flight. They onely pecking meat flew fast away As farre as e're mans sight could after stray. Thus flying o're Avernus stinking lake, They swiftly hovering up, their way do take
Through the transparent aire, and gliding sit Each on a tree, upon their branches fit. Whence on the boughs gold glistering glimpses lay, Like as when on a pinching winter day The mistle-tow doth flourish fresh and gay With new sprung leaves, which ne're grew from the tree, On which it hangs, whose yellow berries be 'Bout the tall trunk thereof, a clinging shade: Even such a shew the golden branches made, On adverse oaken boughs, which a soft blast Made dangling leaves a twinkling lustre cast. At it straight leaps Aeneas, pulls it quick Greedily, thinking it too long did stick. Which to the Sibylls cell away he bore. Meanwhile the Trojans did lament on shore Misenus dead, and his neglected dust They now adorn with funerall rites most just. And first, fat-heart of oak in shivers cut, And pitchie chips of wood together put, They built a mightie pile, and thereto adde In gracefull wise his arms and cypresse sad. Some get warm water, some set on the flame Brasse boyling cauldrons, some with ointments came, And wash and 'noint his frozen body there, And weeping much his wofull corps they beare Unto the bed; then over him were thrown His purple robes, rich vestures throughly known. Some on their shoulders beare the mightie beere (Sad piece of service) as to parents deare Young men do use; their torches turn'd behinde, Their frankincense and oyles, given with free minde, They heap together, and together burn.
Thus when his corps and all to ashes turn, And the flame slakes; vvhat ever did remain, His unburnt bones, hot cinders, up were ta'ne, And washt vvith wine, and by Chorineus laid Into a brazen coffin, by him made: And thrice pure water on his mates he threw, And with an olive-branch sprinkles sweet dew. And thus due expiation makes for all, And bids farewell, last knell, to th' funerall. But good Aeneas the sepulchre raises To a huge height, and to the mans due praises Layes on his arms, his oare, and trump of fame, Upon the skie-top mount, which from his name Was call'd Misenus, aye to beare the same. This done, he speeds to do the Sibylls charge. There is a dungeon deep, with mouth most large, Lined with stones, fenc'd with black pools, boughs thick, O're which no fowl dares flie, though ne're so quick, Without destruction; such foul stinks arise Out of its mouth, and putrifie the skies: Whence Greeks that place Avernus nominate. Here foure fat heifers he did ordinate, Upon whose front the priest pure liquor threw, And pul'd the haires, which 'twixt their horns thick grew, And cast them in the fire, first expiation; Making to Hecate due invocation, Whose soveraignty in heaven and hell was great. Some kill the beasts, and in their basons neat Save the warm bloud: Aeneas self also A black-wool'd lambe to th' dam of hagges below, And her great sister, vvith his sword did slay; And unto thee, sacred Proserpina,
A barren cow. Then to the Stygian king He built night-altars, and to them did bring Fat flesh of bulls, to sacrifice i'th' flame, Pouring on fatty oyle t' increase the same. But now, behold, before Sols first arise, Under his feet the ground made muttering cries, Wood-mountains mov'd, dogs seem'd to howl i'th' shade, Just as the Goddesse came, foule stirre was made: The priest cries out, Avaunt, be gon, profane, And cleare these groves, not one must here remain. Force thou thy way with naked sword in hand, Be strong, Aeneas, stoutly to it stand. This said, her self into the cave she cast Most furiously; he stiffely follows fast, So good a guide, at heels, and thus he pray'd; Great Gods, which rule each ghost and silent shade, Phlegethon, Chaos, rooms dark, dumbe and deep; O let me not of these things silence keep: O let me with your leave speak what I heare, Disclose hid secrets, vvhich do here appeare, Deep under ground, and in black darknesse drown'd. Then in dark night, black shades, they ramble round Through Pluto's palaces, and regions void: Much like, when men (the moon with clouds being cloyd) Walking in woods but by a glimmering light, Iove having hid with fogs the skies cleare sight, And colours faire being dampt by darksome night. Before the porch, in the first gape of hell, Foule mournings and tormenting cares did dwell; Deadly diseases old-age anguishes, Feare, faultie famine, vvants lean languishes; Affrighting-forms, fierce death, and deadly toiles,
Deaths kinsman, sleep; false filthie joy, that soiles Mens soules. On th' other side were deadly warres, The Furies beds of steel, and desperate jarres, Her viperous haire tide up with bloudy bands. I'th' midst a mightie shadie elm there stands, With weather-beaten boughs and aged arms▪ Where usually (they say) vain dreams and charms Made their abodes, and 'bout the leaves did 'bide, And many furious fierce vvilde beasts beside. Two natur'd Scylla's, Centaures stabled were About the doores, monsters of hideous feare: Briareus hundreth-handed, Hydra's ire, Teeth-gnashing Chimaer's arm'd with flames of fire; Gorgons, and Harpyes, hagges with shapes three-fold. Here sudden fright Aeneas forc'd to hold, And shake his naked sword to all he met: And had not his vvise guides advisement let, And made him from those corps-lesse soules to fly, And passe in peace, those thin shapes subtiltie He had assail'd, but vainly beat the aire. Thence then he to the right path did repaire, Which leads to th' Acherontine filthie floud: Whose troublous stream boiles up vvith mire and mud, And from Cocytus sands evaporates. Charon, hells frightfull ferryman, there vvaits, And plies the passage o're this filthie floud, VVith crabbed countenance, hoare haires, which stood Most roughly over-grown o're all his chin, His gogling eyes star'd, as they flames had bin; In ragged robes and tattered old attire. Thus, a strong long pole thrust into the miro, He drives his boat, assisted vvith one sail,
And, as his charge, in's barge soules o're doth hale. Much grown in yeares, yet lusty for his age; To whom to th' shore soules flock for their passage, Women and men, yea all whom death destroyes, Great potent peeres, unmarried maids and boyes, Compt youths, vvhich die before their fathers face, Like leaves in vvoods, falling from trees apace, Pincht off by autumnes chilling, killing cold: Or like conglomerated birds that hold And flie together, forced o're the main, By vvinter vveather, to some pleasant plain. Thus stand they striving, first, to be past o're, With hands and hearts longing for th' other shore. The fuming ferryman takes these, leaves those, And others fiercely farre from shore o'rethrows. Aeneas (with this noise much mov'd, amaz'd) Sayes to the priestly maid, Pray, vvhence is rais'd This flocking to the floud? vvhat seek these soules? What strange adventure to these banks them toules? And why do those the livid waves vvith oares So swiftly sweep, to get unto you shores? To whom the aged priest sayes briefly thus▪ Anchises, and Ioves off-spring generous, This is Cocytus deep black Styxes lake, By which to sweare, forsweare, Gods conscience make▪ Unburied soules, that ragged-rabble be, And he the boatsman, Charon, whom you see. Those vvhom he rowes in's boat, due buriall have; Now may they, till their bones do rest in grave, O're those rough streams, those banks have transporta∣tion, But make about those shores perambulation, And wandring walks, at least, an hundred yeares,
Then passe they o're those ponds, which them re-cheeres. Aeneas then with fixed feet stood still, Full of deep thoughts, pitying their case most ill: There he beheld Leucaspis 'mongst them all, And brave Orontes, his fleets admirall, Mourning their vvant of honourable graves, Whom boystrous blasts o'rewhelmed in the vvaves, And sunk both ships and men, sailing from Troy. Behold, he now beheld, vvith more annoy, His ship-master, his Palinure, perplext: Who sailing Sicils seas, his eyes fast fixt Upon his starres, fell over-board, was drown'd; Whom scarce for mists, his sad friend having found, Thus he sayes to him; My deare Palinure, What God our losse of thee did thus procure? And drench thee in the deep? I pray thee tell, For ne're till now did falshood with him dwell: Apollo with this one unsure reply, Did much deceive my vain credulity; Who told me, thou seas safe shouldst passe, and see Faire Italie, and there shouldst landed be: And is this (now) the faithfull promise made? But he on th' other side repli'de, and said; Brave Trojan prince, nor Phoebus thee deluded, Nor any God me to the seas obtruded: For I my self holding my helm too fast, Where I sat pilot, did me headlong cast Into the sea, guiding the ship. I sweare By all rough seas, nought did me so much feare As thy great ships and ship-masters decay, Lest on thy bark rough swelling seas should prey. Three vvinter-nights, fierce vvindes me blew about
The ocean vast; the fourth day I found out, VVith much adoe, the banks of Italie, Keeping my head still 'bove the waves on high: At last, by small degrees I got to land, And thereon safely I a while did stand, And so had staid, but for a barbarous crew, VVho to me (dropping vvet) in fury drew: And as I crawled up on hands and feet A craggy bank, vvith swords they did me meet, Slew me, and of me hop'd to make a prey: Now vvindes and vvaves me neare the shore do lay, Yet keep i'th' sea. Wherefore by heavens light cleare, By this faire aire, and by thy father deare, And young Iülus hopes, I thee intreat Free me from this ill state, thou captain great; And either put me (as thou mayst) in ground, (For I in Velines haven may be found) Or else, if means there be, if Goddesse great Have shewn thee any supernat'rall fear, (For I beleeve, not vvithout heavnly aid Thou swam'st this floud, this Stygia lake didst vvade) Lend me poore wretch thy hand, and help me o're, That I, at least, may rest in you weet shore. Thus he; and thus the priest her minde expres; Whence, Palinure, comes this thy rash request? VVouldst thou unburied, Styxes stream pae o're? The furies flouds, unbidden, leave thy shore? Cease to expect by prayers to change heavens fates. But heare and mark what thy case consolates. The nearest neighbours, bordering 'bo those parts, By heavens prodigious signes perplext in hearts, Shall take thy bones, and vvith solemnities
Interre, entombe thee: from which grave shall rise Unto that place an everlasting name Of Palinure. Hence he more glad became, His care had cure, his grief in part was past, That that land should his name retain at last. Then on they passe, and to the pool draw nigh, Whom Charon straight on Stygian streams doth spie, How slily they the wood walk, haste to land: Thus he with checks and taunts them takes in hand. Who e're thou art, that arm'd wouldst sail this way, Say, what's thy will? why com'st thou? thou shalt stay. These be soules seats: here night and sleep do sit: In Styxes boat live bodies 'tis not fit To carry o're, nor did it me well please To carry Theseus, or great Hercules, Or Pirithous, though they were heavenly bred, For strength and stomack most unconquered. Alcides bound fierce Cerberus in bands, Hells great grim-porter, and with his strong hands Him quaking drag'd from Pluto's princely seat; The rest did plot our king of 's queen to cheat. To whom th' Amphrysian priest reply'd again; Trust me, here's no such tricks; from rage refrain; Our weapons wound not, Cerberus may bark, And ever fright poore soules in's dungeon dark: Proserpina may keep her uncles bed; For this our Trojan prince much honoured For piety and prowesse, but intends To go to's father, to deep hell descends. If so great goodnesse in the man moves not, Yet know this branch of gold, which he hath got: (Which she pul'd forth, being hid under his gown)
Whereat his rage and wrath of heart sank down. Silent, that sacred gift he did adore, The fatall branch not seen long time before, And shoves to shore the blew boat them to take, And other soules which sate beside the lake He thrusts aside, and layes the hatches fit, And great Aeneas sits ith' bulk of it. The joynted barge groan'd with their pondrous weight, And through the chinks took in much puddle straight. At length the priest and prince pasto're the floud, And scapt the flaggy gray-grasse, myre and mud; Hells porter Cerberus, through his triple throat Through all those regions rais'd a barking note. Couching, huge curre-like, in his kennell by, Whose snake-like swelling neck the priest did spie, And cast to him a soporiferous sop, With drugs and honey mixt, which he did slop, And through his treble throat it quickly snaps, In dogged-hunger, with his meager chaps. Whereat his mighty back croucht, down he lies, And spreads himself ith' cave, with slumbring eyes. The porter laid, Aeneas whipt in brave, And got to shore from th' irregressive wave. Straight in's first entrance piteous cries he heares, And loud laments of infants 'bout his eares, Of tender babes snatcht from their mothers breast, Depriv'd of longer life by deaths arrest. Next these, were those who by false sentence dy'd, Yet lot and law these to their place apply'd. Minos th' inquisitour the lots doth cast, And spies and tries their lives and follies past. Next, they lie mourning, who with guiltlesse smart,
Hating their lives, their own hands pierce their heart: Then though they spilt their bloud, yet now'd be glad To suffer earths worst toiles, then hells pains bad. But fates forbid, and hells most loathsome lake, And Styxes nine-fold streams tie them to th' stake. Not farre from thence lie all the fields about (For so men call them) of the weeping rout. Here all, whom tyrannizing love did slay With piercing passions, these in by-paths lay, Hid under myrtle boughs, whose grief of heart Still stings them, and in death doth not depart. Here he beheld Procris and Phaedra faire, Eriphyle her sonnes wounds laying bare. Euadne he, and Phasiphe did finde, And Laodamia, to her pheere most kinde: Caeneus now a woman, once a lad, Yet re-transfigur'd for her follies bad. 'Mongst whom he spi'de Sidonian Dido there, Wandring ith' wood her love-wound fresh t' appeare. Whō Troyes brave prince approaching near, scarce knew Through the thick shade: (like Luna, whose first view A man through clouds doth see, or thinks he sees) He weeps, and speaks such sugred words as these; Distressed Dido, ah, that sad report Was too too true, brought to me from thy court; That thou wast dead, and with a sharp sword slain. Alas! sweet lady, I did cause thy bane. Yet I protest by starres and deities, And by firm faith, if under ground it lies, I left thy land (faire queen) against my minde, And here the Gods commandments me do binde To traverse up and down these foggy shades
Through thornie paths, and deep, dark, dumpish glades: Nor could I e're beleeve that it could be, That my departure could so cruciate thee. Ah sty vvith me, fly not away so fast, Whom shun'st thou? since this talk must be our last. Thus spake Aeneas, thinking therewithall To swage their grief, and flouds of teares let fall. She frowning fixt her angry eyes on ground, Nor was more mov'd with all he could propound, Then is hard flint, or Parus rock obdure. At last she from him breaks into obscure And bushy vvoods, flying most angrilie, VVhere her first spouse Sich courteously Answered, her vvoes vvith equall love repayd. At this hard hap Aeneas vvas dismay'd: Yet vveeping follows her aloof, apace, Lamenting much her absent vvofull case. Thence on he goes, and at the last they came To th' utmost fields, where men of Martiall fame Did walk about: here he Tydeus meets, And Mars-like Parthenopeus kindely greets; Adrastus gastly ghost: and here he spies Such Trojan lords as caus'd full weeping eyes: They being slain in warre, he knows them all In their rare ranks, and many a teare lets fall. Glaucus, Thersilocus, Medon, all three Antenors sonnes, he sadly there did see, Polybetes, great Ceres priest most stout, Idaeus still in's chariot drawn about, Still brandishing his blade: soules thick do flock On both sides, making him their gazing-stock. One sight sufficeth not: they stay, stand still,
Make neare approach, and know the cause they will Why, how he came. But Greeces peeres most stout, And those of Agamemnons warre-like rout, Spying the man, and his drawn glistering blade Through the thick mists, extreamly all afraid, Some flie away, as once to ship to get: Some gape to speak, whose gapes their speech do let. And here at last he saw in wofull case King Priams Deïphobus mangled face, And all o're wounded corps most cruelly, Yea, his faire face defac'd uncomelily; His broken brows, both hands, both eares, and nose, All quite cut off by his most barbarous foes. Scarce he him knew, trembling in wofull wise, Lab'ring to hide those dire deformities. Yet in a well known tone thus he cries out; Deare Deïphobus, valiant, stern and stout, Sprung from Troyes royall stemme, what savage minde To take such foule revenge in's heart could finde? O who had power to use, abuse thee so? Fame did report, and I nought else did know, But that in dead of night, thou wearied, With slaying Greeks didst fighting fall down dead On heaps of them. Then I in vain did frame On Rhetian shores a tombe unto thy fame: And to thy soule sent three salutes most deep, And made that place thy name and fame to keep: Thy body there (faire friend) I could not see, Nor as I would (my countrey left) give thee A worthy buriall. Deïphobus here Sayes, Nothing's left undone, O friend most deare; To Deïphobus thou all dues hast payd,
All buriall rites: but here alas I'm stayd, And drown'd in this distresse by fates decree, And base Lacaena's fatall villanie: She left me these sad monuments of woe. For as we all (you cannot choose but know, And too too well remember) that last night Did spend in frolick, but most false delight; When first that fatall horrid horse o'releapt Our Trojan walls, when from his paunch out stept His swelling troops of armed foot-men fierce, She feigning votes in Bacchanalian verse, Led up and down our quaffing Phrygian dames, And in her hand held forth bright burning flames: And from their camps call'd out the Grecians bold. Then cumbring cares and sleepinesse did hold Me prest to rest, in my unhappie bed, And sweet deep sleep had me (now) vanquished, And laid like one quite dead. This worthy wife (Meanwhile) my arms, the safegard of my life, And trusty sword, purloyn'd and stole away, Set my doores ope, call'd in without delay Her Menelaus, hoping (thus) to endere His love to her, and all past ills to cleare. What needs more words, they burst into my bed, Together with Vlysses, mischiefs head. Great Gods, repay those Greeks with vengeance due, If it be just which I request of you. But what strange chance hath brought thee (thus) alive To us? Tell me likewise; what seas did drive Thee to these parts? or was't the Gods decree? Or to these toiles hath fortune forced thee? To tread these sad and sunlesse wearying wayes?
Thus with this talk Aurora's radiant rayes Had guilded half-o're heavens huge axletree, And haply all their time thus spent might be: But that the Sibyll his most watchfull mate, Said, Good Aeneas, night doth properate, And we with weeping waste the time in vain: Here see the way divides it self in twain. way, which leads by Pluto's gate, Will bring us the right way t' Elysium straight: But the left leads to Tartars torturing cell, The place where damned soules are plagu'd in hell. Then Deïphobus said, Prime priest, be still, If I offend, I'le back; my number fill, And shelter me in shades. Go thou, O go, Thou glorie of our land, the heavens bestow Better good luck on thee. This having said, As soon as spoke away from them he made. Aeneas quick lookt back, and soon espi'de A spacious castle on a rocks left side, With a strong threefold mightie wall surrounded, Which Phlegethons fierce fierie river bounded; And did thick ratling stones evaporate. Before it stood a mightie open gate, With adamantine pillars set in view, Such as nor Gods nor men could cut or hew By strength or art: a brazen tovvre stood high, Where Tisiphone fierce sate usually In bloudy robes, and night and day did guard And watch the way. From hence was eas'ly heard Great groans and moans of screeking smart and pains, And rumbling noise of shackling iron chains. Aeneas stood amaz'd, dampt with that din,
And said; Faire lady, tell me, what's within? What damned soules? what plagues? what hideous cries Are those I heare? To whom she thus replies; Brave Trojan prince, no upright man may dwell In this nefarious nest of damned hell: But me, when as Proserpina me made Hells governesse, she taught, and open layd The plagues which Gods inflict, shew'd me them all: Here's (sayth she) Rhadamanthus horrid hall, Where he corrects and findes out knaveries, Forcing confession of all villanies: And when they hope to scape with foolish joy, At last in death he plagues them with annoy. Then Tisiphone, in one hand a whip, Revenge fully makes guiltie soules to skip, With furious lashes, holding stinging snakes In th' other hand, which greater tortures makes, Calling for all her furious sisters aid. At last the sacred gates huge screeking made, And opened wide. Seest thou (sayes she to him) What looks look on us? what a guard most grim Sits at the porch? see horrid Hydra's seat, With fiftie snaky heads and gape-mouths great: Then hell it self, full twice as broad and deep Downward, as heaven, upward beheld, is steep. Here Titans youthfull troop, earths aged race, By thunder thrown down, sunk to th' deepest place. And here the bastard-giant twinnes I saw, Which with their hands meant heaven to scale, and draw Great Iupiter from his supernall seat. I saw Salmones suffering tortures great: For he Ioves lightning needs would imitate,
And rattling thunder: being born in state Upon foure horses, shaking flames of fire, Making Greek towns and countreys him admire, In triumph drawn, in frantick arrogance, Himself with Ioves due honour to advance; Whiles he heaven, inimitable fire, By sounding brasse, and horn-hooft steeds desire To counterfeit in their most swift careeres: But mighty Iove, to whom this soon appeares, Through thickest clouds dasht out a deadly dart, (Nor could his torches, nor bright fierie art Assist) and headlong in a storm him slew. There also might you mighty Tityus view, Fructiferous Terra's sonne, whose body great Stretcht out, in breadth nine acres is compleat: A foule devouring vultures bending bill, Gnawing upon his wastelesse intralls still: Whose guts him ever glut with horrid pains, Thus feeding on his breast it still remains, And restlessely pulls his regrowing veins. Why speak I of Lapitha, Ixion, And Pirithous? on whom a huge flint-stone Doth alwayes hang, and alwayes seem to fall; Before whom stand rich lustfull beds most tall; And costly cates to feed their luxurie, Stand ready disht: but nestling o're them nigh Stands the prime Furie, and them strict commands Not once to touch the table with their hands: And if they stirre, she starts up in great ire, Rattles them up, bangs them with flames of fire. Here brother-haters whiles they liv'd, I saw; Parents despisers, cheaters of just law:
Rich churles who got great wealth, but for themselves; The greatest troops being of these impious elves) Such as for foule adulteries have been slain; And who in jurious jarres do entertain; Who rob their masters, traitours are to th' state. All these with plagues hell doth incarcerate. Nor need'st thou ask, what pains and tortures fierce These various vitious men do sting and pierce. Some 'rowl huge stones, soe hang fast ty'de to wheels, Thus wofull Theseus torments sits and feels, And e're shall feel. Thus Phlegyas most of all With hortatorie cries in hell doth yaull; Be warn'd, be just, the Gods do not despise: For gold of's countrey he made merchandize, And brought in an usurping powerfull lord, Old laws annull'd, made new laws for reward. Another did his daughters bed defile, Using forbidden copulation vile. All did foule deeds, and what they will'd, enjoy'd. Had I an hundred tongues to be employ'd, An hundred mouths, and iron elocution, I could not shew the diverse distribution Of all the kindes of hells impieties, And every plague which on them heavy lies. This when Apollo's Sibyll sage had said, Let's now go on (sayes he) all stayes evade, And our intended task begun conclude: Come, let's make haste; for I farre off have view'd The Cyclops shops, strong walls, high chimneys stand, Where we to leave our present, have command. This said, together they blinde paths passe by, Taking the midway, to the gates drew nigh. Aeneas first rusht in, with water cleare
Sprinckles himself, and on a post most neare Unto the gate, the branch of gold sticks fast; Which done, his gift given to the Goddesse, past; They came at length into these pleasant places, Those fragrant filds and groves of all the Graces, Those sacred seats, where's larger, purer aire, Bright light, true sense of starres, and Phoebus faire. Where some delight in grassy plains to sport, To skip and leap in sand in wrastling sort; Some dance and sing, and trip it on their toes, VVhiles Orpheus in his priest-like long gown goes About, and playes on's seven-fold sounding lute▪ And strikes the strings with quill and skill acute. Here he beheld Troyes ancient noble race, Her potent peeres, born in more blisefull case; Ilus, Assaracus; first king of Troy, Dardan; their arms put off with peacefull joy. He uselesse chariots (wondring) sees set by; Their speares fast fixt in ground, and carelessely Their steeds let loose, feeding in pastures wide; And look, what chariots love, what Martiall pride, They living had, what care to feed and dresse Their gallant coursers, now 'twas here no lesse. Again, on's right and left hand he doth eye Some, feeding on the grasse, sing merrylie Rare panegyricks 'mongst sweet lawrell trees, VVhere fluent Po through groves to flow he sees. Here patriots good, who for their countrey dy'd, Here priests, who liv'd most modest lives, did bide; Here pious prophets, who pure truths did preach, Here expert artists, who rare arts did teach▪ And here were they, who, mindefull of their state,
Made others their true goodnesse gratulate. All these were crown'd with fragrant garlands gay, By whom environ'd, thus did Sibyll say; (But chiefly to Musaeus 'mongst them all, For he vvas in the midst, and fare most tall) O say, sweet soules, and thou priest most divine, What parts, what place doth old Anchises shrine? For for this cause this toile we undertake, Are hither come, have swumme hells mighty lake. To whom this Heroë this reply did make; No soule hath certain seat, here we all dwell In shady groves, flower-beds, in fields that smell Most fresh and fragrant, grac'd vvith rivers cleare: But ye (if thereunto such joy ye beare) Climbe o're this hill, your vvay I'le easie make. This said, by his good guide, their way they take: And as they passe, he shows them fields most faire; Thus high hills left, they to the plains repaire. But grave Anchises vvas most closely bent To see, observe in valleys excellent, The soules reserv'd for more supernall places, Recogitates all his own kindreds cases: Their number, nature, fates, and fortunes all, Their customes, courage, he to minde doth call. And vvhen he saw Aeneas come to meet him, Through the green grasse he joyfull runs to greet him; Lifts up his hands, lets fall thick teares on's cheeks: Yet thus unto his sonne he cheerely speaks; And art thou come? by power and piety? Hast thou (as I had hope) got victorie O're this hard task? see I thy face again? Shall I my sonne heare and reply most plain?
Thus truly I suppos'd, and cast in minde, Counting the times, and now all true I finde. From vvhat strange parts (deare sonne) vvhat dangerous case! What seas turmoiles, do I thee now embrace! O how I fear'd thy harm in Libya land! Straight he reply'd; Deare father, thy command, And gastly ghost in visions oft beheld, Hath, for thy sake, me to these parts compell'd. My fleet lies safe i'th' port, on Tyrrhene sands: Ah, grant good father vve may now joyn hands, Grant me: ah flie not from our sweet embrace. At vvhich words teares ran down his cheeks apace. Thrice 'bout his neck to clasp his arms he tries, Thrice from his frustrate holds his image flies, Like fleeting blasts, or flashy dreams by night. Meanwhile Aeneas had full in his sight, In a by-valley, an enclosed wood, With ratling boughs and sprigges, where Lethe floud Ran through Elysian fields; 'bout vvhich did stand People and nations, an innumerous band. Like bees, when summers sun-shine does them warm▪ Who in faire meads 'bout flowers and lilies swarm: So o're the field a muttering noise was rais'd, Whose sudden sight Aeneas much amaz'd. Being ignorant, he does the cause enquire, What floud that vvas, and vvhat so great desire, About those banks did cause such troops of men. Then old Anchises answered thus again; Those soules to whom new corps are due by fate, About the banks of Lethe floud do vvait To drink deep draughts of dull forgetfulnes. Long since I long'd these things to thee t' expresse,
And ou old stock to thee to numerate, The more with me thee to exhilarate, Latium once found. O father deare (sayes he) Can sacred soules from hence translated be To heaven? and there resume dull corps again? Can wretches such dire love t' earths light retain? I'le tell thee sonne (sayes he) and cleare thy doubt. And thus began Anchises to set out, And punctually each circumstance t' explain: At first one abstruse spirit did maintain Heaven, earth and seas, bright moon and twinkling lights: That spirit infus'd through all parts, moves, incites The totall bulk; diffus'd o're the whole frame. Hence men, beasts, birds, and all sea-creatures came, And take life-feeding heat; and to their seed Celestiall birth, if corrupt bodies breed No obstacles, nor terrene tumours ill The corps with dull and heavy humours fill. And hence they feare, weep, have a longing minde, Regard not heaven, clos'd in flesh prisons blinde. Besides, when they their lifes last breath forsake, Yet death from them (poore soules) doth not quite take Each blot and blemish, or all corp'rall ills, Which long i'th' body grown, it strangely fills. Wherefore they purging punishment endure, To make them from old evils clean and pure. Some frisking soules i'th' whisking windes hang high, Some in huge streams wash their impurity, Or ele are purged in refining flames: Thus these our pains each soule here fits and frames. Thence then we are to large Elysium sent, Few are in those faire meadows resident,
Till times long progresse quite expired be, And we from imbred, long-fed faults are free; Our soules all simply pure in due degree. And then all these (a thousand yeares full spent) In troops to Lethe flouds by God are sent: There made unmindefull of their former state, They long t' ascend corps to re-occupate, This said, Anchises his Aeneas brings With Sibyll into th' midst o'th' troop, which rings With ratling rumours: to a hill conducts him, Whence all now coming, he to know instructs him. And now go to (sayes he) I'le to the show Our Albane peeres, the glorie which shall flow In Italie, on our faire families, Th' imperiall princes which from us shall rise; Yea all thy fates and fortunes I'le declare. Seest thou (sayes he) that princely youth most faire, Which leans on's headlesse lance? He first shall spring From Latines bloud and Thyne, and be first king; Sylvius an Albane name, thy posthume birth, Whom thy Lavinia to thy long-lifes mirth Shall in the woods bring forth a royall king, From whom a regall race of kings shall spring, From whom our line o're Alba long shall reigne: And Procas next Troyes glorie shall maintain, Capys and noble Numitor, and he VVhose name shall personate, re pattern thee, Sylvius Aeneas, rare for arms and arts, If ever he reigne o're those Albane parts. Behold, my sonne, those youths, what powers they show, Those which with peacefull oaken garlands go, These shall for thee Nomentum, Gabi, tame,
Fidena faire, Collatia's towers reclaim; Towns famous for their chastities report: Potent Pometia, Bola, Cora's fort, And Inuus camp, towns once of noble fame, Now onely lands, but of no note or name. Besides, to's grandsire Martiall Romulus Shall be a prop, whom from Assaracus His mother Ilia shall produce at last: Seest thou not on his head two crests stand fast? And how great Iove on him his favours poures? Behold (faire sonne) his high emperiall towres, Renowned Rome, vvhose magnanimity Shall rule the earth, and raise their fame to th' skie: And on their vvall she shall seven towres erect, Happie in famous peeres of high respect; Such as from Berecynthia, Gods faire queen, In chariot drawn through Troy, to spring were seen: Triumphant in her hundred God-births faire, All heaven-inhabitants, all starre-kings rare. And now look this vvay, view this nation great, Thy Romanes rare, and Romane Caesars seat, Iülus royall race, the whole earths Keisar. There's, there's the God-sprung man, Augustus Caesar, VVhom I so oft have promis'd unto thee: By whom the golden age Latium shall see. As once by Saturn 'twas the whole earth o're, His empire shall lie past the Indies shore, And Garamants, and where Sols prying eye, And the celestiall signes yet ne're past by: As farre as e're heaven-propping Atlas high Beares on his back the beauteous starrie skie. At his approach all Africk soon shall quake,
And at his God-decrees great Nile shall shake, Maugre his seven-fold mouth. Nor so much ground As he shall win, could Hercules surround, Though light-foot hindes as windes he could outflie, And boares and beares in Erymanth make die: Nor Bacchus that vine-victour with vine-chains, Who tigres fierce to draw his coach constrains O're Nisa's steepie tops. Now then shall we To spread our fame by facts base cowards be? Shall feare affright us from Ausonia land? But what renowned prince doth yonder stand, Crown'd with a sacred olive-branch? oh now I know him by's gray haires on beard and brow, Even noble Numa the first Romane king; Who shall establish laws, and make Rome spring From a poore land, by simple Sabines aid, Unto a mightie monarchie, firm laid; Whom Tullus shall succeed, his men to make Their lazie lives to leave, arms up to take, And wonted triumphs now again to gain. Next him shall rise Ancus with ampler train, Too much affecting popularity: And, if thou wilt, hither reflect thine eye, And see the kingly Tarquines haughty heart; And Brutus, acting the revengers part, Shall first accept the consuls dignity, VVith bundles born, and axes fatally. This father first his own sonnes shall destroy, Raising rebellions to the states annoy; And slay them, for his countrey liberty; Unhappie, howsoe're posterity May elevate and much commend the same,
O'recome with's countreys love and thirst of fame. See there where Decii, Drusi, stately stand, And fierce Torquatus with his ax in's hand; And brave Camillus stoutly doth regain Romes ensignes lost. But that most royall twain Whom thou seest glistring in like-arms most plain, And now seem loving soules, kept in deep shades, Ah! what fierce warres, with slicing bloudy blades, Shall they raise up, when once they rise to life? What battells shall they fight? what stintlesse strife? The fath'r in law passing th' Alps altitude; The sonne in law with's Eastern multitude In battell ray. Not so, deare sonne, not so, Use not uncivil civil-warres of woe, T'embrew your honour'd hands in countreys bloud. And thou, O thou Csarean sonne, most good, Great seed of Iove▪ sprung from a sacred line, With such foule warres stain not those hands of thine: The Capitoll he shall triumphant take, And in hi chariot make Corinthus quake. The Grecians slain, he Argos shall subdue, And trample down proud Agamemnons crew, And victour, vanquish Pyrrhus self most strong, Armipotent Achilles lay along: And thus old Troyes great wrongs revenge shall have, And Pallases polluted temple brave. And who can thee, grave Cato, here omit? Or of couragious Cossus silent sit? Of Gracchus great? those two rare Scipios, Warre wondrous thunder-bolts, to Carthage woes? Fabricius, mightie in his mean estate? Serranus, plow-man, yet Romes potentate?
VVhy am I tyr'd to tell of Fabius grt? That mightie man, whose wisedome to retreat, And grave cunctation shall Romes wrack repaire. Some for their skill in brazen statutes, rare; Some able (I think) hard marbles so to cut And carve, as if they life had in them put: Some famous for facundous oratorie, Some for the Math'maticks deserving glorie. But thou, rare Romane, rule with might and right: Let this be thy chief art, thy choice delight, To plant good laws in peace, to use most kinde Good subjects; but to curb the haughty minde. Thus grave Anchises: and, to their more wonder, Behold (sayes he) mightie Marcellus yonder: How he with spoiles most richly loaded goes, And all transcending, him great victour shows. He, he shall Rome from ruines re-advance, Curb and crush Carthage, and subdue all France▪ A third time shall to Iove, in sacrifice, Hang up the captive arms, his Martiall prize. And here Aeneas (for he saw in's sight A lovely lively youth in armour bright, But with a heavy look and cast-down eye) Sayes, Father, pray, who's that in's company? His sonne? or some of his renowned race? VVhat noise they make? see his most portly pace. VVhy do such dark black mists his head so hide? To whom Anchises, weeping, thus repli'de; Deare sonne, long not to know thy countreys woe: The fates this childe to th' world will onely show, And onely so: Rome (sure) seem'd too too great To you high Gods, if her imperiall seat
Had been perpetuall. O what sighs and cries Shall by his death unto great Rome arise I'th' field of Mars! what frequent funeralls Shalt thou, swift Tyber, in thy fluent falls Behold, as thou dost by his new grave glide. N're shall a sprig sprung from our Trojan side, Exalt Italian ancestours so fairely, Nor Rome triumph in any race so rarely. Alas, for his connative pietie! Alas, for faith spread by antiquitie, And Martiall spirit! what do these avail? Who, unreveng'd, durst him in arms assail? And or on horse or foot durst him encounter, But he was ever found his farre surmounter? Ah prince to be deplor'd! if fates decree (Hard fates) thou scape, thou shalt Marcellus be. O give me (now) handfulls of lilies faire, And let me strew, with store of violets rare, Those odoriferous gifts about the grave (Though all in vain) of this our kinsman brave. Thus in these sad complaints they stray about, And prie and spie all in those fields throughout. And when Anchises all to's sonne had shown, And fire of future fame in's heart had blown, At last he shews what battells he must fight, Latinus towns, Italians warre-like might; And how to beare, or forbeare, hazards all, Which could or should i'th' future him befall. There are (sayes he) two dormitive great gates, Th'one made of horn (as fame to us relates) By which true spirits have a passage right: Th'other of elephantine ivorie bright:
But false and fictious dreams soules this way send. When thus Anchises did his conference end, Both to his sonne, and to the Sibyll grave, Through th' ivorie gate he them free passage gave. He hastes to's fleet, revisits his old friends; And to Cateta's port his course he bends. Where they with joy their anchours all do cast, And there the fleet at shore is fixed fast. An end of the sixth book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the seventh book. Caieta dead, here buried lies. Aeneas to Laurentum hies: Which he did plainly understand, By his Ascanius, was the land By fates assign'd. Then straight he sent An hundred legates eloquent, With presents to Latinus great, A peace and pardon to intreat. The king with peace doth them dispatch, And for his daughter makes a match. Juno displeas'd, Alecto's sent From hell, i'th'peace to make a rent. A wounded stagge breeds all the jarre: Confederates fit themselves for warre. ANd thy death, nurse Caieta, in this strand, Eternally hath memoriz'd our land: And now thine honour there, thy bones and name, Great Italie maintains. (If this thy fame May ought enlarge) but her due obsequies Rightly perform'd, her grave made high to rise, Seas smooth and calm, Aeneas hoyst up sails, And left the port, with prosperous nightly gales. Nor did dame Luna's light impeach their pace, But made a shivering shine on seas surface. Thus Circes next adjacent shores they slice,
Where Sols rich daughters daily songs entice, In groves unpassable: where she by night In her proud palace burneth fires most bright Of odoriferous cedar, watchfully With nimble spindle spinning curiously. Hence we might heare by night fierce lions roare, Strugling in rage against the bonds they bore: Wilde beares and bristly boares rage in their stie, And shapes of mighty wolves howl hideously: Whom furious Circe by her sorcerie And potent potions, metamorphis'd had, Of comely men, into wilde beasts most bad. Now that these honest Trojans might escape These havens, and such prodigious bestiall shape, And not approach that hurtfull hatefull shore; Neptune with prosperous gales their sails up bore, Forc'd them from thence, them from those dangers ave. Now Thetis breasts waxt red, Aurora brave I'th' azure skie with golden rayes shone bright, And suddenly the windes were calmed quite: The rocky seas their oares did nimbly smite And beat about. And here a mightie wood Aeneas spide, through which faire Tybers floud With nimble goldie streams to sea did glide, And yellow sands the current beautifi'de: And various birds, which did those banks frequent, And the flouds bubling falls such notes did vent Above, about, as did delight the skie, And in the woods with chirping chants did flie. And here he bids his mates their voyage stay, To winde the fleet to land: then joyfull, they Enter the shady river. Now relate,
Vrania faire, what kings, what times, what state, Old Italie retain'd, when this thy fleet, Thy new-come armie brought to Latium sweet: I'le all set forth, and warres first grounds recite. Thou, O thou Goddesse faire, teach me to write Those bloudy broiles, fierce troops, warre-thirsty kings, The Tyrrhean and Italian Martiall wings, All in an uproare: here's new work indeed, A mightie task, to which I now proceed. Old king Latinus o're those realms did reigne, And them in peace and plentie did maintain. Faunus and Marica (old writers gather) His parents were, king Picus, Faunus father; And thou great Saturn, thou art said to be The utmost basis of his progenie. No sonne, or issue-male fates did him give, Death on one saz'd as soon as he gan live. One onely marriageable daughter faire Upheld his court and state: to whom repaire Many Italian peeres and potentates. All whom brave Turnus chiefly emulates For's famous ancestours most eminent; And him the queen with love most vehement Did like and long to make her sonne in law; But heaven-diverting prodigies she saw Crossing her thoughts. A spreading lawrell tree Grew in the midst o'th' court, whose branches he Had many yeares preserv'd with reverend feare, And whih Latinus, when he first did reare His stately towres, there found and consecrated To geat Apollo (as it is related) And from it did the land Laurentum name.
A thick quick swarm of humming bees there came (Strange to be spoken) out o'th' open aire, And to this lawrells tops did all repaire, And on the boughs close by their feet they hung, All in a sudden swarm in clusters clung. Their augur straight cries out, I plainly finde A forrain prince t'approach; with him conjoyn'd Are strong confederates, who with partners bold From these same parts this towre shall take and hold. Moreover, as lady Lavinia good, In sacrifice, hard by her father stood, Her haire (strange sight) was all on a light fire, Whose cinging flames burnt all her rich attire: Her locks were burnt; burnt was her diadem, Beset with stones most rich, and many a gemme: Up flies the fume, abroad the flame extends, And Vulcans violence to th' roof ascends. This was a hideous sight, hard to endure: For fame and fates did glorious things assure From her; yet that she should fierce battels breed. But these strange sights the carefull king with speed Brings to his father Faunus auguries, In great Albuna's grove, there to advise: In which wide wood a sacred spring did glide, Misty mephitis with foule fogs doth bide. Hither all Italie, Oenotria land, Do still repaire, dark doubts to understand. Here when the priest (the presents being paid) On slain sheeps skins by night to sleep is laid, And falls asleep, in sleep strange visions views, Heares various voices, conference does use, And speech to sprites from th' Acherontine lake.
Here, when as grave Latinus prayers did make For faire replies, and many sheep being slain, Prostrate upon the skins he did remain, And from the wood these words he heard most plain, Faire sonne, forbeare thy daughter deare to wed To native Latines, shun their marrige bed: I have new forrain sonnes in law, whose race Our name and fame unto the starres shall grace: Whose noble seed each sublunary thing Which Sol beholds, shall to subjection bring, And rule and over-rule. These plain replies Of's father Faunus, and his counsel wise, Latinus locks not up in silent sort, But of it flying fame makes loud report Throughout all Italie. And now at last The Trojan youths their fleet made firmly fast Against the grassy banks. Aeneas then, And faire Iulus flower of all his men, With his couragious captains in degree, Repose their bodies under a great tree. Then on the grasse they set their cheere, and cakes Made of good meal; whereof each one partakes: But (for so Iove by th' Harpyes had decreed) Were fain at last on mountain-fruits to feed. And this food failing, they were forc'd to eat The crums and scraps of refuse bread and meat, And with their hands to break (all hungerbit) The sacred food, for other use more fit: Nor spared they their trenchers broad: whereby Iulus said, See, sirs, strange penurie, Which even our tables hath devoured quite. Nor more did he allude: but with quick sight,
At his first words his father did foresee, Of all his travells now an end to be. And intercepted the first words he spake, And at his fates amaz'd, forth straight he brake Into these words; Faire fate-given land, all hail: And you Troyes Gods, whose faith ne're yet did fail: Here's, here's our countrey happy habitation, (For now I well remember) this relation Of these hid fates my father made to me: When thou deare sonne, (sayes he) ariv'd shalt be On a strange land, and famine thee shall force, Thy meat all spent, to have sharp-set recourse To sacred cates; then there thou mayst expect, To ease thy vvearie limbes, there to erect Safe seats, and with strong hand thy state protect. This was that dearth, that last affrighting ill, Which should all future feare and mischief kill. Be stirring (then) betimes by break of day, And scout about, each part and place survay, What houses and inhabitants you finde: Thus from the port all severall vvayes let's winde. And now full cups to Iove let's drink, and pray To old Anchises, and in goblets gay Set wine upon the board. Thus having said, With gallant garlands he his head aray'd; Then invocates Apollo, Tellus faire, The mother of the Gods, and nymphs most rare, And the yet unknown flouds, and obscure night, And nightly rising starres, by solemne rite, And Ida's Iove, and's Phrygian mother faire, His parents both, in hell and heaven which are. And now all-potent Iupiter on high
From heaven thrice thundred, but auspiciously: And in his hand a fierie cloud did shake, VVhich did a radiant golden lustre make. Here 'mongst the Trojan troops (straight) rumours rofe, That now's the time they cities should compose. Busily therefore banquets they prepare, And full of vvine by th'sacred signes they are. Next day, when Sols light lamp had earth made bright, They stray'd abroad, about them cast their sight, To see what confines, cities, shores these were; And straight they found the river Numick there: Here current Tyber, there the Latines stout. Anchises sonne then straight selected out, Of all his troops, an hundred legates vvise: Their brows with olive-boughs in most grave guise Adorn'd, he to the kings great palace sent, And gifts unto the king for to present, And for the Trojans peace to mediate. With this commission forth they properate. Meanwhile Aeneas meats his walls extent, With shallow trenches fits its continent; Most like a camp on first approached land, VVith dikes, forts, bulwarks, makes his citie stand, And now those Trojan youths so farre were past, That they the Latines turret spi'de at last, And then their houses tops, and quick they came To the town walls, where they saw children game; And lusty youths their prancing horses ride, Some making chariots through the dust to glide; Some were a shooting with their arrows swift, Some slender lances brandish, tosse and lift: Some were a wrastling, running-matches making,
All of their best affected sports partaking. Straight to the aged king a post reports, Brave strangers in strange cloaths came to his courts. He straight gave charge to entertain them all, Himself on's kingly throne sat in his hall: A hall most faire and large, born up most high With full an hundred pillars, anciently The stately palace of king Picus grave, For groves and parents piety, most brave. Hence kings were wont their crowns and powers to take, This they their temple, court, and hall did make: Here, many sacred sacrifices slain, The peeres were wont constantly to remain. Besides, here stood rare statues carv'd in vvood, In solid cedar, of ancestours good: Great Italus and grave Sabinus king, Who first in Italie made vines to spring: Old Saturn also holding in his hand A crooked sicle, pourtray'd there did stand: And two-fac'd Ianus at the entrie stood, And other kings sprung from most royall bloud: Who vvarres deep wounds did for their countrey beare. And on the posts rich spoiles there hanged were, And captives chariots, axes us'd in warres; And helmet-crests, huge bolts and iron barres, And shields and darts, and ships foredecks most faire: King Picus self, for horse-breaking most rare, Sate holding in's right hand his regal rod, In's left a shield, enthroniz'd like a God. Whom, led vvith lst, Circes his wife so charm'd, And with her golden rod and druggs so harm'd, That she into a bird transformed him,
And made a Jay with coloured feathers trim. Latinus sitting in that sacred seat, And inmost parlours of ancestours great, Bad them the Trojans to him to bring in: Who entred, with these kinde words did begin; Tell me, brave Trojans (for we all do know Your land and linage, and heard long ago Of your sea-voyage) tell me what you'd have: Or what hard straits your barks to Latium drave: Whether y'ave lost your way, or weather-beaten, (For such like ills at sea do sea-men threaten) From other parts and ports hence farre remote, You safely now 'bout Latium banks do float. Shun not your safegard, know that Latines all, Of Saturn seed, were never yet in thrall To laws or leagues; but voluntarily, By our Gods pattern, we love equity. Indeed I think on't (time hath fame obscur'd) And Italies old men have thus assur'd, That Dardan, who did from our nation spring, Was first Idaean Troyes victorious king. And Thracian Samo's streams did penetrate, Which Samothracia now men nominate. Whom now deceast, from Corits Tyrrhean seat, Heavens regal court, starre-canopie most neat, Enthroniz'd hath, and made a God most great. He ceast: And thus Ilioneus made replie; Great king, whose race did rise from Faunus high, No tempest fierce did force us on your land, Nor ignorance of starres, or unknown strand, Hath us misled; but vve deliberately, And vvith unanime votes did all apply
Our thoughts unto these parts, from realms expell'd, Which all that Sols broad eye beheld, excell'd. From Iove we sprang, Iove was Troyes joyfull sire: From Iove our king himself doth kin acquire. Aeneas Troyes great prince us hither sent. O that stern storms did cruel Graecia vent On all our Trojan fields! what furious cloud Of angry fates did Europe, Asia, shroud? I know, fames trump these things hath sounded loud, To utmost lands, from sea the most remote, And where the torrid zone (as writers note) By Sols intemperate heat doth much displease Our obvious world, call'd the Antipodes. We, driven about by that vvarre-inundation, Humbly desire a peacefull petty-station: First, for our countrey Gods a seat secure, And for our selves free aire and waters pure. VVe'le to your kingdome bring no foule disgrace, Nor sleightly your deserving fame abase, Nor this faire fact in foule oblivion smother, Nor Latines grieve, that they did Trojans mother. I sweare by great Aeneas destinie, And by his Martiall hand, who e're will trie His vertue, valour, or by faith or flight, As many have, and many (do not slight This voluntarie tender of true peace, Or that we our submisse desires increase) Many, I say, to us have sought and su'de, 'Twixt them and us like friendship to conclude. But sacred secret fates, and heavens command, Hath us enforc'd to seek out thy faire land: Hence Dardan sprung, hither doth us invite;
And grave Apollo's great commands incite To Tyrrhean Tyber, sacred Numicks spring. And here I thee present, from our great king, With these small gifts, of better former fate Remains, reserv'd from Troyes combustive state. This bowl of gold Anchises sacred us'd: This Priams princely robe, which still he chus'd To weare, when he in councels, laws wrote down, A regall sceptre, sacred priestly crown, And royall robes, the Trojan wives rare skill. And thus Ilioneus ceast. The king sate still With settled count'nance, eyes fixt firm on ground, And rowling downward, full of thoughts profound: Regardlesse of the gifts, the robes most rare, Nor did the king for Priams sceptre care So much as for his daughters nuptiall state, And Faunus foretold fate to ruminate: Strongly perswaded, this was he should be His sonne in law, sent by the fates decree, From forrain parts, to be his realms relef, To raise a famous race, and be earths chief. Here at he joyfull sayes, Heavens happifie Our high intents, and their own augurie: Thou hast (brave Trojan) what thou dost desire, Nor do I sleight thy gifts: till life expire, And whiles Latinus reignes, you shall enjoy A wealthie soile, and fatnesse of rich Troy. As for your prince himself (if he desire, And do our love and league so much require) Let him come hither, nothing feare his friend: To peace, in part, we soon shall condescend, If he, your king, and I, kindely shake hands:
You therefore shew your king these our demands. I have a daughter, whom the whole consent Of our domestick oracles full bent, And many a fearefull heaven-shown prodigie, Marriage with any native prince denie: But that faire sonne in law, from forrain parts, (Thus writers say to cheere Italian hearts) Whose bloud and birth our name should stellifie. And this your prince (if e're with verity I ought could augurate) I hope and pray, May be the man. This said, without delay, Out of three hundred stately steeds that stood In faire-built stables, at their manger-food, To every Trojan he a choice horse gave, Most swift of foot, in purple trappings brave, With dangling rich embroidred breast-plates faire, And champing in their mouths gilt bits most rare. And to their absent prince he also sent A chariot, with two coursers excellent, Of heavenly breed, who breath'd out flames of fire, Engendred of that kinde, celestiall sire, Which quaint Daedalian Circe did contrive, On mortall mares bastardly to derive. With these rare gifts and sweet words of the king, They bravely mounted, peace t' Aeneas bring. But now behold, still jangling Iuno fierce From Grecian Inachus the aire doth pierce: And from Sicilian Pachyns parts espi'de Aeneas joyfull, all his fleet to 'bide In supine safety, all his men intent 'Bout buildings faire, of confines confident, His ships forsaken. Hereat angrily
Shaking her head, in sharp perplexitie These words she thundred from her boyling breast; An hatefull brood! fates 'gainst our fates addrest! What, were not all in Troyes fierce battells slain? And were they captiv'd, yet could not be tane? And was Troy fir'd, yet could not burned be? Could they through thickest troops and burnings flee? Now (sure) my supreme power as tyr'd must lie; And must I rest, yet wrath not satisfie? Yet I have them pursu'de, quite chas'd from Troy, And on those vagrants brought all seas annoy, And on them spent my spleen by sea and lands; And yet, alas, what good do deep quick-sands? What's Scylla sharp? Charybdis vaste, to me: Since they in their wisht Tyber lodged be, In spight of seas and me? Mars had the power, The mightie Centaures nation to devoure. Diana could obtain my Ioves consent, On ancient Calydone her rage to vent. What so foule fact could Centaures perpetrate? Or Calydone, such plagues to tolerate? But I Ioves mightie spouse, who all means try, Which angry I could use, or each way spie, Am vanquisht by Aeneas. If my might Be still too weak, I'le seek where-e're for right: If heaven refuse to heare, I'le rouse all hell. And since from Italie (I see right well) I cannot keep him, since fates firm decree Is, that Lavinia shall t'him married be: Yet I all rubs and remoras will use, Yet I fierce flames of discord will infuse 'Twixt both those nations. With this precious prize
The sonne and father in law shall sympathize; And Trojans and Rutulians bloud shallbe The damsells dowrie, and Bellona she Shall be her bride-maid: nor fierce Cissean flames Shall onely be the birth of Trojan dames. But why may not dame Venus brat prove so? A second Paris, Troy-novant with woe To set on fire. This said she angriely To earth descends, and rais'd up instantly From deepest darks, the furies fearefull seat, The hag Alecto, hell woe-worker great, Whom bloudy battells chiefly do delight, And impious acts, snares, slaunders, and despight: Whom even her father Pluto loathes and hates, And all her hellish sisters, for debates; Such frowning faces and such mouths she makes, So serpentine she seems, full of foule snakes. VVhose madnes Iuno thus incites, and sayes; Great maid, black midnights imp, thy choice assayes And proper projects lend me straight thou must, Lest my renown sore shaken lie ith' dust; Lest Trojans work Latinus to a match, And all Italia's confines thereby catch. Thou canst belovedst brethren force to fight, And overturn whole families by spight, And cast from house to house combustious flames, Assume a thousand shapes, false, feigned names: And thou a thousand cheating tricks canst use: Then pump thy plenteous breast, break off abuse. Their peace compacted, sowe thick seeds of warres, Their youths do look, like, long for Martiall jarres. Alecto straight swollen with Gorgonean spells,
And pest'lent poisons, flies to Ltiums cells, And Laurents kingly court, and silent sits Close at Amata's doore, which place best fits. Whose breast began to boyle with discontent, With female feares and cares most vehement, That Trojans and that Turnus wooers came. The hag that quickly did observe the same, From off her head one of her blew snakes drew, And at her breast into her heart it threw: By which this hag the whole house might molest. The snake slips slily 'bout her tender breast, Roules up unfelt, and her with furie fills, And viperous venome to heart burning ills. Then like a chain of gold her neck he twists, And wreathes about her haire, like hairelace lists, And sliperily about her bodie frisks. But e're first power of pour'd-in poison had Soakt through her senses, kindled flames most mad, Or all her intellectualls quite possest, With wonted motherly milde terms addrest, She spake unto her spouse, and much complain'd, About her daughter, that he entertain'd Those Trojan wooers. Must, great king, said she, Our daughter deare Lavinia married be Unto those Trojan vagrants? carest thou not For thine and mine, and her more noble lot? Whom that perfidious wretch will soon forsake, VVith the first windes that blow, and him betake To sea, and like a pirate false make prey Of our deare daughter? was not this the way That that base Trojan shepherd took, when he VVith Helen did from Lacedmon flee
To Troy? And where's thy faith so often plighted? Thy wonted care of kindred? All now slighted? Thy promise to our cousen Turnus great? Say that the Gods bad thee from forrain seat To seek a sonne in law; and say thou art By Faunus his commands much toucht in heart: Yet I suppose, each state from our state free, May be held strange; and so it (sure) may be The Gods did mean. And if you please t'enquire For Turnus pedegree, you'le finde his sire Acrisius and great Grecian Inacus. Whiles all these words in vain she vented thus, To trie Latinus, whom she found averse; And that all o're wraths poison did her pierce: Then full of monstrous furie, spight, and spleen, She madly 'bout the streets to rage was seen. Much like a scourged gygge, box-top, or ball, Which boyes are wont to scourge about a hall Or open yard, with lashes whipt about, Which with quick spinnings windes, works in and out, The boyes whip close, the top about doth flie, And roundly frisks, and never still doth lie: The lively lads make sport and wonderment, From hand to hand to see it nimbly sent: The more it spins, the more they whip it on, And laugh and leap to see it comne and gon: With such fierce flutterings up and down the streets She rangeth, rageth, as she people meets. Moreover, fiercely to the woods she flies, Doth feigned feasts of Bacchus enterprise, (Attempts more frantick mischief, playes mad pranks) And hides her daughter in the woodie banks,
The Trojans nuptiall rites (thus) to protract: And, Ho, ho, Bacchus cries, with rage distract; Thou, thou alone, must wed thy virgine faire, For unto thee small ivie javelings rare They beare about: thou lov'st (they say) to dance, And sacred haires, thine altars to advance. Like-furious madnesse does possesse the waves, To leave their own, to seek new dwelling drives. Their dangling haire, necks bare, they spread to th' windes, And some loud howlings raise, with trembling mindes, And clad in skins, vine-lances beare about. The queen her self, in mid'st of all the rout, Bearing a flaming pine-tree, tunes her voice To Turnus, and her daughters marriage choice: Yet suddenly, with frowning bloud-red eyes, Ho mothers, maids and wives, aloud she cries, Who-e're she be, that pity yet retains, When poore unhappie Amata complains, Who-ever tenders tender mothers grief, Unlace your head-attires, afford relief, Advance with me my Bacchanalian rites. Thus in the woods with madded frantick frights, Through damping deserts fierce Alecto had Stung and stirr'd up the queen with passions mad. Who, for this first time now, seem'd fir'd enough, To give all first contracts a counter-cuffe. The hellish hag therefore with frightfull wings, Straight to the walls of Rutuls kingdome flings: Which city first Danae was said to build, And with Acrision colonies it fill'd, Driven there on land by tempests violent: Antiquitie did call that continent
Ardea, and still it is great Ardea nam'd, But once it was by fortune much more fam'd: Here great king Turnus, in his palace faire, In the dark night slept sweetly, void of care: And here Alecto doffes her frowning face, And is transform'd into an old-wives case; And her old brows with aged furrows plowes, And weares white haires, close coifs, and olive-boughs: Seems Calybe, great Iuno's sexton old, And priest of her faire temple, to behold: And to the princely youth thus comes, and sayes; Brave Turnus, wilt thou suffer thy assayes And many labours to be spent in vain? Shall Trojan strangers thee supplant, and reigne? The king denies thee marriage, dowrie due By birth and bloud, seeks a successour new To rule his realms. Go thou thus laught to scorn, Now cast thy self on thanklesse dangers born; Go slay the Tyrrheans, Latines, rule in rest. These things (since thou didst all in sleep digest) All-potent Iuno bid me tell thee plain. Rise therefore quick, thy souldiers muster, train: Arm, arm them all, to all thy havens make haste, And let those Trojan captains all be chas'd, And burn their barks, which 'boutfaire Tyber lie: Thy warrant's good confirmed from on high. And let king Latines self (if he refuse To grant thee marriage, kindely thee to chuse) Feel thy fierce force, and utmost Martiall might. Here the brave spark the southsayer seem'd to sleght. And thus reply'd; I'm not (as you suppose) So unacquainted how this businesse goes:
Their ships in Tyber left affright me not, I know queen Iuno hath us not forgot. But over thee (old beldame) old-wives tales, And doting doubts too much in vain prevails: And kings affaires thee with false feares do flout. There's work enough for thee to look about, And tend thy temple, thy Gods image faire: Leave peace and warre unto the warriers care. These words Alecto made with rage to burn. But whiles the prince did him to prayers turn, A sudden trembling all his joynts possest, His sight grew dimme, fierce snakes much din exprest, With raging hissings, frightfull visages, Him staying, praying her, her wrath t'appease. She forced back, with flames his eyes do stare, And two choice snakes she plucked from her haire, Lasht him therewith, and thus in rage she rails; Behold thy beldame, with her old-wives tales, Whom kings affaires do with false feares so flout. Mark these thy words. See me come from the rout Of hellish furies, bearing in my hand Both warre and death. This said, a flaming brand She at the prince with rage and furie flings, Which in his heart with quenchlesse burning stings. Fierce feare did straightd isturbe the princes sleep, A sudden sweat o're all his corps doth creep. Arms, arms, in rage he cries, and strives to finde: Mad heat of warres and jarres enflame his minde: Furie foams up: much like a cauldron great Which makes huge bubling noise with boyling heat By store of flaming sticks, whose crackling fire The seething liquor swells, and boyles up higher,
The scumme about the cauldrons brims contends, And into th' aire black foam and froth ascends. Choice youths therefore unto Latinus came, Their peace-infringer, warres for to proclaim, To safegard Italie, t'expell their foes, Or else he would with potent power oppose Trojans and Latines both. These words thus spoke, His Gods he did to his high votes invoke. Then straight the stout Rutulians to the fight Do one another readily incite. His beauty, brav'ry, this man stimulates; His kingly kindred that man provocates: His former famous facts a third doth spurre. Whiles Turnus thus to arms his men doth stirre, Alecto lewd to th' Trojans flies full fast, For her new tricks fit place she spies at last, Where brave Iülus was about the shore, Busily hunting some wilde beare or bore. And here hells hagge a sudden foile infus'd Into the dogs, and much their sent abus'd, With fierce pursuit to prosecute that deere, Which did the first cause of much ill appeare, And to fierce broiles the rustick clowns did steere: A high-horn'd stately stagge was tamely bred, By Tyrrhus children from the damme so fed. This Tyrrhus from Latinus had the charge, To keep his deere in parks and forrests large. Their sister Sylvia deare that deere kept trim, And on his horns with flowres adorned him: And comb'd his locks, and kept him clean and slick, And he to hand would come, and meat would pick Out of his masters hand, and forth would stray
Into the woods, yet finde the readie way Unto his masters house, though late at night. Iülus dogs had of him sudden sight, And at him flew, as he was wandring there, Cooling his heat in woods and waters cleare. Ascanius also, who did fame affect, A sharp shaft from his bow did straight direct; Nor did fate fail to help, the mark to hit: But through his paunch the whistling arrow split. The hart pierc'd neare the heart, homeward made haste, And with deep groans him in's known stable plac'd: And like one mourning, seem'd much to complain, And every room his bleedings did retain. Sad Sylvia first the sister beats her breasts Cries out for help, the rusticks rude requests To come together. They (for yet i'th' wood The mischief lurking lay, not understood) Rashly run to her: this brings in his hands A knottie clubbe; that with bright fier-brands Is stoutly arm'd; each one what first he findes Snaps up: Wrath armeth peevish testy mindes. Tyrrhus calls troops also, as he was cleaving Oaks in foure parts, them with stiffe wedges reaving, His ax snatcht up in furious puffe and snuffe. Here then the hellish hagge sate high enough, To spie this mischiefs opportunitie, And from the ridges of the stables high, A past'rall summons on her horn she sounds, Whose ratling noise i'th' trembling groves rebounds, And made the mounts and thickest woods to quake. Farre sounding shrill, even to Diana's lake, And Nars white floud, sulphurous streams it heard,
And Velines fount: And mothers much affear'd, Their tender infants hug'd close to their breast. Then to the call which the hags horn exprest, The rigid Corydons, unruly clowns, With snatcht-up weapons flockt from all the towns. The Trojan gallants also forth do flow, And from their camps to aid Ascanius go. Their armie they draw out, but not to fight With countrey clownish clubs, brands burning bright; But with their slicing swords: and all the lands Tremble to see their glistring blades, brave bands: Their brazen shields reflected lustre bright Against the sun, which seem'd the clouds to smite. Like as when waves seem white by windes first blast, But by degrees the sea swells up at last, The waves work from the bottome up so high, As that they seem fiercely to dash the skie. Here, at first on-set, Tyrrhus eldest sonne, A lusty youth, Alon by name, begun To taste of death, by a swift arrows flight, VVhich stuck in's throat, and did him deadly smite, Stopping his vocall breath, locking up fast His vitall spirits, by much bloud forth cast. Many more bodies lay about him slain, And grave Galesus, striving to obtain And mediate peace between them; one well known, For's upright dealings, to give place to none, The richest landed man in Italie: Five flocks of sheep he kept most constantly, Five herds of cattell, and to till his land An hundred plows. Now whilest with equall hand The field they fought, and that the hagge did finde,
The issue answerable to her minde, The warre with both sides bloud initiated, And mischief firmly at first machinated: She Italie forsakes, mounts up to th' skie, And like a conqueresse, superciliously Speaks thus to Iuno; See, great madam, see, With deadly discord they so fired be, That though thy self wouldst them reduce to peace, Yet they from mutuall bloudshed would not cease. So soyl'd are Trojans with Italians bloud. Yet this I'le adde, if so thou think'st it good, Th' adjacent towns I'le so incense to warres, By rumours rais'd, and to most frantick jarres: So move, promove their mindes, that all about To auxiliarie broyles they shall burst out. O no, sayes Iuno, thou hast shown thy self, With art and smart enough, the furies elf. Warres seeds well sown, well grown already be, What chance had dipt, fresh bloud hath dy'd, I see. Such marriage matches may Latinus wise, And Venus godly off-spring solemnize. But as for thee, great Iupiter, heavens Lord, No longer liberty will thee afford To flie about the aire. Back to thy place: If any work remain in this like case, I'le see to it my self. Thus Iuno spake. Alecto then her forthwith did betake To her snake-fluttering wings, leaving the skie, And to Cocytus swiftly she doth flie. I'th' midst of Italie there is a place, On mountains high, of noble name and grace, Deep sacred valleys with huge leafy shades,
Which woody banks upon both sides invades: In midst whereof a rough swift stream did glide, Which did with ratling noise from rocks down slide. Here fearfull Pluto's gaping gulf was found, A dungeon dark, there 'twixt deep cleaving ground, Was a huge hellish hole, whose chaps most wide Did fierce Alectos hatefull presence hide; Where she, to heavens and earths content, did 'bide. Meanwhile queen▪ Iuno plies her helping hand, T' increase the furious warre throughout the land: Great troops of shepherds to the citie throng, And slain Galesus body bring along, And youthfull Almons; and their Gods for aid, And king Latinus urgently they pray'd. Turnus was present at their exclamation, Ingeminating threats, makes protestation, With fire and sword to ruinate them all, Since into league he did the Trojans call, And joyn himself unto the Phrygian race, But him rejected, with indigne disgrace. Those wives also, whom Bacchus frantick dance (For they queen Amata did high advance) Led in mad measures, through the woods most wide, Flocking in troops, would not be reconcil'd, But urge for arms, and instantly require VVith peevish spirits ('gainst the Gods desire, And former fatall omens) bloudy fight, And thus hedge in the kings court with fierce might. He like a rock resistlesse, firm, stood out, Like a sea-rock, when stiffe blasts blow about, Making such mountain-waves with bellowing sound, And ratling stones, and boyling foam surround,
And wash and dash, in vain, the rocks hard sides, And floating flags and weeds about it glides. But when no might might their blinde wills subdue, And to her beck fierce Iuno all things drew; The king to's Gods and emptie aire complains: Alas! (sayes he) we suffer piercing pains, We run to ruine, fatall storms us beat, But fierce revenge does you, vile wretches, threat; Your sacrilegious bloud shall for it pay, And vvofull smart does for thee, Turnus, stay; And thou in vain unto thy Gods shalt pray. But I, at rest, my house, my haven, vvho thought, Am rob'd of rest, to woes sepulchre brought. Hereat he ceast, and him to's house betook, And publick rule and regiment forsook. The custome was throughout all Italie, Which custome Albanes towns kept sacredly, And now great Rome conserves, vvhen first they vvage Fierce vvarres, and Mars in battels brave engage, Either vvith Scythians or Arabians bold, Or eastern lands, or Indies fraught vvith gold, Or Parthians proud to purchase glorious fame: There are two vvarre-gates (for so is their name) Of sacred use, of Martiall terrour great; An hundred brazen locks and bolts most neat, And iron barres do shut them sure and straight, And two-fac'd Ianus, porter, there doth wait: These gates, vvhen once the peeres do vvarre declare, The noble consuls self in robes most rare, In princely pomp, Gabinian garments tide, With mighty screeking noise doth open wide, And vvarre proclaims; then troops of youths do follow,
And sound assent vvith brazen trumpets hollow. Latinus thus vvas charged urgently, With furious vvarres Aeneas to defie; To ope those fatall gates; vvich he deni'de, And vvould not that offensive office 'bide But hid himself (good man) in discontent: In secret shades, vvould give no such consent. Then jangling Iuno, gliding from the skie, With her own hands unlocked instantly The lazie doores, and breaks the iron barres, And turns the hinges, and sets open vvarres. Thus Italie, vvhich lately lay at rest, Now unincited, is to vvarre addrest. Some flock as footmen to the field to fight, Some hasty horsemen make dust dim the light. All ask for arms, some take their speares and shields, And with fat tallow scoure them for the fields; And vvhet their bills and blades on whetstones strong, For ensignes spread, and trumps alar'ms, they long. Five powerfull cities do in forges frame New weapons for the vvarre: which five, by name, VVere potent Atina, and Tybur bold, Ardea, Crustumer, and Antemnae old, Strong for its bulwarks brave. Some helmets make, And buckler bosses wreath, some corslets take Of strong-proofe steel, light boots with silver lin'd: And now the plough, sicle and sythe declin'd, No love, delight in tillage, countrey toile, Their peacefull blades in fornace they reboyle. And now th' allarums sound, vvarres signe is given, This man, his helm from home in haste is driven To snatch away: that man his horse constrains
To weare his traces, foamy bit and reins: A third, his shield and treble coat of mail Put on, and weares his trusty sword, t' assail. And now ye sacred nine, set ope, I pray, Sweet Helicon, and let my Muse display The mighty kings, heroick captains stout, And Martiall bands, these bloudy fields that fought; VVith what most potent peeres and armies great, All Italie was fraught in Martiall heat. You ladies faire, you best can shew the same, For scarce▪ fames whisperings to our knowledge came. The first that waged warre with Martiall bands, VVas fierce Mezentius from his Tyrrhene lands, A stout contemner of Troyes deities: And with him came Lausus his sonne likewise, A compt, accomplisht prince, without compare, Onely excell'd by Laurents Turnus faire: Lausus, I say, famous great horse to ride, And tamelesse beasts to tame, of peerelesse pride, From Agylla unhappie troops he train'd, VVorthy o're's fathers empire to have reign'd, Unworthie to be call'd Mezentius sonne. Next these Aventine brave due honour wonne, Sonne of Alcides, victour-like proceeds, Drawn in his chariot with his conquering steeds; In's hand a shield with's fathers scutchion faire, VVherein an hundred poisonous snakes he bare, Environed with Hydra's serpentine. VVhom in Aventine mount, the priest divine, Rhea, by bastard birth conceiv'd and bred, The victour being vvith the priest coupled. VVhen Geryon was deceast, and Laurents lands
Hercules had obtain'd with conquering hands, And Spanish spoils, fat beeves, had brought with him, And them in Tyrrhene streams had washt most trim. His souldiers held in hand a Romane speare, And hacking halberts to the field did beare, And fought with rapiers and Italian dart, Himself (to strike more terrour to the heart Of his beholders) wore a lions skin Full of rough haire, whose fangs did seem to grin In manner of a helm above his head. Thus like his father fierce apparrelled, Feare-smiting Hercules, he statly stulks, And to king Latines court on foot he walks. Two brethren then, Catillus, Coras stout, Two gallant Grecian youths, went bravely out From Tybur strong, which from Tyburtus name, Their brother, was so call'd. They bravely came I'th' armies vantguard, hedg'd with weapons thick: Much like two cloud-begotten Centaures quick, Running in rage from some hills steepie height, Leaving Thessalian Othrys, Homol white, Whose rapid race makes trees and woods give way, Whose furious flight huge ratling boughs obey; Strong Caeculus, Praeneste's founder faire, Was also there, whom pristine times declare To be black Vulcans sonne, a king of kine, Found in the fire, with whom huge bands combine Of countrey Corydons, much men, beside, Of high Praeneste, and of those which 'bide About Gabinian Iuno's pleasant plains, And icie Anio, and the waterie trains Which Hernicks rocks inhabit. And the swains
Whom rich Anagnia, Amasenus fields Do feed: they had not all strong arms or shields, Nor ratling chariots; but the greatest part Fought with black leaden bags, with swinging smart: Some others strong two-handed slings did beare, And on their heads rough wolfs-skin hats did weare. Their left legs bare, raw skinnes their right did hide. Messapus also, famous horse to ride, Great Neptunes sonne was there; whose furie great None could with sword or fire abate or beat. His peacefull people, unaccustomed To bloudy broiles, he on a sudden led To battell, and to handle sword instructs. One from Fescinium mightie troops conducts, From just Haliscus and Soractes towers, And from Flavinium faire leads forth great powers, And from Cyminus mount and flowing spring, Capenas woods, who in array did sing Their princesse praise, as snowy swans do use, When in the aire themselves they broad diffuse, Flying from pastures, and with chattering shrill, Through their long throats with notes the skies they fill, And make Cayster and moist moores to sound, And Asia wide, nor could a man be found To think the arms of so great bands would fail, But that the airie clouds of swans prevail, Singing and swooping from the sea to shore. And now, behold, great Clausus addes yet more, Clausus from ancient Sabines sprung, who brought Great troops, himself a mighty troop being thought: From whom faire Claudias stock and race arose In Italie, when Romanes Sabines chose.
With him came troops from Amiternums town, And antique Sabines, all to reap renown; Eretums powers, Mutuscas might, where spring Olives great store: Nomentum bands did bring. And Velines rosean regiments were there▪ And hilly Tetricus, and high Severe: From Foruli, Casperia Himell's floud, From Tybers and Fabaris rivers good, From frigid Nursia, rigid Hortines bands, And many troops from utmost Latines lands. From Allia's odious streams great armies go, As thick as Libyas marble flouds do flow, When winter-waves do fierce Orion hide, Or standing-corne by parching sun-shine dry'de, Or Hermus flouds in field, or Lycia's lands Fruitfully overflown: So martiall bands, So clattering shields, and souldiers confluence fast, Make the ground grunt, and dusty clouds up cast. Again, great Agamemnons Halesus, The Trojans ancient foe most furious, Drawn in a chariot, unto Turnus brought A thousand souldiers with warre-furie fraught: Who Bacchus his vine-bearing Massica With spades eradicate, without delay: And souldiers from Arunca's hills most high, From Sidicinums seas and Cales nigh, And from Vulturnus adjacent faire floud, And dwellers in Saticulus thick wood: And Hoscies powers, who with short darts do fight, Fitted with leather-holds, more deep to smite; Their left hand held a targe, their right a blade Or faulchion faire, much like a sicle made.
Nor may our lines in silence pretermit Oebalus, whom (as ancient times have writ) On Sebethis the nymph Telon begat, VVhen aged, king of Caprea he sat. But when this sonne his fathers throne rejected, And larger limits for his rule affected, He over-ran Sarastes people strong, And Sarnus, which lies sea-ward all along; And those which Rufae, Batulum, do hold, And all Celenna's fields and fertile mould; Fruitfull Abella, and her walls and plains, VVho cast a kinde of dart much like Germanes; Their heads, for hat, cover'd with cork-bark light, Armed with swords and shields of brasse most bright. Great Vfens also to this warfare came, Mountanous Nursa left, of matchlesse fame, And fortunate in fight: whose natives brave Themselves to arms, and hunt in forrests gave: Their Aequiculians arm'd, would till their land, Delighted most, by furious force of hand To live by catching preyes and robberies vile. Moreover, from Marrubia's ancient isle, King Archippus renowned Vmbro sent, A famous priest, who as along he went, VVore on his helm a branch of olive faire: He able was, by skill and cunning rare, Both with his hands and words to cast a sleep Vipers, and poisonous snakes from hissings deep, And tame their rage, and heal their stingings fierce. But when the Trojans lance his heart did pierce, He could not cure that wound, nor to that grief His soporiferous charms could yeeld relief,
Nor herbs that grow on Marsian mountains high. For thee Angitias woods weep wofully, For thee cleare flouds and lakes do mourn and crie, Hippolytus brave sonne, young Virbius came Unto these warres, a man of Martiall fame: Whom full of glorie, nurs'd in savage woods Of faire Aegeria, neare Hymettia's flouds, Where great Diana's full fraught altars are, With pleasing and appeasing offrings faire, Aritia his most agust mother sent: For thus 'tis said, after with ill intent Hippolytus by's step-dame slaunderous train, Being by his father most unjustly slain, By horses drawn in pieces, through the care Of great Diana, and the cunning rare Of Aesculapius, was reviv'd again. But mightie Iove hereat took high disdain, That any mortall man such power should have, To raise a man to life from's fatall grave: With thunder-smart he smote the authors rare Of such great art. Whereat Diana faire Hippolytus preserv'd, him closely gave To faire Aegeria, him i'th' woods to save, Where he unknown, i'th' groves of Italie Spent his remaining dayes in privacie: Him now therefore they fily Virbius name, As who should say, he twice a man became. Hence therefore horn-hooft horses are deny'de About Diana's sacred groves to 'bide; For from those shores sea-monsters do affright Both horse and riders, putting them to flight: But yet his sonne that us'd great horse to ride,
In's chariot came to th' warres with Martiall pride. But chiefly Turnus self amongst the best, Of stately stature, him to th' warres addrest, Arm'd Capape, by's head then all more tall, Upon whose hairie helm did seem to crawl, A fierce Chimaera, breathing flames of fire. The more it rag'd, and flashes did expire, The more the field was fill'd with bloudy mire. Upon his shield in gold was pourtrayed Iö into an ox transfigured, O'regrown with haire, but no horns on her pate. The storie would be tedious to relate Of her and Argus, with his hundred eyes, Her keeper, who did o're her tyrannize: And now her father Inachus pour'd out A floud from's golden pitcher all about. A cloud of clustring footmen followed fast, Whose armed armies clouds of dust up cast: With them brave Grecian youth Aruncus bands, Rutulus powers, ancient Sicanus hands. Sacrana's troops, Labicians all proof shields, Tybers banks dwellers came into the fields: And they which dwell by Numacks sacred shores, And on Ciraean hill, and all the Bores Which plough Rutulian tops, and Anxur's train, Where mightie Iove doth ever Patron reigne: Woody Feronia, where Satyra lyes With blackish streams, where Vfens swiftly hies And hides it self in sea. And with these came Camilla queen of Volscia, of rare fame, Leading strong troops of horse, and footmen brave Glistring in arms: her self she did behave
Most like a warlike woman stout and stern: Nor did she of Minerva list to learn To handle flax and distaffe, but was strong Warres to endure, and in swift races long T'outstrip the rapid windes, and nimbly she On tops of untoucht standing corn could flee, And ne're presse down the tender eares i'th' race: Or o're the swelling waves could run a pace In midst o'th' sea, yet scarcely should her heel, Or sole o'th' foot seas superficies feel. All men and maids ran forth of doores to see, And with amazement to behold, how she In most majestick and most Martiall guise Riding about her troops, most bravely ties Her royall purple robes on shoulders light, And with gold buttons did her haire unite: And at her back a Lycian quiver wore, And in her hand a strong steel speare she bore. An end of the seventh book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the eighth book. King Turnus from Laurentums tower Sounds warres alarm: sends for more power To Diomede by Venulus, Who shews the cause most hazardous. Aeneas by advise divine, With King Euander doth combine: Who lends him aid, and sends his sonne, By angrie fates, in fight undone. And now Aeneas fitted faire For warre, and with a harnesse rare, Procured by his mother deare, His fates and fortunes do him cheere. His arms do much delight his heart, Chiefly his shields admired art. AS soon as Turnus from Laurentums fort Flags of defiance hung forth, made report Of open warre, with trumpets trembling sound: As soon as horse and foot fierce arms had found: Their hearts forthwith are flam'd, all Latium strong In hot spurr'd hasty troops together throng. Th'unbridled youths with hairebrain'd rage are led: Captain Messapus, Vfens first makes head, Mezentius great, God-scorner, next makes haste, Collects his powers, layes all the countrey waste:
Venulus to great Diomede was sent, To ask his aid to shew their discontent: Namely that Troy built nests in Italie, Aeneas and his conquered deitie, With all his fleet, was on their borders brought, And must (forsooth) Italia's king be thought; And that, by fates decree. To which effect Great power to th' Trojans do themselves connect, That his great fame o're-spread all Latiums land. And what strange structure may he take in hand, If fates befriend him? what event may he Expect from this great warre? 'tis plain to see, That he through Turnus and Latinus lands, At Diomedes crown spreads forth his hands. And these were now Italia's faire affaires, Which Troyes brave prince o'rewhelm'd with flouds of cares, Soundly survayes, his thoughts here, there, revolving, Distractively thinks this, that, nought resolving. Like as the quivering shadow of the sunne, In a brasse pan of water quick doth run, By sunnes or moons most radiant rayes inspection, And flutters all about with quick reflection. Now high i'th' aire it nimbly leaps and skips, And suddenly to tops of houses whips. And now 'twas night when toile-repelling rest, O're all the earth, men, birds and beasts possest; When grave Aeneas in the open aire Lay on a bank perplext with his warfare: Whom thus repos'd, and laid in slumber sweet, Faire Tybers God himself doth kindely greet. And from the poplar leaves the aged sire Seem'd to ascend, cloath'd in gray grave attire,
Of a sail-vail, his head array'd with reeds Thus courteously to comfort him proceeds. Great offspring of the Gods, by whom old Troy And everlasting Pergame we enjoy, From foes preserv'd. O thou long lookt for peere, To all Laurentums land and Latines deare; Here's thy sure seat, here thou thy Gods shalt place, Depart not hence, nor feare foes threatning face. Heavens former furie now is laid aside, And now (think not vain dreams do thee deride) Thou shalt the mightie white sow great espie, With thirrie pigs under the oak-roots lie Upon the ground, sucking the sowes teats white, And there's thy cities seat, thy toiles delight. And hence 'tis sure that thy Ascanius shall Within these thirtie yeares build Alba's wall, And from that noble name, that countrey call. I speak but what I know: now by what course, What yet remains, thou victour mayst enforce, Observe it, and I will it briefly show. Th' Arcadians, who from Pallas race do grow▪ Following their king Euanders ensignes faire, Did in these parts a place select prepare; And built a citie on the mountains small, Which they, from Pallant, Palanteum call. These with the Latines warre continually; Make these thy mates, link in confederacie. My self will thee right through my streams conduct, Ane with thine oares all stops to shun, instruct. Then rise faire Goddesse sonne, by peep of day So gentle Iuno then discreetly pray, With submisse votes and treats her threats and rage
Endeavour to evince or to asswage: Having thy hearts desire, pay me my rite: I am even he, whom there thou seest in sight O'reflowing fertile meads, by banks, smooth fleeting Skie-colour'd Tyber, vvhom vvith kindely greeting The Gods embrace: Here's my large habitation, Here to high towers my head hath first foundation. This said, the river in the pool is hid, Sunk to the bottome: night and sleep are slid From grave Aeneas. Up he starteth straight, And Sols brave shining face doth contemplate: And from the stream his dipt hands lifting high, These words he vented to the azure skie; Faire nymphs, rare Laurents nymphs, whence springs do spring, And thou deare Tyber, rivers sacred king; Accept Aeneas, all his dangers end, Where-e're thy pitying spring her streams extend, Where-e're thy beauteous billows flow apace, Ever, oh ever shall my gifts thee grace. O thou horn-headed Italies faire floud, O now propitious be, streams guider good, And make thy power appeare. This having said, Two ships out of his fleet he ready made; His friends he fits with oares, and arms his men. But here, behold, in sight appeared then A sudden and an unseen prodigie, A white sow with her white piggs there did lie Upon the shore, under roots of a tree: Which good Aeneas kill'd, and said, To thee, To thee, great Iuno, this I sacrifice, And all the brood bring as thine altars prize. Kinde Tyber all that night his flouds allay'd,
And all their swelling stirre most calmly stay'd; And like a lake, or standing-water faire, Was a still sea, fit for their oares affaire. A way they therefore haste with joyfull noes, And by the banks the pitcht bark smoothly flots. The waves and woods unus'd to such rare sights, Admire the glistring shields o'th' Trojan knights, And such rare carv'd and painted ships to see Float on the floud. Thus day and night they be All tyr'd with rowing, and the reaches large They swiftly passe, and boughs oft hide their barge▪ And thus they slice calm seas, and passe woods green. And now i'th' midst of skie hot Sol was seen Swiftly ascend: and now they gladly spie Walls, towers, and tops of peeping houses high, And Romane power, vvhich now should equalize The starrie skie: but now in most vveak vvise Euanders realm and regal state did stand. They nimbly vvinde their vessels to the land, And to the citie haste. By chance that day Euander unto Hercules did pay His honours due, a solemne sacrifice, In a great grove, vvhich 'bout the citie lies: Pallas his sonne vvas there, and there were more, All their choice young men, and a senate poore, Offring their incense, and hot streaming bloud, Upon the altars in amaze they stood, Fearefully frighted at the sudden sight Of such tall ships entring their harbours right, With silent stroaks of oares, and with great dread They in a fright, all from their able fld. Whom valliant Pallas did prohibit straigh
Those sacred rites not to contaminate. Himself with his drawn sword to shore doth flie, And from the bank aloud aloof doth crie; Young men, what forc'd you to this unknown vvay? Where vvould ye land? vvhat is your nation? say, Where do you dwell? What? bring ye peace, or warre? Then grave Aeneas in his ship, a farre Shew'd forth an olive peacefull branch in's hand, And friendlily thus answered his demand; Thou seest, brave sire, Trojans and weapons bent Against the Latines, vvhom they insolent Have forc'd to flight, by proud and unjust vvarre. VVe seek Euander: Favour us so farre, As to relate and tell him what I say, That Dardan peeres are come his aid to pray. Pallas amaz'd, to heare that famous name, Sayes straight, Come forth who'ere, whences'ere ye came, And speak your self before my fathers face, A vvelcome guest you are unto this place, And to our Gods. Then hands they shake and greet, And on the shore with kinde embraces meet. The river left, into the wood they vvalk, And thus Aeneas to the king did talk; O thou farre best of all the Grecian train, To whom my fortunes do me now ordain Thy humble suiter, with faire boughs of peace To seek to thee: and sure all feare did cease, Although I knew thou wast a Grecian lord, And that in kindred thou didst ne're accord With both th' Atrida's, Troyes two deadly foes; Yet on mine own vvorth I did me repose, And oracles divine of destinie,
And ancestours true consanguinitie, And thy renown throughout all countreys found, Have me to thee vvith vvisht good fortune bound. Dardan Troyes founder first, and first great king, (As Greeks relate) did from Electra spring, Great Atlas daughter, and to Trojans came, Yea that most mightie Atlas, who heavens frame Props on his back, begat Electra faire. Mercurie was your sire, whom Maia rare On Cyllens frigid tops did generate: And (if we may beleeve what men relate) Atlas, even that same Atlas which doth stay Heavens twinckling starres, begat faire Maia. Thus from one stemme our branches both do sprout. With these strong reasons arm'd, I thus came out, Sent not embassadours, nor us'd quaint art, To filch affection from thy friendly heart: But I, even I my self unto thee came In mine own person, submisse suits to frame. The same Rutulian bands which thee infest With cruell vvarres, do us as much molest: If us they vanquish, then they think all sure, To make all Italie their yoke endure: And all the seas that East or West do lie. Then take, and give us interchangeably Firm faith and furth'rance: We have valiant hearts, Stout stomacks, and brave sparks to act their parts. Aeneas ceast. The king with stedfast eye Observ'd the speakers count'nance curiously, His eyes, and totall parts; and briefly thus Replies; O thou the most magnanimous Of Trojans brave, O how I thee embrace!
How glad I bid thee vvelcome to this place! O how thou dost thy parents personate! And great Anchises amply imitate In face and feature, in thy words and voice! For I remember, and therein rejoyce, How when king Priam in his progresse vvent Unto his sister Hesions continent, To visit her, from Salamina past, To cold Arcadia's confines came at last. My youthfull chin that time began to bud With hairie doun, and then I wondring stood To see your Trojan peeres, yea I admir'd Great Dardans self, and was with joy even fir'd, To see Anchises taller then the rest. Youthfull affection boyled in my breast To talk with him, and hands with him to shake. I to him vvent, and joyfull did him take Along with me to my Pheneum faire: And he bestow'd on me a quiver rare, At his departure, fraught with Lycian shafts, And a faire mantle wrought with curious crafts, Richly in gold, two faire guilt bits with reins; Both which my young sonne Pallas yet retains. The peace therefore desir'd, I ratifie: And here's my hand for firm confederacie. And when to morrows sun renews earths light, I'le you dismisse, and aid with means and might. Meanwhile these annual rites (since here you are So friendly come) t' omit I may not dare. Pleaseth you them with us to celebrate, And at our tables us t' associate? This said, he bids bring back the cups and cates,
And on grasse seats, sets down the Troj states. Chiefly Aeneas on a bed he seated, Spread with a lions skin, and him entreated Unto a stately throne. Then youths selected, Yea and their altars priest their charge effected; And busily brought in their bull-beef drest, Baskets of vvell bak'd bread, vvine of the best. Aeneas and the Trojan peeres did dine Upon those entralls, and bull-beef divine. Their stomacks staid, and hunger qualifi'de, Thus king Euander to them testifi'de; This annual feast, and this accustom'd cheere, This great Gods altar, vvhich we yeare by yeare Observe, is not through silly supertition, Or errour of our antique Gods condition; But we do this (most noble Trojan guest) And yearely these due honours are exprest, Because we were preserv'd from dangers great. For proof whereof, behold this rockie seat Hanging vvith craggy nooks, whose ruin'd waight, Of an old mount seems to precipitate. Here vvas a huge and large retiring cell, Wherein inhumane Cacu us'd to dwell, VVhose filthie face vvas in so black a plight, As that Sols rayes could ne're afford it light: Fresh murthers still lay reaking on its flore, And heads ofmurthered men besmear'd in gore VVith gastly looks hung on the odious gates. Black Vulcan father vvas (as fame relates) Unto this monster belching fumie fire From his foule mouth, vvho seem'd then mounts much higher. At last, as we desir'd, heaven sent us aid,
And time thereto most fitly for us made: For why? Alcides that revenger great Having perform'd his conquering retreat From treble-formed Geryons dire decay, Enricht with spoiles, his beasts all brought away, And 'bout our fields and flouds scarce had they fed, But Cacus with his theevish furie led, Whereby no fact most foule, no cunning cheat He fear'd t' effect, by force or sly deceit, Foure of his fatted oxen stole from's stall, And foure faire-horned heifers therewithall: And lest their feet the way to's den should show, By th' tails he pul'd them backwards to and fro, Into his den: the caves mouth with a stone He shut, whsoe way could by no search be shown. Mean while, when from those stalls great Hercules To move his full-fed herds of kine did please, To other parts, the beasts going on along, Began ith' woods to bellow loud and strong. Where at the caves, beasts lowed loud again, And Cacus craft was thereby made most plain. Hereat Alcides, full of furious gall And griping grief, doth to his weapons fall: His tough and knotty club he fiercely takes, And with swift pace way to the mountain makes. Where first our men saw Cacus full of fright, Swiftlier then winde to's den to take his flight. Fre wing'd his feet. When he himself had clos'd Within his cave, and the strong chain unlos'd, The mightie stone fell down, which by the chain And Vulcans art, before did fast remain, And with strong bolts the gate did fortifie.
Behold, great Hercules did thither hie; VVith rage enflam'd, observing every nook, He this way, that way, up and down did look, Gnashing his teeth, hot with intestine hate: Thrice through Aventines mount he doth lustrate, Thrice at the stonie gate in vain he beats, And from the hill, thrice tired, he retreats. A flintie rock, cut sharp on every side, With concave back, rais'd high, hard by he spi'de; 'Bout which were holes, and rav'nous vultures nests. This on the streams left side, he fierce infests, As it lay bent unto the mountain side, To loose it on the right, he strongly try'd; And shoving with his shoulders strenuously, At last it shook: whereat he by and by Put forth his strength, and rous'd it from the root, And it remov'd: whose movall with loud shout Did fill the echoing aire, the rivers bank, Leapt up and down, and fearefull backward shrank. And then the den, and Cacus court most wide, Lay ope, and all her duskie deeps were spide. Much like the earth, enforced deep to cleave, His bowels dark do yawn, in sunder reave, And shew their shadie cells, irksome to light, And upward seems of horrid hell full sight: And soules, the light let in, are sore affright. By this unlookt for light Cacus thus caught, And suddenly shut up ith' stonie vaut, And made to breathe and bray with unus'd waight, Alcides still more loads doth congregate, And all the trash and trump'ry there about, And boughs and blocks, and mil-stones huge seeks out.
He then (for hope of flight was quite expell'd) Belcht from his throat (most strange to be beheld) Huge smothering smoak, which fill'd the rooms with fume, And from their eyes all light did quite absume, And made the cave throughout as dark as night, Thick mists being mixt with fierie flashes bright. Which Hercules himself could not abide, But through the flame in rage he headlong hi'de, Where thickest flakes offume, dark clouds of smoak Did belch and boile, all in the den to choke. Thus Cacus in his cave evaporated Vain flashie vomits, fast incarcerated, Was by Alcides bound in griping bands, His fierie eyes squeez'd out with his strong hands, And cloddie bloud his chimney-throat did choke. Then straight the dens black doores being open broke, All the stolne cattell and base theeveries VVere open laid to Sols all-seeing eyes. The uglie carcasse was by th' heels drawn out, And people ne're had done to prie about His odious eyes, foule face, and beastlike breast, O'regrown with haire, with flames his chaps opprest. E're since our joyfull youths did celebrate A day of triumph for this happie fate. Potitius was first founder of the same, And keeper of Pinarius sacred frame, And for him did t' Alcides sacrifice, And in this grove this altars edifice Did fairely frame, thus stately as you see, VVhich is our best, and so shall ever be. Thereore brave youths, such honours due to pay, VVith boughs dresse all your brows, shunning delay,
Take your full bowls in hand, poure wine most free, And let our Gods in common call'd on be. This said, he with Herculean poplar boughs, Faire, double-colour'd, decks his head and brows: Whose branches dangled down, and wine in's hand, In sacred bowls, all suddenly do stand About the altar, pouring plenteous wine, And joyfull votes vent to the powers divine. Meanwhile the evening drew on duskie skie, And now the priests, Potitius specially, Went (as they're wont) in skins apparrelled, With tapers in their hands, and ordered The banquets brave, with second courses meet, And load the board with store of juncates sweet. The singing Salii then stood round about, With poplar boughs their heads adorn'd, set out: The young men here, the old men there were seated, And Hercules his praise in songs repeated, And all his famous facts: First, how with ease His stepdames snakes he with both hands did squease, And strangle dead: And how he did destroy Brave cities strong, Oechalia and old Troy: How in king Eurystheus troublous land A thousand toils, by Iuno's fierce command, He underwent. How thou, unconquered knight, Didst ruinate, by thy resistlesse might, Those cloud-begotten mongrell Centures great, Hylaeus and foule Pholus, and didst beat, Yea kill the Cretan Minotaure most fierce, And a huge lion mortally didst pierce, Upon Nemea's banks. Thou hideous hell Didst make to tremble, and hells porter fell,
Lurking in's bloudy den, on bones half gnawn, Who by thy might was from his kennell drawn. Nor could mis-shapen shapes thee once affright, No nor Typhoeus self with armed might. Nor wast thou then of wit and worth devoid, When Lerna's dragon fiercely thee annoy'd With horrid heaps of heads. All hail therefore Thou sonne of Iove, with Gods, whom we adore, Accept us and our gifts: propitious be. And thus his praise in layes they sang most free. But Cacus den they chiefly memorize, And how from Cacus mouth the fire out flies; And all the woods, and hills and dales resound This famous fact of Hercules renown'd. These sacrifices done, all now retreat Unto the town, the king in state compleat, Full of grave yeares, went on, and on each side Aeneas and his sonne with him abide. And thus he past, and past the time in talk. And good Aeneas wonders, as they walk, And glanc'd his eyes about on every sight; Affected with each place full of delight, He questions every object, and must know How every ancient monument did grow. Then king Euander, Romes great founder, said, In these woods Pauni and faire wood-nymphs stay'd, And kindes of men, of trunks of trees begot, And of hard oaks, whom nature did allot No nurture good, nor customes commendable, And working oxen how to use, unable: Riches to get, or got to keep, unskill'd; And heps and haws and hunted cheere them fill'd;
Old Saturn first came from Olympus high, Shunning Ioves power, banisht from's emperie. He those untutour'd people, stragling wide About the woods and mountains, beautifi'de: He gave them laws, call'd their land Italie, For there he liv'd in long securitie. Under whose rule and regiment most sage, Was then (as men report) the golden age: In such sweet peace he did them regulate Till by degrees times did degenerate, And a more vitious age began to reigne, And bloudie broiles, and greedinesse of gain. Then came Ausonia's powers and nations strange, And faire Saturnus lands name oft did change. Then kings came in, and Tybers torrent main, From whose surname, the river did retain That name, by us Italians having quite Lost the true name of Albula most white. I exil'd from my land, did float along In seas extremities, till fortune strong, And fierce resistlesse fate did fix me here, Mov'd by monitions of my mother deare, Goddesse Carmenta, and Apollo wise, Whose oracles thereto did me advise. Scarce said he thus, when walking on in state, He shew'd her tombe, and Romes Carmentall gate; Which men in honour of Carmentis faire, A Goddesse nymph, and prophetesse most rare, Erected had, who first did sing the praise Of famous Trojans, to ensuing dayes, And noble Pallantu. And shew'd us The mightie wood, which warlike Romulus
Made a safeguarding sanctuarie faire, And on a rock the Lupercall most rare, Of Lycean Pan, unto him consecrated, And in th' Arcadian custome dedicated. Beside, he shew'd Argilets cursed grove, And 'gainst the place, disgrace (protest by Iove) Of faithlesse Argus his injurious guest. Hence to Tarpeia's towre he us addrest, And the now rarely guilded Capitol, Which once with shadie shrubs being covered all, Excessive feare of that affrighting place Did terrifie the hearts o'th' Bores most base; Even then they gave the rock and grove great grace. This grove (sayes he) this bushie hill so steep Some God (but who, uncertain 'tis) did keep. Th' Arcadians think they Iove himself did see, When oft fierce storms and crackling thunder he Made flie about the skie. Besides, behold These two demolisht towns, the fragments old And rude remains of ancient men of fame: Old Ianus this, Saturn did th'other frame. Ianiculum was this, Saturnia that. And thus along they past with this kinde chat, To poore Euanders buildings, where they view About the Romane courts a scattered crew Of cattell, 'bout the edifices faire. Thus when they did unto his court repaire, This court (sayes he) great Hercules did hold, This palace him receiv'd. Brave guest, be bold To spurn at worldly pelf, thy self to show Like a great God, not scorning fortunes low. He ceast: and brave Aeneas he brought in
Into his court of princely state most thin, Plac'd him upon a leafie quilted bed, With a fierce Libyan beere-skin overspread. Dark night rusht down, whose black wings earth did hide: But Venus, as a mother, terrifi'de, And at Italia's troops sorely perplext, And with Laurentums threats in minde much vext, Thus from her golden bed to Vulcan speaks, And in love-charming words thus silence breaks; Whiles Grecian kings with warres well wasted Troy, And for mens fires did her faire towres destroy, I sought no succour for those wofull men, No arms nor art of thine to help them then, Nor thee (my dearest love) could I in vain, Nor thy rare skill, to exercise constrain, Though much I ought to Priams sonnes relief, And my Aeneas toiles cost me much grief. Now Rutuls land by Ioves command him holds, Me therefore now (sweet heart) thy love embolds To supplicate: I onely arms do crave, A mother for her childe: Dame Thetis brave And faire Aurora could thee move with teares. My dearest heart, see, see, what frighting feare, What troops are mustred, cities up are shut, Sharpning their horns, at me and mine to but. She ceast: and with her snowie arms most white About the neck she clasps him soft and light. He seems to shrink, she clings and toyes the more: He on a sudden felt loves honey-rore Soak in, and wonted flames to heat his heart, And to o'respread his bones and every part: Much like fierce thunder from clouds rumbling ript,
VVhen flashie flames through th' aire have nimbly skipt· She gladlie found her fraud and face most faire T'have pierc'd her husbands heart, and cur'd her care. Then father Vulcan bound in loves sweet chains, Reply'd, and said, Sweet soule, what thee constrains To use such farre fetcht phrases unto me? Sweet Goddesse, where's thy trust 'twixt me and thee? Alas deare heart, had former care been so, Even then we might have armed Troy from wo. Nor Iupiter, nor fates Troyes blisse deny'd, But Priam might yet other ten yeares 'bide. Now if thou wilt to warre, if here th'art bent, VVhat e're my art can adde for adjument, What steel and iron, brasse or silver plate, VVhat fire and blasts can best consolidate, (Cease needlesse prayers) distrust not thine own strength, 'Tis all for thee. This having said, at length He gave her long embraces, loving greets, And on her bosome tasted all loves sweets. Thus when sweet midnights rest was past and spent, Like a good huswife, thriftie, provident, VVho timely rising closely cards and spins, Her cinders builds, to make her fire begins, Blows the quick coals, working, turns night to day, And makes her maids their bones to work to lay, VVith toyling tasks, her self well to maintain, And all her charge and children to sustain: Even so, uxorious Vulcan, iron-tamer, Ignipotent, most excellent arms framer, Earely starts up, his basking bed forsakes, And him to's iron instruments betakes. Neare Sicili an isle aloof there lies,
Lipara and Aeolia; whence there flies Much fire and winde, much fume and furious din▪ Under which lies a cave and deep within: The Cyclops Aetnaean forges grown i'th' rocks, Do through the chimneys vent such thundring knocks, And bouncing blows upon the anviles smit, And tinkering strokes with nimble hammers hit, As loudly echo out with clanging sound Of steel and iron, batter'd long and round Upon the anviles shrill, into broad plates, The forge-fire sputtering puffes evaporates. Here's Vuloans house, here's vaste Vulcania town, Hither from heaven this fire-fierce god came down. In this large cave the Cyclops iron frame; There brangling Brontes fast does file the same: There streporous Steropes makes sparks to flie, Naked Pyracmon does at th' anvile lie. A yet unfinisht fiery work they wrought, But in some part, to some perfection brought, Some thunderbolt, which Iove from heaven did smite, (As on the earth do many of them light) Some part unpolisht was. Three clattering showres Of winter-hail upon the work he poures, And three of spring-tide rain, three flashes swift Of summer flames, three puffes of autumne drift. Thus at their work fierce frightfull flashes flie, Bright rapid lightning rage, and by and by With fearfull rumbling, thumping thwacks of art They beat about. Then on another part A chariot with swift wheels for Mars they made, Wherewith he town and townsmen makes afraid, A coat of arms for angry Pallas they
With snake-like scales and gold did overlay: And in the breast-plate of the Goddesse faire Serpentine Gorgons heads in wreaths there are, Chopt from the neck, whose gogling glarie eyes Rouling in rage, beholders stupifies. Away (sayes Vulca) lay away with speed All other works, you lads of Aetnaean breed, And hither bend your thoughts, rare arms to frame, For a renowned prince of matchlesse fame. Now shew your strength, your nimble hands, rare art, Come, come, make haste. This said, each playes his part, And fast they fall to work, each takes his place, Gold, silver, brasse, steel-mettals, boile apace: And being melted, run like streams about. And first a goodly targe they forged out, Even one 'gainst all the adverse Latine shafts, With fourteen folds and crosse-barre turning drafts: Some at the bellows put in, puff out blasts; Some hissing hot-iron into th' water casts: The whole shop rings with thick quick anvile blows, And each his arms in order fiercely throws, To give his stroke, and with the tongs to turn The massie mettall, which red-hot doth burn. Whiles Vulcan in Aeolian puffy plains Thus busie was, the rising sun constrains Euander from his palace poore to rise, Wakned by morning-chanting birds in skies: Who gravely risen, and apparell'd meet, And Tuscanes sandals laced on his feet: Then his Arcadian blade he hangs by's side, VVhich on his left hung by a panthers hide. A lease of lusty dogs did on him vvait,
Guarding their master from the palace gate. Thus to his guest Aeneas lodgings went This Heroë brave, mindfull of's high intent, And of his promis'd aid. With no lesse care Aeneas in the morning doth prepare. With Pallas young the king associated, Achates kinde Aeneas comitated. Met, they shake hands, and down together sit, And having time for talk, and leisure fit, The king thus first began; Great prince of Troy, I ne're shall think (whiles thou dost life enjoy) Troyes crowns and comforts to be brought to thrall▪ Our forces, I confesse, are too too small, To give so great a prince aid competent: On one side we by Tuscanes stream are pent, On th' other side troops of Ruulians stout, With clattering arms our walls do hedge about: But I am mustring for thee mightie bands, A people strong, and very rich in lands: VVhich happy hap, unlookt for luck hath given, And thou art come, by fates decree, from heaven. Not farre from hence the citie Agylla, An ancient stony basis doth display, Once Lydia call'd, famous for battels bold, Which once did all Etruria mountains hold. This land, which fairely flourisht many yeares, Proud king Mezentius rul'd with cruell feares. Why should I mention all his murthers fierce? Or why this tyrants facts most foule rehearse? The Gods repay it on his impious head! Besides, he bound live bodies unto dead, Coupling them hands to hands, and face to face,
(Ah horrid torment) in which foule embrace, Them all-besmear'd with putrefaction ill, He with a lingring death thus us'd to kill. His people tired with this tyranny, At last in arms him and his familie, Plotting more impious pranks, they close surrounded, Slew all his mates, with fire his house confounded. He in these broiles to Rutuls realm did flie, To Turnus harbour, for securitie. Then all Etruria in just furie came, Their king with arms, for due revenge, they claim. Thou great Aeneas, of these thousands brave The leading and the Martiall guide shalt have. For all their ships stand ready ridg'd at shore, And fluttering flags do hang the decks before: An aged southsayer singing secret fates, Does them with-hold, saying, O choice Lydian mates, Of pristine potentates the cream and flower, VVhom just revenge incenseth with strong power Against your foes, and whom Mezentius base Hath stimulated, with just wrath to chase: No native of Italia may such bands Conduct; then seek a captain from strange lands. These things did all Etruria much dismay, Yet still in field their ensignes they display: And troubled at these heavenly destinies, Tarchon himself sent oratours most wise To me▪ with regal robes and presents rare, Desiring I would to their tents repaire, And of great Tuscanes state take tutelage. But me, my feeble and congeal'd old age, And faint unfitnes to activity,
Denies that profered state and soveraignty. My sonne I would have sent: but mixed bloud With's mothers faire Sabella, thus withstood, By whom part of those parts to him enclin'd. But thou, whose yeares, and whose heroick minde The fates do favour, and the Gods provide: O thou Troyes and Italia's valiant guide, Do thou assume this charge. And here my boy, Pallas my sonne, my hope and future joy, To thee I vvill commit, to thee commend, On thee his Martiall master to attend; VVarres burthen great with thee to undergo, Rare feats of arms from thee to see and know, And from his childehood thy rare parts t' admire. And (as the present case doth now require) Two hundred brave Arcadian horsemen strong, All chosen youths, I give to go along: Pallas in's own name likewise does the same. Scarce to an end of's words the king yet came, And that Aeneas and Achates kinde, Their eyes fixt on the ground, their troubled minde Full of afflicting thoughts: vvhen suddenly Faire Cytherea in a serene skie, Gave them a signe: for why, a sudden sight In th' open aire of wondrous glistring light, VVith rushing ratling noise, quick o're them came, And seem'd to shake the universall frame: And they suppos'd the Tuscane trump they heard, And more and more the ratling roare was rear'd. And then between the clouds in pleasant skie Bright-shining and loud-sounding arms they spie, VVith thundring noise, which did the rest affright:
But Troyes brave prince discern'd the sound aright, And thought on's sacred mothers promise made: And therefore to them thus at last he said; Kinde hoste, feare not, nor seek what accident These signes fore-show, for me heaven hath them sent. Venus, divine creatrix of each thing, Promis'd she would this signe upon me bring, If warres were wag'd: and that for my protection, She'd bring me Vulcans arms, with sweet affection. Alas! vvhat woefull warres are imminent Unto Laurentums nation turbulent! What vengeance on thee, Turnus, shall I take! How many helms and targets shall I make, And bodies of brave captains, to be rould About thy banks and brims, faire Tyber old! Thy armies making, yet still marring peace: This said, from farther talk he now did cease, And from his seat himself he raised higher; And first of all he kindled the sleep-fire On Hercules his altars, and renews, With joyfull heart, yesterdayes sacred dues, Unto the petty Gods, and both the king And Trojan youths, slain sacrifices bring. This done, his ships and mates he goes to see: Amongst whose troops, those whom he found most free VVith active hearts his warres to undertake, He chose to him; those that would him forsake, Down the declining river thence he sent, VVho without sails homeward most smoothly went▪ To carry to Ascanius future news Both of his father and his facts issues. Then horses to the Trojans given were,
To Tyrrhene territories them to beare, But to Aeneas they a choice one gave, Clad with a lions skin, with gold claws brave. Fame quickly flew o're all the citie small, That to the king, through Tuscan horsemen tall, Did posting rie. Women with extream feare Did double their designes: in men appeare Doubts of the worst and warres more open face. Then grave Euander, with a kinde embrace, Teares gushing out, his parting guest held fast, And lovingly into these speeches brast; O if my yeares of youth Iove would restore, (As once when at Praeneste heretofore I routed my foes ranks, and victour stout, Burnt heaps of captains targets all about. This hand king Herils soule sent under earth, VVhose mother, faire Feroni, at his birth Infus'd in him three soules (horid to tell) By which three weapons he could handle well: And therefore must be three times vanquished, Thrice slain, and thrice of's arms disfurnished.) O then, sweet sonne, I'd ne're disjoyn'd have been From thy sweet greets, nor have endur'd t' have seen Mezentius proud, my bloudy borderer, Such vaunts and villanies 'bout me t' inferre, Such murthers to have made, a town so good By husbads losse to weep in widow-hood. But oh great Iove, and ye the Gods on high, Piie Arcadia's kings great miserie; And heare a parents prayers, and your great love Let me in my poore Pallas safety prove: And if I live to see him safe again,
Life thus I crave, for this I'le beare all pain. But if, fierce fates, you threaten dire distresse, Now, oh now end these dayes of wretchednesse, Whiles thoughts are doubtfull, hope of hap's unknown, Whiles thee, my childe, my sole, sure joy alone, I yet may clasp in these mine aged arms, Before sad news my heart pierce with thy harms. Thus this good father these sad words pour'd out, At parting; and his tendants round about, Him, fainting, falling, carried in with care. And now Aeneas on his courser rare Mounted, rode foremost forth, Achates kinde, With all his Trojan peeres, with cheerefull minde, And princely Pallas in the midst of all In rich-wrought arms, conspicuously tall, With a short coat: like Lucifer most bright Shining upon the oceans waves at night, (Which Venus loves above each ignean starre) VVhose lustrous beams are the most bright. by farre. The women on the walls stood fearefully, And clouds of dust, and glistering arms did eye. The next way they through bush-paths armed ride, The fields even quake with horse-hoofs prancing pride. Neare Crits floud a mightie wood doth lie, VVhich ancients farre and neare religiously Held in great honour, clos'd on evey side With hollow banks, 'bout which thick firre-woods 'bide. Fame sayes, the ancient Greeks did sacred yeeld Unto Sylvanus, God of beasts and field, The grove and solemne-day, that in old-time That they first held the Latines lands and clime. Not farre from hence brave Tarchons armie stout,
Of his Etruria troops lay campt about: And from a high hill he might see their bands, How they lay spread about their fields and lands. Hither Aeneas with's choice youths addrest, And there their wearie selves and horse they rest. But beauteous Goddesse Venus through the skies With her rare gifts unto Aeneas hies, And in a separate valley by a brook, As soon as on her sonne she cast a look, She to him comes, and these words uttered▪ See here, deare sonne, the gifts I promised, By my kinde husbands art thus perfected: Now feare no Laurent strong, nor Turnus stout, In field to fight with, and to single out. This said, faire Venus did her sonne embrace, And under an oak the glistering arms did place. He overjoy'd, and wondrously affected With such the Goddesse gifts to be respected, And highly honour'd, gluts his gazing eyes, And with strange wonder every parcell spies, And turns and windes betwixt his arms and hands, The horrour-striking helm, like flaming brands Vomiting fire, and the death-wounding blade, A brazen breast-plate very richly made, Big, and bloud-red of hue: like Sols bright rayes, When its faire shine abroad it self displayes Upon some rain-bow cloud, full opposite. Then he admires his silver-boots most light, With gold and ammell wrought, and well refin'd, His lance nd shield most strangely stuft and lin'd. For here Italian facts, Romes victories, Fire-furious Vulcan, seen in prophesies,
And future strange events, had graven faire: And here Ascanius issuing offspring rare, And all his famous fights, were pictured brave: How a great she-wolf in stout Mars his cave Brought forth her young, and how two chopping boyes At mothers dugs lay dandling, mothers joyes; Who did her fearelesse twins, most loving, lick, And with her tongue make necks and bodies slick. Hard by stood Rome, and ravisht Sabine dames By troops assembled at Circean games. And how new warres did suddenly arise Unto the Romanes, Cures, Tatius wise, And how (at last) contentions laid aside, Those armed kings about Ioves shrine did 'bide, Wh bowls in hand, and having slain a swine, As kinde confederates, did in league combine. Not farre from thence Metius was pictured, By horses torn, and quit dismembered; (But thou Albanus stoodst not to thy word) And all the bowels of that lying lord Tullus tore out, and drag'd them through the wood, And all the briers besprinckled with his bloud. How king Porsenna charg'd Rome to re-take. Their banisht Tarquine, and how for his sake The citie with a hard siege he did crush, When on their swords, for freedome, Romanes rush. There you might see him rage, and threat and fret, 'Cause Cocles durst the bridge break down and get. How captiv'd Chlaelia, having broke his bands, Swamme o're the river stoutly with her hands. How on the top of high Tarpeia's tower Brave Manlius stood, and with undanted power
The temple and the Capitol defended, And all the reed-thatcht palace that ascended, Did tumble down, and the white-feathered goose In the guilt gallery, cackling, fluttering loose, Frighted the French, and their approach discride, Whom clambering up, thick bushes did so hide, And benefit of black night, aid therein, That they got up, and so the towre did win: Whom goldy locks and golden garments decks With purple jackets, and their milk-white necks With bracelets grac'd, in hand two Alpine speares, A long shield o're his corps each souldier beares. The dancing Salii, Pns priests, naked quite, VVool-wearing Flamines, Numa's target slight, VVhich fell from heaven, were curiously set out, And how the modest matrons bare about In easie coaches, their most sacred rites: Aloof from these were horrid hells affrights, Black Pluto's gates, and damned soules dire pains: And thou, base Catiline, hungst there in chains, On a steep tumbling rock, with Furies jaws Frighted: But Cato, giving wholesome laws, Sate 'mongst the good: in a sequestred place Betwixt both these, sea-waves with golden face Did run abroad, and boyl'd-up froth most white; About were dolphins grav'd in silver bright, In circles with their tails the billows sweeping, And cutting through the waves, their course keeping. In midst of whom you guilded ships might see: How Martiall sports yearely solemniz'd be: How all Leucates with fierce warres did sweat, And waves of seas like gold to glister neat:
And how Augustus Caesar by warres might With Latiums peeres and people ruled right, His small and great Gods his tall ship ascending, From his faire brows two glistring flames extending, And o're his head his fathers starre most bright. On th'other side, Agrippa with great might With friendly Gods and gales his armie led, His Martiall ensignes being bravely spread, Sea-conquest garlands garnishing his head. How with Barbarian aid Antonius great In various conquests did Romes foes defeat, And 'mongst the Indies black and Aegypt long, By red-sea shores, and orient forces strong, T'increase his strength, all Asia to him drew, Whom Cleopatra (shamefull) did pursue. All rusht together, the whole sea did seem, Wrought up with winding oares, thick froth to steam; The foredecks one another dashing fast: And to the ocean thus they get at last. Thou'dst think the isles rous'd up did swim and meet, That mightie mountains did high mountains greet. With so great strength men strenuously did strive, Their towering vessels close to force and drive. Wild-fire from hands, steel-shafts from bows are sped: New broiles on Neptunes soiles do die seas red. The queen i'th' midst her troops with trump doth cheere, As yet her fatall snakes do not appeare. But all the rout of monstrous Gods, meere fiends, Yea barking Anubis his weapons bends Against great Neptune, Pallas, Venus faire. Amidst their troops mad Mars doth stamp and stare, Carv'd in a garbe of steel, and horrid hagges
Sent by great Iove, and Discord in torn rags Skips jocand 'mongst them: whom Bellona fierce Follows with bloudie whips their hearts to pierce. Actian Apollo these things well did eye, Straight bent his bow, at them from heaven let flie. Whereat in terrour all th' Aegyptian rout, Arabians, Indians, and Sabaeans stout, Turn'd backs and fled: the queen herself also Was heard to wish for windes, hoise sails, and go, Yea flie full fast, slackning the ropes and sail. The black-fire furious God with Western gale And tydie-waves, her, looking gastly white With feare of future death, amidst the fight, Did drive along: but yet against the same With mightie body weeping Nilus came, Opening her bosome, calling back again Her thus surprised and quite conquered men Into her livid lap and unfound springs. But Caesar, conquerour of these adverse things, Thrice born in triumph 'bout Romes royall walls, His everlasting vow to minde recalls, To his Italian Gods doth sacrifice, And through the citie with great joy likewise Three hundred temples built: the streets throughout Do ring with sports and peoples joyfull shout: Each temple fill'd with dancing matrons faire, About the altars singing songs most rare, And every altar fraught with heifers slain. Caesar himself i'th' temple did remain Of pure Apollo, in the porch most white, And of the nations gifts taking full sight, Fits the rich posts with choice of royall spoiles.
The captives conquer'd in the warres turmoiles Are led along, in speech as different, As in their habits, arms and ornament. Here mudling Mulciber had cast in brasse, Fierce Scythians and black Moores in gowns to passe: Here Caraeans, Lelages, Gelonians stout, Skilfull in casting darts, he pictur'd out. And here Euphrates streams did smoothly glide, And French Morinians, who remote reside: Two-corner'd Rhine, undanted Daians stout, Araxes swift o're his bridge swelling out. These rarities of Vulcan in his shield, His mothers gift, cause of much wonder yeeld: The things unknown, the figures him affect, Friends fame and fates he beares with choice respect. An end of the eighth book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the nineth book. Whiles on both sides the state thus stands Of their affaires, Juno commands Turnus to hasten 'gainst his foe, The Trojans ships to overthrow, By flinging fire into the fleet: But Jove does with their project meet, And turns the ships into nymphs shapes. Two friends go forth, but neither scapes. Trojans their camps do bravely hold, A scanius kills Numanus bold. Pell-mell they fight, but Turnus stout Bitias and Pandar puts to rout, And Trojans from their trenches beats: But tyr'd with troops, he thence retreats. ANd now, whiles thus th' ffaires on both sides stand, Iuno from heaven sent Iris out of hand To supine Turnus, who took up his seat I'th' sacred dale of Pilumns grove most great. To whom Thaumantias with faire face thus said; Turnus, behold, what none o'th' Gods, though pray'd, Durst ere have promis'd, time now profers free. Aeneas leaving all behinde for thee, Cmp, mates, and fleet, to king Euander's gon: Yet rests not so, but farther is past on, To Corits utmost confines, Lydians strong
With rustick wrath in arms to lead along. What fear'st thou? 'tis high time, leave all delay, With horse and chariots now to make thy prey On their confused camp. Thus having said, With well-poys'd wings to th' heavens herway she made; And in her flight she cuts her mightie bow Under a cloud. The young prince did her know, And lifting both his hands up to the skies After her, flying, with these words he flies; Faire Iris, heavens great grace, who did thee force, Thus from the clouds to me to have recourse? Whence is this sudden storm, so bright and cleare? Me thinks I see heaven cleft i'th' midst appeare; And stragling starres from proper pole declines: Who e're me call to arms, so sacred signes I'le follow fast. This said, to th' stream he hastes, And of the water a deep draught he tastes, Loading his Gods with prayers and protestations. And now his troops to field made properations, Rich of rare horse, embroidered cloaths and gold. The valiant vantguard by Messapus bold, The rereward by brave Tyrrhus youths was led, The main battalion Turnus marshalled, Advancing his brave arms farre 'bove the rest: Like flowing Ganges with seven streams addrest, And silent running; or like fertile Nile O'reflowing fields, yet couching close the while. A sudden black-dust cloud the Trojans spide, Growing farre off, darknesse the fields do hide. Whereat first Caicus from a crosse bank cries, Faire friends, what cloud-like troop doth yonder rise? Flie to your swords and speares, get up the walls:
Alas! our foe on us already falls, Hereat the Trojans raise a piteous crie, But close about the wall and gates they lie. For so, at's parting, wise Aeneas had His armie charg'd, if any fortune bad Should them befall; and not in battell ray In field to trie the fortune of the day, But keep their camp with forts and trenches strong. Though therefore shame and rage provoke them long, Battell to joyn; yet they do fortifie And guard the gates, and do obsequiously As they were charg'd. Thus well prepar'd in arms, They in their forts expect their foes alarms. Now Turnus all his tardie troops out-iding, Twentie choice knights about his body biding, Was on a suddn to the citie nigh: Whom a white spotted steed most prancingly Of Thracian breed did beare; upon his head A golden helm with a crest beauteous red. O who is he, brave sparks, amongst you all, (Sayes he) with me first on our foes dares fall? With that he cast a dart into the aire, (The onset to the fight) with courage rare; Entring the field himself, his mates in arms Following him fast with clamorous loud alarms, Wondring to see the Trojans cowardise, (As they suppos'd) not daring t'enterprise To fight the field, in arms to play the men, But keep their camps: he in a furie then Doth gallop up and down the wall about, For fierce assaults, a fit place to spie out. And as a ravening wolf all hungerbit,
Doth roave and rave, and 'bout the sheep-fold sit, At midnight dark enduring winde and weather, To watch and catch the prey; the lambes together Keep with their dammes, and do securely bleat; The wolf without rageth about for meat, Extreamly vext to see the sheep so pent, And he so long to suck their bloud so bent: Even so Rutulian Turnus hunts about The walls and trenches, extream rage flames out. Hate heats his heart, to know by what means best, To finde a way the Trojans to infest▪ And flying out of their forts, compulsively To force them to the field: then does he spie Their fleet, which did behinde their camp lie sure, And which strong walls of waves did safe immure. This he assails, and all his mates desires, To bring in haste store of consuming fires: And first himself cast in a pine-board flame; And all his souldiers forthwith do the same. Their princes presence stimulates their hearts, Thus all the youth with fire-brands play their parts, And fling about fierce flames, and to the skies Made mightie fumes with pich and tarre arise. Tell me, faire Muses, what so mightie power, Permitted not such fierce flames to devoure? And turn'd to ashes all Troyes navy great? Though future times may former facts repeat With hard belief; this facts fame ne're shall die: When first in Phrygian isle most carefully Aeneas did a fleet for sea prepare, The Gods great mother, Berecynthia faire, Is said, her sonne great Iove thus to intreat;
Deare sonne, since thou now rul'st olympus great, Grant thy intreating mother this request; A pine-tree wood long time I loved best, I'th' height whereof a gallant grove there stood, Whither were brought me sacrifices good; Shadow'd it was with firres and maples brave: These to the Trojans use I freely gave, When they to build them ships had speciall need: Now anxious feare much care doth in me breed. Of this feare free me: grant me this request, That by no nimble course they be distrest, Nor overthrown by fire or furious winde, Let all that thence do grow this favour finde. Her sonne, which rules the world and starrie skie, Unto his mother made this brief replie; Whither (deare mother) wouldst thou fates incline? Or what request for them is this of thine? Can mortall things immortall states possesse? Or can Aeneas sail free from distresse? What God so great can in this case be free? Nay, when Troyes princes sailings finisht be, When Trojans Latiums ports and parts have gain'd; Whats'ever ships from storms shall have remain'd, I'le take from them their mortall shape and form, And them into sea-nymphs I will transform; Like Nerean Clotho, Galatea faire, Cutting the foamy waves with breast most bare. He said it, swore it, for more confirmation, By's brother Styxes foule flouds inundation; By pichy streams, and Pluto's black gulfs banks, And nods, whose nods whole heaven affrights & blanks. The promis'd day wa come, fates now fulfill
The due designed time to Ioves great will; VVhen Turnus turbulent, injurious deed, Mov'd the great mother of the Gods, with speed To free her sacred ships from his fierce flame. Here first to sight a sudden brightnes came, A mightie cloud from th' Eastern skie did glide, And all th' Idaean damsells were discride. Then from the skies a thundring voice was heard, Deare Trojans, of my ships be not afraid, Nor struggle ye to shield them with strong arm. Ere Turnus does my sacred ships least harm, He sooner shall with fire burn up the seas: Go sea-nymphs, go (sayes she) swimme loose at ease, Your mother bids you. Straight at her commands Each ship from shore most nimbly brake their bands; And presently, like dolphins, duck and dive, And like so many virgins faire alive, (Strange to behold) in sea they all appeare; So many ships, so many nymphs were here. All the Rutulians hereat stood amaz'd, Messapus self hereat with terrour gaz'd, And all his frighted horse: the stream stands still, Tyber retreats, and vents out voices shrill. Yet for all this Turnus turns all to th' best, His courage and his confidence are prest: Boldly he cheeres them, boldly chides them thus; These monstrous signes are surely ominous Unto the Trojans: Iove himself, you see, Takes from them thus all hope and help, to flee: Rutulians need not sword or fire t' infest, From sea-fight, sea-flight Trojans are distrest. Thus part of their protections from them ta'ne,
All the land-power doth in our hands remain. For many thousands arm'd in Italie We have: Troyes scarre-crows can't us terrifie. If Trojans of the great Gods answers boast, The fates and Venus have them given the most They can deire, Latiums faire land to see: On th' other side, are not my fates to me, That cursed stock with sword to ruinate, Which would a wife perforce praeoccupate. Nor Agamemnons kinne this sole concerns, Nor Greeks alone this grief due caution learns, To arm themselves: Enough one wrack had been, If they enough had held it, once to sinne. Should not all women to them hatefull be? What trust in triviall trenches can they see? Delayes by ditches, thus to pride their minde? Which they small distances from death shall finde. Have they not seen Troyes walls, by Neptune wrought, (Maugre their might) to ashes to be brought? But oh brave sparks! who of you will with me Break through their trenches, and most fiercely flee Upon their quaking camps? I have no need Of Vulcans arms, or thousand ships ofspeed Against these trembling Trojans: Let them get All their Etrurian mates with them t' abet: I'le seek no shades, no shelters of dark night, No theevish horses paunch, by Pallas slight; Let them not feare their watch-towers to be slain: For we by day most stoutly will maintain The battell brave, and girt their walls with fire. I'le make them know, that now with Grecian ire, Or Greekish spirits they do not contest,
VVhom their great Hector ten yeares did molest. But now since more then half the day is past, VVhat yet remains, but that with sweet repast Every one fit himself to play the man, Bravely to end what he so well began? Meanwhile the care of keeping watch and ward By Sentinels, with vigilant regard About the gates, is to Messapus granted, VVho bout the walls with sword and fire is planted. Fourteen Rutulian captains were chose out, Each guarded with his hundred souldiers stout In glistring azure arms, adorn'd with gold: And these their quarters 'bout the trench must hold. They spread themselves, change turns, laid on the ground, And wine in bowls they all carouse profound, Making huge fires, in mirth and much delight Breaking their sleep, and wasting (thus) the night. These things the Trojans from their trenches spie, And armed, all do keep themselves on high: Yet with great care and feare the gates they guard, VVith bridges and strong barricadoes bar'd, Still arm'd: brave Mnestheus and Serestus stout, VVhom in all straits and cases of great doubt, Aeneas o're his youth chief guidance gave, And made commanders bravely them behave. Each band abode in watch upon the wall, And took his turn as dangers did them call. Couragious Nisus strongly kept one gate, VVhom Ida's huntresse sent, Aeneas mate, By Hyrtacus his father bravely bred, At bow and arrows well experienced. Next him Euryalus, his faithfull friend,
VVhose beauteous countenance did him commend Past all the Trojans, but no arms did beare, For yet smooth unshaven doun his chin did weare. Each lov'd alike, and each for other fought, Each kept the gate by course with courage stout. Thus then sayes Nisus to Euryalus; Deare brother, have the Gods enflamed thus Our hearts with love? or is mans genius high A God unto himself? Long time have I Been mov'd in minde, some fight or fact most great To enterprise; nor can I quench this heat. Thou seest those proud Rutulians hopes most high, Their various fires, how they even buried lie In wine and sleep, how all all-o're is still: Now mark, I pray, what doubts my heart do fill, And whereon now I muse and meditate: Does not our armie now expostlate? Both peeres and people, with a joynt consent, To call Aeneas home incontinent, Send men and messages of our estate, Him to enform. If they'le remunerate Thee for the fact which now I'le undertake, (For to my self fame shall requitall make) Me thinks I could break through our enemies, And by that bank a passage enterprise To Pallanteum. Faire Euryalus Hereat astonisht, yet most valourous, With love of lad enflam'd, sayes with brave minde To his endeered friend; My Nisus kinde, Wouldst thou thy mate in great facts leave behinde? Should I in such great straits leave thee alone? No sure, my father (as it is well known)
Opheltes, well in warres experienced, Hath me not therein so absurdly bred, In all our Grecian terrours, Trojan toiles, Nor hath mine honour yet receiv'd such foiles, Following Aeneas brave in's utmost ill. I want not courage, no, I want not will, To scorn this light, yea life it self for thee, To welcome death, that thou mayst honour'd be. Surely, sayes Nisus, never did I feare Such things in thee: oh no, it impious were So to suspect. O may great Iove above So link me firmly to thy faithfull love: Or any equall-sighted deity, Observing herein my sinceritie. But if there should (as such things oft fall out) If there should happen any adverse doubt Or fatall danger; oh mayst thou survive Rather then I! worthier to rest alive: May one remain to snatch me from the fight, Or to redeem me to a funerall rite: Or, if this favour fortune me denie, Yet to me dead to frame an elegie, My herse with some death-dues to dignifie: Oh never may I to thy mother bring Cause of such woe, her wretched hands to wring: Thy mother deare, of many matrons best, Who durst for thee (faire youth) refuse sweet rest, Neglect the welcome of Troyes kinde Acest. Euryalus reply'd, Thou ply'st in vain These vain excuses, constant I remain. Let's then (sayes he) make haste; and therewithall They stirre about, and the next watchmen call;
Who straight gave way, chang'd turns, and left their station; And thus with Nisus he makes properation To call their king. Now all the rest took rest, Their day-toiles (thus) with sweet sleep were redrest. Now Troyes prime peeres, and youths of best respect, In councel sate, state-businesse to direct; Consulting what to do, who news should beare Unto Aeneas. Leaning on their speare, They carefully do stand, in hand their shields, Just in the midst both of their camp and fields. Then Nisus and Euryalus most brave, Hast'ned unto them, and admittance crave, Saying they had a businesse great t' impart, Delay whereof might turn unto thir smart: Ascanius first them carefull did receive, And unto Nisus to begin, gave leave. Thus then he spake; Attend, brave Trojan peeres, With moderate mindes, and judge not by our yeares The motion we now make. Our Rutule foes O'recome with wine and sleep, do them repose All snorting on the ground: and we have spi'de A place where we an ambush safe may hide, Open to th' gate which to the two-paths guides, The gate I say, neare which the sea resides. Their scattered fires, huge fume and smoak up-cast, Shew that this happy hap may not be past Or pretermitted: and if you give way, T' Aeneas to Pallant'um passe we may: And this brave youth you'le see return again Enricht with spoiles of foes defeated, slain: Nor can we (by this means) misse of our way. We saw and knew, by hunting every day
I'th' bottome of deep dales, the river faire, And much o'th' town to which we would repaire. Alethes, ripe in yeares, both grave and wise, Said, O our Gods, who Troy do patronize, As yet I see ye minde not to blot out Poore Trojans name, since such brave youths, so stout, Such valiant hearts ye still unto us raise. Thus speaking, on their necks his hands he layes, And holding both their hands, with teares of joy He thus sayes on; What praise, what prize can Troy Repay to you brave youths, of so rare parts? The Gods will best requie your due deserts: And good Aeneas will not be behinde, Nor ripe Ascanius blot out of his minde Such meritorious deeds: yea and I will, (Sayes young Ascanius) for my joyes ye fill, In my deare fathers safe return to me: By our great Gods (Nisus) I sweare to thee, And thy kinde mate, by all our sacred kinne, And by the aged Vesta's rites within, That whatsoever fate or fortune's mine, Into your bosomes it shall full incline: Call back my father; let me see his sight, And nothing then can me molest, affright. Two silver bowls richly engraven and wrought, Both which my father from Arisba brought, When it was ruin'd by Achilles bold: Two three-leg'd cups, two talents of pure gold, A bason brave, given by queen Dido faire: And if Italia chance to be our share, And we by conquest do enjoy that crown, And 'mongst us part the prey with high renown,
Thou saw'st what horse, what arms, rich Turnus had: All those thou saw'st, thy valiant heart to glad: Assure thy self, brave Nisus shall be thine. Besides, my father hath twelve matrons fine, And captives twelve, with all their ornaments, And all king Latines lands and continents: All these my father shall bestow on thee. For thee, faire youth, whose yeares come nearest me, Thee in my bosome of best love I take, Thee my companion in all states I'le make. No fame by facts will I without thee gain, In peace or warre thy counsel shall be ta'ne. To whom Euryalus made this replie; Faire sir, no time shall finde me falsifie My promise in such high designes as these: Yet fortune good or bad (as heaven shall please) May on us fall. But thee, this one thing I, 'Bove all thy gifts, intreat most earnestly: I have a mother sprung from Priams race, Whom neither Troy through its now captiv'd case, Nor kinde Acestes realm (poore heart) could stay, But with me she hath travel'd all our way. Her I (alas!) now unsaluted leave, Ignorant what dire fate may to me cleave: By this dark night, and thy right hand I sweare, That I could not her tender weeping beare, Upon our parting. I thee therefore pray, In her distresse to be her staffe and stay, To help her in her need. If this request Thou to me grant, my heart will be at rest, And I the boldlier shall all hazards trie. The Trojans hearts hereat melt instantly,
Who fell aweeping: but Iülus chief, Toucht at the heart, between great joy and grief, At this rare copie of connative love, Which in's affection this reply did move; I promise and protest, all said and done, Is highly worthy such an honour'd sonne. Thy mother shall be mine, in all the same With my Creüsa, save alone in name: Nor such a sonne to have is honour small, Whats'ever issue do this fact befall. Now by this head I sweare, by which before, My father upon oft occasions swore, What I thee promis'd, safe return'd again, Shall to thy mother and thy kinne remain. Thus weeping spake he, and from's neck did take A rare gilt sword, which Lycaon did make With curious art, in ivorie scabbert rare, Which he bestow'd upon Eury'lus faire. To Nisus Mnestheus gave a lions skin, Huge rough with haire, which had a conquest bin: Friendly Alethes did his helm exchange. And thus they armed, valiantly forth range: Whom to the gates the Trojan gallants guide Both young and old, and them with prayers plide; Chiefly Ascanius, grave beyond green yeares, Expressing wisely manly filiall feares, Follows them fast, with prayers and messages, Unto his father in their passages: But all (alas! they spake) flew into th' aire, And to the clouds in vain they vented are. Thus (then) gone forth, they o're the trenches past, And by dark night to foes camp came at last;
To many of them (first) dire death to bring. There all-about neglected lies each thing, The men laid on the grasse, with wine and sleep O're whelmed all, no watch their carts do keep. Men 'mongst horse-harnesse lay: here wine-pots stood, There armour lay: nothing in order good. Nisus hereat first to Euryalus said, Deare friend, our way must now with blows be made: This way we must; and lest assaults behinde Do us infest, have thou a watchfull minde, And keep a distance off, wide way I'le make, And all these vast impediments hence take. This said, he silent was; and instantly Upon proud Rhamnes he set furiously, Upon a rich wrought Arras carpet stretcht: Who in a deep-drunk sleep, his last breath fetch't: A king and southsayer, which king Turnus joy'd, But southsaying could not this great mischief void. Three of whose servants lying neare were slain, And Rhemus page and coachman quickly ta'ne, Under his horses. Both whom he left dead, Cut both their throats, cut off their masters head, Leaving his headlesse trunk tumbling i'th' mire, Soil'd with black bloud his soule and breath t'expire, And to sigh out: the beds and ground about, Reaking warm fumes, with gore that gushed out: Besides, Lamirus, Lamus, Serranus A brave young spark, that night most riotous, With Bacchus drunken bands his body bound: Happy, had he all night been playing found, Even untill day. But rav'ning lion-like, (For famine fierce made him the sheepfold strike)
Infesting all the flock, he teares and spoiles The silly sheep, and chaps with blood besoiles, Whiles they lie mute for feare: no lesse also Euryalus with slaughter on doth go: And he in wrath raging, about him layes. And numbers of the namelesse vulgars slayes: Hebesus, Fadus, Rhoetus, Abaris, He unawares did cause deaths cup to kisse. But Rhoetus was awake, and all this ey'd, And (base) behinde a huge bowl did him hide From his fierce foe: who seen, was follow'd fast, And with a fierce full wound his weapon past Into his sheathing corps, with which deep blow His crimson gory soule doth belching flow, And flie away, mixing his bloud and wine: Thus hotly he by stealth doth on incline. And now unto Messapus mates he came, And found their fires lifting their latest flame, And all their horse at grasse about them ty'd. Then briefly thus sayes Nisus (for he spi'de Euryalus to too much wrath inclinde, And nought but bloud and slaughter still to minde) Let's now surcease, sayes he, for tell-tale day Hastens upon us, and we must away. Enough revenge we now exhausted have, And through our foes our passage purchas'd brave. Much wealth they left behinde, silver and gold, Rich arms, rare bowls, faire carpets to behold. Euryalus had from king Rhamnes ta'ne Rich gold-bost trappings, when he had him slain, And golden girts, which wealthie Caedicus At the league linking, sent to Remulus,
As friendly gifts; and which he dying gave Unto his nephew, after death to have: But he being dead, the Rutuls got that prey In warre: Euryalus took these away, And, but in vain, upon his shoulders strong With courage brave bare them with him along; Messapus handsome helm, with comely crest, Fitting him well, he wore. Thus then addrest, They past the camp, and on securely went. Meanwhile a troop of horse, which forth were sent Out of Latinus town, whiles all the rest Of th' armed bands stayd in the camp addrest, Past on unto king Turnus, to declare The message sent: three hundred men there were, All bravely arm'd, Volscens their Generall. Who now drew neare the camp approacht the wall, When those farre off did both those two perceive, Hastily them on the left hand to leave: And young Euryalus his helmet gay By the nights glimmering light did them betray. He most unmindefull of the glist'ring brightnesse, The helmet did reflect against least lightnesse. VVhich fairely seen, Volscens aloud did say; Stay, masters, stay, why passe ye on this way? VVhy are ye arm'd? and whither are ye bound? They answered nought, but swift away they wound, And scud into the wood, hoping dark night VVould them advantage, thus to scape by flight. The horsemen 'bout known-turning paths do lie, And here and there each passage fortifie VVith a strong guard. The wood was wide, o're-grown, Full of great oaks and prickly bushes known,
And scratching briers and brambles: and thereby VVayes were shut up, and paths most hard to spie, And shade of trees and heavy weight of spoiles Molest Euryalus with tedious toiles, And ignorance o'th' way did him delude. But Nisus got away, his foes eschew'd, And unadvised had escapt that place, (Not thinking on Euryalus his case) Which afterward was call'd from Alba faire, Albanus, where king Latines stables rare Were situated. Nisus here made stay, And (but in vain) finding his friend away, O where (sayes he) Euryalus, have I, Unhappie I, thee left in miserie? O whither should I go to follow thee? Straight hereupon, away he back doth flee Through those perplexed paths, pries all about The crooked woods false creeks and nooks throughout: Observes each passage as he backward goes, And through thick thickets, where no way he knows. Horses he heares, he heares a noise at last, And signes of some at heels him following fast. Nor was it long ere clamours came to's eares, Nor ere Euryalus poore case appeares; VVhom all the band (through errour of the place, And darksome night, and coming-on apace▪ Of th'enemie swiftly and suddenly) Had now surpriz'd, yet fighting valiantly. And what should he do now? what strength expresse? What force to free the young man from distresse? VVhat? should he dying rush i'th' midst of's foes? By honour'd death make haste his life to lose?
Advancing straight his arm, shaking his lance, Thus to the Moon he did his votes advance; Faire Goddesse, thou, thou seest our present woe, Help us this danger great to undergo; O thou starres state, woods warder, daughter faire Of Titan bright! if on thine altars rare My father Hyrtacus did e're for me Presents present; if I my self to thee In hunting have augmented thine oblations, And on thy scutchion hung due adornations, Great gracefull gifts on sacred posts made fast: Grant then, I pray, I may (at least) at last Vex and perplex this troop most turbulent, Do thou my darts direct to that intent. Thus having said and pray'd, with all his might He cast a dart, which pierc'd black shades of night, And flying, lighted on and brake in twain Great Solmons targe, piercing with mortall pain His vitall part, his heart, he's overthrown, And with a deep▪ and heart-string-breaking groan Disgorg'd a floud of luke-warm bloud, and straight He waxed cold, because inanimate. The souldiers diverse wayes do look about, And see a fiercer then the first flie out: For he by's eare levell'd another dart; Which, whiles they troubled stood, with fatall smart Whistlingly flying, Tagus temples twain Did penetrate, and stuck fast in his brain. Volscens hereat grew violent and mad, Not knowing th' author of these facts so bad, Nor upon whom deserv'd revenge to take. But as for thee (sayes he) I'le surely make
Thy bloud requite the death of both my friends: Thus at Euryalus his sword he bends. Straight noble Nisus thereat much molested, In rage cries out (seeing his friend infested, Himself not willing longer now to hide, Or so great sorrow in his friend to 'bide) 'Twas I, Rutulians, I that did the deed: Here, here I am, against me, me proceed, And set your swords on me, revenge to take, My hand and heart did all this mischief make: He durst not do this deed, alas not he, Nor could he do it (by these heavens you see, And testifying starres, I truth protest) Onely his love he hath too much exprest Unto his friend, me his unhappy friend. These words he spake, but they their swords do bend With utmost force against Euryalus: And through his sides vvith rancour venomous They pierce his heart, and he falls down stark dead: Whose hearts gore-bloud doth all his parts o'respread. His neck between his shoulders doubled lay: Even as the plow, to make his furrowed way, Cuts down a violet faire, which withering dies; Or like tall poppy, which by showres from skies O're-laid, from its weak neck hangs down the head. But Nisus nobly shaking off all dread, Burst into thickest foes, and singles out, From all the rest, their leader Volscens stout. With whom alone he would the combate trie: About both whom the totall troop doth flie, And neare at hand, still Nisus they molest, Who nimbly still stomack and strength exprest:
And bravely whiskt about his bloudy blade, Till this Rutulian crying loud, dismayd, He sheath'd his sword in's mouth, thrust down his throat, And made his soule sing a harsh dying note. Himself being wounded mortally also, O're his friends body he himself did throw, And so at last in pleasing rest expir'd, Both fortunate, both in their love admir'd. If my poore layes their praise could dignifie, No age should e're blot out their memorie, As long as brave Aeneas kin remain, And Rome her Capitol shall firm sustain, And Romanes o're the world have emperie; So long my lines their loves should magnifie. The sad Rutulians with their spoiles and prey, (Though onquerours) unto their camp convay Their Volscens slain, with many a weeping eye, And for king Rhamnes fatall destinie, And for Serranus and stout Numa slain, As they the first assault did well maintain: A mightie confluence of people came About the corps, flocking to see the same, To see their half-dead friends, the bloudy place, And streams of foamy gore flowing apace. They know the spoiles, Messapus helmet bright, The trappings faire re-gain'd with sweaty fight. And now Aurora rare relinquished Her earthly Tithons saffron-colour'd bed, And with fresh light the earth had garnisht gay, And Sol, now up▪ all hid things did display. Turnus compleatly arm'd, his men icites To arms, and to fierce skirmishes invites.
Each souldier calls his mate, and various words Of those last facts whet both their hearts and swords. The heads besides (a woefull sight to see) Of Nisus and Euryalus fastned be To th' tops of two tall poles, and carried high With mighty clamours of the armies crie. The Trojans indefatigabely stand, And on the citie-walls to the left hand They bend their armed bands (for on the right The river running hedg'd them in with might) The ditches they defend, and on high towers In mournfull manner stood their Martiall powers, Before their eyes the mens two-heads being plac'd, (Sorrows too well known signes) both much defac'd With filth and bloud. Meanwhile doth winged fame Throughout the trembling town divulge the same, And to the mother of Euryalus Relates these things: she most calamitous Straight fell into cold sweats and shivering feares, Let fall her wheel and spindle, lets fall teares, And woefully flies out, cries out apace With womanish loud screeks, in piteous case Tearing her haire, and frantickly ascending The citie-walls, her hastie courses bending To the first watch, regardlesse of whats'ere, She neither men, nor darts, nor death doth feare. But thus she fills the heavens with plaints and cries; On thee, Euryalus, cast I mine eyes? And art thou he should'st be the staffe and stay Of mine old age? and could'st thou run away, (Hard-hearted boy) and leave me all alone? Might not thy woefull mother first have known
Thy parting hence, and ta'ne last sad farewell, Before such bitter dangers thee befell? Alas! thou unknown land, alas for thee, That thou a prey to birds and beasts shouldst be: I brought thee not to this sad funerall, Nor shed salt teares to rensh thy corps withall, Thy body in pure linen cloaths to lay, Which thriftily I wrought on night and day, My aged dayes and cares to passe away. Whither, deare sonne, shall I now follow thee? Tell me where thy dismembred members be. Where are thy parted parts, thy joynts disjoyn'd? Where, in what land may I thee buried finde? Bring'st thou (my sonne) this woefull news to me? Have I for this, through sea, land, followed thee? You rough Rutulians, if least love you have, Least pity you possesse, on me, I crave, On me, I pray you, showre out all your darts: Let all your swords end all my living smarts. Or else do thou, great Iove, now stand my friend, And vvith thy stroke, my hatefull life now end, Since I no otherwise can end these vvoes. From her great grief, o're all the camp arose An universall sorrow, loud lament, Their former courage now seems dull and spent. As thus her sorrows did incense their grief, Actor, Idaes, two brave Trojans chief, Advis'd thereto by vvise Ilioneus, And sorely vveeping young Ascanius, Took her up straight, and in their arms her bare Into the house, and there of her took care. But now brasse trumpets sounded shrill alarms,
Cries flie to th' skies, and blustering stirre to arms, The Volscians close their shields together knit, To hide their heads; and hastily them fit To fill the dikes, the trenches down to teare: For passage, some to th' vvalls their ladders reare, On that side vvhere the armie vvas not great, And vvhere their troops vvere thin, and not compleat. The nimble Trojans, on the other side, Accustom'd long besieged brnts to 'bide, Do all their engines and their arms retort, And vvith strong pikes thrust them from vvalls and fort. And vvith huge ponderous stones tumble them back, Thus, if they might, their pendhouse shields to crack, And break in sunder, they now having tride All hazards, under their thick shields to 'bide. But all too vveak: for vvhere most heaps collected, The Trojans there a poudering pile dejected: Which rouling, rumbling down, with vvondrous waight, Did beat and batter the Rutulians straight, Their targets touh and strong unbound and brake; Forcing Rutulians (maugre former crake) To feare, forbeare sight under blind-fold shields: And leaving stratagems, i'th' open fields, With vvingy shafts, they now vvith courage stout Contend, and from their trench to beat them out. On one side, proud Mezentius, vvith fierce look, His huge Etruscan flaming pine-lance shook: On th' other side, Messapus, rider rare, VVhose royall race sprang from great Neptune faire, Brake into th'trench, for scaling ladders calls, To keep his hold, and to ascend the vvalls. O see faire Nine, Calliope, I pray,
Grace with your gracefull aid my warbled lay, That  may sing and shew what slaughters great, What grave heaps Turnus made in Martiall heat, What soules he sent to hell: help me, I pray, These mightie battells issues to display. For ye, faire ladies, can them promptly tell, And ye have power to expresse them well. There was a skie-topt fort, with scaffolds high, And situated adventagiously, Which the Italians with their utmost strength Assaulted fiercely, to o'rethrow at length; And which the Trojans on the other side, With thrown-down stones to safeguard did provide, And through the loop-holes shooted showres of darts. But Turnus chiefly, and his Martiall hearts, Fierce fire-balls threw, which 'gainst the walls did stick, And help'd with windes, burnt up the boards most quick, And on the weather-beaten posts took hold. The troubled Trojans hearts vvithin vvaxt cold, And fain they vvould these pressing ills have fled, But savv in vain they all endeavoured. They drew up then in heaps, retreating straight, Whereas no fire was flung; then with huge weight The thus assaulted fort praecipitate, Came tumbling down with thundring noise to th' skie, In whose fierce fall with extream miserie Men were dasht down half dead, unto the ground, And their own weapons did themselves confound, And wooden splinters did them pierce and vvound: Helenor onely and Lycus likevvise Did hardly scape, and from that mischief rise; Helenors yeares him eldership allot,
King Maeons sonne, upon his maid begot, And by her nurs'd in secret; after, sent To Troy to th' warres, without allow'd consent: He scapt (I say) with's naked sword, most poore, And on his arm a shield ignobly bore. Who when he saw himself surrounded quite With Turnus troops and Latine bands, in bright And glistring arms, on both sides spread about: Like a wilde-beast, whom huntsmen with great shout Do hedge in round, seeing himself beset, Against their tools and toils doth rage and fret, And on expected death doth rudely lip, And desp'rately on snares and grins doth skip: So this (now) lustie lad, fearelesse to die, Into the midst of's foes doth fiercely flie; Even where he saw their swords and shields most thick. But Lycus being of foot more light and quick, Betook him to his heels, through thickest bands Fled to the walls, strove there with feet and hands To clamber up, hopefull of help from's friends: Whom Turnus following, at him fiercely bends A deadly dart: and like a conquerour stout With these like chafing terms to him cries out; Thou frantick fool, think'st thou our hands to flee? Supposest thou from us secure to be? And with those words (as he did upward crawl) He pull'd him down, and with him, part oth' wall: Much like an eagle preying on a hare, Or some white swan rising up into th' aire, Fiercely pull'd down by th' eagles tallons strong: Or like a rav'ning wolf, whose chaps do long To lick the bloud of the poore bleating lambe,
And therefore in the stall pulls him from's damme. From all parts clamours rise, assaults are made, With rubbish heaps the dikes are levell laid. Fierce flaming brands to houses tops are cast. But as Leucetius to the gates came fast. To fire the same, Troyes Ilioneus brave With a huge stone a deadly pelt him gave: When valiantly Liger Emathion slew: Asylas made death Chorineus due; The one at darts, th'other at shafts excell'd: Caeneus stout by death Ortygius quel'd: Turnus, the victour Caeneui did slay; Clonius and Itys he with death did pay: Dioxippus and Promulus most stout, And Sagaris and Ida holding out Worthilie on the wall: but Capys brave Privernus kill'd: and him Themilla gave A light wound with his lance, who instantly Threw his shield from him, and most foolishly Claps his hand on the wound; whereat most fierce A winged shaft his left-side ribs did pierce, And nail'd his hand unto his wounded side, And bor'd his breathing lights, wherewith he dy'd. Brave Arcens sonne stood there in battell ray, Clad in a coat of needle-work most gay, Of a dark Spanish-purple colour rare, Himself of lovely look and countnance faire: Whom Arcens, his great sire, to warres had sent, Bred up in Mars his grove, neare the current Of Symths floud, where is the altar faire, And full of presents, of Palicus rare. Mezentius bold, his lance being laid aside,
A whisling sling up took, with Martiall pride, And swung it thrice most fiercely 'bout his head: The leaden bullet, as it swiftly fled, Melted i'th' aire, and dasht him on the pate, And dead, upon the sands laid him prostrate. Ascanius then for his first enterprise, Is said to fling a shaft in Martiall wise, Who formerly wilde-beasts was wont to fright, Wherewith Numanus he did deadly smite, Who was surnamed Remulus: this same, Turnus his younger sister, a faire dame, Did lately wed: he in the forefront loud Vanting vain and vile things with spirit proud, Unworthie our relation, strook with feare Of kindred new, the kingdomes rule to beare, Went up and down, boasting with haughtie din, As if some princely pers'nage he had bin: Twitting the Trojans thus; Base cowards all, Shame ye not to sit mew'd up in a wall? To be immur'd in trenches now again, Twice captiv'd Phrygians? think ye (but in vain) By walls to scape from death? I pray behold, What gallant lads are these, that dare be bold By warres to get our wives! what destinie? What madnesse great drave you to Italie? Here are not Greeks Atrides tired rout, No false Vlysses tongues to feigne and flout. We are a people tough from rough stocks stemme: Our children at the first we make to swimme In frozen flouds, and harden them thereby: Our boyes are bred to rare activitie; In hunting beasts, and them i'th' woods to tire,
To ride great horse, is sport which they desire; And horny darts to cast they much affect. But constant at their work without neglect, Small wealth our youth contents; and either they With rakes and plowes do make the ground obey Their thriftie wills, or towns with warre suppresse. Thus every age doth it to steel addresse: Yea even in peace our speares we hold in hand, Working our cattell plowing up our land: Nor does weak old-age weaken our stout mindes, Make valour vanish: but each gray-haires bindes His helm unto his head, fresh spoiles and prey With sword and shield daily to beare away. But as for you, your cloathsare rich and rare, Of purple hues, embroidered all most faire, Signes of your lazie mindes▪ and your delights In wanton dancings are, fond carpet-knights: In jackets short, with sleeves most delicate, And hairelace, bongrace, most effeminate. Fond Phrygian females (masculines y'are none) Gad to your Dindyms high hills every one, Whereas your various-vain pipes sounds do call You to your wonted wanton dancings all: Your Idaean mother, Berecynthia faire, To make you sport, doth taber and pipe prepare: Let arms alone to men, touch not steel-swords. Him vaunting thus with bold and bitter words Ascanius brave no longer could forbeare, But he his horse-hide bow straight up doth reare, His shaft set ready: and his arms stretcht out, To Iupiter he prayes with courage stout; All-potent Iove, my bold beginnings aid,
And on thine altar shall vow'd gifts be paid; A faire fat bull with gilded horns most high, And a young calf like his damme, lustily Bearing his head, whose pace makes dust to flie. Iove heard from heaven, and from a skie most cleare Ascanius did a prosperous thunder heare. Whose bow therewith set ready at full bent, A deadly arrow fiercely forth he sent: The whistling shaft through th' aire took nimble flight, And on proud Remulus his pate did light, Piercing his brains: Go (sayes the young prince stout) Go on, true vertue with vain brags to flout. Twice-captiv'd Phrygians send Rutulians thus This answer. Thus did brave Ascanius. The Trojans with loud cries second the same, Fiercely flie on, spurr'd with affected fame. As then it hapt, Apollo sagely sitting Upon a cloud i'th' open aire befitting, Beheld th' Italian troops and Trojan town, And thus t'Iülus said, to's high renown; Go on, brave spark, rare vertues to augment, Thus fame shall raise thee to heavens firmament: Faire sonne, and future sire of Gods most great, All following bloudie broiles most boistrous heat, Shall by the fates most due decree decrease Under great Dardans line, and end in peace: Troy can thee not contain. And this being said, Down from the skies his way he smoothly made: And doffing all aire-puffing vapours quite, He kindely came into Ascanius sight, And on him took old Butes shape and face, (He heretofore enjoy'd the honour'd place
Of Troyes Anchises page, and guardian just Of temple rites) and as a mate of trust The aged sire Ascanius sociates. In every thing Apollo imitates An old-man right, as he along did go, In count'nance, colour, and gray locks also, In ratling Martiall armour drest; and thus And thus he spake t'enflam'd Ascanius; Let it suffice thee, brave Aeneas sonne, What thou hast freely on Numanus done; He slain, thou safe: now then for thy first praise, Apollo great doth crown thee with due bayes, And envies not thy imitating arms; Yet wills thee, warre forbeare, from future harms. Thus spake Apollo; having spoke, departed, And from mans fight into th'cleare aire he darted. The Trojan peeres knew him a God to be, When they his arms divine and shafts did see In's ratling quiver, as he flew away. Wherefore Apollo's words and will t'obey, Ascanius, fierce to fight, they all restrain, And to th'encounter they return again, Trusting their lives in dangers imminent. A mightie clamour through their trenches went, They bend their trustie bows, fierce arrows flie, And thick upon the ground they strewed lie: And shields and hollow helms make clanging sound With clattering shafts, whose blows from them rebound. And now fierce fight begins, like mightie showres Which boedean Western starres upon earth poures, And thick as clouds of hail, quick ratling down, When Iupiter with winter storms doth frown,
And with a thunder-clap the clouds doth pierce. Even so the Trojans showre out shafts most fierce; Bitias and Pandarus, whom Hiera faire A wood nymph, to Idaean Alcnor bare, In Ioves great grove, two brethren strong and stout, As tall as trees; as mounts, hard to hold out. These two were set the gate to guard, set ope, And both well arm'd, they voluntarily Their foes with them t'encounter did defie. They on the right and left hand stoutly stood, In stead of two great bulwarks strong and good, Arm'd with their swords and glistring helms on head, Like two most mightie oaks with boughs o'respread▪ Whose unlopt tops ascend up into th' aire, About moist Padus banks, Athesis faire. No sooner saw Rutulians open way, But rashly they rush in without delay. Querceus and faire Equicolus, all arm'd, Tmarus, stout Haemon, but all sorely harm'd, Headlong they haste with all their troops and strength: But either were all beaten back, at length, Or at the gate did gasp their latest breath, And, maugre all their might, were prest to death. And as their rage increast, so Trojans stout Did valiantly assemble thereabout, And bravely skirmish, and adventure farre: And as elsewhere stout Turnus hot did warre, Fretting, affrighting them, news was him brought, That with fresh slaughters Trojan foes were fraught, And flesht, and had their gate set ope to fight. Hereat his work in hand forsaking quite, Enflam'd with quenchlesse rage, he thither flies,
And to the Trojan open gate he hies, And those proud brethren both but first of all (For he first met him) Antiphates tall, Born of a Thebane dame, but the base sonne Of great Sarpedon, on whom he did run, And smote him with his dart, th' Italian horn Whistling through th' aire, pierc'd through his corps for∣lorn: Whose hollow wound vented much black gore-bloud, And in his heart the warm dart fixed stood. Then Meropes and Erymantha strong, Aphidnus stout, by death he laid along▪ Bitias, with frightfull face and fretfull heart, He then did make to taste deaths direfull smart, Not with a shat (a shaft could him not kill) But with a mightie dart, thrown with strong skill; Which stuft with wilde-fire, flew like lightning fierce, And through two tough buls hides would stiffely pierce, And penetrate double steel-folds, in shields, Though lin'd with gold: herewith to death he yeelds. His mightie members ruinated fall, And make the earth to tremble therewithall, And crusht his target with a thundring din: Much like the stony pile, when men begin To build the Baian banks by Cuma's town, Which suddenly all tumbles headlong down: And all the former frame and mightie heap Fal'n plump i'th' sea▪ makes the waves dance and leap▪ And thus sunk down i'th' waves, it sticks and stands, Rowls billows up, and cleaves and heaves the sands. The noise whereof Prochyta's sle made shake, And all the adjacent huge mounts to quake. Here Mars armipotent pour'd courage great
Into the Latines hearts, and Martiall heat; And fill'd the Trojans mindes with feare and flight. And now they flock together to the fight, And now the God of warre and Martiall spight Reignes in their hearts. But now, when Pandarus Saw his deare brother to be conquer'd thus, How their affaires and fortune ticklish stood; With all the haste and strugling strength he cu'd, Shoving with's shoulders, close he locks the gate, And bolts and barres it fast; and many a mate He thus lockt out, and left to fatall fight: But others he lockt in, safe-guarded quite From rage of foes. But O how mad was he Which could not Turnus fiercely entring see Amongst them clos'd, not with an armie great, But singly shut up in the thronging heat, Like a fierce tiger, feeble flocks to eat! But suddenly bright light their eyes did cleare, And who he was did speedily appeare By his rough ratling arms, his bloud-red crest, And shield, which bright fire-flaming shines exprest. The Trojans hereat stupifi'de, did know His hatefull face, and limbes that hugely grow. Then great Pandarus unto him drew neare, Vext for the slaughter of his brother deare, Thus to him said; Nay sir, good sir, I pray, This is no dowre of your queen Amata, Nor do thy native Ardean walls thee close, But here thou seest th'art fenc'd in by thy foes, Imprison'd in their camps and custodie: Whence there's no hope of re-deliverie. Turnus, with haughtie heart upon him smiling,
Sayes, Sir, leave off thy brags and proud reviling▪ Do thou begin: if any heart thou hast, Thy spight and spirit now declare thou may'st: Here thou shalt tell to thy king Priamus, That thou hast found Achilles valorous. Pandarus hereat took a knottie lance, And with his utmost strength did it advance Against king Turnus; which winde turn'd aside: (For from least wounding Iuno did it guide) And missing him, it stuck fast in the gate. But thou (sayes Turnus) shalt not finde the fate To scape the force of my fierce slicing blade: This wound and weapon thou shalt not evade. And herewithall he rais'd his sword on high, And with his sword, himself, and furiously In sunder cut his brain-pan, with the blow, And chops his chaps, where yet no haire did grow. With a huge gash. A noise was rais'd to th' aire, The earth even trembled with the weight it bare. His fal'n-down limbes and arms all-soil'd with bloud, O'respread the ground, besmear'd with brainy mud▪ And in two equall parts lay his cleft head, This way and that way on each shoulder spread. The trembling Trojans hereat fled for feare: And had this victours vigilance been cleare, T'have broke the barred doores, let in his mates, That day had been the last for fight and fates To Trojans. But rough rage and rash desire Of slaughter, did so set his heart on fire, That he fell on his foes. And first of all, He Phalaris and Gyges forc'd to fall: And gathering up the darts from foes that fell,
He did them at their flying backs repell: For (Iuno did his minde and might augment) 'Gainst Halys next and Phegeus both he bent His Martiall rage, and those that on the wall Were fighting fierce, not knowing ought at all What he had done below, there dead he laid; Alcander, Halius, Prytanis, he made Deaths underlings: and whiles that Lynceus stout Did bravely fight, and recollect the rout Of flying mates, and o're the trenches vvent, He him with brandisht sword did soon prevent, And hand to hand fighting, with one fierce blow Cut off his head, and helm and corps laid low: Then valiant Amycus he set upon, A hunter brave, then whom there was not one More fortunate, or of more art and skill, Who us'd wilde-beasts with pois'ned darts to kill. And Clytius and Aeolides he slew, And Cretea, friend unto Parnassus crew; The Muses mate Cretea, whose delight VVas on rare instruments his layes t' indite, And to his harp melodious songs to sing Of steeds, of warres, and facts of many a king. But when at last the Trojan lord did heare The slaughters great which 'mongst the souldiers were; Mnesthus and stout Serestus thither went, And saw their men with frights and feares nigh spent, And yet their foe enclos'd. Straight Mnestheus said; Sirs, whither flie ye, scud ye, thus afraid? VVhat better walls or bulwarks would ye have? VVhat? shall one single man you thus outbrave? And even within your citie-walls surrounded,
Shall so many by slaughter be confounded Within your town, and he unpunisht go? Shall he so many choice youths overthrow? Shame ye not thus extreamly to disgrace Your most unhappie woefull countrey case! Your houshold Gods and your Aeneas great! Do you not blush at such a base retreat? The Trojans fired with these words, stand fast, And in great heaps conglomerate at last. Turnus thereat shrinks backward by degrees, And to that side retreats, on which he sees The fluent floud to run. The Trojans, they So much the fiercelier force him on that way; And with great shouts their companies augment. Much like a troop of men, vvho having pent A furious lion, and vvith swords beset, He therewith terrifi'de doth rage and fe: Shielding all sharp assaults, he back doth stride, But neither rage nor courage can abide To turn the back and flie, nor yet t' oppose (Being over-charg'd with troops) he hardly knows. This though he would and could, yet may 't not be; Therefore through foes and swords way forceth he: Directly thus doth Turnus back retire, With doubtfull, yet undaunted steps; with ire His heart is heated: as thus slow he goes, He twice assaults the thickest of his foes: And twice by flight about the walls them frighted: But now from all their tents the troops united, Against whose force not Iuno's self suffic'd: Iove therefore airie Iri straight advis'd With taunting terms to tell his sister faire,
That some should smart, if she took not quick care, To hasten Turnus from the Trojan towers. With targe therefore he could not shield the showers, Nor with his hand resist the Trojans blows, So thick flew shafts about: so hotly grows The fight, that arrows seem him to o'rewhelm, And tinckling tangs make on his hollow helm: And storms of stones his brazen cap so batter, And all his plumy crest so teare and shatter, That all the brazen bosses prove too weak, But that their thick quick blows it bruise and break. The Trojans still their rage ingeminate: With speare and shield Mnestheus doh fulminate, And all his body o're is on a sweat. Hence Turnus takes no breath from toiles most great▪ But clammy drops of pichy sweat distill, And all his tired joynts with fainting fill: So that at last himself he headlong throws Into the river (spight of all his foes) VVhose flouds him friendly took, and smoothly glide, And set him safe with's mates on th' other side. An end of the nineth book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the tenth book. The Gods convoke a parliament, 'Bout mans affaires their cares are bent. Rutulians do the fight maintain. Aeneas now returns again Vnto his mates, with ample aid. On both sides fierce assaults are made▪ In battell Turnus Pallas slayes, And numbers dead about him layes. But Juno snatcheth Turnus thence, Endanger'd by his violence. Aeneas with most Martiall might Doth with Mezentius fiercely fight. Lausus his sonne him rescuing, dies: Mezentius self is slain likewise. MEanwhile olympus day-light doores stand wide, And now great Iove, Gods sire, and mans grave guide, A councel calls in his stelliferous seat. From whence he views vast earth and trenches great Of Trojans, and the lofty Latines rout, As i'th' two-gated hall they sate about. Iove thus begins; Great Gods, what mean ye so Against your own decrees thus crosse to go? VVhy strive ye partially against our fates? I had forbidden Latium all debates Against the Trojans: then, vvhat discontent
Is this, thus rais'd 'gainst our commandement? What fretfull feare does those, or these incense, To use their swords and shields with violence? A time will come (you need not call for it) For just provoked battells farre more fit: When as curst Carthage shall Rome sore infest, And with her Alpean powers her much molest; Then may your rage rush out, with bloud embrew'd: But now forbeare, and kindely peace conclude. Thus briefly Iove: but golden Venus faire Replies more largely, being full of care. Great fire of mortalls and of Gods supernall, The mightie moderatour, wise, eternall; (For, but thy power, what else may more be had?) Thou seest how Rutuls rage, Turnus growes mad, Amidst fierce troops of horse made proudly glad In his successefull warre: the Trojans all Scarcely secure in their enclosing wall: Nay even within their walls and trenches strong Their foes fight safely, fiercely on them throng, Making their ditches gore-bloud inundations: Absent Aeneas, of these desolations Utterly ignorant. Ah, shall they ever In strict besiegements restlessely persever? And must their foes again spoile springing Troy, Another Grecian armie them annoy? And must a second Diomedes rise Against my Trojans? Sure (I think) thine eyes Behold my wounds: yet I thy heaven-born childe, With mortall battells am still much turmoil'd. But if without thy leave or fates consent To Italie they came, as insolent;
Then let them smart, and strip them of all aid: But if they have the oracles obey'd, VVhich Gods and ghosts unto them oft have given; VVhy then hath any thus against them striven To crosse thy great decrees? new fates to finde? O why should I our fir'd fleet call to minde In Sicils shore? or how that blustring king Did from Aeolia windes and tempests bring, And painted ladie Iris forc'd from skies? And now at last she made hells hags to rise, (For this way onely unattempted stay'd) And to the heavens Alecto rise she made, VVho on a sudden through all Italie Did madly rage, and rouse up crueltie. I'm not much mov'd at's empire: that's well ta'ne, VVhiles fortune smil'd: Whom thou wilt, let him reigne. But if thy froward wife no land can spare Unto my Trojans; yet great father faire, By Troyes yet smoaky cinders I thee pray, Grant that my nephew, my Ascanius, may Survive in safety, free from piercing arms: As for Aeneas, let him feel the harms Of unknown tossing waves and billowing seas, And wander where thou wilt, if so thou please: But let me save his sonne from warres dire woes. I have faire cities fit for safe repose, Paphos and Amathus, and Cythera, Idalia faire, thither repaire he may; There leaving arms, lead an ignoble life: Then may'st thou Carthage cause with Martiall strife To vex all Italie: nought can oppose (If this may be) their Carthaginian foes.
To what end hath he scapt warres mischiefs past? Why hath he fled through Grecian flames at last? Why hath he shun'd so many dangers great, Which lands and swallowing seas did to him threat, Whiles he and his poore Trojans Latium sought, And Pergams walls t'have re-erected thought? Had it not better been t'have stay'd in Troy, And seen their countreys burning, last annoy? Sweet fire, let me thee for my Trojans pray, That they to Xanthus streams, and Simois may Return again: revert, I thee Intreat, To Trojans poore their toils and travells great. Hereat queen Iuno grew most passionate, And unto Venus thus she burst out straight; Why from deep silence do you me constrain, And force me my hid griefs rip up again? Did any, either God or man, compell Your sonne Aeneas unto battells fell? Or for to make king Latine thus his foe? The fates (you say) to Latium forc'd you go: VVell, be it so; yet I say otherwise, Cassandra forc'd him with mad fooleries. And yet did we him from his tents entice? Endanger'd he his life through our advise, By windes, at sea? did we his sonne incite Fierce warre to wage, or on town-walls to fight? To make a league with adverse Tuscanes stout, Or peacefull nations, thus with warres burst out? VVhat God enforc'd this fraud? what did our might? VVhere now was Iuno? Iris cloudie flight? You say 'tis pitie Italie should fire Your Trojan town, which did new life acquire;
That Turnus should his native land maintain, Where's granfather Pilumnus once did reigne▪ And where his mother, faire Venilia The Goddesse, dwelt. And why is't not, I pray, As great a pity that with bloudy broile Your Trojans should infest our Latines soile? To plow in others fields, to catch the prey? From mothers bosomes thus to steal a way Betrothed virgins, wives by force t' obtain? Pray peace, by legates, yet warres prae-ordain? You could Aeneas from Greeks arms protect, Put for a man. a cloud; slight aire inject; And to so many nymphs transform your fleet: Yet must it be supposed most unmeet For ours also your way, their weal to meet? Your sonne Aeneas, absent, knowes not ought; Still may he absent be, and still know nought: You have a Paphos and Cythera faire, Why do you not then our fierce people spare? Whose hearts and homes are big with bloudy broiles, And once spurr'd up will hardly cease from spoiles. Was't we that first o'return'd Troyes triviall treasure? Was't we, or he, that for his lustfull pleasure Brought Greeks to your poore Trojans? what's the cause, That Europe, Asia, with warres greedy jaws Devoure each other, marriage-rites being broke By filtching filthie lust? did I provoke Th' adulterer of Troy the Spartane dame To force with him? did I incense the flame Of warre with violence and venerie? Then had it fitter been thus fearefullie Their cases to condole: now 'tis too late
To use such coyn'd complaints, t' ejaculate Such unjust janglings. Iuno thus reply'd, Whose words the sacred synod did divide In various votes: much like the bustling winde, First puffing in a wood, by boughs confin'd, Makes a close rumbling murmure; whence, unknown: Whereby fierce following storms are sea-men shown. Iupiter then, who had prime power to speak, From further silence now began to break. Who speaking, all the court of Gods was still: Earth trembled, aire did cease all echoing shrill: Fierce VVestern-windes, rough ocean-waves were laid. Mark well therefore (sayes he) what now is said. Since Trojans and Italians may not be VVith links of love, in one made to agree; Nor any hope we have to end your jarres: What-ever hope or hap ye have in warres, Enjoy the same on both sides: but to me Trojans, Rutulians, both alike shall be: So't shall be seen, whether by destinie The Trojans get firm ground in Italie; Or whether by an impious errour led, And sinister conceipts they ventured. I'le neither Trojans nor Rutulians cleare, For either side shall his own travells beare, And follow his own fortunes, shame or fame: Great Iove their king will be to both the same. The fates will finde a way. This here I vow, By my beloved brothers Stygian slow, By all those pichy flouds and banks most black. VVhereat he beckt, and with a thunder-crack Olympus totall frame extreamly trembled.
Here ceast the parle of all the Gods assembled. Then mightie Iove rose from his golden throne, By all the Gods to's station tended on. Meanwhile the Rutules 'bout the gates were spread, Much men were slain, the walls were oft fired: VVithin theirtrenches Trojan bands were bound, And hard besieg'd: no hope of flight was found: And poorely on their forts in vain they stand, And fence their walls with a thin thrivelesse band. Asius Imbrasius sonne, Thymaetes stout Hictaons sonne, two Trojans stood about; Two of king Tros his sonnes, and Caster old, The forefront kept, with the two brothers bold Of great Sarpedon; and Ethimon brave From Lycia land: these them attendance gave. Then Phrygian Acmon, sonne of Clytius great, Brother to Mnestheus, for his Martiall heat Equall to either, with huge might and art Took up a mightie stone, a mounts best part. These strive with stones those to defend with shafts, VVith wilde-fire balls, and bow-mens sinowy drafts. Himself i'th' midst, faire Venus darling deare, Ascanius young, bare-headed did appeare; (Much like a precious pearle fast fixt in gold, Gracing ones head or neck, rare to behold: Or as white ivorie in black ebonie, Inlaid by art, glisters resplendentlie) His milk-white neck with dangling locks o're-spread, Yet wreathed up in folds with golden thred. The noble nations (Ismarus) thee saw, VVith poysoned shafts mens hearts-bloud out to draw. Thou peerelesse prince, sprung from faire Lydia's land,
Where Pactolus yeelds gold, a fruitfull strand. Mnestheus was also there, whose grace was great, Who from their forts did Turnus lately beat. And Capys from Capua's town took name, They by fierce blows contending thus for fame. Aeneas crost the foamy seas by night. For when he parted from Euanders sight, And to Etruria came, he met the king, And to the king related every thing; His name and nation, whence and why he came, What strength Mezentius did unto him frame, King Turnus turbulence; mans fickle state; To shun delayes, he then doth supplicate. Tarchon conjoynes his powers, firm league doth make; Then they a forrain captain to them take, Freed from all fault therein, by destinie: And so a ship-board went immediately. Aeneas ships the vantguard led along, The foredecks deckt with Phrygian lions strong: Whose poop with Ida's painted mount was graced, A gratefull guarding signe to Trojans chased. There great Aeneas sate, casting in minde, Warres various events he's like to finde. Prince Pallas with him sate on his left side, And now night starres he gaz'd, their ships to guide: Thinking what land and sea-toiles he did 'bide. And now set ope (ye sacred Muses nine) Sweet Helicons faire fount, with power divine, To raise my layes to sing and shew the might Which in Aeneas aid came now to fight, From faire Etruria bravely armed all, Transported over sea in ships most tall.
Prince Massicus in's golden tiger sails: With him a thousand youths from Clusus dales, And Cosa's confines, skilfull at the bow, Death-wounding shafts to shoot, and darts to throw. Fierce Abas in another vessell went, VVhereon Apollo's figure excellent Glistered with golden rayes. His totall rout VVas full six hundred Martiall souldiers stout, From Populonia their faire native soile: All expert youths, and fit for fight and spoile. From Ilva faire three hundred gallants came, A fertile countrey, mettals strong to frame. Asylas a southsayer the third place had, VVhose divinations, birds and beasts were glad, And starres above, obediently to heare, And rapid lightnings all his votes to cleare. An armie of a thousand thick he led, At lances long and strong experienced. All these from fluent Alphins Pisas came, A Tuscane town, readie to purchase fame: Next whom came on renowned Astur faire, Astur, for riding horses, expert, rare, Arm'd with most curious, various colour'd arms. Three hundred of them (prompt for fierce alarms) Bred up in Caerets soil by Minions lands, Old Pyrgus and ill-air'd Gravisca's strands. Nor may I thee omit, great Cycnus strong, VVho bravely thy Ligurians led'st along; Nor thee, Cupavo, with thy armie small, Whose helmets height was rais'd with swans-plumes; tall Your love your guilt began, and cognizance. For Cycnus (as 'tis said) the dire mischance
Of his beloved Phaëthon bewailing, Among the poplars and the shades him vailing Of his deare leafie-sisters: as thus he Sate warbling out love-sighing melodie, He turned was into a milk-white swan, Leaving the land and companie of man, And flying up i'th' aire with chattering voice. His sonne in's ships led troops of equall choice, And forc'd along with oares his centaure great, And thwacks the waves, and seems huge rocks to threat, Furrowing the mightie main with's vessell strong. VVhom Ocnus followed with an armie strong From's fathers realm, esteem'd a southsayer wise, VVhose birth from Tuscane river did arise, And Manto faire; and to his mothers fame The town and towres he Mantua did name; Mantua mightie in progenitours, But yet not all from lineall ancestours. This nation rul'd three tribes, and under them Foure mightie states made up that diadem: But this was the metropolis of all, From Tuscanes bloud came their originall. And hence Mezentius 'gainst himself did arm ve hundred valiant sparks his pride to charm; VVhom Mincius Benacs sonne, cloath'd in ripe reeds, In piercing pine-ships through rough seas proceeds, And leads along. Next went Auletes brave, Whose hundred branchie trees so slice each wave, And roule the rising flouds with restlesse roare, As that they boile with foam at rocky shore. Him terrifying Triton strongly bare, Set in's sea-frighting coerule shelly chaire,
Whose upper parts from face unto the breast, Though rough and hairie, yet mans form exprest: From belly downward, a sea-monster foule, Who as he swims with fins, the waves doth roule Under his half-wilde breast, with rumbling roares, And foule slime-foamie billows to the shores. So many peeres in thirtie ships did sail, And plow the liquid soile, for Troyes avail. And now day spent, and night comne on apace, Night-gadding Cynthia with her whitely face Having past half the heavens in chariot faire; Aeneas (for he takes no rest for care) Sitting himself, the helm holds, sails does tend. And as they now i'th' midway onward bend, Behold the troop of sea-nymphs, once ship-mates, To whom faire Berecythi ordinates Seas soveraigntie, of ships, them having made So many nymphs: these swimming to him, stayd; As many as at shore (when ships) did stand, So many know their king, and hand in hand About them dancing swimme: of all which train, Cymodocea, ablest to explain And speak their mindes, coming behinde them all, With her right hand holds fast the ship most tall I'th' poop thereof, raising herself upight, With her left hand fleering her passage sight. Thus to him then unknown the sea-nymph spake; Faire Goddesse sonne, Aeneas, art th'awake? Awake then still, slacken thy ropes to sails, Give way to winde, enjoy these goodly gales. We once were sacred Ida's pine-trees faire, But now to nymphs we metamorphiz'd are:
We were thy fleet, till thy perfidious foe, Rutulian rough, sought us to overthrow With fire and sword; whereat (though 'gainst our minde) We brake our bonds, our safety so to finde; And now thus through the sea we thee have sought: Thy tender mother on us this form wrought, And made us (thus) sea-nymphs, to spend our dayes Amongst the rocks in Neptunes watery wayes. As for thy childe Ascanius, he is well, And safe immur'd, i'th' town and trench doth dwell 'Midst deadly darts and Martiall Latines stout. Th' Arcadian troop of horsemen stirres not out From station set. One half of Turnus bands (Lest to the town they power unite) now stands Firmly resolv'd thee herein to prevent. Arise therefore, in haste thy mates convent, And set in battell-ray before sun-rise; Thy all-proof target take to thee likewise, VVhich the ignipotent black Vulcan gave, Impenetrable, edg'd with gold most brave: For this next morning (if thou trust for true VVhat now I say) shall see thee to embrew Thy sword in bloud of thick Rutulians slain. Thus having said, she shov'd with might and main His mightie ship, at her departure thence, In her known way, which with fierce violence Flew through the floud, more swift than shaft from bow, Or nimble dart, equalling windes that blow. And therewithall the ships fast after flie: This fact did Troyes Aeneas stupifie: The omen yet his heart exhilarates. Thus then to th' heavens he briefly supplicates;
Faire Ida's mother of Gods, to whom poore Troy To save and shield is thy delight and joy; Who towns and towres, and lions fierce and strong Dost make to yeeld to yokes; to thee belong The praises of my facts, of this great fight; Order this augure prosperously aright; Stand to thy Trojans with auspicious aid, Faire Goddesse, I thee pray. This having said, Meanwhile day light began now to wax cleare, And night quite banisht, all did bright appeare. First he his mates commands warres signes to watch, And to their harnesse strong their hearts to match, To fit them for the fight. And now he had His Trojans and their camp in's sight, most glad, Standing aloof in's ship: whereat he rais'd With his left hand his shield, which brightly blaz'd. The Trojans from their walls, who this did spie, Do raise a clamour echoing to the skie: Hope kindlesse courage, darts i'th' aire they fling, Like Thracian cranes descending with strong wing From the high clouds, all soaring in a train With cackling noise, fierce tempests to refrain. But to the Rutuls king, Italian state, These wonders seem, and them exanimate; Untill at last to sea they cast their eye, And see the ships fast to the shore to hie; And with tall barks the sea all-over spread, And burning crests and helm upon his head, The golden bosses belching flames of fire: Much lke i'th' dewy night a comet dire Of hurtfull bloud-red hue; or dog-starres heat, Which drought and sicknesse sore to men doth threat,
And makes the skie to lowre, and dimmes the light. But none of these stout Turnus heart could fright. But he must first the shore anticipate, And these his foes from landing profligate. Whereto he cheeres the hearts, he chides the stayes Of all his troops, and freely thus he sayes; What ye your selves desir'd, now here ye have: Now use your hands therefore with courage brave; For Mars himself the prey puts in your hands, Remember now your vvives, your goods, your lands. The famous facts of ancestours recount, And praises due; let yours now theirs surmount, And let us freely them at shore assail, Before they land, now whiles their hearts them fail. Fortune befriends bold spirits. These words he spake, And vvhom with him to lead, great care doth take, His sea-foes to invade, to vvhom to leave The hedg'd-in town, their hopes thus to deceive. Meanwhile Aeneas, vvith ship-bridges faire, To land his souldiers takes all speedie care: But many stay'd till calm seas flouds did flow; Some leapt on studs and stakes, thus out to go Upon their oares; some to the shore make haste. Great Tarchon up and down the sea-banks trac'd, To see if he could spie fit place to land, Secure from shallow shelves, or swallowing sand. And vvhere no rigid surges did appeare, But a smooth sea vvith swelling flouds made cleare, A harmlesse passage, there he suddenly Winding his ship, thus to his mates did crie; Now noble youths, plie close your slicing oares, Beare up your barks, cut through these adverse shores,
And let our ship plow furrows deep in sand, And break my bark, so we may gain the land. Tarchon thus having said, his maes with oares, Through frothy seas, their ships to Latine shores Do bravely bring, so that their noses kisse Drie-land: and all secure, their aims none misse, Except thy ship, great Tarchon, which neare land, Was so assail'd with stubborn shelves and sand, As that it wavering both wayes, deep stuck fast, And strugling long, in pieces split at last, Exposing all his men unto the waves: VVhereat each one himself on splinters saves, Pieces of oares, and planks, and floating boards, VVhich safe assistance unto them affords: But oft the flowing streams their heels did trip, Yet thus at last they safe on land do skip. But all this while Trnus uns off delayes, His totall troops 'gainst Trojans he arayes, At shore them to assail the trumpets sound: And now Aeneas firmly set on ground, Himself first set upon the rurall bands, And for first hansell, with his valiant hands Slaughters the Latines, Thern bold being slain, VVho stoutly durst a bickering short maintain Against Aeneas, whom he quickly foil'd, And through's gilt arms with his heart-bloud him foil'd▪ Lucas likewise he flew; who when a childe, Was cut out of the wombe of's mother milde, Whereof she dy'd; though to thee, Poebus faire, He, yet a young man, consecrated were, Yet could not scape this princes licing blade: Hard by he Cysseus also slaughtered laid,
And mightie Gyas, who with clubs did fight, But both he slew; Alcides arms too slight Did prove, to save their lives, their hands too weak, And sire Melampus, though he bold did break Through hazards great, being Hercules his mate▪ And Pharon, as he fondly much did prate, He through his gaping throat pierc'd with a dart. And thou stout Cydon tasted hadst deaths smart, Whiles thou faire Clytius, with young douny chin Unfortunately followedst, him to win To new, but nought delights of love unchaste, This Trojan prince had made thee death to taste, Foulely affecting love of youths impure, And thou hadst been deaths woefull subject sure, Had not a troop of armed brothers stout, All sonnes of Phorcus, met him in the rout, Being seven in number, who seven darts did throw, But to no end, which partly clattered so Upon his shield and helmet back rebounding, And Venus partly from his corps least wounding Putting them off. Aeneas herewithall Unto his kinde Achates thus did call; Bring me those darts (for none in vain he threw At the Rutulians) which proud Grecians slew In Trojan fields. Then a great speare he took, Which darted, flew; and flying, fiercely strook; And penetrating Maeons brazen shield, Through corps and corslet, he to death did yeeld. Whose brother Alcanor unto him hies, And held him up as he thus falling dies: Whose arm that stayd him pierced was also, The bloudy speare through's brauny arm did go,
And's right hand dangling did his deaths wound show. Numitor then pulls out the deadly dart From's brothers bodie, and with wrathfull heart Retorted it at Troyes Aeneas brave: But there it could not the least entrance have; And yet it wounded his Achates thigh. Here Lausus, full of juvenility, And bold, there by with troops attended came, And throws at Dryopes vvith Martiall flame, Standing aloof, a deadly vvounding lance, Which underneath his chin did fiercely glance, And pierce his throat, snatching thence voice and soule: Whose face fell first to ground in's gore most foule. Three Thracians more, of utmost Northern race, And three of Ida's sonnes and Ismar's place, By diverse deaths he furiously did slay. Thither Halesus came in battell-ray With his Auruncian bands: and thither came Messapus bold, sprung from great Neptunes name, Famous for riding horse: All close contend, Now these, then those, each other to offend, I'th' edge of Italie. Like two fierce vvindes I'th' open aire, contending in their kindes, With crosse contrarious blasts in equall might, And neither they, nor clouds, nor sea in sight Yeeld to each other, doubtfull, long they jarre, And stiffely, crossely, all maintain the warre: Thus Trojan troops and Latine bands contend, Thus foot to foot, thus hand to hand, they bend Their furious force. But on another part, Where pebble-stones lay all abroad most smart, Roul'd up by vvaves, and boughs and bushes thick
About the banks, most apt their feet to prick, And so unfit for horsemen there to fight, And such th' Arcadians were, not footmen light, Who to foot-battells unaccustomed, They to the Latines turn'd their backs and fled. Which Pallas spying (th' onely staffe in straits) He cries to them; some prayes, and some he rates With bitter words, their hearts to re-incite, Saying, Sirs, what mean ye? whither take ye flight? Now by your selves, and by your valiant acts, By your commanders great Euanders facts, And conquering name and fame, and my hopes great, Which emulates our countreys praise compleat; I you adjure, trust not base flying feet, But break through thickest troops your foes to meet, And with your swords assail them: for this way Your countrey wills us all our parts to play. No angry Gods, but mortall foes you force, VVe have as many hands and hearts to course And chase our foes; behold the seas also, VVhose waves so block us up and 'bout us flow, That there's no hope by land away to flie, And will ye back to Troy by sea now hie? And with these words, himselfi'th' midst of all Doth on the thickest ranks of Rutuls fall; VVhom Lagus first by fate unhappie meets, VVhom as a mightie stone he pull'd, he greets VVith deadly dart, which ribs and back did pierce, VVhich sticking in the bones, he pulls out fierce. But over him he did not Hisbon slay, Yet this he hop't t' have done without delay: For as he rusht and rag'd, regardlesse quite
Of his mates death, him Pallas deep did smite, And sheath'd his sword in's heart, and life forth drew, Thus Helens, Anchemolus, he slew, From Rhoetus ancient offspring sprung; who durst Defile his step-dames bed with most accurst Incestuous lust. You Rutuls twins most stout, Daucius two sonnes, vvho valiantly had fought, Both you he slew, Tymber and Larides, So like by birth they were, that 'twixt both these, None, even their parents could no difference see, Nor by their persons sweet deceived be: But Pallas 'twixt them made a difference great, Even 'twixt you both: for in his Martiall heat His sword cut off thy head, O Tymber faire, And thy right hand par'd off, Larides rare, Whose half-dead hand, sprawling, his sword lets go. Th' Arcadians, vvho but late retyred, so With Pallas vvords and vvorthie deeds spurr'd on, Now rage and shame arms them to set upon Their fiercest foes. Then Pallas prosecutes, And Rhoeteus swiftly flying executes. Like tariance and delay he Ilus sent: For as at Ilus he his strong speare bent, It Rhoeteus intercepts and slayes by th' vvay: And there faire Teuthra, flying, it doth slay; And's brother Tyres who from chariot reels, And being half dead beats the ground vvith's heels. And as the shepherd, vvhen vvisht vvindes do low In summer, does i'th' woods his fires bestow, Which by their nearenesse fire do quickly take, And o're the fields a vast combustion make: And vvhiles thus Vulcans armie spreads about,
He like a victour glad, at flames doth flout: Thus all their mates their powers in one unite, Which sight to see, thee, Pallas, did delight. But Martiall Halesus all foes defies, And with his shield 'gainst them his power applies. And Ladon soon he slayes, and Phaeretus, Demodocus; and of Strymonus, With his bright blade, he cut off the right hand, Threatning Halesus throat; nor still doth stand, But Thoas brains he dasht out with a stone, And mixt together bloud and brains and bone. Halesus father his sonnes fate foresaw, Him therefore to a wood he did withdraw: But when old-age his life for death did fit, Th' impartiall Parcae from their hands commit Him to Euanders darts: whom Pallas thus Assails; but first thus prayes; Grant now to us, Grave father Tyber, that this dart I throw, May finde good fortune, and the right way go, Through haughtie Halesus obdurate breast: So shall thy aged oak be deckt and drest With this mans arms and spoils. The God did heare; And whiles Halesus hop't away to beare Imaons spoils, a strong Arcadian dart Through's open breast pierct his unhapppie heart. But lusty Lausus did least feare disdain, At slaughter of so rare a prince, thus slain, A prime part of the warre; nor would admit His Rutuls to be thereat dampt a whit. For first confronting Abas strong he slayes, The bolt and barre of these most furious frayes. Down fall Arcadians, down Etrurians fall,
And Trojans thick which scap't from Grecian thrall. Both armies meet, captains and souldiers fight With equall force, the reeres with utmost might Presse forward, making their approach so thick, That the whole armie seems stone-still to stick, Without least motion. Pallas hereupon His souldiers urgeth and inciteth on. Here Lausus laboureth on the other side, Neither much different in their youthfull pride, Both bravely beautifull; but both gain-said Into their countrey to make retrograde, And hereunto Iove would not condescend, That they in single duell should contend: But for a greater foe their fate now waits. Meanwhile Iuturna moves and instigates Her brother Turnus, Lausus straight to aid. Who in a wingy-chariot swiftly made Through thickest of their troops: and when he saw Both Time, and's Martiall mates from fight withdraw, I (sayes he) I alone must Pallas finde, To me alone I see his death assign'd. I wish his father now spectatour were. And hereupon his mates the field forbeare, Being charged thereunto. The princely spark, As he the captains pride and power did mark In's Rutuls quick withdrawing, stood amaz'd, And tupifi'de, on Turnus stature gaz'd, With envying eyes viewing his limbes most great, And every part about him most compleat. Thus then unto the kings words he replies; Sure I shall now get praise by this rich prize, Or by a noble death. My father (sure)
Is just and wise, what fates will, to endure. Spare then thy brags and threats. Thus having said, the midst o'th' Martiall list he made: Th' Arcadians hearts were fill'd with chilling feare, Turnus from's chariot then descending there; And now on foot was stately seen draw nigh, Like a fierce lion, who from's den doth spie A stout big bull fitting himself to fight, Farre off i'th' field, he to him takes his flight: Even such is Turnus in his fierce accesse. VVhom Pallas now within the reach doth guesse Ofhis darts-cast, Pallas doth first advance, Unmatcht in might, but hoping happie chance. First thus he prayes; O thou Alcides great, I by my fathers kindenesse thee intreat, VVho thee a stranger took to bed and board, To my designes thy mightie aid afford, And let my adversarie half-dead see Himself of's bloudy arms bespoil'd to be: And let proud Turnus see with dying eye, Me winne the field with valiant victorie. Hercules heard the youth, and (but in vain) Fetcht a deep sigh, which did even teares constrain. Then mightie Iove to's sonne most kindely sayes; To each man's given his appointed dayes; Mans life is short, his time irrevocable, But fame by facts to make most memorable, Is vertues work indeed. Under the wall Of stately Troy how many sonnes did fall, Even sonnes of Gods! yea my Sarpedon faire, My sonne  slain, the fates would him not spare: And Turnus hath a term and certain fate,
And his lifes period hastes to terminate. This said, on Rutuls fields his eyes he bent. And Pallas now wih all his force forth sent A nimble speare, and from his scabbard drew His glistring blade. The speare most fircely lew To Turnus shoulder on his armour blue; And on the brim of's shield did glance along, And gave a clattering blow on's bodie strong. Turnus hereat shaking a speare of oak, Tipt with sharp steel, darts it, and thus he spoke To Pallas as it flew; Go now and see Whether more penetrable now ours be Then his. This said, through his most mightie targe Lined with plates of brasse and iron large, And cover'd o're with many bulls hides thick, VVith brandisht blow the speare did enter quick Piercing his corslet, wounded deep his breast. He straight the bloud-wrm'd speare in vain doth wrest; Striving to pluck it out, plucks out withall Life, bloud and soule, and straight down dead does fall Flat on his face: in's fall his rms do clatter, The ground his gore-bloud-gushing mouth doth batter. Over whom Trnus trampling, thus doth say; Go now Arcdins, minde my words, I pray, Go tell Euander, This sonne re-send Unto him with a well-deserving end. VVhat-ever buriall-honour he can crave, Or full content and comfort in a grave, I will bestow on him, his rborous cheere To his Aees, now doth cost him deare. Thus saying, standing on the corps now dead, Spoiling him ofhis belt embroidered
With the whole storie of the impious act, How Danaies daughter foulely did compact Upon the wedding night in marriage-bed To murther their young bridegrooms there left dead: Which things Eurytion had wrought thick in gold, This prize most rich Turnus doth joy to hold. Mans minde is ignorant of future fate, Knows not a mean, is puft with prosperous state. Turnus shall see the time when he'd be glad This prize most dearely bought, he never had Once toucht, and when, this day and Pallas spoiles Shall prove most hatefull, and his hearts turmoiles. But Pallas mates with sighs and feares all fraught, Upon a shield his corps in troops thence brought. Ah, the great grief, yet grace thy sire will have, This day the first and last to battells gave: And yet about thee thou didst make remain A mightie heap of fierce Rutulians slain, Nor now did flying fame this mischief shew; 'Twas brought t'Aeneas by a poste too true, Who told him how distrest his souldiers were, How 'twas high time to help them fled for feare. Hereat Aeneas mowes all down with's blade, And like a mad man he wide path-wayes made Through thickest troops, thee, Turnus proud, to finde, With slaughters fresh, having still in his minde (All came to's sight) Pallas, Euander kinde, The table spread, where first he was a guest, All, though a stranger, right-hand loves exprest. And here before him he foure youths espies, All born at Sulmo, and foure more likewise Train'd up by Vfens, all alive he snatches,
And as a sacrifice, them all dispatches To the dead ashes of his dearest friend, And in the fires their captive bloud doth spend. Thence passing on, when he next dart did throw At Mago stout, he slyly stooping low, Escapt the quivering dart, which flew away. Whereat his knees he clasping, thus did pray; Now by thy fathers ghost, and hopefull state Of thy Iülus, I thee supplicate, Preserve my life both to my sonne and me, And in my stately house thou hid shalt see, Deep in the ground, great store of silver coyn'd, And much good gold, some fin'de, some unrefin'de. My life (alas!) stayes not Troyes victorie, Nor can I onely work such jeopardie. This said, Aeneas presently replies; Those heaps of gold which thou so high dost prize, Keep for thy children; Turnus took away This quarter, when my Pallas he did slay. Thus thinks Iülus and Anchises dead, And with these words, upon his helm and head He layes fast hold; and as he so did pray, Up to the hilts his sword in's soule made way. Hard by he met Emonides most brave, Faire Phoebus and Diana's priest most grave: His head a sacred hood and head-bands tie, Glistring all-o're in arms most gorgeously. Whom chas'di'th' field, and overcome i'th' fight, He sacrific'd, and on him stood upright, Whose mightie shade him hid: Serestus stout Upon his shoulders bare his armour out, Thy trophie, mightie Mars. Then Cculus
Black Vulcanes brood, and Vmbro valourous Of Marsies mounts, the fight afresh ingage. But Dardanes prince doth on them fiercely rage: And Anxures arm his sword slic'd off so round, That arm and shield straight fell down on the ground. This gallant had some loftie words given out, And thought perhaps time would it bring about: His heart was high as heaven, perswaded, sure, Ofhoarie haires, and life, long to endure. Tarquitus proud in glistring arms him met, Whom Faunus did on Driope beget, Who furiously a strong speare at him throws, Which through his harnesse and huge target goes. His head (he craving life, but to no end, And much about to speak) he soon did send From's shoulders to the ground, on'strunck he stood, And o're him thus he spake, in heat of bloud; Lie there, thou frighter fierce, thy mother deare Shall never thee unto thy buriall beare, Nor in thy native soile entombe: wilde-beasts Or fish i'th' sea shall on thee make them feasts. Antheus then and Lycas stout, who led King Turnus voward, he encountered, And Numa strong, sworthy Camertes stout Sprung from renowned Volscens race and rout: A mightie landed man in Italie, Who o're th' Amyclians had the soveraigntie; Men for their sparing speech of speciall name. And like Aegaeon, who (as blazeth fame) Had full an hundred arms and active hands, And fiftie mouthes; whence, as from firebrands, And firie breasts, he flames of fire forth threw,
As many shields held up and swords he drew Against Ioves lightnings: so Aenea stout Victoriously did fret and fume about As soon as once his sword waxt warm with blows: But then (behold!) most furiously he goes Against Niphaeus and his coach horse swift, And 'gainst his breast his fatall blade did lift: But they farre off, as soon as ere they saw Him rushing, fiercely raging, 'gainst them draw, For feare they flie, and backward madly go, And in their race their rider overthrow, Whurrying the chariot with them to the shore. Mean while Lucagus also prest on sore With his white coach-horse, then accomitated With's brother Ligr, who thus regulated The coach-horse reins, Lucagus brandishing His glistring blade. Troyes prince not suffering Their bold out-braves, unto them rusheth straight, And against both did quick accommodate A mightie speare: to whom thus Liger bold; Thou dost not here Acilles coach behold, Nor Diomedes horse, nor Prygin field, But in these plains thy life to death must yeeld, And end these broiles. Thus madly loud hespake: But Troyes brave erö no reply would make In words, but casts a dart at hisfierce foe. And as Lucgus reaching out a blow With stiffe intent did fetch his horse about▪ And his left foot unto thefight set out, The fly ing speare piercing histget bright, On his left groin did penetrating light, Which did him overhr and deadly ound;
Where he lay groveling dead upon the ground, To whom in these tart terms Aeneas said; No ghost, Lucagus, made thy horse afraid And flie thy foe, nor did their paces slow Thee and thy coach betray unto thy foe: But thou thy self, leaping down from the wheels, Thy coach forsook'st, and triptst up thine own heels. Thus having said, the coach in hand he takes: Th'unhappie brother prostrate fall'ne down quakes, Holds up his trembling hands, thus does intreat; Now by thy self and by thy parents great Who thee begat (Troyes prince) so great so good, O spare thy suppliants life, spill not his bloud. O sir, sayes he, these words you us'd not late; Die then, let brothers brothers sociate. Then with his sword his breast he opened wide, And from's hearts hollow caves his soule did glide. Thus through the fields this Trojan victour made Great slaughters: like fierce flouds which banks invade, Or blustring windes, so did he rage about: Th'enclosed Trojans now also break out, And leave their camps, and young Ascanius brave VVith his green sparks, them valiantly behave, Though late (in vain) besieg'd. Things resting so, Iove of himself does to his Iuno go, And thus sayes to her; See, my sister kinde, And speciall spouse, most gratefull to my minde; Venus, thou seest (even as thou didst suppose, Nor art deceiv'd) supports thy Trojan foes: Their boldest hearts, strong hands, nor patience stout VVarres woes t'endure, could not alone hold out. To whom thus humbly Iuno did reply;
Why, O my Pheere most deare, ah tell me, why Dost thou my grieved heart more grieve; which quakes, And at thy bitter piercing words even akes? O if thou lov'd'st me now as formerly, If (as 'twere fit) thou hadst first fervencie; Great Iove, thou this request wouldst grant to me, My Turnus from the fight withdrawn to see: That to his father Daunus him I might Safely restore. But let him fall i'th' fight, And be a pious prey to Trojans base; Yet is he sprung from our celestiall race. Pilumnus was his sire, i'th' fourth descent, Thine altars he with hand munificent, And many gallant gifts enriched hath. To whom olympus king thus briefly saith; If thou desirest present deaths delay, And the death-marked youths dire fall to stay, And think'st I may the same procrastinate; Let Turnus flie then from his present fate. This onely distance must thy minde suffice: But if thy prayers to higher hopes arise, And that thou think'st he may be wholly freed From chance of warre, or what fates have decreed May altered be; thou but vain hopes dost feed. To whom thus Iuno full of teares replies; But what if Iove, what he in words denies, Would grant in heart, and Trnus life make sure? Now he most guiltlesse, must hard hap endure, Or I no truth do know: but rather I Could wish thou wouldst my fond feare falsfie, And (as thou canst) convert all to the best. Thus having now each way her votes exprest,
From heaven she forthwith flies, to earth descends: Storms flie before her, clouds she 'bout her bends. Thus through the aire to Trojan bands she flew, And to th' Italian tents she nearer drew. The Goddesse then in concave cloud did frame A forcelesse shade most thin to seem, the same With brave Aeneas shape (a most strange sight) And fraught it faire with Trojan arms most bright, A plumy helm fit for his sacred head, A shield which his most nearely patterned: Yea gives it windie words, a senselesse sound, And goodly gate, like one walking profound. Much like those shapes which walk (they say) being dead, Or those fallacious dreams in snorting bed. The frolick figure brags before the bands, And Turnus tempts to shew the strength of's hands, And him with speech provokes: whom Turnus straight Assails aloof, and with represselesse hate A whisling dart casts at it; instantly The shadow turns its back, away doth flie. Turnus supposing now Aeneas fled, Nourisht vain hope, which thus he uttered; Aeneas, whither fly'st thou? do n't forsake Thy spouse betroth'd, to whom thou vows didst make: This hand of mine shall give thee lands so sought. And thus he follows him in word as thought, Brandishing his bright blade; but could not finde, How these vain joyes were but puffe toyes of winde. As thus he past, by chance a ship he spi'de, To a rocks rigid bank most fitly ty'de, Whereto a ladder for ascent did stand, For a sea-voyage fitted out of hand.
In which Osinius king from Clusium came. Aeneas fearfull figure in this same Cast it self quickly, there it hidden lay: Which Turnus following, cuts off every stay, Nimbly ascends the top: scarce did he take Footing i'th' ship, but Iuno quickly brake The fastning cable, launcht the ship from shore, Which with full sail into the ocean bore. Meanwhile Aeneas with a bloudy fight, Seeks up and down his foe thus out of sight; And multitudes of men him meeting slayes. But now the nimble shade no longer stayes, Hid in its holes, but vanisht into th' aire; And when to th' midst oth' sea storms Turnus bare, Ignorant of these things, for's life ingrate; He looks about, to th' heavens doth elevate (After this manner) both his hands and heart; Almightie Iove, deem'st thou it my desert, To suffer such a shame, a scourge so great? Ah, whither go I? vvhence make I retreat? What flight is this? vvhom do I thus forsake? Shall I not once more yet my self betake To Laurents walls and warres? What now (alas!) VVill to my troops of souldiers come to passe, VVhich followed me in fight? vvhom impious I Have left alone, a thousand deaths to die? For now, me thinks, I heare and see them all Dying and crying as they wounded fall▪ VVhat shall I do? vvhat land me live can swallow? But oh ye windes, do ye me rather follow VVith pitying puffs: (this Turnus does you pray VVith gladsome minde) O cast this bark away
On rocks or sands, where Rutuls may not see, Or tainted fame may never follow me. Thus moaning up and down, thoughts ebbe and flow, What to resolve to do, he does not know; Or madly slay himself, for such disgrace, And in his corps his bloudy blade to case; Or headlong into th' sea himself to cast, And so by swimming to get land at last: And landing, to the Trojan troops to hie. Thrice both these wayes he did attempt to trie; And thrice great Iuno his attempts did hinder, Pitying the young prince with indulgence tender. Thus on he sails with prosperous winde and tide, At last at's father Daunus town did 'bide. Meanwhile by Ioves advise, Mezentius stout Comes forth to fight, and (Trojans all about Joyning in good successe) does now invade The Trojan troops, who to him joyntly made. And all at once at one alone they flie, Their hands and hate do this one man defie. But he, much like a rock 'gainst mightie waves, Withstands the furie of windes bigge outbraves, Layes ope his rigid fides'gainst billows great, And all the rage that seas or skies can threat, It self unmov'd remains: he's even so. And Dolichaons sonne did overthrow, Hebrus; with whom he Latagus did slay, And Palmus, as he from him ran away: But Latagus he with a stone most great, Even with a mountains part, his brains out beat. Palmus his hammes and legs he cut off quite, And left him there to roule in piteous plight.
His arms he Lausus gave, on's back to beare, And on his head his plumy helm to weare. Phrygian Euantes, Mimas, Paris mate, And Coaetanean, he did ruinate: Whom to Amycus, milde Thebano bare, Paris being born of Hecuba most faire, Who dreamt she had a firebrand begot, And he to die in's countrey had the lot: But Mimas, ignorant of this his hap, Did finde his grave here in Laurentums lap. Now as a boare hunted from mountains high By barking, biting dogs, (which long did lie Shelter'd in wide pine-bearing Vesulus, And in Laurentums fields most copious, Of wood-like reeds, having been long time fed:) As soon as he's i'th' nets intangled, He stands and stares about, his tusks does whet, And fretting, fiercely brissels up doth set; Nor is it wit or worth for any there, To be too busie to him to draw neare, But off to stand, and at him darts to throw, And with loud clamorous shouts to tire him so: So those that to Mezentius bare just spight, Durst not come neare him hand to hand to fight; But with their darts farre off and clamours shrill, They him provoke: the boare sits boldy still, Gnashing with foamy chaps his tusks most keen, And shaking off the darts from's back is seen. From Cerits ancient coasts came Acron stout, A Grecian forc'd from's countrey to flie out For breach of marriage; whom, when as remote, Mezentius saw, and seriously did note,
Amid'st the troops moving his mates to fiht, Adorn'd with purple plumes and scarlet bright, His kinde contracted spouses goodly gift: Much like a hungry lion rambling swift About the mightie woods (for so indeed Fierce hunger forceth madly to proceed) If haply he some well-grown goat may spie, Or bravely headed stagge that way to flie, He gapes for joy, his brissels rough erects, Falls close unto the prey he so affects, Washing his ravenous chaps in bloud luke-warm. Thus thickest foes Mezentius fierce doth charm: And quickly he unhappie Acron slayes, And him with's heels beating the ground he layes Low on the earth, his bloudy speare unsplit. But he Orodes flying scorn'd to hit, Or smite to death by casting his strong dart, And coward-like to wound him in's back-part: But he must meet his foes all face to face, And man to man by dreadfull duells chase, Not pleas'd with pilfering, but with powerfull blows. And thus he great Orodes overthrows, His foot set on his corps, his speare at's heart, A man of no small worth, this warres best part. His mates him following, panegyricks sing, And of his conquests make the aire to ring. But he expiring, ere quite dead, thus said; Proud conquerour, thou shalt not passe unpaid, Who e're thou art, my death reveng'd shall be, Nor shalt thou long from this revenge be free: My fate thee follows, thee these plains shall hold. To whom Mezentius with a spirit bold,
Yet smilingly reply'de; But thou shalt die: But as for me, Iove, king of earth and skie, Will see to me. This said, the speare he pulls Out of his corps: then fatall rest him lulls Into a deadly sleep, which clos'd his sight, Shutting his eyes up in eternall night. Stout Caedicus in fight slayes Alcath'us, Sacrator kills Hidaspis; Parthen'us And mightie Orsis do by Rapo die; Messapus fierce slayes Clodius valiantly, And Lyaconius and Ericates, VVhom from his skittish jade fallen with small ease Unto the ground, on foot a footman slew: Then Lycian Agis hotly to them drew, VVhom yet Valerius, not a jot unfraught VVith sires connative noblenesse, soon taught The way to's grave: Salius Atronius slayes; Nealces nimble dart ends Salius dayes; Nealces, expert both at speare and dart. And now like heavie hap was on each part, And mightie Mars made equall funeralls: Alike they fight, alike catch fatall falls: These conquer now, anon are conquered: But neither these nor those from foes have fled. The Gods from Ioves high hall pity the plight Of both parts, thus o'rewhelm'd with fruitlesse spight, And tyr'd with troubles. This way, Venus faire; Iuno looks that way with contrarious care. Pale-peevish Tisiphon with frantick heat Doth rage and rave between the armies great. And still Mezentius shakes his mightie lance, And furiously does to the field advance.
Like great Orion, when with staulking feet He walks moyst Nereus pools and flouds that fleet, Slicing his wavy way, whose shoulders white O're-top the streams: or when he does delight, Walking the woods, a huge old oak to beare, On mountains-tops his head to th' clouds to reare: Even thus Mezentius to the armie goes, Whom seen farre off, Aeneas to oppose Prepares himself. He dauntlessely doth stay, Waiting his mightie foes approach that way. In's strength he stands, watching the distance right Sufficient for his lances fatall flight. Assist me now (sayes he) my right hand brave, And brandisht lance; none other Gods I have: And here I vow, the spoiles which I shall gain From this great theef Aeneas, shall remain To thee, brave Lausus, as thy trophie due. And with these words at him farre-off he threw A whistling speare, which flying fierce did glance Upon his shield; whence, by unhappie chance, It pierced Anthors noble breast and heart; Anthor, Alcides mate, who would not part From king Euander, once from Argos sent, But made abode in Latines continent. Unhappie he dy'd by anothers wound, His eyes to th' skies, he thinks on's native ground. Then brave Aeneas cast a dart at him, Which flying, pierc'd the hollow edge or brimme Of's three-fold brazen arms with linen lin'd, And through his treble bulls hides way did finde, Or forced through into his groin most deep, Nor could his strength the paining wound out keep.
Whereat Aeneas joy'd to see the bloud Of his proud foe, draws out his fauchion good Which hung by's side, wherewith he furiously Assails his trembling foe, which with quick eye As soon as Lausus sees, due filiall love Doth in him, for his sire, much mourning move, And brinish teares provoke. Here cannot I In silence burie thy dire destinie, And famous facts (if future times will trust And credit what of him relate I must) Most memorable youth! Mezentius maim'd Unfit for fight, the battell, slow, disclaim'd; And in's retreat the wounding speare he bare, Sticking in's shield. Then straight the young man rare Steps in between, i'th' midst maintains the fight. And as Aeneas rais'd his hand to smite, Lausus his sword crosse underneath it came, And brake the force o'th' blow, and stopt the same. His mates him follow with a mightie shout, And whiles the sire, guarded by's sonne, got out, They throw thick darts, incense their foe to fight: Aeneas frets, hid under's target bright. And as black clouds pouring down showers of hail, The lowns and plow-men all without all fail Scud from the fields apace, themselves to hide, With cunning tricks, under some rivers side, Or in some rocks deep hole, whiles it doth rain; That i'th' sun-shine they may to work again: Even so Aeneas, showr'd on round about VVith shafts, this cloud of warre strongly beares out, And 'bides all brunts, and chides young Lausus sore, And bitterly thus threatens Lausus poore;
VVhither, weak childe of death, dost rush so fast? VVhy dost thou on facts past thy strength thee cast? Thy filiall zeal doth flout thee most unwise; Lausus no lesse doth madly him despise; VVhich makes this Trojan captains rage break out. And now the fatall sisters had spun out Lausus last thred of life; for now with ruth Aeneas through the bodie of the youth Made his bright blade to enter instantly, There wholly hid: his shield and arms do flie In parts, and slasht his coat wrought curiously, His mothers work; and fill'd his breast with gore: VVherewith his soule into the aire did soare, And left his corps. But when with ruthfull eye Aeneas did his dying count'nance spie, His count'nance which waxt wondrous pale and wan, He deeply sigh'd, greatly to grieve began, Embrac'd him in his arms, and call'd to minde The tender love to sonnes in parents kinde; And sonnes reciprocall to sires, and said; VVhat honour now may worthily be paid, (Belov'd and much lamented youth) to thee? VVhat gift may to thy goodnesse congruent be From kinde Aeneas? all thy arms most rare VVherein thou joy'dst, not mine, but thine they are, Thy corps also for buriall, I commit Unto thy sire (if he have care of it) Yet let this thee unhappie happifie, That thou by great Aeneas hands didst die. Then freely he his friends checks tauntinglie For their delay; himself lifts him from ground, His lovely locks (i'th' fashion) comptly bound,
Being all-besmear'd with bloud. In this mean space His father dry'd his wounds at a fit place, About faire Tybers floud, his bodie he Makes clean with water, and against a tree Refresht himself, his helmet strong of brasse Hung on the boughs, his huge arms lay i'th' grasse. Chief gallants 'bout him stood; he faint, takes rest, Eas'd his tyr'd neck, his beard spread on his breast, Often enquiring for his Lausus deare, And sending oft, that he of him might heare. They quickly do the mournfull fathers will; And on their shields, lamenting loud and shrill, Brought mightie Lausus dead, with mightie wound Woefully slain. Which when the father found, His mournfull minde farre-off foreseeing woe, On his gray-haires much dust he straight does throw, And both his hands unto the heavens doth heave, And with these words to th' corps doth cling and cleave; Oh my deare sonne, had I such love to live, That thee for me I to my foe should give? Even thee whom I begat? must I by thee Survive secure, and thou thus murthered be? Must I live by thy death? Unhappie I, What now remains, but exiles miserie? O wound most deeply driven, O my deare sonne, 'Tis I have sham'd thee, and thy fame undone! Even I, whom home-bred hatred hath disthron'd, I should have dy'd, through envy, unbemoan'd. I by all kindes of death most guiltily Should to my realm have paid this penaltie▪ Yet live I still: nor men, nor light yet leave. Well, now I will me of them all bereave.
And with these words, up on's weak limbes he stood, And though his strength was dull'd through want of bloud, By his deep wound, yet not a jot dejected, He calls for's horse, his horse most high affected, His crown and comfort, wherewith evermore In all his battels he the conquest bore. And thus he to his mourning horse did say; Brave Rhebus, we now long (if long I may Say ought 'mongst men continues) lived have, And either we'le this day be victours brave With bloudie spoiles and proud Aeneas head, And for my Lausus losse be thus well sped; Or else, if force no way can force or finde, My death and thine shall be in one combin'de. For sure I think, stout steed, thou never yet To others didst, or Trojan lords submit. This said, he mounted; and i'th' saddle set, Into both hands sharp shafts he straight doth get; His glistring brazen helm on's head, and crest Fast fixt, and with most rigid horse-haire drest. Thus 'mongst them with a fierce careere addrest, He rushed in: his heart with shame did boile: Madnesse and mourning for his Lausus foile, Outragious love, and secret sense o'th' might Of his fierce foe, do spurre him to the fight. Aloud three times he now Aeneas calls, Aeneas knows him, glad, to prayers falls; So grant great Iove, so grant Apollo high, That thou mayst now begin the fight to trie. This said, he with a piercing speare him met. Whereat Mezentius, in a ragefull fret, Cries out, Fierce wretch, why dost thou thus in vain
Me vex, perplex? thou having my sonne slain, Thou hast the way me now to ruinate. And surely now to die I do not hate: None of thy Gods regard or spare will I. Leave off thy threats, for here I come to die, But first of all, these gifts to thee I bring. Which said, a dart he at his foe did fling, And then another and another, thick He flings, which flies as in a circle quick. But yet the gold-bost shield them all abides. Then 'bout Aeneas standing fast, he rides Three light careeres, still at him throwing darts, And thrice Troyes prince with his brasse target thwarts The seeming wood of shafts. But when he saw, And seeing sham'd so many darts to draw Out of his shield, such long delayes to use, And how he was constrain'd not to refuse The combate, though unequall, musing thus, At last with valour most magnanimous He rusheth on, and with resistlesse force He threw a dart which hit the warriours horse Between his hollow temples, with which blow The horse mounts up an end, kicks to o'rethrow His rider; and at last does backward fall, Fastning his master under him withall: He groveling headlong, out of joynt his arm, Trojans and Latines raise a loud alarm And clamorous noise. Aeneas to him flew, And from his scabbard his bright fauchion drew, And o're him said; Where's now, Mezentius stout, Where's thy proud strength and stomack? all flown out? To whom the Tuscane, having ta'ne some breath,
Fierce bitter foe, why so dost threaten death? Why so insult'st thou? 'tis no crime to die: Nor came I to the field so cowardly, Nor for me with thee would my Lausus have Such base conditions: Onely this I crave, (If any favour vanquisht ones may get From victours) I thee earnestly intreat, Permit my body to have buriall-rite: For why? I know my peoples hate and spight Stand round about me; keep me, I thee pray, From their great rage, and with me my sonne lay, Consorting in one grave. And with this word Expectedly his throat receives the sword. Whereat upon his arms gusht out his gore, And from his body forth his soule did soare. An end of the tenth book of Virgils Aeneïds.
THE ARGUMENT of the eleventh book. Aeneas, for these victories, To Mars doth trophies solemnize. Pallas dead corps is sent thence straight To king Euander, in great state. Truce made, to burie both their slain: Euanders grief, paternall pain For his dead sonne. The souldiers dead Are gather'd, burn'd, and buried. From Diomedes message came, That he these warres did quite disclaim. Drances and Turnus 'twixt them chide. Aeneas to Laurentum hy'de. Fierce fight: the day the Trojans gain: Vnwares, Camilla there is slain. AVrora rising now the sea forsook. Aeneas (though especiall care he took, And time, for buriall of his slaughtered mates With sedulous intents he meditates) Yet first, like victour brave, by break of day He to the Gods his Martiall votes will pay. Upon a hill a mightie oak he plac'd, Which lopt all o're, with glistring arms he grac'd, Mezentius spoiles (great Mars, thy trophies good) And fitly fixt the crest, yet dropping bloud, Speares broken splinters, and his corslet strong, Which twelve times dig'd with darts, scarce took least wrong.
His brazen shield to th'left hand up was tide, And from his neck, his ivorie sheath beside. Then thus his mates (for all his Martiall Peeres Had hedg'd him in) he with these speeches cheeres; Brave sirs, our main work done, avaunt base feare, A rush for what remains: the spoiles see here, And first-fruits of our joy, from that proud king Mezentius, whom these hands to ground did bring. Now to the King we must, to Laurents wall. Prepare your hearts for warre, yet hope withall For good successe; and let not least delay (So soon as th' ensignes thence to pluck away The Gods permit, and tents their youth forsake) In ignorance or sloth, force you to take Feare-caused counsell. In the meanwhile we Our mates unburied corps interr'd will see: This rite alone departed soules desire. Go then (sayes he) and carefully enquire, And search out all those worthy wights most rare, Who this faire land to purchase, did not spare Their deare hearts bloud, for us: finde them, I pray, And hang their hearses with last gifts most gay: And first unto Euanders city sad Let princely Pallas noble corps be had: Whom, full of valour, fatall destinie And bitter death drencht in extremitie. These weeping words he spake, and went his way Unto the place where Pallas body lay, Watcht by Acetes old, Euanders page, But not by happie fate to such ripe age Admitted his sons mate. His servants all About him stand, mourning their masters fall.
The Trojan troops, and Phrygian matrons faire Stood weeping (as th'are wont) with unbound haire. But soon as e're Aeneas entred in, There straight was rais'd a mightie mourning din, With loud laments, their breasts they often beat, Whose ruthfull roares fill'd all the palace great. But when he saw Pallas white face and head, And th' open wound which this just sorrow bred, Through which th' Italian dart dire entrance made, With trickling teares these wofull words he said; Ah, wofull youth, must lot thus lucklesse be, Even then when't smil'd to envie thee to me, Lest thou our conquer'd kingdomes should'st behold, And brought triumphant to thy father old? I promis'd not to him these things of thee, When at our parting he dismissed me With sweet embraces, to an empire great, And with advise did fearfully repeat What furious foes we had, what people stout To fight withall. And now fond hopes do flout The good old king, who now (sure) hopes and prayes, And for his childe heapt-gifts on altars layes. But we esteem no gifts to th' Gods now due, The dead young man we vainly 'tend and rue. Unhappie old man, thou with grief shalt see Thy sonne by cruell fate return'd to thee. Here's our returns of love, our spoiles expected, Thus thy great trust in me seems quite neglected. Yet, grave Euander, this some joy may be, Thou wilt not him by base wounds conquer'd see: Nor him alive, for cowardise, wish dead. Ah! woe is me, what fence is from me fled For Italie, and what a noble mate
Hast thou Iülus lost by his dire fate? Thus having wept, he bids them beare away The woefull corps, choosing without delay A thousand gallants brave from all his bands, To wait upon the corps he these commands, As his last honour, and at hand to be, With his sad father, whom still as they see Shedding salt teares, to yeeld him comfort sweet (Although but small) to so great sorrows meet. Then straightway some long reeds do quickly get, Some make a beere whereon the corps to set, With twisted twigs and oaken sprigs most tender, Whose hearse-like bended boughs thick shades do render▪ Here the young prince high on the reeds they lay, Much like a flower by damsells cropt in May: Or withering hyacinth, or violet sweet, Not yet quite stript of sent and semblance meet, Though now its mother earth affords no sap, Nor yeelds such strength, as hugged in her lap. Then two rare robes of purple, thick with gold, Aeneas straight brought forth, rich to behold, Queen Dido's art, which in her prosperous state She for him wrought, with gold-twist accurate. One of these robes he in most mournfull wise Puts on the prince, last due to's obsequies; And therewith hides his locks for fire prepar'd, And nought of all these warres rich spoiles he spar'd, But heaps them on, which in a long array Were born in state: great horses made a prey, And speares and darts all taken from their foes, And many a captive chained with them goes, Whose bloud in flames must sacrificed be:
Truncheons of broken speares commanded he His captains in their hands to beare along, And on their tops to beare foes arms most strong, And on them every adversaries name. Then aged sad Acetes onward came, Beating his breasts, tearing his aged face, Fal'ne faintly on the ground in piteous case. Along they led chariots besmear'd with bloud Of Rutuls slain. Aetho, his courser good, His warre-horse brave, came after all his train, Stript of his trappings; nor could he refrain To weep, as on he went, full flouds of teares: Then one his speare, and one his helmet beares. The rest of's arms the conquerour Turnus had: Then followed all the troops and Trojans sad, The Tuscane and Arcadian captains strong, The wrong end of their speares trailing along Upon the ground. Thus as in Martiall bnds These gallants passe, Aeneas here still stands; And with a deep-fetcht sigh does to them say; Deare mates, warres self-same fates call us away To weep for others: then my Pallas deare, Rest safe for ever, never to be here Re-visited, for ever then adew. His speech here stopt. Then he his troops withdrew Unto the town and tents; where soon they saw King Latines legates toward them to draw, With olive-boughs adorn'd, leave to intreat, The scattered bodies by that battell great Slain in the fields, that they might seek and have, And gathered up, bestow on them a grave. Adding, No fight ought be with conquered slain;
Praying, his once kinde hoasts he'd not disdain, Fathers in law, once call'd. To whose request Aeneas kinde him flexible exprest, And gives them leave; adding these words beside, Tell me (you Latines) what unworthie guide, What blinde-fold fortune hath involv'd you thus Into this warre? Why have ye flown from us Your vowed friends? ask ye peace for your slain? Intreat ye for your dead? Truely I'd fain Farre rather to your living grant the same. And to this place, these parts, I onely came By fates decree. Nor warre I with your land: Your king our love and friendship does withstand, And rather trusts himself to Turnus might: Whereas for Turnus it had been more right His life to hazard. If he do intend By force to force us hence, this warre to end; 'Twere fit he onely were to me addrest, And he should live, whom fates or facts made best. But go, poore citizens, your slain interre. Thus spake Aeneas: they amazed were, And silent stood, gazing as men agast On one anothers faces, till at last Drances the gravest of them, evermore Who to young Turnus wrath and envie bore, Set forth himself, and thus his words did frame; Brave Trojan prince, great by illustrious fame, Greater by vertuous facts; vvith what due praise May I thy worth unto the heavens now raise? I know not which, or first, or most t' admire, Thy justice great, or quenchlesse Martiall fire. But we, thy gratefull friends, these things will show
To all our mates, and towns where-e're we go: And if successe do smile, vve hope to make King Latine thee into his love to take: Let Turnus somewhere else go seek him vvives, But vvhen thy fate-given vvalls and building thrives, We all shall be most glad Troyes stones to beare Upon our shoulders, that great work to reare. He ceast; and what he said, all hum'd assent. Then for full twelve dayes they a truce indent, And peace a space to hold. Then up and down Trojans and Latines stray about the town, And vvoods and fields, vvithout controll or strife. And now to fell ash-trees strokes sound most rife; Cloud-kissing pines and good old oaks to cleave, To chop down cedars, which sweet sents do leave: And having fell'd them, never cease, till they In carts have carried them thence all away. And now fame, hastie sorrows harbinger, Sad tidings told to old king Euander, And fill'd Euanders court and countrey round With crosse bad news, to that vvhich late did sound, That Pallas conquerour was in Italie, Th' Arcadians (as old custome was) do flie Unto their gates, vvith buriall-burning light, Tall torches, vvhich in long ranks shone most bright▪ Whose shine dark fields abroad distinguisht plain. And thus they meeting with the Trojan train, Unite their mourning troops: which instantly The maids and matrons spying, they drew nigh, And through the citie sad raise piteous cries. But for Euander, nothing could suffice To hold him back, but to the midst he makes:
His Pallas-bearing beere quick down he takes, And falling, fastning on it, weeps and vvails, And scarce his voice, (vvhich him vvith grief yet fails) At last he thus unlocks, thus vveeping spake; O my deare Pallas, ah, didst thou not make This promise to thy parent, that vvith heed And warienesse thou wouldst to warre proceed? Alas, I know my self, how farre new fame, And honyed honour (therefore I too blame) I'th' first assault would spurre young spirits free. Ah, most unhappie youths first-fruits in thee, Most rigid rudiments of too soon vvarre, For vvhom my votes and vows all frustrate are! And thou, most sacred spouse, in death now blest, Not kept to be by this great grief distrest: But I, contrariwise, by life too long, My fates do vanquish, but my self do wrong; The father living, and the sonne thus dead, The Rutuls should me first have slaughtered, Following the Trojan troops: my bloud should I Have sacrific'd, then this solemnity Had been for me, not for my Pallas deare. But neither blame I you, brave Trojans here, Nor yet the league vvhich I with you did make, Then ratifi'd, vvhen as vve hands did shake; This grief (I see) to my gray haires vvas lotted: But since the fates untimely death had plotted Against my sonne, some comfort it had been, If Volscian thousands first he slain had seen, And Trojans by him led victoriously, Ere he had died, into Italie. And now poore Pallas, I can give to thee
No better buriall-rites, then here I see Done by Aeneas kinde and Phrygians brave, By Tuscane Peeres and troops; thus to thy grave Who bring rich spoiles, which thou from slain didst win: And thou i'th' fight a mightie trunck hadst bin, If so his yeares (proud Turnus) unto thine Had equall been: but why do I confine You noble Trojans, and from fight detain? Go with this message to your king again: Tell him, whereas I live, my Pallas dead, 'Tis by his hand to be re-comforted, In making Turnus pay the debt he owes, Both to the fathers and the sonnes great woes. This honour fates (I hope) reserve for thee, That by thy worth I may revenged be. I seek not sweets of life, nor fit I should, But that the death of Turnus may be told By me to my dead sonne. In this mean space Aurora rare shew'd forth her shining face To night-tyr'd wretches, day-toiles to renew. And now Aeneas grave and Tarchon drew Neare to the shore; when fires they build apace, On which slain souldiers carcases they place, (As custome was) kindling black fuming fire, Whose smoak hid heaven, as it did up aspire. And thrice in arms they ran about the flames, And thrice they rode about with loud exclaims, And trickling teares on arms and earth they spill, And wth loud sounds of Martiall musick shrill. Some spoiles from Latines slain obtain'd, do throw Into the fires▪ helmets, brave blades also, Bridles, and chariot-wheels warm with quick turning:
And some cast in their gallant gifts, thus burning Their shields most strong, weapons too weak to save: And many oxen fat to slaughter gave: And briefly, boares and sheep, about the plain; And threw them into th' fire, the first being slain: And thus about the shore they see the stares Of those their slaughtered souldiers burning mates; Whose half-burnt urns and ashes they retain: Nor hardly could be thence reduc'd again, Till night came on, and twinckling starres appeare. On th' other-side, with like lamenting cheere, The wofull Latines many heaps do frame, And many corps they partly burn i'th' flame, And partly burie in the fields about: And some they to next fields do carry out Unto towns adjacent: the rest, collected Into huge heaps, and of them lesse respected, As numberlesse, so honourlesse were burn'd, Promiscuously thus into ashes turn'd. Then all the fields with crackling flames did shine. And now the third dayes light did cleare decline, And utterly expell nights darknesse chill: And sadly they their urns and pots do fill With ashes of their bodies burned so, Ta'ne from the bones, on which hot dust they throw, And now in rich king Latines town throughout, Farre greatest grief, most moan, was heard about. Here woefull wives, daughters in law most sad, Here sisters sweet do beat their breasts, too bad; And children fatherlesse do execrate The day of that fierce warre unfortunate, And Turnus troublous match, wishing withall,
That he alone which would be principall And sole commander of all Italie, Should solely with his sword the battell trie. Old testie Drances these things aggravates, And testifies 'gainst him alone, to's mates, And counsells and encourages (as right) That Turnus onely should be call'd to fight. Much altercation was both con and pro, But yet the queens great presence crost it so, And so protected Turnus Martiall fame, That to her bent she made their mindes to frame. In midst of these commotions, tumults great, Behold, th' embassadours sent (late) to treat With Diomedes, sadly bring back news, That, notwithstanding all means they could use, All cost and pains, they nothing could effect With gold or gifts, but us'd with disrespect, No prayes prevail'd▪ Latines must look elsewhere For Martiall help, or else they all did feare, With Troyes great prince they must a peace request. Hereat king Latines heart great grief exprest. The Gods great wrath, and graves fresh 'fore their eyes, Made them conclude, Aeneas enterprise Fatall to be, and with heavens cleare consent; Therefore in haste they call a parliament. Straight all the empires Peeres are call'd to court, And thither with huge confluence resort: The aged king Latinus, with sad look, In honour chief, chief place amongst them took. And now he bade th' embassadours, comne late From faire Aetolia's town, to promulgate What news they brought, all plainly to explain:
And all, to heare them, silent do remain. Venulus then with due observance spake; Grave patriots, we a perfect view did take Of Diomedes and his Grecian plains, And safe have past all our great journeys pains: We kist that hand which Troy did ruinate, And saw his citie, Argiripa's state, So nam'd from native soile, which, victour, he In Gargan-Iapyx plains would built should be. We being entred, having audience faire, Present our gifts, our nation, name, declare; Who on us warr'd; what us to Argos drave. These things thus heard, he, with a count'nance grave And sweet, reply'd; O nation fortunate, Once Saturns throne, ancient Ausonians state: What froward fate your peacefull mindes molests? And you with unknown warres so much infests? All we, who-e're, that Troyes faire fields did spoile, (I speak not of those woes which Martiall toile Under her walls didwrack, but those rare spirits In Simois slain) we all have our due merits, Now soundly smart for those impieties, Such as even Priam sure would sympathize: Witnesse Minerva's most tempestuous starre, Euböian rocks, which did against us warre, Caphares conquering banks. That warfare fierce Did us to diverse seas and shores disperse. For Menelaus, Atreus sonne most stout, To Proteus pillars hurried was about; Vlysses saw the Aetnean Cyclops fierce. Why should I Neoptolems realms rehearse? Idomeneus towns, and Gods destroy'd?
And Libyck Locrians woefully annoy'd? Yea Agamemnon, Greeks great Generall, Had by his wicked wife his fatall fall, As soon as e're come home; and Asia ta'ne, Adulterous Aegisthus in's throne did reigne. Yea and even me the Gods did plainly hate, As my returning home did intimate; When I had hope my loving wife to see, And Calidonia from all mischief free: Now with prodigious visions I am vext, And my deare mates (vvhich hath my heart perplext, To see their vvoefull state) are flown away, And vvith birds vvings, as birds about do stray In vvoods and flouds, filling the rocks vvith cries, And I e're since feare such like miseries: For frantick I have vvounded vvith my blade Celestiall bodies, and a vvound have made In Venus hand. Move me not then, I pray, To more such fights, vvhich me thus mischief may; Nor vvith the Trojans; since Troyes fall in fight I never vvill attempt, nor take delight To think upon their ancient miserie. As for the gifts which ye have brought to me, Let them to prince Aenes carried be; For vve have fought and bickered hand to hand. And (trust me who have try'd) most stout he'le stand Upon his shield, and fiercely whirling darts. If Ida had bred two more such stout hearts, Dardan through Graecia clearely pierced had, And vve in woe bewail'd our fates as bad. For vvhatsoever stout procrastination Was in Troyes furious warres continuation,
'Twas Hectors and Aeneas Martiall hand, That ten yeares made our conquest anxious stand. Both stout of heart, both were in arms most strong: But unto this did worthily belong Prime praise for's pietie: as for you then, By all means make ye peace with these great men: But if ye will to arms, stand on your guard. And thus, most mightie prince, thou hast both heard The answer and advises to thee sent, Touching this mightie warres most dire event. Scarce had th' embassadours thus made an end, But that their muttering mouths forth forthwith send Vast various humming noise confusedly; Like stones which 'gainst a rivers current lie, The bubling streams 'gainst them rough ratlings make, And neighbouring banks of'ts dashing din partake. But soon as e're their mouthes and mindes were still, The king, first having pray'd, thus vents his will From his rich throne; At first (as 'twas most fit, And I, great Latines, most desired it) I would have settled these affaires of state; And not a councel now necessitate, When foes besiege our walls. Beleeve me, sirs, We have begun represselesse, helplesse stirres. Against God-guarded, war-like men we fight, In battells undefatigable quite, Whose hearts, though vanquisht, cannot banisht be From sword and shield. If hope of help ye see In stout Aetolians troops, entreated late, Let who s' will trust that hope; for 'tis most strait, And small, or none at all, as 'tis too plain. For other things, ye see how they remain
In tottering state, 'tis open in your eyes: And fast and loose in your own hands it lies. I tax not any, all have done their best, What might be, hath been valiantly exprest. But give me leave, and I will briefly show, What thwarting thoughts within my heart do flow. There is an ancient land which large doth lie Toward the West, to our faire Tyber nigh, And on Sicilia's boarders butting out; Which the Aruncians and Rutulians stout Do plow and sow, and though much out of heart, Yet into pastures they do it convert: All this large land, and piny mountains high Let us give to the Trojans instantly, And peace compound, and faire conditions make, And them our friends and fellows to us take. And let them (if themselves do like it well) Amongst us build, amongst us friendly dwell. But if they minde to seek some other land, And that they will relinquish this our strand; Let's furnish them with twentie ships most tall, Of strong Italian oak: or if they shall Have need of more; then more we may them spare, For all materialls by the river are Already ready: let themselves also Their vessels number, and their fashions show: But workmanship, and brasse, and tacklings strong, We will them give, and that to ships belong. Besides, I think it fit what we should send An hundred legates, these affaires to tend; And those also of noblest birth and bloud, To shew our mindes, and make conditions good:
And olive-boughs of peace to hold in hand, And precious presents of our wealthie land, And talents of good gold and ivorie, A chaire of state, and robe of majestie, Rites of our realm. Then let me heare, I pray, Your counsel, our declining state to stay. Then forenam'd wrathfull Drances, whom deep spight And oblique envie at great Turnus hight Did vex with bitter bites, most rich in state, Richer in words; but warres to animate Most cold and cowardly; yet held to be For solid counsel, in a prime degree; A seedsman of dissension (puft with pride Of his nobilitie by th'mothers side, His fathers stock unknown) he up does rise, Thus poures out words, and puts in enmities; Good king, thou counsellest things throughly known, Such as will want best suffrages of none: Such as even all do know they feel and finde, But what they wish, they winde up close in minde. Let him then give me libertie to speak, Let him lay by his pride, whose dealings weak, If not most wicked, and unhappie deeds (For though he death and danger threat, I needs Must speak my minde) so many peeres have slain, And all our citie made in teares complain: And whiles that he assayes, scarcely assails The Trojan trenches, and us therein fails, Trusting his heels, thrusting all else in arms, Even frighting heaven and earth with fierce alarms. Let one thing more be added, I thee pray, To all those gifts which thou to send didst say,
Adde this one more, great king; Let not the heat Of any's rage make thee from this retreat; But give thy daughter (to conclude all strife) To such a sonne, most worthy such a wife, Thus mayst thou tie this peace with endlesse bands. But if thy heart on feare and trembling stands, We'le him intreat, and for this to him sue, To yeeld our king his right, our state its due. And why shouldst thou so oftentimes expose Our wretched natives to such certain woes? Thou head and heart of Latiums miserie, Even thou, O Turnus! no securitie Can be in battells: therefore peace we crave, Therefore we all firm pledge of peace would have. I first, whom thou indeed dot think thy foe, (And much I care not, if I sure be so) I humbly pray thee pitie our poore plight, Doffe thy high thoughts, be gone, since put to flight. For we have seen too many bodies slain, Too many, and too great lands spoil'd and ta'ne. But, if thee fame so spurre, strength so incite▪ If in the princesse thou so much delight, Venture thy self to combate with thy foe, That Turnus may a queen for's wife, get so. We pessants unbewail'd, unburied train, About the fields will silently remain. Thou then, if any Martiall spirit thou have, Shew it 'gainst him, who now does thee out-brave. This speech young Trnus rage exasperats: He sighs, and then these words evaporate; Drances, thou ever drayn'st out flouds of words Even then when there's farre greater need of swords:
Thou wilt be foremost at a parliament; But talk is not for court convenient, Which (thou being safe) with full mouth from thee flies, While there's a wall 'twixt thee and th' enemies, And whiles with bloud dikes do not overflow▪ Thunder (as 'tis thy wont) with babling so, And taunt and tax me then of cowardize, When Drances also hath heapt in a trice So many Trojan bodies, by him slain, And bravely can the field about maintain, Triumphant with rich trophies. Then thou mayst Thy vigorous valour trie, if ought thou hast: Nor needst thou look farre off to finde thy foes, They stand about us, and our walls enclose. Let's out against them, why dost thou delay? What, wilt thou still Mars in thy mouth display? Or in those heels of thine flying like winde? Did I e're flie? O thou of most base minde! Can any truely tax me so, whose blade With Trojan bloud Tyber o'rflow hath made; Who ruined have Euanders stock and state, And strongly did th'Arcadians denudate Of all their arms? Bitias and Pandarus, Though e're so strong, (I think) ne're found it thus; And all those mulitudes whom in one day (Clos'd in their town, and hedg'd in every way) I to black Tartar sent victoriously. In war-fare (sure) there is no safetie. But, frantick fool▪ go sing thy slanderous song To Troyes Aeneas, it does best belong To him and thy base state: Proceed then still All things with thy most impious feares to fill:
Extoll the strength of a twice vanquisht nation, And make on th'other side, vile valuation Of Latines powers. And now it must be said, That Greeks great peeres of Trojans are afraid. And Diomedes and Achilles stout, And that Aufidus fierce turns back in doubt, Into the Adriatick sea to fall. This arts-master of lies and envious gall, Feignes himself fearfull, all because of me, My fault must by his feare imbittered be. But (feare not, fool) such base bloud ne're shall stain This hand of mine; safe to thy self remain. But now to thee (great fire) and thine affaires, I glad return. If in our coasts and cares And future force all hope be past and spent, If so forlorn for one poore hard event, If one repulse hath us quite ruinated, And fortune never can be restaurated: Let's then pray peace in submisse trembling feare; Though O, I wish there yet some reliques were Of wonted valour! O, 'bove all the rest I him admire, most fortunate and blest, For all his toiles, for his renowned might, In that he liv'd not of these woes t'have fight; He bravely stoopt to death, fear'd not his wound, But dying, conquer'd, when he bit the ground. But if we have both wealth and worth, and hearts Unstain'd with cowardize to flie from darts: If Latiums towns and people can bring aid; If Trojans pride hath been with much bloud paid, And that their slain, and warre-tempestuous showers Have (if not more) been equall full with ours:
Why faint we at the first? i'th' doore fall dead? Why for th' alarm, seem we thus basely fled? Much toile and times various vicissitude, Mans mutable estate do oft conclude In sweet content; Fortune re-smiles on them Whom she before threw from a diadem. Will neither Greeks nor Arpians us aid? But yet Messapus will, he's not afraid: Nor fortunate Tolumnius, that brave king, Nor all those lords which mightie troops do bring: Nor is't a petty praise to have choice bands From Italie and stout Laurentums lands. Then from the nation of the Volscians brave, The princesse rare, Camilla faire, we have, Leading her troops of horse in armour bright: But if with me alone Trojans would fight, If this will please, if I alone withstand The publicke good, I ne're yet found this hand So void of victorie, that I should e're For so great hope the greatest task forbeare. I full of courage, will my foe go finde; And though he had Achilles mightie minde, And had such arms as he, by Vulcan drest, Yet I, even Turnus, equall to my best Of ancestours, am here most ready prest, This life and soule of mine to consecrate To you my father in law, great Latines state. 'Tis me (you say) Aeneas does defie: I wish it so, and pray it may be I. Yet, whether I survive or end my life By heavens displeasure or my Martiall strife, I this could wish, that Drances neither may
Insult or boast i'th' gain or losse o'th' day. Whiles they these things contending agitate, Aeneas tents and troops do proprate: And now behold, a poste comes rushing in, Filling the court vvith most tumultuous din, Frighting the citie vvith amazement great, And eagerly this news doth oft repeat, That Trojans were by Tybers stream array'd, And Tuscane troops o're all those plains display'd. The peoples hearts were dampt and much perplext, And vvith deep wrath and rage provokt and vext, Arms tremblingly they crie, arms sparks do crave; Much mourning, muttering is 'mongst old men grave▪ And hereupon doth clamourous noise arise, With various votes in most contentious vvise. Much like when i a wood a mightie flight Of chattering birds on boughs and branches light; Or cackling swans by fishy Paths lake, Whose notes the banks about loud echoing make. Then Turnus taking th' opportunity, Cries out, Well done, my friends, well done say I, Sit ye in councel, praise peace on your seat, Whiles foes your kingdome foile and ruine threat. Without more words, forth from them all he flings, And swiftly leaves them treating on those things. And forthwith bids Volusus arm his bands Of Volscians brave; and instantly commands, And orders stout Messapus to lead forth His fierce Rutulian horsemen of brave worth: With him his brother Coras to bring on, And to the field forthwith for to be gone. Some he bids block the wayes, some guard the towers,
The rest, as I think best, shall strength my powers. Straight through the citie to the walls they scud. Then from the councel, king Latinus good, And great negotiations, doth arise, Deferring them in discontented wise; Taxing himself, that voluntarily He took not into his affinity, As his deare sonne in law, the prince of Troy. Some busily their best aid do employ About the walls and gates, deep dikes to cast, With stones and blocks the gates to dam up fast. The Martiall trump now gives the bloudy sound, And wives and children 'bout the walls stood round, All at a pinch to help the work are bound. Then to great Pallas towre and temple rare, The queen was born with troops of ladies faire, With sacrificing gifts: and in great state Virgin Lavinia did her sociate, (Cause of these ills) her comely eyes down cast: After, whom orderly the ladies past, The temple they perfume with frankincense, Thus praying sadly, at ingredience; Tritonian maid, arms potent patronesse, Do thou this Phrygian filchers power suppresse With thy strong arm, and cast him to the ground▪ And from our gates do thou his force confound. And now fierce Turnus fits him to the fight, His rough Rutulian arms with buckles bright Fastned about him, vvith gold buskins clad, Not yet upon his head his helm he had; But at his side, his sword. Thus gorgeously In glistering gold he from the towre doth flie▪
His heart with hope of hap his foe outstrips, As when a pampered courser nimbly skips, Broke out o'th' stable, now at libertie, Fiercely does to faire fields and meadows flie; And frisks about, and leaps amongst the mares, And in his wonted waters washt, he stares, And snorts and snuffs, and shakes his rough-haire main▪ Which bolt-upright starts up, and falls again In wanton wise, about his neck and breast. Whom thus to meet, Camilla her addrest, Leading along her troops of Volscians stout, The queen alighted at the gates without: Whom all her troops do forthwith imitate, Leaving their horses, were dismounted straight. And thus she first began; O Turnus brave, If for true valour, one may duely have Hope of good hap, I dare adventure now, And Trojan troops I first t' affront do vow▪ Yea I alone dare deal with Tuscane bands. Let warres first fortune fall upon my hand▪ Whiles thou on foot stay'st here, the gatesto guar. To whom thus Turnus with all due regard, (His eyes fast fixt on this admired maid) Replies; Faire virgin, who hast full displayd Thy self the glorie of all Italie! What can I say, or do, to gratifie So great desert? But now (since all I may Comes short of thy brave heart) let's part the prey. Aeneas now (since fame and scouts forth sent, Had made the truth of things most evident) A troop of light-horse fiercely first sent out, His foe t' outbrave, and scoure the fields about.
Himself ascends a craggie steepie hill, Through uncouth combring way, with Martiall skill, And bends to th' citie. I'le (sayes he) here lay An ambush strong close in this woods crosse way, And so block up both passages most strong, With armed troops: do thou then lead along Against the Tuscane horse, thy bands combin'de, And fierce Messapus unto thee conjoyn'd, Together with our Latine companies, And strong Tyburtus troops, our brave allies; And of a stout commander take the charge. And like encouragements he did enlarge Unto Messapus, him to th' warre t' incite, And all his captains; and proceeds to th' fight. Between two hills a crooked valley lies, Fit for defeat and Martiall policies, On both sides with thick shady boughs beset, Passage through which 'twas difficult to get, By narrow entrance, and dark rigid wayes, VVhose mountain-top on high, abroad displayes An unknown plain, which safe holds for retreat, For left or right hands shifting the warres seat, Either to skirmish stiffely on the top, Or from on high great stones on pates to pop. To this vantageous place, by wayes well known, Doth Turnus haste, to get possession Of the said seat, and settles secretly VVithin those woods, his foes to damnifie. Meanwhile Diana nimble Ops doth call, One of her mated maids celestiall, And of the modest crew; and sadly said To this faire nymph her most officious maid;
Faire Ops, Camilla, whom I much affect, Goes to this furious warre vainly bedeckt With our acoutrements: nor is this love Which your Diana's heart thus neare doth move, A new affection, or an up-start sweet. For when as Metabus, by undiscreet And impious envie, and insulting might, Was from Privernus forc'd to take his flight, Scaping through thickest of his fiercest foes, With his poore exil'd infant thence he goes, And her Camilla, from Casmilla's name, Her mother, nam'd; a little chang'd the same. He in his arms his daughter with him bare Through long unwonted woods, with carking care: At whom thick storms of arrows fiercely flew, And troops of Volscian souldiers neare him drew. In whose fierce flight, behold, Amasenus, Swiftly o'reswells his banks most copious, So mightie showres of rain gusht down before, That he prepared swiftly to swimme o're: But tender love unto his infant tender, And feare of this deare burthen, did him hinder. As he a thousand thoughts in minde did cast, VVith much adoe, he thus resolv'd at last; A mightie speare of oak in his strong fist By chance he caught, strengthned with knotty twist, And scorcht about; wherein the childe he layd, And it with bark and cork closely up made: And her conveniently to th' staffe thus ties, And with strong hand it grasping, thus to th' skies He vents his votes; Diana, virgin faire, Goddesse of woods, I this my childe, my care,
Do here thy servant to thee dedicate, Who in her hands thy speare doth elevate; And by me humbly prayes (flying her foe) That as thine own, thou wouldst receive her so, Who now is left unto uncertain fate. This said, his arms laid ope, he casteth straight The twisted speare into the streams, and they Making a dashing-sound, swift floats away Unfortunate Camilla. But her father Metabus, seeing foes him nearer gather In mightie heaps, commits himself to th' waves, And so by swimming, both himself he saves, And (victour in his votes) the childe; and speare, Diana's gift, from a grasse-turffe doth teare. No harbourous house he had, nor town wall'd in, (Nor would have had though they had profered bin) But liv'd a shepherds life i'th' woods alone, And here in groves and beasts dark-dens unknown His daughter he nurs'd up with a mares dugge, VVho with her lips milk from the teats did tugge: And when the babe began to go and stand, He her enur'd to hold a speare in hand, To beare a bow and quiver at her back: And for a cawle of gold, (which she did lack) And a long lovely robe, she wore behinde A tigers skin, loose dangling in the winde: And prettie childish darts she us'd to fling, And 'bout her head would nimbly whisk her sling; VVherewith sometime a fat Strymonian crane, Sometime a milk-white swan were smote and slair. Great Tuscane dames, as she their towns past by, VVisht her their daughter in law, but frustrately,
Her sole delight being in Diana's grace, In pure virginitie to end her race: O that she had not warre so much affected, Nor to provoke the Trojans been addicted! Then had she liv'd one of my damsells deare, But now, since she her bitter fates must beare, Faire nymph descend, view Latines land throughout, Where with unhappie hap the field is fought. Take these with thee, and from this quiver pull A dart vindicative of vengeance full; Which, whosoe're her sacred bodie harms, Trojan, Italian, fatally it charms, And gives me full revenge. Afterwards I Will in a hollow cloud immediately Take up her woefull corps, arms free from spoile, And her interre in her own native soile. This said, she fluttering flies down through the aire, A black thick stormie cloud her body bare. But now meanwhile Troyes troops the walls drew nigh, Etrurian-leaders bands of horsemen hie, In well-compos'd arrayes: the steeds most stout Curvet, and fret, and range the field about, Churlishly champing (still) the curbing reins, And here and there prancing about the plains: Steel-glistring speares the very fields affright, And all the camp seems fir'd with armour bright. Messapus also, on the other side, And lusty Latines shine in Martiall pride: Coras and's brother and Camilla's wing, Their adverse armies brave to field do bring; And in their right hands they their speares do shake▪ And in their rests, their lances charges make.
And now both horse and men with fervour fret To meet: and both sides now together set In distance of a darts cast, both stand still, And suddenly burst out in clamours shrill, And cheere their snorting steeds, and thick darts throw From both sides, all parts like huge drifts of snow, Which darkly dimme the aire. Then instantly Tyrrhenus and Aconteus furiously With piercing speares begin a combate strong, VVhose first affront, with overthrowing throng, Made mightie noise: the horses breast to breast Batter'd each other as they forward prest: And down Aconteus fell unto the ground, Much li a thunder-bolt with clattering sound. Or like  pondrous stone from engine thrown, Headlong he fell, and falling gave last groan. The ranks are straight disrank'd, the Latines flie, Turn back their bucklers and horse-heads, and hie Unto the citie. Trojans drive them on, Asylas makes prime prosecution, And execution on the enemie, And chas'd the Latines to the citie nigh; There suddenly with clamours loud and great Rein back their horses, back their foes they beat. The Trojans▪ straight, re-rein their horse and flie. Like as i'th' sea, when subalternately Now on each other, billows backward rush Fast to the shore, and with foam-waves do brus And overtop rough rocks and bounding sands; And now again with furious countermands And boyling foam re-sups roll'd-pebbles small, Ebbing and flowing, to and fro does fall:
Thus Tuscanes twice to th' walls do Rutuls force; And twice beat back, their backs hid, foes they course. But after third encounters skirmishing, The whole battalions furiously begin Promiscuously to fight it out pel-mell, And closely to it, man to man, they fell. Then groans of dying men drencht deep in gore, Corslets and corps of souldiers more and more Tumbling down dead, mingled with half-dead horse, Wallowing in bloud, loud screeks and cries do force: The fight grows fierce. Thus then Orsilochus (Fearing to set upon fierce Remulus) Darted a speare at's horse, which stuck in's care, VVhereat the furious beast could not forbeare, But stamps and stares, impatient of his wound, And ne're left kicking, mounting, till to th' ground His rider he did headlong tumble down. Catillus then slew, to his high renown, Iöla fierce, and bold Herminius, In corps and courage most magnanimous, VVho with his yellow locks bare-headed fought, Bare-neck'd, not fearing wounds or weapons stout, So great he was in warre; yet through his neck A piercing speare did his bare-boldnese check: VVhich in his mightie shoulders stuck most fast, And into deadly pangs this warriour cast. Black flouds of bloud on both sides flow amain; By steel they die, by death they fame obtain. But through the thickest of these slaughters fierce The manly Amazian dame doth pierce, Rare quiver-bearing faire Camilla stout, VVho with one breast cut off, most fiercely fought.
Sometimes she grasps her darts or whistling speares, Sometime her untyr'd hand a battle-ax beares. Still 'bout her neck her golden bow hangs fast, Diana's arms. And if by chance at last She forced be to flie, pursu'd in chace, Her bow turn'd back, she shoots in followers face. And still about her her choice virgins fight, Larina, Tulla, and Tarpëia bright, Her brazen bill brandishing valiantly, Faire Latium lasses, whom especially Camilla rare chose both for guard and grace, Affaires of peace or warre t'appoint a place. Like th' Amazonian dames of Thracia land, When warring 'bout Thermodoon flouds they stand In rich wrought arms: or 'bout Hippolyta, Or in her coach war-like Penthesil'a. Shewing herself victour with voices shrill, And feminine out-cries, the skies that fill, And stately strutting with their half-moon shields. O whom (fierce ladie) didst thou slay i'th' fields, Both first and last? How many bodies slain And gasping soules did at thy feet remain? Eumenius, Clytius sonne, she first did slay, Whose naked breast ope to her anger lay: Which with her speare she pierc'd, who flouds of gore Straight vomiting, with teeth the ground he tore, And dy'd in his own bloud. On whom she slew Liris and Pegasus; the one who drew His reins too strait, curbing his floundring horse; Th'other, too weakly aiding, she did force To follow him, and headlong both do rush: Next with a speare, farre-off, she fierce doth push
At Hippodates sonne, Amaster strong: Tereus and Harpalycus ere long, Stout Demoph'on and Chromis, all she slew. And look how many shafts this ladie threw, So many Trojans dy'd. Ornitus stout, In arms most strange, did flie the fields about, On an Apulian beast, in hunters pride, Whose shoulders broad an oxes hyde did hide, And for an helm on's head a fierce wolfs head, With grinning jaws, white teeth discovered: He in his hand a clownish club did weld, In thickest troops 'bove all the rest beheld. Him she assailed (nor was this brave fact Effected when the troops retired back) Assaulting, slew: and wrathfully thus said; Proud Tuscane, didst thou (false) thy self perswade, That thou wast hunting wilde-beasts in a wood? This day shall teach thee thou hast understood Erroniously, and that, by female force: Yet tell thy fathers ghost, 'tis no mean course, No common death, thus by Camilla's lance To die. This said, forthwith she did advance Both at Orsilachus and Butes bold, Two Trojans huge of body to behold: But fiercely she at Btes her speare strake, Which 'twixt his helm and corslet way did make, Glistring about his neck: his target strong By his left side hung danglingly along: Orsilochus she subt'ly seems to flie On th'inner-side, circling, with policie, Her foolified foe; who thus again Her close pursues, that chases him amain.
Then raising up her self, with battle-ax great Together armour, flesh, and all she beat: And on him praying, prating, double blows Nimbly redoubles, till at head and nose Warm brains gush out, and all-besmeare his face. Then unawares arrived in this place, And at first sudden sight somewhat afraid, The war-like sonne of Aunus, who long made Abode in Apenine▪ none of the worst Of Ligures lying race, whiles fates (from first) Permitted him to cheat: who when he saw, He by no slight nor flight could now withdraw From a sharp fight, nor turn th'affronting dame; He thought how he by craft some trick might frame; And thus begins; What so renown'd a fact Is it, if thou, a woman, having backt So brave a beast, dost boast and trust him so? Leave thy swift horse, alight to me below, And hand to hand let's bicker on the ground, And fight on foot; then shall it soon be found, How fond thy flash of praise is, who'le best merit. He ceas'd. But she with hot enraged spirit, Enflam'd with deep disdain, her horse forsakes, Commits him to her mate, her self betakes To equall arms on ground, her sword in hand And nimble shield, thus stoutly she doth stand. But now the lying lad, thinking his cheat Succeeded right, flies thence in frightfull heat; He makes no stay, but turns his reins with speed, Sets spurres to's nimble nagge, hopes (thus) he's freed. Whereat sayes she, Vain Ligur, 'tis in vain, That thou thy pride of heart would'st thus maintain:
In vain's (I say) thy countrey cousenage base; Nor shall thy fraud thee shufle in safe case, To thy fallacious father Annus vile. Thus spake the ladie, who in this meanwhile With light-heel'd flashy haste the horse o'retook, Layes hold on's bridle, at him fiercely strook: And thus in's bloud reveng'd his knavish wrong. Much like great Mars his bird, the faulcon strong, Flown from a loftie rock, having in chace A swift aire-piercing dove in quivering case: Which caught, he keeps, and does with's tallons teare, Forcing both bloud and feathers flie i'th'aire. But Iove, great founder both of Gods and men, With watchfull eye looks from olympus then; And Tuscane Tarchon to this fight invites, And with sharp spurres of rage him soon incites. Then into th'midst o'th' fight and failing bands Tarchon doth rush, and stout on horse-back stands, With various votes encouraging his wings, And every one by name about he brings, Re-cheering those that fled to th'fight to fall. And thus he sayes; What feare surrounds you all, O still dull Tyrrhons, ne're to be lamented? What so great sloth hath you so circumvented? What, shall a woman force you to pale face? Shall she you up and down so hunt and chase? Why beare ye blades? why weare ye weapons vain? Ye stand not thus, fond couresie to strain: Nor dreaming thus at Venus wanton sport, At nightly warres: or when with thick resort Bacchus his bag-pipe calls in companies: Or when with beere and cheere ye grmandize!
O here's your love, here your delight most lies, Whiles in high groves your priest glad tidings sings, And to your sacrifice fat offrings brings. This said, his horse into the midst he spurres, Himself much vext in heart, fate first him stirres To set on Venulus most furiously: Whom from his horse he pulls down instantly, And with main force squeez'd him on his own breast. Then mightie clamours were to heaven exprest, And on him all the Latines cast their eyes: Thus lightning flashing Tarchon forward flies, Bearing down men and arms: and as he past, The iron of his speare brake off at last. Yet still death-wounds to give all parts he pries: And fighting, he himself doth shield likewise From bloudie blades, and force by force defies: And as the lustie eagle loftie flies, And in his claws a snatcht up dragon holds, Which fast in's feet he with sharp tallons folds; But yet the pinching serpent wrigling wreathes, His folding limbes and scales with hideous breathes, And poys'nous hissings, strugling sturdilie: Yet ne're the lesse, the eagle eagerlie Him pulls and pinches with his beak most strong, And through the aire forcibly flies along: Even so great Tarchon from Tyburtum bands Triumphantly beares the prey in his hands. The Lydians likewise gladly imitate Their brave commanders pattern and good fate. Then Aruns, full of craft and subtiltie, Subject himself to fatall destinie, Rides round about Camilla with his lance,
His fortunes fitliest lab'ring to advance. And wheresoe're in thickest troops she stood, Thither doth Aruns slylie prying scud: Where she from foes retreats a conqueresse stout, Thither by stealth quick runs he, wreathes about: And this way, that way, every way doth trance, And round he runs, and shakes his death-sure lance. By chance Choreus, once a priest divine, In Phrygian arms 'bove all the rest did shine, Prancing his foaming horse, adorned faire With rich caparisons, brasse scales most rare, Garnisht with gold, himself most richly clad In fine outlandish scarlet, purple sad. His Cretian shafts he shot in Lycian bow, His bow all gilt, his shoulders hung below. A priests gilt helm, rich yellow coat he wore, Whose dangling flaps gold buttons ty'de before, A rare embroidered jacket, robe to's thighs. The ladie him no sooner thus espies, But (either that she might her temple grace, And Trojan armour hang in speciall place; Or cloath her self in captive cloaths of gold) This hot-spurr'd huntresse greedily blindfold Through all the fight follows him eagerly; And fir'd with feminine aviditie And longing lust of that rich spoile and prey Aruns, who long in watchfull ambush lay, At last layes hold of fit time offered, And casts his dart, and these votes uttered; Great Iove, and thou Soracte's grave Apollo, Whom chiefly we with sacrifices follow, To whom a pile of oylie pines still flame,
And we, assisted by thy sacred name, Through midst of flames can walk and passe most free, Yea even bare-footed, yet unhurt are we: O grant, great Iove, my weapon may wipe out Our foule disgrace, too long thus born about. No trophies from the damsell I desire, No prey nor spoiles in conquest I require, By other facts I will advance my fame: So I may but subdue this pest'lent shame, I passe not, though I passe ingloriously Unto my home, and honourlesse there die. Apollo partly his request respects, Partly as airie stuffe he it rejects: He grants Camilla by dire death shall die, But his return safe home he does denie: And these his words like windes he made to flie. Wherefore as soon as e're the whisling lance Flung from his hand, did through the aire advance, The eyes and thoughts of all the hoast throughout, Towards the Volscian queen were cast about. But she, nor aire, nor sound, nor singing dart, Heard or regarded, till it pierc'd her heart: Untill the speare on her sear'd breast fast lights, And drunk with damsells bloud her heart it smites. Her maiden-mates made all about her straight, To stay their falling queen, in dying state. But Aruns chiefly makes away with speed, In whom much feare mixt with much joy doth breed: Nor longer durst he linger, more to trie The damsells dart and speare, but fast doth flie. And like a wolf, who ere the adverse darts
Do him assault, fearfully flies and starts, And hides himself in uncouth mountains high, (Some shepherd by him slain most ravenously, r some brave bullock) conscious of the deed, Does with the tail between his legs proceed, And haste into the woods with feare and fright: So Aruns full of feare gets out of sight, Well pleas'd with flight, him in the armie hides. The dying queen the speare, which in her 'bides, Strives to pluck out; but in her bones and breast The steely weapon fast did stick and rest; She wanting bloud, sinks down, her dying eyes Shut down their lids: her red, which beautifies Late cherry cheeks, is lost. With dying voice To Acca, one of her chief maids of choice, (Whom 'fore the rest for her fidelity Camilla us'd in deep anxiety, With her her sorrows to communicate) Thus she her minde doth dying demonstrate; Hitherto, sister Acca, I was able; But now my mortall wound doth me disable. All things (me thinks) 'bout me seem dark and dim▪ Haste hence to Turnus, and relate to him My last advise; wish him in any case To come to th' fight, Trojans from's town to chase: And now farewell. And with those words her rein Fell from her hand, and with her wounds great pain She fiercely falls to ground; then by degrees, Her corps all naturall heat doth softly leese, And so growes cold, and then her limber neck Lets loose her helplesse head, to bow and beck:
And from her hands her weapons letting fall, With a great groan, her strugling soule withall Flies to the seat of soules. Then instantly A wondrous clamour clambers up to th' skie. Camilla thus cast down, more bloudy growes The furious fight, and thick the confluence flowes, Of Trojan and of Tuscane captains stout, And of Euanders brave Arcadian rout. Meanwhile, faire Ops, Diana's maid, sate high, Mounted upon a mount, undauntedly, To view the fight. As she among the sparks, Furiously fighting sees farre off and marks Camilla most unworthily thus slain, A hearty sigh these words pump out amain; Too deare (alas faire ladie!) ah, too deare Thou now hast paid, by cruell death laid here, By warre thus labouring Trojans to provoke. In vain thou wor'st in woods Diana's yoke, In vain thou didst our shafts and quiver weare; Yet no disgrace (faire queen) there shall appeare In this thy death; nor shall it without praise Passe through the world: Fame thee reveng'd shall blaze: For whosoe're thy corps thus violated, Shall surely be by death retaliated. Under a steepie hill there was the grave Of king Dercennus rais'd aloft most brave, With heaps of earth from ancient Laurent ta'ne, Cover'd with oaken boughs and branches main: Here the faire nymph first swiftly did alight, And from this hill on Aruns cast her sight. Whom spying richly arm'd puft up with pride,
Why fly'st thou hence (sayes she) and turn'st aside? Make this thy way, come hither to thy bane, Take thy just guerdion for Camilla slain. Shalt not thou by Diana's dart now die? And at these words, like Thracian huntresse high, From her gilt quiver she a sharp shaft takes, And fiercely bends her bow, and fitly makes The nock stand to the string: so strong she drew, That both the horn-ends meet; out swiftly flew The shaft from both her hands. Aruns at last Heares the darts din, as through the aire it past: The steel stuck in his breast, he gasping lay, His mates unmindefull of him, gone away, Left him expiring in an unknown ground: Ops for Olympus with her wings is bound. Lady Camilla slain, her left wing first Flies fast away, their faire array quite burst: The routed Rutuls run, Atinas flies, Their ensignes lost by captains cowrdize, Seeking for shelter, horsemen haste to th' town, The Trojans fierce by death do all beat down. None them withstands, none can their darts resist, Foes unbent bows fall from their fainting fist: Flying horse-hoofs shake the bemired fields, The way to th' town rais'd-clouds of thick dust yeelds▪ Wives from the walls behold it, beat their breast, Womanish cries to th' skies their woes exprest. And those which first by flight got ope the gate, Promiscuous might of foes doth perturbate. Nor scape they bitter death, even at the doore, And at their house and homes they gasp in gore.
Some shut the gates, shut out their mates for feare, And though they pray, to ope are forc'd forbeare. A mightie slaughter here defendance found, And fierce assailants finde their fatall wound, And some shut out, 'fore weeping parents eye, Constrain'd, run headlong into th' ditch and die. Some fury-blinded, set spurres to their horse, And headlong butt the barres and gates by force. The women on the walls made so fierce fight, When dead Camilla came into their sight, (Such to their countrey was their zeal and love) That fearfull fast they fling darts from above, And steely staves of oak, peares burnt at th' end, Fearlesse to die, their countrey to defend. Meanwhile a message sad as bad flies out, Which in the woods fills Turnus heart with doub▪ By flying Acca to this young prince brought; How their affaires were with confusion fraught: How Volscians vanquisht were, Camilla slain: How furious foes upon them prest amain: How they in all with prosperous warre proceed: How feare within, without the town did breed. He fury-fill'd (for so Ioves fierce decree Ordained had) the immur'd mounts doth free, Leaves the sharp thickets, scarce was out of sight, Hardly had pitcht his camp in Martiall rite; When brave Aeneas entred had the wood, And on the late forsaken mountain stood, And got out of the grove: when both in haste With all their troops unto the citie pas'd, From one another not farre distant lying. Aeneas also vigilantly eying
The dusty fields and faire Laurentine bands: And Turnus saw where stout Aeneas stands, His footmens fierce approach, his neighing horses: Immediately they had conjoyn'd their forces, And fough he field, had not Sols roseall face VVith tyred eeds been vail'd in th' end of's race, In Western waves, and dayes decay brought night; Before the town they therefore plant their might. An end of the eleventh book of Virgils Aeneïs.
THE ARGUMENT of the twelfth book. King Turnus, now the Latines tyr'd With adverse arms, once more desir'd By single combate fates to try. Latinus labouring urgently A peace to make, the peace is had. Juturna, Turnus sister sad, Disturbs the same, Camertes feignes, Both th' adverse bands to fight constrains. Aeneas wounded with a dart, His mother Venus cures the smart. The town is ta'ne: queen Amata Then hangs herself. Turnus straightway The combate with Aeneas tries, Is slain: Aeneas wins the prize. WHen Turnus saw his Latines tired quite, And much perplext with this unfriendly fight, His promise now requir'd, himself the but On whom the eyes of all themselves did glut. VVith self-incensed rage he burns and blazes, Fury implacably his spirit raises: Much like the Libyan lion hunted sore, VVho with a mortall wound molested more, Prepares to fight, insultingly doth shake His curled locks, hoping revenge to take On the sly-hunter, snaps the speare in's paws,
And furious, fearelesse, roares with bloudy jaws: So wrath vindicative fierce Turnus swells. Thus then to th' king his troubled thoughts he tells; In Turnus (sure) there can be no delayes, Why turn-coat Trojans should use stops and stayes, Eating their words, refuse their promise past. I'le meet him: then (grave sir) about you cast, Secure conditions for your peace to make, For with this hand I'le either undertake That Asian fugitive to send to hell, (Let Latines sit and see, and note it well) And with my sword-salve heal this publick ill: Or he shall conquer us, and with good will My faire Lavinia in due marriage have. The king with settled thoughts and count'nance grave, Makes this reply; O most accomplisht prince, By how much thou all others dost evince In vertue, valour; the more seriously Must I consult with circumspective eye, And cast all courses how to free our feare. Thou hast faire realms held from thy father deare, Faire warre-won towns: Latius still inherits Plentie of gold, but most and best, brave spirits: And Latium and Laurentum doth posesse More vertuous virgins, full of noblenesse. Then give me leave to speak the truth, though tart, Plain without flash, and fix my words in heart: To no old suiter I my daughter may In wedlock joyn: this fates and all men say: Yet won with love of thee, won by thy race, And flouds of teares on my sad spouses face, I brake all bands, infring'd my promise plighted
Unto my sonne in law, vile warre invited. Meanwhile thou seest (brave Turnus) what befalls Both thee and me; what broiles even to our walls, How many tyring troubles, chiefly thee Have overtaken: whereby we now see Our selves in two set-battells vanquished, And we within our town scarce free from dread, The strength and hope of famous Italie: And to this day our bloud doth tepefie Swift Tybers torrent, still our fields look white With mightie heaps of bones. O why so light Turn I so oft? what phrenzie moves my minde? If (Turnus slain) I make these foes friends kinde, Why rather do I not, while he's alive, An end of these fierce fights with speed contrive? What will our kinsmen the Rutulians say, Yea and all Italie, if I betray (Fates falsifie my words) his life to grave, Whiles he our daughter his choice spouse doth crave? Warres various events respect, I pray; With pitie thy old parents grief allay, Whom, full of grief, Ardea's land separates. This speech no whit stout Turnus rage abates, Whose salve doth more and more the sore infest▪ Who soon as he could speak, it thus exprest; Your care of me (grave sire) pray put aside, And let me death for dignitie abide. VVe yet cast darts, draw swords with Martiall hands, And every wound we give, life-bloud commands. His Goddesse mother will be absent farre, VVho in a cloud that fugitive from warre VVith feminine affection us'd to hide,
In pain shall he in cloudy vails abide. But now the queen with this new-purpos'd fight Sorely perplext, showres teares in piteous plight, Her firie sonne in law, ready to die, Embracing in her arms, with plaints doth plie; Deare Turnus, by these teares I thee intreat, (By that, if any love o'th' honour great Of Amata, warms thy late loving heart: For of our old age thou the sole staffe art, Our sorrows solace, Latines lovely crown, That prop, which faling, all our state falls down) This one thing I thee pray, Cease warres with Troy; For whatsoever chance doth thee annoy, The very same (my Turnus) me'le destroy: And life I'le leave, ere captiv'd I will see Aeneas base, my sonne in law to be. Her mothers tongue, with teares, Lavinia knew, Straight crystall drops her blushing cheeks bedew, VVhose corrall colour seem'd her face to flame, And with much heat to overspread the same. Much like white ivorie with vermilion stain'd, Or lilies faire with much red-roses drain'd; Such was the damsels daintie coloured face. Love straight turns Turnus to more amourous case: VVhose eyes fast fixed on her count'nance faire, More eagerly for arms he does prepare. Thus therefore briefly to queen Amata He makes reply; Forbeare, forbeare, I pray, Deare mother, with your teares me to molest, To urge me from a lot which I love best, And for which I will bloudiest battells try: Nor is't in Turnus, life or death to fly.
Go therefore Idmon, tell that Phrygian king, Shew the unsavoury message thou dost bring; That earely the next morn, so soon as e're Ruddy Aurora with a count'nce cleare In purple chariot ushers in day ight, His Trojans should not Rutule  fight, But both might rest, and both desist from arms, And their two's bloud determine these alarms. This message sent, to's home he fiercely flies, Calls for hir horses▪ which, before his eyes Champing with foaming mouths, him much delight: Even those which of a faire and prancing sprite Faire Orithyia to Pilumnus gave, For snowie colour and swift course most brave. The horse-keepers about them busie stand, Slicking their breasts, clapping them with their hand, To cheere them up, and combe their mains rough haire. Himself puts on his corslet, shining faire With glistring gold and streaks of tinne most bright: His sword and shield and helmet, fits to th'fight. His sword (I say) which ignean Vulcane gave Unto his father Daunus, dipt most brave I'th' Stygian stream, to make it strong and bright Then from a pillar standing bolt-upright, I'th' midst o'th' room a mightie lance he takes, And in his hand it furiously he shakes, Actor Aruncus spoile: thus then he said; O thou my speare, which ne're deny'dst me aid When I desir'd, the time is now at hand: Once mightie Actor us'd thee to command, But Turnus now thee in his hand doth hold: O grant, with thee I may his carcase cold
Lay low on ground, and by thee, my brave speare, With my strong hand, the pull'd off corslet teare Of that henhearted Phrygian, and most just, Smeare his perfumed smelling locks i'th'dust, Curled and crisp'd with heated irons neat. Thus up and down with rage and furie great He breathes outbraves, and makes wrath-sparkles lie, And flames of indignation flash in's eye. As when a bull a furious fight intends, Aire-frighting bellows forth he forthwith sends, And with madhead his horns whets on the ground, Buts truncks of trees, to fight with windes turns round, Playes with the dust, plowes up the earth in spight: Aeneas also fits him for the fight, Arm'd in his mothers arms, Mars invocates, And him to th'combate, wrath exasperates, Rejoycing that by this thus offered truce, There was good hope to peace warre to reduce. Then sad Iülus feares, and all his mates He comforts by discovering all his fates: And bids the messengers shew to their king The rules for peace, and truth of every thing. Next morn, when day with light scarce sprinkled had The mountain tops, so soon as Sol most glad Gave reins to's coursers, with a full careere Mounting from sea, snorting out day most cleare From their light-breathing nostrills: when with speed Trojans, Rutulians, busily proceed To bound the limits of their field to fight, Under the citie-walls, i'th'cities sight: And 'twixt them both, they fire and water brought, And to their Gods they grassie altars fraught,
In linen cloath'd, with sacred vervine crown'd. Thus first come forth the Latine bands renown'd: The Trojans then and Tuscanes follow fast, And troops with various weapons, with them past. As comptly, promptly arm'd with blades most bright, As if they all were instantly to fight. And in the midst of these their thousands bold, Their captains praunce in scarlet and in gold. And Trojans brave, Mnestheus, Asyla's forces, And stout Messapus rider rare of horses, Great Neptunes offspring. All then, at the signe Now given, to their set-stations do incline. Their speares i'th'ground they pitch, their shields let fall. Then with desire to see, the women all Flock forth, and young and old, and weak and strong Climbe turrets high, and up and down they throng: Some o're house ridges stride, some on high gates: To all high standings each one properates. But Iun from a mountain steep and tall, Which now adayes, Albanus men do call, (But then was namelesse, famelesse, quite neglected) Survayes the Martiall field, being much affected, Views both the Laurent and the Trojan bands, And in what state the Latines citie stands. Then to Iuturna, Turnus sister, she Thus said, Faire nymph, to whom is granted free Authoritie o're roaring rivers swift, (For from above great Iove gave her this gift, When she was stript of her virginitie) Rare nymph, of flouds the lustrous braverie, To us most neare and deare; thou well dost know Of all the Latine ladies which do go
To mightie Iupiters ungratefull bed, That thee alone I kindely suffered, And lovingly in heaven gave thee a place: Learn then of me thy present piteous case, And do not me, Iuturna, henceforth blame: For I, as farre as fates would grant the same, And destinies decreed, have still protected Latiums affaires, Turnus and's towns affected: But now I see the young prince overmatcht, And by fates frowning day decreed, quite catcht In snares ofhastning death: nor can mine eyes Endure this fight, and curs'd confederacies. If therefore now thou any good canst do, Then for thy brother, it with speed ensue, As 'tis most fit: perhaps fates may afford Better successe. Scarce had she said that word, When from her eyes Iuturna showr'd out teares, And twice or thrice her breast she beat with feares. Cease (straight sayes Iuno) now's no time to weep, Make haste, thy brother (if thou canst) to keep From speedie death; and or with Martiall broile Enflame them; or, their peace begun go spoile. Be bold, I'le beare thee out. With these perswasions She leaves her cumbred with most fierce invasions Of wounding thoughts. Meanwhile the kings proceed; (Latinus in a chariot with swift speed Drawn by foure horses gallantly bedeckt With twelve-fold golden wreathes, whose rare aspect Shone like his gransires glorious sun-beam bright; Turnus goes next, drawn with two horses white, Grasping in's hand two steelie-lances strong: Then grave Aeeas bravely goes along,
The basis of Romes regall progenie, With's starrie shield glistring refulgently, And heaven-given arms; with whom Ascanius came, The second hope, Romes empire fast to frame) Thus on (I say) they to the camp proceed: Their priest aray'd in pure and spotlesse weed, Drawes forth a brislie sowes young porker faire, And unshorn sheep, to th'burning altars rare Bringing the beasts. They then their faces bent To the ascending sunne, on the beasts spent Their salt and bran, and with their sizers keen They clip the haire, and wooll their brows between, And on their altars poure out bowles of wine. Then with drawn sword Aeneas grave, divine, Thus vents his votes; Bright Sol, my witnesse be, And thou O Latium, who both heare and see Me praying, and for whom I undergo These mightie toiles: and thou great Iove also, Yea and Saturnian Iuno, whom I pray A kinder Goddesse be, wrath laid away: And thou renowned Mars, who at thy will All warres dost regulate and order still: And springs and rivers all I invocate, And whatsoe're heavens power do venerate, And all that in the azure flouds do go. If on Italian Turnus chance bestow The victorie, we vanquisht, will depart Unto Euanders town with readie heart. Iülus also shall your land quite cleare, Nor shall our Trojans arms against you beare, Or ever after give you least distaste, Or with their swords your territories waste.
But if to us Mars grant the victorie, (Which I much rather hope by destinie, And pray the Gods would rather ratifie) I neither will Latines subjection crave Unto us Trojans, nor your kingdomes have: But that both Trojans and Italians be Link'd by one law in endlesse amitie: I'le guide you to the Gods and sacred rites. Have power (great father in law) in Martiall fights. Have and enjoy (grave sire) thy soveraigntie: My Trojans onely shall me edifie A setled town, and call it by the name Of thy Lavinia, to her datelesse fame. Thus first Aeneas, then Latinus grave, His hands and eyes lift up, this answer gave; The self same things I (great Aeneas) sweare, Let sea and land and starres true witnesse beare, And both Latona's broods, and Ianus old With his two brows, and hells force uncontrold, And dues divine of plaguie Plutoes seat: And let great Iove heare thus, whose thunders great Do truces tie; fright the fedifragous: And hereupon our shrines I handle thus, And midst o'th' flames I touch, and Gods I call, Of what I speak and vow, to witnesse all. No day shall Latines make this peace t'impeach, Nor of these coards of concord to make breach. Nor (whatsoever chance betide) will I By any force fall backward wilfully: No, though the seas hide earth with inundation, Or heaven with hell should force fierce desolation. And as this mace (for in his hand by hap
A mace he bare) quite void of native sap, Shall never sprout or spring with branches tender, Nor ever any cooling shadows render, Cut out o'th' wood, and from the stock quite rent, VVanting its root, and boughs and bark all spent. And cut away with tools, but once a tree, Though now with gold it garnished you see, By cunning artists skill, and thus made fit For Latine kings to hold, in thrones that sit. VVith such like words their peace they did conclude Amidst the princely peeres and multitude: And then, as custome was, their beasts they slay, And on the fire their sprawling inwards lay. But all this while, this match seems much amisse To all the Rutuls, muttering much at this, VVith various votes and thoughts, and so much rather, By how much their unequall strength they gather. And Turnus his slow walks and paces sad, And low dejected looks much feare do adde, As he was humbly sacrificing there, VVith hollow cheeks and childish totall feare. VVhich muttering whiles Iuturna notes right well, And how the peoples hearts both rose and fell; Camertes count'nance counterfeiting, she, (Famous for grandsires ancient pedigree, And fathers fortitude, which farre was blown, And he himself valiant in arms was known) She mixt her self amidst the thickest wings, And craftily acquainted with all things, Spread rambling rumours 'mongst them all, and said, O Rutuls, are ye not with shame o'relaid? Thus one mans life for many's to expose
To danger great? Equall me not our foes In number and in magnanimitie? See here the Trojans and Arcadians lie, And fatall troop Etrurians, Turnus foes; And if in fight we bravely them oppose, They scarce have man for man. He shall indeed To th' Gods (whose altars he adores) proceed, And live by fame in all mens mouthes, though dead: But we (our countrey lost) live in dire dread, Be slav'd to supercilious lords, whiles we Lie lazing and permit it thus to be. With these like words the youths hot thoughts she fires, And more and more the murmure might acquires Through all the armie. Now the Laurents stout, And all the Latines wheel their thoughts about, And they which lately lookt for rest from fight, And safely from their sorrows, now down-right Addicted are to arms, wish the peace mar'd, And with great grief, Turnus hard hap regard. And to all this Iuturna jugles more, And from the heavens sends a signe them before, Which more effectually than ought else yet, Did mould th' Italians mindes for her most fit, To foolifie them with a prodigie. For as Ioves bird, the eagle, in cleare skie Soaring along, drives little birds about, And frights the chattering flock and wingie rout, When with a sudden swoop and serious watch H gliding down, a gallant swan doth catch, And teares in'stallons; (hereat instantly Th' Italians courage take) then cherpingly, All the birds back do flie (a most strange sight)
And with their wings do dim the skies cleare light, And with a clustring cloud o're all the aire, Their foe so much infest an over-beare, That forc'd at last by force and ponderous waight, He lets his prey fall into th' water straight, And swiftly flutters from them into th' skie. The Rutuls their auspicuous augurie With clamours loud adore, to fight prepare: Tolumnius specially, a southsayer rare, Stands forth and cries; This, this is it indeed, Which I long looking for, wish might succeed. The Gods great power I know, and glad embrace. Brave Rutuls, come, come follow me apace, Even me your captain, let your swords take place: Even you, whom this base stragler by fierce broiles, Would as those weak birds fright from native soiles, And all your shores with fire and sword invade; But he shall flie, and with base retrograde Hoise sailes from hence, and haste into the main: You then with one consent your troops maintain, Double your files, and with your Martiall arm Defend your forlorn king from fatall harm. This said, he running forth at's enemies Casts a strong dart, which whisling fiercely flies Clean through the aire, piercing all opposites: And this and more a doubled din incites, And all the armies startles and provokes, And heats their hearts to fierce tumultuous strokes. And as the speare flew on with furious chance, Against nine brethrens bodies it did glance: All whom one modest Tuscane mother bred o her Gylippus in chaste marriage-bed.
One of which nine standing i'th' midst, it hits Just on the place whereon his brave belt fits, And where a button clasps his clothes aside, A lovely lad, and full of Martiall pride: And through his ribs it quickly perforated, And on the sands his life soon terminated. Hereat the other brethrens valiant band Enflam'd with grief, take some their swords in hand, Some deadly darts, and furiously flie on: Whom to oppose and fiercely set upon, Laurentum troops flie out: hence instantly The Trojans, like an inundation high, Break out, and Agyllines, Arcadians bold, In gallant arms embroidered rich with gold. Thus all had one hot heart to fight it out: Their shrines snatcht up, fierce tempests flie about Through all the aire, and storms of deadly darts, And showres of slicing swords to wound their hearts. Their sacrificing censers thence they beare, And flaming fires. Latinus in great feare Makes haste away, unto the Gods complaining Of their dishonour and the peace profaning. Some from the chariots take their horses out, And nimbly backing them, do range about, With naked swords in hand approach the fight. Martiall Messapus full of war-like spight, This late compacted peace now to confound Against Aulestes king, and kingly crown'd: Over the Tuscanes ran with full careere, And to the ground him straight did over-beare. And headlong him on head and shoulders cast Flat on his back, upon an altar fast:
Whereat Messapus fiercely to him flies With speare in's hand; and as for life he cries And much intreats, he with his beamie lance, On horse-back strongly 'gainst him doth advance, And with a mortall blow, thus to him spake; So, so, 'tis well, thou'lt a good offring make. Th' Italians close him, mangle him all-o're, Whereat stout Chorineus vext full sore, Snatcht up an altar fire-brand, bravely met Ebusus coming in a furious fret, And smiting at him; whom he swift doth chase, And thrusts the flaming fire-brand in his face: Which cing'd his haire and broad beard all about, And sent a mightie stench and savour out. Then this his trembling foe doth with him close, Lugs him by's locks, and gives him more full blows, Forcing him on his knees, fells him to th' ground, And through his side his sword his heart doth wound. Then Podalirius with a slicing blade, Alsus a famous shepherd did invade, Pressing on forward in the vantguard brave: Whom Alsus such a knock with's battle-ax gave, As cleft his head to th' chin, sprinkling all-o're, With his deep broached and out-gushing gore. Rough rest and steel-given sleep do shut his sight, And close his eyes up in eternall night. But great Aeneas stretcht his unarm'd hand, As he bare-headed without helm did stand, And calls aloud to's mates; O whither flock y? Why with this creeping jarre our peace thus mock ye? O pacifie your rage; conditions faire, And good conclusions for us fixed are:
'Tis I alone must now the battell trie. O then give way to me, all false feares flie: For with this hand I will corroborate This peace, and Turnus troubles terminate. As he thus spake, ere he had ended all, Behold a whisling dart did fiercely fall And light upon the prince, uncertain whence, From whose strong hand, what stormie violence, What fate, what fortune should the Rutuls raise To such high honour, unexpected praise. The glorie of the fact lies rak't up, yet Not one dares bragge that he Aeneas hit. When Turnus saw Aeneas leave the field, And all his troubled troops much ground to yeeld, With hastie hope his heart begins to flame, He calls for horses, longs to fight for fame: And proudly prauncing in his chariot high, To his loose reins gives ample libertie. And many a valiant souldier fiercely flying, He sends to Styx, and many leaves half dying: And either teares them with his chariot-wheel, Or bores their flying backs with darts of steel. Like as when bloudy Mars with his strong shield Doth check cold Hebers flouds, and makes them yeeld; And waging warre, his furious steeds sends out, Who swifte then West-windes flies all about The Martiall field, and with their trampling strong Do shake large Thraces confines all along, Frighted about with shapes of damping dread, Wrath, rage and plots, the God accompanied: Thus agile Turnus, 'midst of all the fight, His sweatie smoaking steeds drives on, a sight
Wofull to see, how he insulting goes, And gluts his sword with his thick slaughtered foes: Dying their horrid hoofs with dews of bloud, Mixing both sand and gore like morter-mud. And now he slew Sthenelus, Thamyris, And Polus fierce to death he doth dismisse: Meeting now this, now that resisting foe Fighting farre-off; farre-off he meets also Imbrasus sonnes, Lades, and Glaucus strong, Whom Imbrasus himself had nurs'd up long In Lycia, and alike with arms them fraught, And horse or foot-fight expertly them taught. Upon another part Eumedes stout Amidst the thickest ranks flies all about, Famous in warre, by kindred of great fame, Stout Dolons sonne, right of his grandsires name In strength and courage parents paralell, Who once in valour did so farre excell, That he a scout to th' Grecian camp would go, If they'd on him Achilles coach bestow. But Diomedes did his boldnesse pay, And with another price sent him away, Of great Achilles chariot frustrate quite: Whom Turnus spying a farre-off in fight, Ere he went farre, pursu'd him at the heel, And stopt his passage with his nimble steel. Whereat he stayes his steeds, from's coach descends, And to his half-dead falne-down foe he bends: Sets his foot on his neck, drawes out his blade, Dy'd it in's throat; and this moreover said; See, Trojan, see the land so long time sought, See Italie, which thou with bloud hast bought,
Now lie and meat it out. Here's all their gain, Which me to warre thus boldly dare constrain, Thus to themselves a citie they erect. A dart he then did furiously direct Against his mate Asbustes, Chlores next, Sybaris and Daretes he perplext; Thersilochus, with him Thymoetes strong, Whose starting jade on ground laid him along. As when Aedonian Northern blasts do blow, Aegean roaring surges do o'reflow, VVave following wave, thick rolling to the shore, As puffes do push them, and i'th' skies all-o're Clouds sleet about▪ so Turnus turbulent Makes armies flie, which way soe're he went, And turns troops headlong back; force makes him stout, And blasts his fluttering plumes do puffe about. But Phegeus fierce no longer could abide His sturdie stomack and insulting pride, But to the coach he comes with courage bold, And with his hand upon the reins layes hold, To stay the foamie horses furious pace, And to divert them to some other place. As thus he's drawn, and on his horse-main hangs, A mightie speare upon his armour clangs; And pierc'd his double plated corslet brave, And on the top of's skin a wound him gave. He hereupon safe cover'd with his shield, Makes at his foe, pursues him in the field VVith his drawn-sword, for surerer safetie; VVho with the chariot wheels velocitie And swift driven axle-tree, was headlong cast Down to the ground, whom Turnus follows fast,
A lights, and 'twixt his helm and gorgets brim With his sharp sword straight way beheaded him, Leaving his headlesse carcase on the sand. As thus i'th'field Turnus doth victour stand, Mnestheus, Achates kinde, Ascanius faire, Bleeding Aeneas bring with grief and care Into his tent, who walking with weak strides, And resting on a strong staffe which him guides, He's sorely vext, strives with all urgencie The speare and head to pluck forth totally. Which since he could not, he desires their aid To take the nearest way, cure might be made, And with a blade the flesh to lance more wide, Which did the arrows head so deeply hide, And thus to get it out, and him again To send to th'field, the combate to maintain▪ And now Iäpix came, old Iasus sonne, Who with Apollo from all others won The praise and prize, in his most deep affection, Once taken with his love, by kinde aspection; And thereupon upon him did bestow, Accurate arts and sciences to know, Hid auguries, rare musick, archers praise; But he his bed-red-fathers wasting dayes Long to prolong, himself did most apply To studie physick, and plants secrecie, And such like silent and lesse honoured art. Aeneas still extreamly vext at heart, Leans on a mightie lance, with many a youth, And young Iülus full of feare and ruth, All shedding teares: but he unmoved stood. Then old Iäpix, like a surgeon good,
Tying a linen apron him before, Of salves and physick herbes he brings forth store, Whose power Apollo had unto him taught, These faintly he appli'de; but none well wrought, All prov'd in vain, in vain he trialls made, With hand, with pinching pinsers to give aid, And get the iron out. No chance findes way, And Phoebus physick serves him for no stay: But more and more increase fierce clamours high About the field, and mishef drawes more nigh. They see dust flie i'th' aire, horsemen make speed, And numerous darts amongst them cast, exceed: And clamourous noise and cries of souldiers fighting, And of fierce Mars, dead bodies headlong smiting. Then Venus vext at her sonnes piteous pain, To cure the wound and make him well again, From Cretian Ide straight gathers dittanie, VVhose stalk has little leaves, and to the eye Beares purple blossomes. To this well-known plant VVilde beasts repaire, when cure of wounds they want, VVhen in their flesh fierce digging darts do stick. This Venus, hidden in a cloud most thick, Brought quickly thither with all secrecy, Steeps it in pans of water standing by, Compounds it with Ambrosian juyce most rare, And odoriferous Pnax plants most faire. Iapis old not knowing what was done, The wound to supple now again begun VVith this compounded water; instantly All wonted pain and smart from's wound did flie, All putred bloud into the wound collected, And out oth' sore was carefully ejected:
And then the steel without least molestation Smoothly came forth; and to their admiration, He instantly new strength and vigour feels, And old Iapis now his courage steels, And cries out, Come, come bring the prince his arms: Why stand ye, stay ye him from fierce alarms? Know (brave Aeneas) 'twas not humane will, Nor arts best parts that freed thee from this ill: Nor power or practise of mine own right hand, Some greater God did thus propitious stand By thee, and thee reserve to greater deeds. Aeneas (for his zeal to th'fight exceeds) Plucks on his buskins overspread with gold, Cuts off delayes, his glistring lance doth hold, His shield and corslet on, arm'd capa-pee, His young Ascanius in his bosome, he Hugging within his arms, with kisses sweet, His beaver rais'd, thus he his sonne doth greet; Faire sonne, from me thy father vertue learn, And of true industrie the gain discern; And fortunes power by others undrstand. As yet I'le thee safeguard with my strong hand, And thee exalt unto great dignitie: But when th'art grown to full maturitie, And strength of yeares, then use thou famous facts, And then remember me and my great acts: Recogitate and ruminate with spirit Thy fathers and thine uncle Hectors merit, And let their patterns stirre and spurre thee on. This said, in haste he through the gates is gon, Brandishing in his hand his mightie lance: And with huge troops, along with him advance
Anteus, Mnestheus, and even all the rest, Which in their camps were for the fight addrest. Black clouds of dust o're all the field o'respread, And trampling thick the ground even harrowed. The adverse armie Turnus marching saw, And all th'Italians▪ how they nearer draw: Cold fearefull quakings on them straight do fall, Chiefly Iuturna, 'mongst the Latines all, Observes and knowes their noise, and frighted flies, And he with wingie peed to th'battell hies, Rushing on with his dust-hid armies strong. As when a blustring storm is for'd along, Dissolving furious drops from sea to land, (Which the poore swains, alas! pre-understand, And tremblingly foresee; foreeeing, flie, As knowing what rough ruine by and by 'Twill make amongst the trees and fields of corn: And all before it will be overborn, Before its blustring blasts flie to the shores With mightie huffring, pufing, rumbling roares, Even so Rhoeteius, Trojan captain stout, Against his foes most fiercely flies about: In doubled files they all conglomerated, Thymbraeus stout Osiris trucidated, Mnestheus Archetius slew, Achates brave To Epulo a most deep death-wound gave; Stout Gyas Vfens slayes; Tolumius, he The southsayer which first made them disagree, By throwing first his dart against his foes, Even he was slain A mightie clamour rose, And Rutuls now were put to dustie flight But brave Aeneas will not dain to fight
With all he meets, nor horse or foot will slay, No nor on armed foe his hands will lay. But in the thickest throngs seeks seriously For Turnus; he alone his strength must trie. Jollie Iuturna a Virago stout, In feare of this perplexed with great doubt, Stept to Metiscus, Turnus wagoner, And 'twixt the horses reins o'returns him there, And leaves him fal'ne farre from the beam o'th' wain, And takes his place, and checks the loos'ned rein; And rightly she resembles every way Metiscus, both in shape, words, weapons gay. Like swallows black which princes courts frequent, And fluttering 'bout the yards seek aliment For their young chattering birds left in the nest, Spiders, gnats, flies, as they can catch them best; Sometimes in galleries large, or standing lakes: So diverse wayes through foes Iuturna takes, And drives the coach through every part and place, And fiercely flies, and here and there does trace, And bring her bragging brother to and fro, But will by no means let him fight with's foe; And farre enough flies from him out o'th'way. No lesse, Aeneas does by-paths assay To finde his foe, and through the stragling bands Calls him with words and becknings of his hands; And still as he on's foe his sight doth cast, And thinks with's wing'd-heel'd steeds to meet at last; So oft Iuturna turns the coach a wry. Alas! what should he do? what must he trie? In vain with various rage his heart doth burn, And diverse doubts his thoughts distractive turn.
Messapus meets him, in his hand two speares Well tipt with steel, which he by fortune beares, Both light of flight, one of which darts most swift Griping, he flings with straight and sturdie drift. Aeneas stands, to him his target takes, Shrinks down, but yet the speare impression makes Upon his helm, and teares the top of's crest Hereat Aeneas much fierce rage exprest, And much incens'd by this vile treacherie, Seeing the horse flie back, coach turn'd awry, Great Iove, and th' altars he to witnesse brings Of their peace broke, and many wrongfull things. And now at last invades foes thickest bands, And with successefull warre and conquering hands Makes all without all difference fall and die, And unto rage give reins implacably. My Muse cannot, O then, what supreme might Can help me here to set down and indite The many bittr bickerings, slaughters fierc, And captains slain to sing in solemne verse? Which now by turns (as 'twere) stout Turnus slayes, And now Troyes prince, wounded, confounded layes. Great Iove, was this thy will that with such rage Those men should meet, which in ensuing age Should in eternall peace spend all their dayes? Aeneas now endures no long delayes, But strikes Rutulian Sucro through the side (And that first blow made flying Trojans 'bide And bid fresh battels) and through's vitall part Under his short-ribs wounds him to the heart. Turnus o'returns Amycus from his horse, And meets on foot Diores with great force;
Two Trojan brethren brave, one with a lance, The other with a sword by fatall chance He slaughtered straight, cut both their heads off quite, And hung them on his chariot in full sight. The chariot sprinkled with thick drops of bloud, Then slew he Talo and Tanais good, And stout Cethegus; all three met at once, And brave Onytes venting gasping groans, A Thebane peere, sprung from Peridia His mother deare. Here doth he also slay Two brothers sent from Lacia and the plains Of great Apollo, and here dead remains Arcadian young Menoetes, who in vain To go to warre did feare and much refrain: Whose speciall skill and will was fish to catch By Lerna's fishie banks, in house of thatch He poorely liv'd, his coyn could never swarm. His father also hired a plow-farm. And as huge burnings made in diverse wayes, Amongst drie trees and squib-like crackling bayes: Or like fierce frothie streams which down do shrill With rapid roaring-race, from some high hill, And scud to sea, and finde or force their way: With no lesse force both these their parts do play. Aeneas brave and Turnus with great might Most furiously do rush about and fight: And now, just now, their imbred rage enflames them, Least thought of being foil'd, with envie shames them. Therefore with utmost force they fight and fell. Murrhanus here Aeneas sends to hell, Proud of his parentage and grandsires great, And regall race of Latine kings compleat;
He dasht him headlong down with rockie stone, By which fierce stonie storm he's overthrown, And with his coach-wheels crusht and trampled hard, By's horse, who nought their master do regard. Turnus assails stout Hilus, rushing fast With courage bold at's gilt-arm'd temples, cast A digging dart, which furiously straight ran Clean through his helm, and stuck in his brain-pan. Nor could thine arm, Creteus, Greeks brave knight, From Turnus thee protect, in furious fight: Nor could thy Gods, Cupentus, ease thy case, When 'gainst thee great Aeneas came in place▪ When at his breast his steelie speare he sent, Which (spight of's brazen shield) through's bodie went. And thee, great Aeolus, Laurentines spide Slain in the field, on's back the ground to hide. There thou lay'st slain, whom Grecians could not slay, Nor great Achilles, Priams crowns decay. This was thy fate-given date, neare Ida born Of grat Lyrnessus line, now laid forlorn In Larents field, a sepulchre to finde, And ow the totall troops together winde, All Ltines bands, and all Troyes valiant rout: Renowned Mnestheus and Serestus stout, Messapus, rare horse-rider, and his mate Asylas strong, 'gainst whom do properate All Tuscane troops and brave Arcadian wings, And every one his best assistance brings. No rest they take, no stay they make from fight. And here Aeneas mother, Venus bright, Promps her sonnes thoughts, that to the citie-wall He should make haste, and all his forces call,
And vex the Latines with a sudden fight: Who whiles for Turnus he doth cast his sight On every troop, still prying here and there, Seeks up and down, but could him finde no where. He spies the citie, sitting still, at rest, Untouch'd, unstirr'd, no warre did it molest. Straight hotter brands of broiles in's breast flame out. Mnestheus, Sergestus, and Serestus stout, His captains brave, he to him quick doth call, And takes a hill; to which the Trojans all, And valiant troops thickly and quickly they Assemble close, cast not their shields away, Nor nimble speares; then mounted on a hill, Standing i'th' midst he thus declares his will; Let no delay (faire mates) clog my designes, Ioves friendly face I see now on us shines. Though I be sudden, yet let none be slow, Th' emperiall citie, cause of all this woe, King Latines throne, this day I'le ruinate, And houses tops to th' ground aequiparate, Unlesse they take our yoke, and to us yeeld▪ Shall I (forsooth) stand waiting in the field, Till Turnus please to meet me? and again Attend him, when he vanquisht doth remain? Here is the head (brave sirs) the seat and seed, Which all these toiles and bloudy broiles did breed. Quickly bring brands, with flames your peace demand. This said, they readily do his command, And make a warre-like wedge, and wondrous quick They to the citie flock in clusters thick. The scaling ladders suddenly they rais, And sudden fires to mightie flames do blaze;
Some get to th' gate, and kill the first they meet; Some dart their shafts, which flie so thick and fleet, As dims the aire. Aeneas first of all Holds up his hand, standing hard by the wall, And with loud voice Latinus he doth blame, And calls the Gods to testifie the same; That he unwillingly was forc'd to fight, And that th' Italians twice us'd hostile might, And twice had cov'nant broke. Then 'mongst their foe▪ And fearfull citizens great discord rose. Some bad them ope the gates, let Trojans in, And some the king himself to th' walls do win: Some bring their arms their citie to defend. Much like a swarm of bees in dark rock pend, And by a shepherd found, who joyfully Fills it with choaking smoak all inwardly: The bees afraid, flie 'bout their waxen ell, And with huge humming wax most fierce and fell: Black fumie stench flies out from forth the hive, The stones within make crackling noise, and drive Smoak into th' emptie aire. Besides all this, A woefull chance fell out i'th' town amisse, Amongst the tired Latines, which procur'd Most loud laments, wofull to be endur'd, Through all the citie: for so soon as e're The queen beheld the enemie draw neare, The town-walls scal'd, the houses all on flame, No Rutuls bands, no Turnus neare to tame Their insolence; she thought (poore wretch) again Her young prince Turnus in the fight was slain. Her heart o'rewhelm'd with sudden feare and grief, She straight cries out, that she's the cause and chief,
The head and heart of all these miseries. Thus in much sad and mad perplexities Exclaiming, with her nails she rends and teares Her royall robes, ready to die with feares: And to a beam, a cord made fast on high, She hang'd herself with foule indignitie. Whereof when wofull Latines ladies heard, Chiefly Lavinia, mightie schreeks she rear'd, And with her nails all teares her yellow locks, Scratcheth her face, the folk in mightie flocks Rage up and down, their houses fills with cries: Hence through the town the fame thereof soon flies. Mens courage sinks, Latinus rent and torn, In's regall robes goes up and down folorn, Mightily frighted at his quens foule fate, And at his cities ruinated state, With dirt and soile his grave gray haires he smeares, Blames himself much, drencht deep in thousand feares▪ In that at first he Dardans prince rejected, And as his sonne in law had not affected. Now all this while stout Turnus in the fields Follows a few, whose face small conquest yeelds, Poore and pale scatter'd straglers, and besides He sees, how more and more, more slow he rides, His horses waxing tir'd. Again a noise He heares i'th' troubled aire, which him annoyes. Whereat he stands and listens to the same, And from the citie various clamours came, And most distastfull stirres: hereat he cries, Alas, alas! what wofull miseries Are to this citie come, thus to molest it? And that strange turmoiles variously infest i?
This said▪ enrag'd, his horse rein'd-in, he stayes. Whereat his sister who her old pranks playes, Seeming Metiscus, still i'th' coach remains, Guiding his coach and horse, ruling the reins, Sayes thus to him; Brave brother, this way haste, This way the Trojans first and best thou may'st Fully subdue, here conquest gate stands ope, The town has troops enough with them to cope. Aeneas close on our Italians lies, And fiercely fights with all his companies. Let us then also, with our furie fell, Go send those Trojans soules in post to hell: So shalt thou part in equall parity, No lesse in number, nor in dignity. Turnus reply'de; O sister, now I know, That thou by craft at first didst overthrow, Our treated truce, these warres didst work again. But now, faire Goddesse, all thy craft's in vain: But pray thee tell me, who from heaven thee sent To undergo these troubles turbulent! Was it to see thy wofull brothers bane? For, what do I? what help can hap me gain? I saw before mine eyes, Murrhanus kinde, Than whom to me more deare earth none can finde. I heard him call me, one of mightie merit, Who, though now dead, yet dy'd with dauntlesse spirit. Unhappie Vfens also slain doth lie, That he might not survive our infamie: And Trojans now his corps and arms enjoy. And shall I suffer ('tis the last annoy Which onely yet remains) our buildings flame, And not resist dire Drances foretold shame?
And shall I flie? and shall this nation see, Turnus a turn-coat fugitive to be? And should it now be shame in me to die? O ye the ghastly ghosts, which low do lie, Be ye propitious, for the heavens do frown, To you my sacred soule shall now go down, Untainted and unspotted of this blame. And still m ost worthie that my linag came From ancestours of such renowned fame Scarce had he said, when Sages foamy horse, Hurrying him through his foes with windie force, His face all bloudy with an arrows wound, And rushing on, at last he Turnus found: And calling him by name, Turnus (sayes he) Our last and best help now consists in thee; Pitie our plight, for Troyes Aeneas thunders, In bloudy broiles unto our woes and wonders, And threatens ruine to our Latian towers, And dire destruction, by his conquering powers. And now, even now flames 'bout our houses flie, In thee the Latines hope of help doth lie; On thee Italians all do cast their sight, The king himself mutters in much despight, Whom he his sonne in law might now ordain, And whom in love and league to entertain. The queen beside, they e're most faithfull friend, With her own hands her wofull life did end, In fright hath fled the light: now at the gate Onely Messapus and Atinas wait, And animate the armie yet remaining: But round about them are thick foes, maintaining A furious fight, like standing-corn in fields,
Which to steel sickles helplessely straight yeelds. And yet dost there alone in this left plain, Tracing thy coach about, here still remain? Turnus astonisht at the tottering state Of these affaires, like one inanimate Stands mute, his eyes fast fixed on the ground, And inward shame his boiling heart did wound; And what with sadnesse, madnesse, raging love, Conscious of adverse power, which he must prove, The mistie vails of his dull thoughts put by, And sunne-shine of discretion shining high, His angrie eyes to th' citie-walls he cast, And views the citie as in's coach he past. And now behold, with flames the rafters flie, And boards between burn up unto the skie, Which caught hold of the tower, that tower, I say, Which Turnus self erected rich and gay, With brave crosse-beams and wheels and bridges high. Now, now, deare sister (sayes he) readily My fates attend me, use no further stay; For where my fate and fortune point the way, Thither I'le go, my resolution stands To trie the strength of proud Aeneas hands, To 'bide worst bitternesse of deaths dire smart. Nor shalt thou henceforth see me play the part Of an ignoble coward. This, I pray, Good sister suffer me, that now I may Be mad, e're I be mad: which having said, Leapng from's coach, most swift away he made Into the field, through thickest of his foes, And leaves his sister full of feares and woes: And with swift flight breaks into thickest bands.
And as a rockie mount which headlong stands, And tumbles from the top, broke down by winde; Or by strong sowcing showres quite undermin'd, Or rotted with long yeares antiquity, And so slips down with huge velocity, In broken fragments mounting on the ground, And woods and herds and people doth confound, And roule and wrap with it: Turnus even thus Through his dispersed troops most furious Runs to the citie-walls▪ where all with bloud The ground like pools and ponds bedrenched stood, And whirling arrows clattered to the aire; With hand and voice his minde he does declare Unto them thus; Forbeare Rutulians all, And Latines now your swords and shields recall; What ever fortune falls, 'tis mine own due, 'Tis fitter farre for me alone, then you, To pay the price of this thus broken peace, And with my sword this quarrell quite to cease. All straight gave back, for him i'th' midst made way: But brave Aeneas without all delay, Hearing but Turnus nam'd, leaves towers and town, Breaks off all businesse, and comes nimbly down: Leaping for joy, thundring in arms most strong, Like Athos mount, or Eryx step and long. Or like old Apennius rais'd on high Into the aire, kissing the starrie skie, Ratling with leaves on trees, glistring in sight, Proud of his tops, clothed with snow most bright. And now Rutulians and the Trojans stout, Seriously bend their eyes and look about: Italians, and all those that kept the town,
And those which would with rams the walls butt down. All arms they lay aside, king Latine stands Amaz'd to see two men so strong of hands, Of diverse nations, now to meet and fight. The champions both beholding in their sight The lists made void, and space t' encounter in With rapid race, the combate straight begin; And now farre off darts at each other cast, And to their swords and shields they come as fast: With dashing clashing bangs the ground even groans, And doubled trebled blows they give at once, With their bright blades: vertue and valour brave Seem mixt in one, in one their seat to have. And as two angrie bulls in furious fight, With butting horns encountring with deep spight, On mightie Syla's mount, Taburnus high, Their fearfull keepers keep close, covertly, The other cattell, cows and calves, stand mute, And with soft muttering hold a still dispute, Who shall their leader be, whom they shall tend. The bulls meanwhile each other wounds do lend, And gore each others sides, whose bloud spurts out, And head and shoulders all be bathes about: Whose bloudy blows the echoing woods resound: No otherwise is this fierce duell found, 'Twixt Troyes Aeneas and great Daunus prince, Lab'ring each other strongly to evince, With swords and shields the aire with clanging filling. Then Iove himself, to poise their fortune willing In equall balance, for some distance stayes, And to them both their severall fortune layes: Which should with toiles triumph, which, fighting, die.
Turnus himself rouz'd up, his sword rais'd high, Hoping (untoucht) to do what he did aim: With all his might he smote, the blow home came▪ Whereat the Trojans crie, the Latines tremble, And both the bands in much amaze assemble To eye the issue: But the bastard blade In pieces brake, the blow thus frustrate made. Who, had he not straight fled, had dead there lain. As swift as winde he therefore flies amain, Finding in's hand a hilt, to him unknown, His hand now weaponlesse. Fame thus hath blown, That when he first to fight his coach ascended, And furiously him to the battell bended, 'Twixt feare and furie, left his fathers blade, And snatcht Metiscus sword for it▪ and made Indifferent shift therewith, whles frightfully The scattered Trojans did before him flie. But when he mindes Vulcanes strong tempered blade, And that this silie sword by mortalls made, Brake straight, as brittle glasse the shivers small, Glistring upon the ground as down they fall: Then like a mad man Turnus flies about Through all the field, here, there windes in and out: For all the Trojan bands had hedg'd him round, And citie-walls and mightie moorish ground. Aeneas also (though his late wounds pain, Pinching his knees, did swift pursuit restrain) Followes, and foot to foot, keeps to him nigh. Much like a huntsman, who with course and crie Of eager hounds, a deere hath close i'th 'flouds; Or girt with feare o'th'bloudie dart, he scuds: But frighted at the toiles and banks most high,
A thousand wayes does turn and winde and flie; But yet the noble nimble Vmbrian hound, With breathing chaps, keeps close, doth loose noground. And now, even now, snaps him, yet lets him slip, Who from his cheated chaps doth quickly skip: Loud cries are rais'd, the brooks and banks about Re-echo, thunder from the skies breaks out. Turnus thus flying blams his Rutuls all For his try'd sword, by name doth each one call. On th'other side Aeneas ruine threats, And present death, if any at his treats Dares him approach, whose feare does them afright: Menacing much to raze their citie quite; And thus (though wounded) he his foe draws nigh, And five round circling courses, eagerly, They finisht had, leaping back here and there: And for no pettie prize thus earnest were, Even for no lesse then Turnus life and bloud. By chance, a sowre-leav'd olive-tree there stood, Devoted to God Faunus, venerable, To mariners once, when it stood, most stable, When they did shipwrack scape; whereon they plac'd The gift wherewith they Lrents Gods had grac'd, And garents to the God were consecrated: This tree the Trojans had eradicated, Regardlesse of its use, that so they might Prepare a full and faire field for the fight, Here stuck Aeneas speare, by force there cast, And in the tender root was setled fast: Aeneas stayes▪ ssayes with his strong hand To pluck it out, with's speare to make him stand: Whom he in running could not overte.
Turnus in rage and feare this prayer did make; Favour me, Faunus, and this goodly ground, Keep fast the speare, since alwayes ye have found My sacred worship to your deitie, Which Trojans wrong most sacrilegiously. This said, thus pray'd, his prayers were not in vai; For why? Aeneas labouring with long pain▪ And strugling at the stock, yet by no might Could make the stump let go his fastned bite. As thus he stirres and struggles all in vain, The Daunian Goddesse did assume again Metiscus shape, the wagoner before, And to her brother doth his sword restore. Venus being vext, to see this nymph so bold, Hastes to the speare, and plucks it from its hold. Thus both these warriours arm'd with sword and spea Themelves most bloudily, bravely, now they beare: This proud of's blade, that joyfull for his lance, With breathlesse blows to th'fight they readvance. Meanwhile great Iove, olympus soveraign high, From's yellow cloud casting his all-seeing eye Upon the combatants, to Iuno spake; Faire spouse, when meanest thou an end to make? What yet remains? thou know'st and dost confesse Aeneas for to be a God, no lesse, That he belongs to heaven, starres must him hold. What dost thou build? what hope in clouds thus cold Makes thee stay here? think'st thou it fit to be, A sacred God with mortall wounds to see▪ Or that his sword (for but by onely thee, Iuturna nought could do) should gotten be, And brought to Turnus, vanquisht hearts to cheer,
O now at length, faire Iuno, cease, forbeare To presse me with thy prayers, thy self to fret With tart intestine grief, me to beset With carking cares, to give thee sweet content; 'Tis now come to the period of event. Thou know'st I let thee both by sea and land Infest the Trojans, and, at thy command, To wage fierce warres, his house quite to deface, And marriages to make in mournfull case. Farther I now forbid to enterprise. Iupiter ceast. Iuno in submisse wise On th'other side reply'de; All-sacred pheere, Since first I knew thy mightie minde most cleare, My Turnus and the world unwillingly I have relinquisht; nor so sorrily Shouldst thou me see on this cold cloud to sit, Suffring so many things fit and unfit; But cloath'd in flames, standing my troops about, And fiercely firing all the Trojans out. And as for poore Iuturna, I confesse, I bad her help her brother in distresse, And for his life bad her all hazards trie: But bow to bend or weapons to supplie, This I ne're bad, and to this truth I sweare By Styxes muddie peacelesse spring, the feare, And onely sacred oath the Gods do take. And now I cease, and all these fights forsake. Yet this one thing (which fates do not gainsay) For Italie, grant me I humbly pray, And for the grace and honour of thine own; That when they to a peacefull passe are grown By marriage made (well, be it so) and when
All rites and rules of peace are fixt by men, That thou'lt not change ancient Italians name, Nor Troy or Trojans to weare out the same; Let then their language and their weeds retain, Let Italie and Albane peeres remain: Let Romes rare offspring spread by Latian might: Troy now is dead, O let Troyes name die quite. Iupiter smiling on her, said, most milde, Thou art Ioves sister and Saturnus childe: Yet can thy breast enchest such anger still? Well, go to then; yet now subject thy will, Cease thy vane rage begun: I grant thy motion, Willingly won herein to thy devotion. Italians shall old kindes and customes keep, And, as 'tis now, their name in fame as deep Still stand and grow; Trojans shall onely be A mixed body 'mongst them▪ thou shalt see, That I religious rites will teach them all, And every land shall them Italians call. The offspring which from Latian bloud shall rise, All men on earth, yea and the Gods i'th'skies, Shall passe in pietie; and than this nation, None shall bring thee so copious adoration. This tickled Iuno passing-well at heart, And from her cloud to heaven she did depart. This thus perform'd, great Iove doth now contrive How he Iuturna might from Turnus drive. Two hellish hags there are call'd Furies fell, Whom dreadfull night begat in horrid hell Both at a birth, upon Megaera black, Both with like serpents stings and wreathed back, And wings like windes. These at Ioves footstool lay
Under his throne, their angrie king t'obey: These feares and frights, kindle in ale-contents, When direfull death or vexing punishments Iupiter pleaseth on the bad t'impart, Or towns will terrifie with warres desert. One of these furies fierce Iove from him send, Who to Iuturna, Turnus death portends. She flies away to earth, whirlewindes fast Much like a shaft from Parthian quiver cast All dipt in poyson curable by none, And by some Parthian, or stout Cydon thrown; The dart unseen whisling through shadows, flies: Thus this night-imp hastes on, to earth now hies. Who having spi'de Troyes troops and Turus hands, I'th' figure of a little bird she stands▪ As screech-owles, who are wont on graves to sit And dark-night walks, to screech and hollow it, And in this owlie shape, this furie fierce, In Turnus sight doth up and down traverse, Making much noise, fluttring her wings about His shield, which lets in feare, sets courage out. Trembling, his haire doth stare, speechlesse he stood. But when farre off, Iuturna understood The furies fluttering wings and screeching stirre, Poore sister, ah, how it bemadded her! Her face she scratches with her bloudie nails, With fists she beat her breasts, and thus she wails; Alas poore Turnus! pray thee speak, which way? What means remains whereby thy sister may Shield or assist thee? or hy life prolong? Ah! how can I resist this omen strong? Now, now foul fowles I from these armies flie.
Cease then me trembling more to terrifie; I know your plaguing plumes and deadly din, I know Ioves proud prescripts; do I this win And nought but this, for lost virginitie? Why gave he me lifes immortalitie? Why am I freed thus from a dying state, Whereby I might these great griefs terminate, And in hels depth with thee poore brother range? Am I immortall? ah, I would it change! For without thee, deare brother, nought can please me, Oh, if some earth could swallow me 't would ease me! Sending a Goddesse down to Limbo's lake, These words with many teares and sighs she spake; And straight her head waterie gray weeds hid, And deep into the river down she slid. Meanwhile, Aeneas strongly doth oppose, His tree-like lance brandishing as he goes, And angrily thus cries; Now Turnus stout, What stayes, delayes, make thee still time it out? Why draw'st thou back? we must not fight by flight, But hand to hand with furious blows down-right. Transform thy self to shapes most variously, Collect thy self with magnanimitie. To fight or by arts slight to soare i'th'aire, Or hid i'th'ground to cover all thy care. Turnus in rage shaking his head, replies, Thy tongue, proud Trojan, nothing terrifies My troubled breast, but th'angry fatall Gods And Iupiter himself, with me at ods. And with these words he spide a mightie stone, A huge old stone, by which lands bounds were shown All difference to decide, left long i'th'field:
VVhich twelve men scarce upon their necks could weld: Such proper men (I mean) as now adayes Times do produce. This he with ease doth raise, And with his trembling hand cast at his foe: And yet this noble prince doth scarcely know That he himself rais'd high, did swiftly run, Took up the stone, or what else he had done: His knees began to faint, his bloud grew chill; Then on i'th'emptie are, the stone went still, But went not its full way, nor hit its mark. Like as, when in our dreams, at midnight dark, VVhen lazie sleep tyr'd eye-lids down doth force, VVe seem sometimes to run an eager course: And in the midst of many a seeming act, VVe faintly fail, and vainly cease the fact; VVe talk sometimes in sleep, but faultringly Our forces fail, nor words, nor works comply: Thus 'twas with Turnus, where his power was bent, Fierce fates made all his facts in vain be spent: Then diverse doubtfull thoughts in's heart arise. Upon his Rutuls casting now his eyes, Now on the town, fright stayes him, and deep feare (Even every moment) of his foes strong speare: Nor findes he means to flie, nor means to fight, Nor sees his coach, nor sister-coachmans sight. Aeneas having in his nimble eyes Faire fortune offer'd, doth not sluggardize, But brandishing his dart at's doubting foe, Farre distant, at him doth it fiercely throw VVith all his might: never flew stones so fast To batter walls from war-like engine cast VVith battering din, nor thunder makes more roare▪
Like a black storm, hurrying destruction sore, So flies the speare, and through his corslet strong, And seven-fold lined shields brim glanc'd along With clanging noise, sticking fast in his thigh, Which strake down mightie Turnus instantly, Doubling his knees to th'ground. The Rutuls straight Raise a huge crie, which hills reverberate, With mightie echoes, round about the plain, And all abroad the woods beat back again. He meek and lowly raising hands and eyes, O now (sayes he) I beare my most just prize. I ask no favour, use thy happie fate, Onely I pray thee to commiserate My aged father Daunus (if in thee Least pietie to parents harboured be, And thy Anchises once was such an one) And me (if so much favour may be shown, If die I must) restore my corps to mine. The victorie to thee I now resigne: Our Latines see my conquered hands extended, Lainia is thy wife, thus fates intended, Let farther furie cease. Aeneas stands Fierce in his arms, yet still he holds his hands, Gazing with's eyes, and now even now began His speech to work compassion in the man, Till that unhappie belt he did espie Upon his shoulders hanging broad and high: Whose buckles known, and glistring rarely cleare, To be young Pallases did plain appeare, Whom Turnus with a conquering wound-had slain▪ And 'bout him did that fatall prize retain. But when his eye did seriously survey
That badge of griping grief, that piteous prey, Enflam'd with furie, all with rage possest, Ah! dos thou hope to scape my hands thus drest With my deare Pallas spoiles? for Pallas sake This wound shall thee his due oblation make. And with that word, he sheath'd his sword in's heart. Whereat death seazing on his vitall part, His members bursen, loathed life out flies, And with a deep-fetcht groan to Charon hies. An end of the twelfth book of Virgils Aeneïds. Trin-uni Deo soli sit omnis gloria. FINIS.
ERRATA. COurteous Reader, The large distance of place, and inevitable duties of my calling hindring my presence from the▪ Printers-presse▪ divers faults have escaped, which I heartily desire may with thy pati∣ence and pen be corrected, as here is directed. IN the life of Virgil, pag: 3. lin. 12. for shallow, read sallow▪ Aeneids. p. 5. l. 22. for Orentes, read Orontes. p. 28. l. 8. for I, read By. p. 29. l. 13. for sheep-shelter, read ship shelter. p. 35. l. 11▪ for wraths, read wreaths. p. 39. l. 21. for hiddie, read hideous. p. 40. l. 2. for wag, read way. p. 45. l. 3. for Automedon▪ read An∣tomedon. p. 46. l. 26. for they, read for he. p. 53. l. 24 for Frame. read From's. p. 61. l. 27. for saue, read leaue▪ p. 66. l. 8. for could, read cold. p. 68. l. 18. for grew, read drew. p. 72. l. 1. for siecie, read feirce. p. 73. l. 25. for to th' Sea by Gods, read by Sea to th' Gods. p. 77. l. 14. for Achilles, read Anchises. p. 79. l. 10. for a station, read our station p. 81. l. 22. for sigh's, read fights. p. 8. l. 17. for on, read on's. p. 83. l. 24. for au-all, read ouall. p. 93. l. 30. for long, read longs. p. 95. l. 2. for fiction, read fictious. l. 6. for The, read That. l. 10. for these mens, read these in mens. l 28. for right, read rich. p. 111. l. 14. for cutting, read crossing. p. 113. l. 20. for thousands, read thousand. p. 115. l. 20. for That same, read, That the same. p. 118. l. 20. for a more, read no more. p. 121. l. 16. for Phaethons, read Phactons. p. 124. l. 12. for or'eth' board, read o're-board. l. 32. for power, read poure. p. 132. l. 21. for land, read laud. p. 134. l. 16. for begirt, read begirts. p 139. l. 6. for partly, read party. p. 140. . 2. for Laborynthicke, read La∣byrinthicke. l. 25. for fleets, read fleet. p. 141. l. 15. for from, read for. p. 164. l. 29. for Now, read Nor. p. 175. l. 6. for hee heauen, read he did heauen. p. 177. l. 4. for these, read those. pag. 185. lin. 4. for Statutes, read Statues. pag. 194. lin. 25. for tur∣ret, read turrets. pag. 197. lin. 6. for O that, read O what. l. 24. for flight, read fight. pag. 200. l. 3. for An, read Ah. p. 204. l 7.
for waues, read wiues. p. 205. l. 21. for bid, read bad. p. 210. l. 21. for godly, read goodly. p. 214. l. 3. for Put-on, read Puts-on. p. 217. l. 18. for grunt, read groane. p. 220. l. 23. for Numacks▪ read Numicks. p. 224. l. 29. for Ane, read And. l. 31. for So, read To. p. 227. l. 10. for sire, read Sir. p. 237. l. 6. for protest, read pro∣tests. p. 238. l. 11. for for-mens, read foemens. p. 57. l. 12. for flying, read fling. p. 259. l. 9. for afraid, read afear'd. p. 262. l. 28. for land, read laud. p. 265. l. 30. for Italie, read Italia. p. 277. l. 20. for touch, read tough. p. 298. l. 10. for Asius, read Iasius. p. 323. l. 17. for Ioyning, read Ioying. p. 346. l. 5 for Adulterous, read Adul∣trous. p. 352. l. 14. for coasts, read costs. p. 353. l. 2. for forth' ala∣rum, read, fore th' alarm. p. 361. l. 23 for There, read They. p. 372. l. 12. for her, read his. p. 373. l. 3. for defendance, read defendants. l. 9. for made fight so feirce, read make furious fight. p. 379. l. 8. for And their, read Let our. p. 384 l. 21. for thus, read this. p. 386. l. 1. for me, read we. p. 392. l. 13. for sleet, read fleet. p. 398. l. 16. for giue, read giues. p. 399. l. 2. for shrill, read thrill. p. 403. l. 11. for fills, read fill. l. 32. for that, read what. p. 405. l. 26. for they, read thy. p. 406. l. 2. for there, read thou. p. 411. l. 17. for bloudily, read bouldly. p. 413. l. 4. for then, read them. p. 418. l. 8. for bursen. read loosen.
