3622 99842132 6762
A LEARNED TREATISE OF THE SABAOTH, WRITTEN By Mr EDWARD BREREWOOD, Professor in Gresham Colledge, LONDON. TO Mr NICOLAS BYFIELD, Preacher in Chester. With Mr BYFIELDS answere and Mr BREREWOODS REPLY. AT OXFORD, Printed by Iohn Lichfield Printer to the Famous Vniversity, for Thomas Huggins. An. Dom. 1630.
Proue all things, hold fast that which is good:1 Thes. 5. 21. For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodnesse, and righteousnesse, and truth, prouing what is ac∣ceptable to the Lord,Ephes. 5. 9. 10. Holy Father, Sanctify them through thy truth: Thy word is truth.Ioh 17. 17.
These faults I desire the reader to amend before he read the booke. PAGE 9. line 10. leaue out and, p. 25. l. 13. read consecration, for, par∣ticipation, p. 27. l. 17. r. not of the, for, not the, pag. 28. l. 2. r. commande∣ment, for commandements, l. 7. read Gods command, f. God commands, p. 29. l. 26. read greater, for, great. p 30. l. 3. r. per accidens, for, per accidence, l. 15. r. thereof, for, thereon, p. 32. l 4. r. servant, for, seruants, p. 30. l. 21. r. respected, for, expressed, l. 29. r. in the Sabaoth, for, in Sabaoth, p. 42. l. 5 r. of the comman∣dement, for, of commandent, p. 47. l. 14. r. their, for there, p. 54. l. 7. r. haruest, for, heauinesse: p. 68. l. r. perpetuall, for, perpetually, p 79. figure 9. r. volly, for, vally, p. 81. Mr Brerewoods text should be continued, p. 90. r. short, for shord, p. 91. r. for a great part, for, of a great profit, p. 91. l. 23. r. who, for whose, p. 94. (for) should be out, ib. the, for, your, p. 95. the gap at (appointment) should not be, nor any point. Many mispointings, and lesser faults there are, by the darkenesse of the copy, and the oversight of the Printer, which the iudicious reader may easily correct.
A TREATISE OF THE SABAOTH WRIT∣TEN BY Mr EDWARD BREREWOOD to Mr NICHOLAS BYFIELD preacher in Chester. SIR I am but a stranger vnto The occasion of this trea∣tise. you, yet I am bold to trouble you, because you haue troubled me, with as strange an occasion: There is a young man (one Iohn Brerewood dwelling in this Citty, but borne in that, whom his Father & Graundfather, when they left this World, left very young. And left he was especial∣ly to my care, who am his vnckle. That youth I pla∣ced
here in London, to serue in condition of an ap∣prentice: and placed he is with a man of so good reli∣gion report & trade, that if I might haue picked him a master in the whole City, I thinke I should haue chosen none before him. In this mans service hee hath spent two years and more, and (God shewing him, and in his behalfe me also more mercy then ei∣ther of vs deserued,) I began to receiue comfort of him after some sorrow, that his former vntowardnes had caused, and to recouer good hope, after my for∣mer doubt and feare; but yet for all this, Gods good pleasure it was to abate this contentment of mine, and by the youths new follies, to bring me into new perplexities, for being not long since sent to Chester about his Masters businesse, he returned againe so strangely altered, that I haue seldome seene in so short a time so great a change. For so deiected he was in his countenance, so dull and wretchlesse about his businesse, so alienated quite from his master, and so obstinately resolued (whether by faire means or by fowle) to forsake his seruice; that I was not fuller of sorrow to see him so changed, then of wonder to i∣magine how he became so. And yet the care and paines I tooke by the endeavour of my selfe and of my friends to recouer and to resettle him, was equall to both, and so much more they were, because I la∣boured to cure a disease, whereof I could not per∣ceiue the cause. For the pretences which at first hee made of the vnablenesse of his body and toilesome∣nes of his seruice, I know were but fained excuses, or
else complaints of lazinesse, as being assured that there are 20000 in this City of lesse bones, that make noe bones of greater labour. But the true cause of all this distemper, fell out to be at last a case of conscience (and full glad I was that the case proved no worse) then that he had such feeling of conscience, (for I had imagined sundry others) although it grieued me not a little, to see his conscience so seduced, and the point that pricked him was this: his Master on the Lords day sent him forth sometimes on arrands, as to bid guests, or fetch wine, giue his horse provender (which last his Master remēbreth not that euer he bad him past once) or about some other light businesse. & he was instructed (he said) that to doe these things or any other worke on the Sabaoth day, although it were such work as might lawfully be done on another day; and although he did it not of his owne dispositi∣on, but only in obedience to his Masters command; yet was a sinne and transgression of Gods comman∣dements touching the Sabaoth, and that he was not bound to yeeld, nay that hee sinned against God in yeelding obedience to euery such commandement of his Masters that day, which by the precept of almigh∣ty God was wholely precisely consecrated to rest and the service of God. To this effect (he told me) he was instructed when he was in Chester and that you Sr were his chiefe instructer, out of which doctrine he deduced (as naturall reason rightly taught him to doe) that he ought in such cases to reiect the com∣command of his Master and in no sort to performe
it; which because he could not doe without his ma∣sters great offence, and his owne affliction, he saw no other course to be taken but to forsake his masters ser∣vice, that so becomming his owne Master, he might not be commanded to sinne, against God: Which resolution of the young mans being so peremptory, and obstinate, as for a time I found it to be, if it mo∣ued me both to melancholy and anger who can iu∣stly blame me? For I saw not only a poore youth (my neere kinsman) entangled with the conscience of ano∣ther mans sinne, (if it be sinne) but withall his vtter ru∣ine for his condition in this World hardly ventured, his Master wronged, his friends grieued, and my selfe especially indammaged, that am in bond deepely in∣gaged for him: and yet this was not all that inwardly afflicted me, but some thing there was beside that might well stirre as patient an heart as mine to indig∣nation; Namely because I perceiued this doctrine of yours, (whereof this resolution of his proceeded, and his ruine was likely to follow) neither to haue good beginning, nor likely to haue good ending; but to beginne in ignorance and to end in sinne, to beginne in mistaking the Law of God & to end in the wicked disobedience of seruams to their Masters, & in the re∣bellious contempt of the lawes of men. But for the transgression of mens lawes by this doctrine, or the mischiefes that may ensue of it, in the cōmonwealth, I will not meddle: I will not censure the one, nor di∣vine of the other, you are a teacher of Gods word, within the compas of that word I will stay with you
and by it, examine with your patience; whether this frame of your doctrine be grounded on the rocke or on the sand, on the firme rocke of Gods law, or on the fickle sand of your owne fantasie misunderstand∣ing the law, and so whether it tend to the edification or ruine of the Church; For touching the comman∣ding of the Sabaoth, (vpon which I averre this do∣ctrine of yours cannot be grounded) lay it before you and consider it well. And tell me to whom is the charge of seruants ceasing from worke on the Sa∣boath The com∣mandement not giuen to servants but their Masters. day giuen? Is it to the seruants themselues or to their Masters? It is giuen of seruants I confesse, their worke is the matter of the commandement. But I demand whether it be giuen & imposed to the ser∣uants themselues, or to the Masters whose seruants they are? For if the commandement be not giuen to them, then doe not they transgresse the commande∣ments, if by their Masters they be set to worke, but the Masters to whom the law was giuen, that the ser∣uant should not worke, & consequently the sinne is their Masters and not theirs: so if the law be not im∣posed to them, then it requireth no obedience of them, It obligeth them not, therefore is neither the transgression of it any sinne to them, but only to those to whom it was giuen as a law. For the better cleer∣ing of which point let me aske you a question or two of other commandements, that for their forme are pa∣ralell to this, and whereof you haue no preiudice. God commanded the Israelites that no stranger should eate of the paschall lambe; againe that no
Ammonite nor Moabite should enter into the con∣gregation of the Lord, to the tenth generation. Good Sit tell me did the stranger sinne if hee eat of the passeouer being supposed invited? Or did the Am∣monites or Moabites sin if they came into the con∣gregation being admitted? Did the stranger (I say,) and the Ammonites and the Moabites, in these cases sin, of whom the commandements were giuen, or the Israelites to whom the commandements were gi∣uen touching them; no but it is clearely the Lords meaning that the Israelites should not admit of any gentile to the participation of the Passeouer, nor re∣ceiue the Ammonites and Moabites into the con∣gregation of the Lord: Let me aske you one question more, of a case that hath fallen in my remembrance: A precept comes out from the Prince; That every Cittizen in London shall on such a day keepe his seruants within doores and not suffer them to goe a broad. If not withstanding that precept, some Ma∣ster sends forth his seruant about his businesse, doth the seruant transgresse the Princes commandement by obeying his masters: Or ought he by pretence of that precept to disobey his Master and neglect his charge? It is plaine he doth the former and therefore he ought not to doe the latter. For the commande∣ment was giuen to his master not to him, and the purpose of it was to restraine his Master from com∣manding such seruice and not to restraine the seruant from obeying his Master if it were commanded: there it is apparent that the obligations of commande∣ments
pertaineth to them to whom they are prescri∣bed as rules, and not to them of whom only (as being the matter of the precept) they are prescribed. Now that that clause of the Commandement touching seruants was not giuen to the seruants them selues, but to their Masters, in whose power and dis∣position they are, the text and tenour of the com∣mandement doth clearly import; for marke it well and answere me; to whom is this speech directed? Neither thy sonne nor thy daughter, shall doe any worke on the Sabaoth day: is it not to the Parents? For can this manner of speech (thy sonne thy daugh∣ter) be rightly directed to any other then the parent, and is not by the same reason the clause that next fol∣loweth, (neither shall thy man seruant nor thy maid∣seruant doe any worke on the Sabaoth day) directed to the Masters of such seruants? Seeing that phrase of speech (thy man seruant thy maidseruant) cannot rightly be vsed to any other? It is therefore as cleare as the Sunne, euen to meane vnderstandings, (if they will giue but meane attendance, to the tenour of Gods commandements, rather then the fond inter∣pretations and deprauations of men) that that clause of the commandement touching seruants cessation from working on the Sabaoth, is not giuen to ser∣uants themselues but to their Masters concerning them. Or if to any darke vnderstanding, which some grosse cloud may ouershadow, this seeme not cleere enough, the declaration yet of Moses himselfe touch∣ing the commandement, will make it so: of Moses
I say, who can neither be suspected of ignorance, as hauing beene with the Lord 40 daies together in the Mountaine when he receiued the tables of the com∣mandements: Exod. 24. v 18. Exod. 33. v. 11. & with whō the Lord talked familiarly, as a man doth with his friend: nor yet of corrupti∣on as being by the Lords mouth pronounced faith∣full in all his house: he therefore in the 5 of Deuter. 14. (which is only the place of Scripture, besides the 20 of Exodus, where all the branches of that com∣mandement are repeated) after the seuerall prohibiti∣ons touching the workes of sonnes, seruants, cattell, &c. addeth this Epiphonema: That thy man servant and thy maidseruant may rest as well as thou: It is to this (thou) therefore to whom this charge is dire∣cted that the seruants should rest vpon the Sabaoth; who can be conceiued to be no other then the master of those seruants, which yet moreouer the reason of that commandement (touching seruants rest immedi∣atly added) will better cleare from all exception; for remember (saith Moses) that thy selfe wast a seruant in the land of Aegypt, and the Lord thy God brought thee out thence with a mighty hand, and an out stret∣ched arme: Therefore the Lord thy God hath comman∣ded thee to make a day of rest, for to whom was that spoken, remember that thy selfe wast a seruant in the land of Aegypt, but to them that had beene servants, and now were not seruants? Or to what intent and purpose is that (remember) brought in? remember that thy selfe wast a seruant, but to moue compassion in them towards their owne servants, and allow them
a time of rest, hauing themselues felt the burthen and affliction of seruants in Aegypt, and remembring how glad they would haue beene of some remission; but if the commandement of rest had beene directly and immediatly giuen to seruants themselues, what needed any perswasion to that effect? Would not seruants, over set and wearied with six daies toile, be of themselues glad to rest on the seauenth? Or would they be so hot set on worke, whereby yet they gained nothing, but their labour for their paines, and the profit being another mans, that the commandement of God could not restraine them, but they needed al∣so to be perswaded? Or if perswasion had beene needful, were this a convenient perswasion to vse to seruants? Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Aegypt: which euen now, when they were out the land of Aegypt were seruants? And (to pro∣ceede with the text) what other importance hath that other reason, which immediatly followeth. And (remember that the Lord thy God hath brought thee thence) out of Aegypt with a mighty hand and out∣stretched arme. Therefore the Lord thy God hath com∣manded thee to make a day of rest. Hath it any other but to declare that the Lord who had redeemed them from their continuall slaueries, hath iust title & right to impose on them the commandement of the Sabaoth for their servants rest; importing as much, as if he had said, although of thy selfe thou shouldest haue compassion of thy seruant and allow him rest. Remembring that thy selfe wast a seruant in the land
of Aegypt, yet art thou more effectually obliged to doe it, because the Lord hath commanded thee. (The Lord) that brought thee out of thraldome and vnces∣sant labours in Aegypt, and therefore hath reason to command one daies rest, in a weekes revolution (Thee) that by his redeeming hand art set at liberty from that labour and seruitude. Where marke againe that the Lord is said to haue commanded them, who a little before were said to be seruants in Aegypt and by his goodnesse were freed from that slauery; which reason could not be intended or directed to them, which still remained in servitude. It is cleare there∣fore that all this perswasion of Moses for servants re∣sting on the Sabaoth, was not directed to the seruants themselues, who to take their ease on the Sabaoth nee∣ded neither to be commanded nor intreated (licence would serue their turne) but to the Masters whose de∣sire of gaine, by the seruants labour might stand be∣twixt the Sabaoth and the seruants rest: and to make an end with the text, with the last wordes of it: what is it, that the Lord for these reasons commanded? was it barely to keepe & obserue the Sabaoth, as it is in the vulgar English, Latine and Greeke translations? No they are all short, it is  that Deut. 5. 15. is to make a day of rest. Now to make it to be so, im∣porteth not only to obserue it himselfe, but to cause others also to obserue it, which is euidently the pro∣perty of Masters and gouernors: wherefore seeing both the commandement touching seruants rest from labour on the Sabaoth day and reasons added,
by Moses to perswade that point, (and draw their mindes to obsequiousnesse) are evidently directed to the Masters and not (neither of both) to the seruants themselues, I take it out of all question as cleare as the Sunshine at midday, that if seruants by their Ma∣sters command doe any worke on the Sabaoth the sinne is not theirs, who as touching their bodily la∣bour are meerely subiect to their Masters power, but it is their Masters sin: for their sin it is that transgres the law. They transgresse the law, who are obliged by it: they are obliged by it, to whom it was giuen and imposed, and giuen it was as I haue plentifully pro∣ued only to Masters. Or if notwithstanding all these euidences, you will still contend that the prohibition touching bodily la∣bour on the Sabaoth is directly imposed on the ser∣uants themselues, see whether you bring not the Oxe and the Asse and other cattle also vnder the obliga∣tion of this commandement, whose worke is imme∣diatly after that of seruants prohibited, and precisely vnder the same forme of words, whose labours yet on the Sabaoth I hope you will not say to be in them sinnes and transgressions of Gods law? But as the la∣bour of the beast is the sinne and transgression of the Master, to whom the commandement of the beasts resting from labour wasgiuen, so is the labour of the seruant also, which by the Masters commandment he executed on that day (as being touching bodily seruice incident to mankinde in like degree of subie∣ction) the Masters sinne, and not the seruants. For di∣stinction
must be made betweene the matter and the forme (if to speake in schoolemens stile offend you not) that is betweene the act and the guilt of sinne, of which in this case the act indeede, wherewith the commandement of the Sabaoth is violated is the ser∣vants, but the crime and guiltinesse is the Masters that sets him on worke, for seeing sin formally taken is nothing else but the transgression of the law or vn∣lawfulnesse ( as the Apostle tearmeth it most 1 Ioh, 3. 4. properly & exactly, even as guiltines is the obligation to punishment, for that transgression, it appeareth ma∣nifestly, that his is the guiltinesse, whose the transgres∣sion is; and his the transgression, to whom the law was prescribed as a rule, & that is the Masters, to whom it is not only imposed that he himselfe should doe no worke on that day as a particular man in the first clause: Thou shalt doe no worke, but also that none of his should doe any as he is the Father or Master of a family, in those clauses that follow. Neither shall thy sonne nor thy daughter, nor manseruant nor maid∣servant, &c. which latter point touching his keeping of the Sabaoth viz. as the gouernour of his house, had not beene so well provided for, and regulated by the law of God, if these clauses of children and seruants abstinence from labour on the Sabaoth, had beene gi∣uen directly to themselues, and not to their go∣vernours. But you will reply perhaps that the commande∣ment touching seruants rest on the Sabaoth, is giuen to their Masters indeede, but not only to them,
but to their seruants also. No such matter; for if it be; let that appeare and set downe the clause wherein it is manifestly expressed or necessarily im∣plied, that seruants are forbidden all labour on the Sabaoth day, as servants I say touching matter of ser∣vice or labour imposed on them by their Masters, for that in those workes which seruants doe on the Sa∣baoth day of themselues and not as proceeding from their Masters iniunction, but from their owne election it is no question but they transgresse the commande∣ment: but those workes they doe not as seruants, that is at anothers command; but as in the condition of their seruice, or favour of their Masters they retaine some degree of liberty, and haue some disposition of themselues permitted vnto them, so in that respect fall into the clause of free men viz. the first clause of the commandement: Thou shalt doe no worke; but to seruants as seruants (in case they be commanded to worke) which is our question, there is no clause of the commandement imposed. Whereby may easily and clearly be discerned the difference betwixt the equity & wisdome of Almigh∣ty God in the constitution of the law of the Sabaoth, obliging Parents, and Masters and owners, for the children, & seruants and cattle that are meerely vn∣der their powers; and the rashnesse and iniquity of wretched men interpreting the law as immediatly & directly obliging the children & seruants themselues: for (good Sir) consider it well, and tell me whether it be more equall to impose the law of ceasing from
worke to the servants themselues, or to their Masters in whose power they are? Servants are not homines turis sui nor operum suorum domini as Lawyers speake; they are but their Masters liuing instruments  as Aristotle tearmeth them, they haue noe right or power to dispose of themselues, they can∣not play and worke at their owne pleasure (for this is the condition of freemen, not of servants) but are meerely and intirely for bodily labour and seruice vnder the power & commandement of their Masters and vnder their power for service only: in such sort as they can neither iustly performe any labour, which their Masters forbid, nor omit any which their Ma∣sters command, but are vnder their inforcement, and punishment also if they disobey. This I say is the pro∣perty and obligation of a servant, and that by the law of nations, which alloweth, and ever hath done, Ma∣sters over their servants (as the law of nature doth Pa∣rents ouer their children) not only a directiue, but a correctiue and coactiue power: So then I pray you (tell me) whether the commandement touching the Sabaoth was not of common reason, rather to be im∣posed on them which were at liberty, and had power to obey it, then on them which were vtterly void and destitute of that power, and liberty? Whether in such a case it were not more reasonable to inioyne the Masters that they should not command, then inioyne the seruants not to obey, for the poore seruants if their Masters command them could not chuse but worke, the law of nations bound them vnto it, which
had put them vnder their Masters power, and inforce∣ment: but the masters might forbeare to command, there was no law, that bound them to that, or inioy∣ned them to exact ought of their seruants. It was therefore much more agreeable both to the wisdome and iustice of Almighty God to impose the comman∣dement rather on the Masters then on the seruants, for thereby was preuented the disobedience of ser∣vants to their Masters, & the punishment that might attend on that, and the breach of the law of nations, (all which the other had occasioned) and yet the Ma∣sters were in noe sort wronged: for their seruants re∣mained in their power, no lesse on the Sabaoth, then the other sixe common daies, only the Lord did qua∣lify, and determine the act, or execution of that pow∣er, on the Sabaoth day namely to command their ser∣vants cessation from bodily labour & instead of that to exercise themselues in spirituall workes of holi∣nesse; it was I say (to establish the commandement in such forme) more agreeable to the wisdome, and justice of God; and was it not also to his goodnesse, and compassion? For say that the commandement touching servants vacation was giuen to themselues, not to their Masters, should not thereby poore ser∣vants (to whom every where else the law of God ap∣peareth milde and pittifull) be intangled with inex∣tricable perplexity? For suppose his Master inioyne him some worke on the Sabaoth day (couetous Ma∣sters may soone doe it) especially if they thinke that precept touching their seruants cessation, not to
touch them) or else they may be ignorant of the law of God, (as Christians and Iewes, may happily serue Pagans) Admit I say some Master commands his ser∣vant to worke on the Sabaoth, what should the ser∣vant doe, should he worke? God hath forbidden him; should he not worke? His Master hath comman∣ded him: for the law of God is set at strife with the law of nations, and that poore servant like the Sailor betweene Sylla and Charybdis, standeth perplexed & afflicted in the midst betweene stripes and sinne: for he must of necessity either disobey Gods commande∣ment, which is sinne; or his Masters, which is atten∣ded with stripes. Besides it is absurd that the law of God, should restraine the seruant from obeying his Master, and yet not restraine the Master from com∣manding his servant vnlawful things: As it is also another absurdity that that day which by the law giuen was manifestly intended to bring seruants release, and remission of their weekely toile; should by the decree of the law it selfe aboue all other daies breede their greatest perplexities: forasmuch as a∣boue all other daies (if their Masters be not men that feare God) enforced they are (there is no avoidance) to venter either on sinne or stripes, for either God must be disobeyed, and sinne cleaueth to their soules, or their Masters; and stripes light vpon their bodies, ei∣ther they must obey God, and be plagued by men; or obey men, and be condemned by God: you will say it is better to obey God then men; and worse to diobey him that can cast both body and soule into hell, then
him that can only for a time afflict the body: true, who doubts it? But that is not the point I stand vpon; the point is how it agreeth with the tender goodnesse, and compassion of Almighty God towards poore servants (whose condition is yet honest and lawfull) to plunge them into such perplexities, as namely to im∣pose on them a commandement, which they can nei∣ther keepe nor breake without a mischiefe and in∣convenience; neither keepe as the seruants of men nor breake as they are the servants of God: neither keepe without sharpe punishment; nor breake without hea∣vy sinne: all which intanglement of seruants, and ca∣lumniation against both the iustice and mercy of God, is clearly avoided, if the commandement be giuen (as the tenour of it doth simply import) to the Masters, and not to the servants; which I haue suffici∣ently proued, both by the evidence of holy scrip∣ture, soe to haue beene, and by the evidence and in∣forcement of reason, that it should be so. And doth not the practise of holy gouernours registred in the Scriptures, declare, that they had the same vnder∣standing of the commandement? Nehemiah, when he saw among the Iewes at Ierusalem the Sabaoth pro∣phaned with treading of wine presses, carrying of burthens, buying and selling, whom reproueth he for it? The seruants by whose imployment and labour these things were done, and the Sabaoth defiled? No but them vnder whose power the servants were, the rulers of Iudah; and what rulers? the Magistrats on∣ly? Noe such matter; but the freemen of Iudah, that
is to say the Masters of those Servants: for such (namely freemen) the word  there vsed doth pro∣perly import, not only the Magistrats or rulers of the commonwealth, for the septuagint which (being them selues Iewes) I hold, best knew the property of their owne language; translate  by the greeke word  which word is properly and directly oppo∣sed to seruants: & euery where almost in the old Te∣stament where the hebrew word  is found (which is knowne, to signify a freeman) and is trans∣lated in the greeke , it is in the chalde , which is manifestly knowen to be the same with the hebrew  but farre more vsuall in the Chaldie tongue. They were the freemen of Iudah then that by Nehemiah were called to account, and reprooued, for the prophanation of the Sabaoth by those seruile la∣bours which (no question) had beene executed by their seruants; but if the seruants by those labours, had themselues transgressed the commandement: had he not done both iustly, to haue made them partakers of the reproofe, who had beene partakers of the sinne? (seeing the commandement of God lay equall on both) and wisely to; that if he could not restraine the masters from commanding, yet hee might restraine the seruants from obeying, and so haue two strings to his bow? This Nehemiah did not (who vnderstood well the commandement) but rebuked the freemen, or Masters only, and omitted the servants; and yet, dealt (you will not deny I am sure) both iustly and  for had he done more wisely thinke you to re∣buke
seruants for not resting on the Sabaoth, that would haue rested with all their hearts, if they had not beene constrained to worke? Or had hee done more iustly to exact that of the seruants which, (for ought that appeareth) the commandement of God exacted not from them? For what worke is it that men are forbidden of the Sabaoth? Is it not the same that is permitted on the sixe daies, their owne worke. Thou shalt doe all thy worke . & is it the ser∣vants worke where about as a servant he is imployed, that neither is vndertaken of himselfe, nor for him∣selfe? that neither beginneth nor endeth in himselfe, but beginneth in his Masters command, and endeth meerely in his Masters profit; and from beginning to end is performed in his Masters feare? It is manifest that in the accompt of God, it is not; for God be∣holdeth the heart, and that is a mans owne worke with him, that proceedeth from his owne will. And therefore in Isaiah: it is the will that is forbidden, a∣bout the prophaning of the Sabaoth, that which in the law was  thy worke is there  thy Isaiah. 58.  will and that most iustly, for the will it selfe in∣deede is the proper seat and subiect of sinne, which essentially is nothing else, but the inordinate, or vn∣ruly election, or resolution of the will varying from the Scripture, or Gods law (for this very election of mans will, is the proper forme of actuall sinne) these outward vnlawfull actiōs of ours, are but the expres∣sions or manifestations or fruits or effects of sinne, sin properly they are not which hath her residence, and inhesion in the soule it selfe, and passeth forth of it
only the tincture and euidence & name of sinne they carry with them, because they issue from a sinfull de∣termination of the will, and are no whit further sinfull then they are voluntary. Seeing therefore sinne con∣sisteth especially in the exorbitance of the will, they that are only ministers of anothers exorbitant will, are only ministers of another mans sinne, which so farre only becommeth their owne sinne, as their owne will concurreth therevnto. The servant there∣fore doeing that worke on the Sabaoth day in obe∣dience to his Master, which of his owne will and ele∣ction he would not doe, although the worke where∣by the commandement of God is transgressed, be in some sort his, yet the transgression is none of his, but his Masters, that exacted the worke, so that although the worke as naturally considered be the servants, yet morally it is the Masters; The labour of it is the ser∣vants, but the sinne of it is the Masters: for the sinne is not the seruants obedience to the Masters com∣mandment, but in the Masters disobedience to Gods commandement, which hath indeede prohibited the worke of seruants in the Sabaoth, but yet the prohibi∣tion is imposed, and directed to their Masters not to them, who are only ministers, not authors of their owne labours; now in the imputation of sinne, diffe∣rence is to be made betwixt the authors and the mini∣sters. Betwixt the principall, & instrumentall agents. For is it the sinne of the eye when it beholdeth vanity, and of the tongue when it is loose to blaspheame, slander, ly, or of the hand when it is stretched forth
to strike, and shed blood? They may be tearmed the sinnes of these members I confesse, because in these sinnes, these members are abused, but are these workes properly the sinnes of these instruments, or of the dis∣solute minde; of those subordinate Ministers, and ser∣vants of the soule, that performe their naturall obedi∣ence; or of the inordinate soule herselfe that mis∣gouerneth them? But you may obiect, that these are Obiection. naturall instruments, in the workes of the soule, and conferre only power, but the seruant is a voluntary instrument in the workes of his Master and confer∣reth also will: I answere; he conferreth will indeede Sol. if he be a good seruant, by reason of the obligation of obedience wherein he standeth to his Master, but yet not absolute but conditionall will: not the selfe ele∣ction, but only the obedience and yeelding of his wil; and that onely as it is his masters worke: not as it is his Masters sinne; for the worke on the Sabaoth, hauing sinne annexed to it, & so being a sinfull worke, the servant and the Master must diuide it betwixt them: the worke is the seruants, and the sinne is the masters, for the seruant doth but his duty, in obeying his Masters commandement, but the Master trans∣gresseth his, in disobeying Gods cōmandement, tou∣ching his seruants ceasing from that labour: But see∣ing I haue begunne to obiect I will proceede a little farther in that course, both the more euidently to de∣clare my meaning least it be obnoxious to calumni∣ation, and also to resolue the obiections that may be produced against seruants obedience touching
worke on the Sabaoth if my imagination be so good as to finde them, and my learning also to satisfy them. For first, it seemes that servants are touching this Obiect. commandement in better condon then other men: if by their workes on the Sabath they transgresse it not: and transgresse it they doe not if it be not impo∣sed on them, but only on their Masters. Touching Sol. them I answere that the workes of servants are of two sorts, some proceeding from them as they are seruants that is vpon their Masters commandement: others proceeding from their owne election: vnto which namely not by any commandement of their Masters, but by the way of their owne desires they are carried. Of the first sort of workes they are only Ministers, of the second they are authors. And tou∣ching this second sort I confesse (although of the for∣mer it be farre otherwise) both that seruants haue a severall obligation of their owne, & that their trans∣gression and sinne is seuerall, & therefore that them∣selues are bound to answere it to the iustice of God, but whether the sinne of these second workes, be pe∣culiarly the seruants, or that the Master also partici∣pate with the seruant in that guiltinesse. It may be a question. for if they be done meerely by the seruants election (beside the knowledge and contrary to the commandement of his Master) it seemes to be parti∣cularly the servants sinne. But if they be occasioned by the Masters negligence then doth he certainly par∣ticipate in guiltinesse with his seruant although in a diuerse sort, for it is a sinne of commission in the ser∣vant
vnlawfull act, and a sinne of omission  the  neglecting his due care, because by the  Almihty God the Master is bound not nly  command his seruant to worke, but to com∣mand him not to worke on the Sabaoth day: well then the workes which seruants doe on the Sabaoth day on their owne election are condemned: the workes  doe by obedience, are excused by their Masters mandement; but what workes are so ex∣cused▪ Ar all? No; but briefly all those which while they are performed as by the Servants of men, they that d m are not impeached for being the ser∣vants of God. That is to say the workes of labour but not the workes of sin: for to the first they are obli∣ged by the law of nations, but the second are forbid∣den them by the law of God, not nakedly forbidden as their labour on the Sabaoth is, but directly and im∣mediatly forbidden them, for it is cleare that all the other commandements being indifferently imposed without either specification or exception of any person whatsoeuer, respect not any more one then a∣nother: & therefore hold all men vnder an equall ob∣ligation, and so was it altogether conuenient, because they are no lesse the secret lawes of nature, then the reuealed lawes of God. and no lesse written with the finger of God in the fleshly tables of the heart, then in the tables of stone, all of them forbidding those things that by their property and nature, or (as the Schoolemen say) ex suo genere, are euill; but the com∣mandement that forbiddeth seruile workes on the
Sabaoth is of a different sort, first because the servant is, touching the matter which it forbiddeth (labour) wholly subiect to another mans command: secondly because the commandement forbiddeth not the ser∣vant to worke but onely forbiddeth the Master his servants worke; thirdly because the thing it selfe namely servants labour, is not evill materially and ex suo genere, as the matters of the other negatiue com∣mandements are: but only circumstantially, because its done vpon such a day: for idolatry, blasphemy, dishonouring of Parents, murther, adultery, theft, false testimony, coueting of that is other mens; which are the matter of other commandements are euill in their owne nature; and therefore forbidden, because they are euill in their owne nature: But to labour on the Sabaoth is not by nature evill, but therefore evill because it is forbidden. So that the natiue ilnesse in the other, causeth the prohibition, but the prohibiti∣on in this causeth the evill, for labouring on the sea∣venth day; if God had not forbidden it had not beene evill at all (no more then to labour on the sixt,) as not being interdicted by any law of nature, as the matters of all the other commandements are for al∣though the secret instinct of nature teacheth all men, that sometime is to be withdrawen from their bodily labours, and to be dedicated to the honour of God (which euen the prophanest Gentiles, amidst all the blind superstition, and darkenesse, wherewith they were couered, in some sort did) appointing set times to be spent in sacrifice and devotion to their Idols,
which they tooke for their Gods) yet to obserue one day in the number of seauen, as a certaine day of that number, and namely the seauenth in the ranke, or a whole day by the revolution of the Sunne, and with that seuere exactnesse of restraining all worke (as was enioyned to the Iewes) is but meerely ceremoniall, brought in by positiue law; and is not of the law of nature; For had that forme of keeping Sabaoth, beene a law of nature, then had it obliged the Gentiles as well as the Iewes, seeing they participate both equall in the same nature: yet it did not so, but was giuen to the Israelites, to be a speciall marke of their separati∣on Exod. 31. 13. Ezech. 20. 12. 20. from the Gentiles, and of their particular partici∣pation to God: neither shall wee finde either in the writings of Heathen men (whereof some were in their kinde very religious) that any of them had ever any sense of it, or in the records of Moses, that it was euer obserued by any of the holy Patriarches before it was pronounced in mount Sinai: But if it had beene a law of nature her selfe, and so had obliged all the Patriarches; and as large as nature her selfe, and so obliged all the Gentiles: and had it not beene as dura∣ble, as nature too, and so obliged vs Christians also? Certainely it had; for if that precise vacation and sanctification of the Sabaoth day, had consisted by the law of nature, then must it haue beene by the de∣cree of all Divines immutable, and consequently right grievous should the sinne of Christians be, which now prophane that day with ordinary la∣bours, & chiefly theirs, which first translated the cele∣bration
of that day, being the seauenth, to the first day of the weeke; who yet are certainly supposed to be none other then the Apostles of our Saviour: To turne to the point and clearly to determine it; the Master only is accountable vnto God, for the ser∣vants worke done on the Sabaoth: but for what worke? Namely for all the workes of labour, but not for the workes of sinne: and how for the workes of labour? Namely, if he doe them not absolutely, of his owne election, but respectiuely, as of obedience to his Masters command; for touching labours, ser∣vants are directly obliged to their Masters. But tou∣ching sinnes, themselues are obliged immediatly to God. Therefore those they may doe because their ma∣ster commands them: these they may not doe (al∣though commanded) because God forbids them. The servants then may not in any case, sinne at the commandement of any Master on earth: because hee hath receiued immediatly a direct commandement to the contrary, from his Master in heauen. For it is better to obey God then man. And there is no pro∣portion betwixt the duties which they owe as ser∣vants to their Masters according to the flesh. And which they owe as Children to the father of spirits: or betwixt the obligation wherein they stand to men, who haue power but ouer their bodies in limited ca∣ses, and that for a season. And that infinite obligati∣on wherein they stand to him that is both creator & preserver, and redeemer, & Iudge of body and soule; sinne therefore they may not, if their Masters com∣mand
them, because God hath forbidden them (not only forbidden I say but forbidden it them) But la∣bour they may if their Masters command them, be∣cause God hath no way forbidden them that; God hath indeede forbidden the Masters exacting that worke on the Sabaoth; but he hath not forbidden the Servants execution of that worke if it demanded or exacted: he hath restrained the Master from com∣manding it, but he hath not restrained the seruants from obeying if it be commanded, for although I ac∣knowledge the servants worke on the Sabaoth to imply sinne: yet I say it is not the servants fault. And albeit I confesse the commandement of God be trans∣gressed and God disobeyed by such workes on the Sabaoth, yet it is not the seruant that transgresseth the commandement, it is not he that disobeyeth God. For the question is not the passine sense, whether God be displeased with these workes, but of the a∣ctiue who displeaseth him. The thing is confessed but the person is questioned. Confessed, that is, that there is sinne committed in that worke, but questio∣ned whose sinne it is. For worke hauing relation both to the Master and to the seruant: to the Masters com∣manding and to the servants executing; I affirme that the worke is sinfull only on the Masters part, not on the seruants, namely as it is an effect of the Masters command not as an effect of the seruants obedience. And the case seemes cleare. The matter whereabout the seruants labour is, is the Masters. So is the com∣mand that sets him to it. So is the awe and feare that
keepes him to it. So is the profit that redoundeth of it. And aboue all the commandements of God where∣by that worke of the seruant is forbidden is giuen directly to the Master. And in the seruant all is con∣trary. It is not his owne worke. It proceedeth not from his owne will. His condition exacteth his obedience about labour, and aboue all God commands of ceas∣ing from labour belongeth not to him, I meane not to him directly, as the person to whom it is giuen, but only as the subiect or matter whereof it is giuen; for he is one of them indeede, whose workes are forbid∣den, but not of them to whom it is forbidden, one of whom but not to whom the commandement was im∣posed. But where the law was not imposed, sinne cannot be imputed seeing sinne is nothing but the transgression of the law; it is not therefore the ser∣vants but the Masters sinne. But there is another obiection, for admit the ser∣vants Obiection. worke vpon the Sabaoth be the Masters sinne, that imposeth it. Is it not sinne to giue consent and furtherance to another mans sinne? But this servants doe when they execute their Masters commande∣ments, and consequently it is vnlawfull so to yeeld, lawfull therefore it is to resist and reiect such cōman∣dement. I answere first touching the pointe of con∣senting that in such a worke is to be considered the Sol. substance and the quality, that is the worke it selfe & the sinfulnesse of it, seruants may consent to it, as it is their masters worke, not as it is their Masters sinne, for except these things be distinguished, God him∣selfe
can no more avoide the calumniation of being the author, then poore servants of being the ministers of sinne; for that God concurreth with euery man to every action whatsoeuer, as touching the substance of the action, is out of all question, seeing both all power whence actions issue are derived from him, and that no power can proceede into act without his present assistance and operation, but yet to the crime, the faultinesse, the inordination, the vnlawfulnesse of the action (wherein the nature of sinne doth for ma∣lice consist) he concurreth not. But it wholly pro∣ceedeth from the infection of the concupiscence, wherewith the faculties of the soule are originally defiled, the actions themselues issuing from the pow∣ers, and the sinfulnesse of the actions from the sinful∣nesse of the powers, like corrupt streames flowing from filthier springs. It is not therefore euery con∣currence of the servants with the Master to a sinfull action which causeth the staine, and imputation of sinne vpon the servant: as when he consenteth and concurreth only to the action not to the sinne: name∣ly likes and approues it, as his masters worke, yet vt∣terly dislikes it, as it is his masters transgression, likes of the worke for the obligation of obedience, wherein (touching worke) he standeth to serue his Master, and yet dislikes of the sinne, for the great obligation wherein euery one standeth toward the honour of God. But yet (to answere secondly to the point of resisting) the seruant ought not for any dislike or de∣testation Sol. of the annexed sinne, to resist or reiect his
Masters commandement touching the worke: for in obeying he is at most but the minister of another mans sinne (and that as they say per accidence, name∣ly as it is annexed to such a worke) but in resisting he is directly the author of his owne sinne, by with∣drawing his obedience about bodily seruice from him that is his Lord according to the flesh: euen that obedience wherein both by his owne covenant and the law of nations he standeth bound vnto him, and that without any exception of the Sabaoth more then other daies. And is it wisdome in a seruant to com∣mit himselfe sinne to prevent his Masters sinne? That is to offend God himselfe least another man should offend him; no not so, wee must not doe evill that good may come thereon (especially doe evill our selues that anothers good may come of it) rather wee must carry two eyes about vs that while wee looke with one to the end (that is to the glory of God), we looke with another to the means that they be law∣full and agreeable to the will of God, and not disho∣nour him with our sinfull actions, while we would ho∣nour him with our good intentions. But yet one scru∣ple Obiect. remaineth because every person that did any worke on the Sabaoth day, was by the law to be cut off from his people, and to dye the death, every person therefore, the servant as well as the master. I answere Exo. 31, 14. 15. that the iudiciall commandement is to be vnderstood Sol. of the same persons to whom the morall commande∣ment was giuen; the commandement touching pu∣nishment of them, to whom the commandement
the offence was imposed: but I prooued before, that the morall commandement was not imposed to ser∣vants as seruants, but to them that were at liberty. All they therefore that did any worke on the Sa∣baoth were to dy the death by the Iudiciall law: they I say that did it: not they that were made to doe it; which were as well passiue as actiue in doing of it: namely they that did it of election, as free that might obstaine from worke and would not, not they that did it of iniunction and necessity, as seruants that would abstaine from worke and might not; whose condition was such that they would not worke by their masters direction, might be made to worke by their masters compulsion, for a hard case it were if poore servants to whom no commandement to cease from worke was giuen by God; and yet might be compelled to worke by men, should dye for it, if they did soe worke. It is therefore to be vnderstood of them that worke willingly of themselues or (as au∣thors) cause others to worke (as masters doe their servants) not of them who only (as ministers) and a∣gainst their wills are set to worke. And rather be∣cause the worke of the servant (that I say which hee doth by the commandement of his master to whom for matter of labour he is meerely subordinate) euen reason and equity will interpret the masters worke. And certainly that God accounteth it so, the decla∣ratiō of that precept in another place doth, make ma∣nifest. Exod. 23. 12. Sixe daies thou shalt doe thy worke, and the seaventh day thou shalt rest that thine Oxe and thine
Asse, and thy Sonne, and thy Maide, &c. may be re∣freshed, for is it not manifest that the servants worke is accounted the Masters, seeing the rest from the Masters worke is the refreshing of the servants, the Master therefore who by the morall law was com∣manded that his servants should not worke on the Sabaoth was by the Iudiciall to bee punished with death, if the servant did worke that day by his com∣mandement. And thus haue I proued my assertion, namely that the commandement of the Sabaoth was not giuen, nor fit to be giuen to the servants themselues but to their gouernours, both by arguments of reason which is the rule of men, and authority of Scriptures, which is the rule of Christians, and cannot finde any thing materiall in either of both that may reproue it: but yet if I should admit (which I doubt you will neuer proue) that the commandement was directly giuen to servants themselues, as servants, and that they might lawfully disobey their Masters touching those workes where by the precept of the Sabaoth might be transgressed: yet haue I another exception against your doctrine; namely for condemning every light worke (such as inviting of guests, or fetching of wine from a neighbours house, or giuing a horse proven∣der) (for these are the very instances which bred the question) for transgression of Gods commande∣ments, forbidden on the Sabaoth: no; it is not; the commandement importeth no such thing for it is not [] that is every worke, but [] that
is there forbidden, that is every servile worke, for such the word [] properly doth import, and ser∣vile worke, by the interpretation of the best diuines is accounted, either that which is attended with the toile of the body, or at least intended and directed to lucre and gaine of riches, with some care of the minde, such as mens ordinary worke is wont to bee on common daies. And that the worke there forbid∣den hath a speciall relation to the gaine of riches is the better apparēt because the same word [] signifieth (opes) as well as (opus) riches as well as worke, and not only where the commandement was pronounced (in the 20 of Exodus) but wheresoeuer it is repeated in the bookes of the law, which is of∣tentimes (and differently for other circumstances) the same word [] is euer retained and never changed, not every worke therefore absolutely, but e∣very worke of such a kinde, namely consisting in toile and tending to gaine is restrained by the commande∣ment, and is there not evident reason to vnderstand it so? For seeing the intendment of the precept is clearly (in the point of that daies vacation) that the body should be refreshed by abstinence from labour, And (in the point of sanctification of it) the mind should be refreshed by attendance to spirituall exer∣cise: it followeth manifestly that if there be any workes that resolue not the body and so hinder not the re∣freshing of it, nor dissolue and alienate the minde from the service of God, and meditation of Godli∣nesse, that these workes are not forbidden because
neither the vacation which the commandement im∣porteth, nor that sanctification which it intendeth is impeached by them. And if you will obiect that euen very light workes are expressely forbidden in the law, so that to kindle fire on the sabaoth day was vnlawfull, I must answere Exod. 353. you that that and some other were but ceremoniall precepts not morall (and belonged to the curious observance of the commandement) and therefore obliged the Iewes and none else: for that such light and labourlesse workes on the Sabaoth were no trans∣gression at all of the morall commandement the pra∣ctise of him whose every action was our instruction, of him who was the giuer of the law as God, and the only keeper of it as man, will put all out of questiō, for had that exact and extreame vacation on the Saba∣oth beene required by Gods morall commande∣ment, and so every light worke beene a transgression of it, would not our Sauiour haue repooued the Iewes Luke. 13. 15. for loosing their beasts from the staules, and leading them to water on the Sabaoth day? Yet hee mentioneth, and reproues it not (and thinke Sr by the way, he that condemned not bringing of beasts to drinke, would not condemne bringing meat to beasts) or would he haue (not suffered only) but ex∣cused the Luke. 6. plucking of eares of corne, and rubbing out the graines on the Sabaoth day as he did in his disciples? or would he himselfe Ioh. 9. 6. on the Sabaoth day haue made clay, and anointed with it the eyes of the blinde? or would he haue commanded others to doe
such workes on the Sabaoth, as he did the impotent man, whom he had healed, namely to Ioh. 5. 8. 9. take vp his bed that day and depart? See then how this seuere precisenesse of yours agreeth with the practise and doctrine of our Saviour: who not only suffered these light workes to be done without reprehension, but excused them, but did them himselfe; but comman∣ded others to doe them: therefore in his iudgement, who was the law giuer, and must be the Iudge of all the sinnes of men; they were no transgression of the commandement of the Sabaoth. For vaine it were to reply that Christ was Lord of the Sabaoth, and therefore might dispence with the commandement at his owne pleasure: vaine it were I say, for although he were Lord of the Saba∣oth as God, being so the law giuer, yet was he subiect to the commandement, as man, being as the Apostle saith Galat. 4. 4. made vnder the law; for what else importeth that kinde of speech (made vnder the law) but that he which by nature was not vnder the law, as being God, was yet made vnder the law as becomming man: which law first himselfe pronounced: he came o fulfill, and secondly his Apostles that hee had ful∣filled it in that he had no sinne: but every transgressi∣on of the law was sinne, therefore in no sort he trans∣greffed the law, and it not only were (not) vaine in this manner to excuse our Saviours actions, but a ve∣ry hard & dangerous point, when question is made of our Saviours fulfilling of the law, to fly in this case to the refuge of dispensations: as if our Sauiour that
came to satisfy for all our transgressions of the law, performed not the law himfelfe, with such perfect & exact obedience as might answere the justice of God, and the strictresse of his commandements, but that something must be helped or supplied by dispensa∣tion. The truth is therefore that our Sauiours obedi∣ence, answered exactly, and perfectly satisfied the exigence of that, and all other commandements of Almighty God, performing all to the vtmost that they required, and therefore those easie and slender workes, were no breaches of the commandement touching the Saboth. But let that be admitted also; first that the com∣mandement was immediatly giuen to seruants, Se∣condly that it was giuen touching the lightest degree of workes. Let servants bee the persons, and those workes the matter to whom, and of which the com∣mandement was giuen, is your doctrine yet iustified hereby, and subiect to no other reproofe? The per∣sons haue afforded me exceptions against it because the commandement was not giuen to seruants. And the matter because it was not imposed touching that light sort of workes; the time also will, because it cā∣not be vnderstood of the Lords day; for what day was it, of which the charge of vacation was so strict∣ly giuen? Was it not the seauenth day of the weeke? The seauenth (saith the precept) is the Sabaoth of the Lord thy God; In it thou shalt doe no worke. And why the seauenth? Because in sixe daies the Lord finished all the workes of creation, and rested the seauenth
day; therefore he sanctified the seauenth day, & what day is it whereof we question? The Lords day? That's the first day of the weeke It is therefore the seauenth day of the weeke (the Sabaoth of the Iewes) not the first day of the weeke (the Sabaoth of Christians) that was so strictly by Gods commandement destined to rest. Therefore the workes done on the Sabaoth day are no transgressions of Gods commandements. But Obiect. you will say the old Sabaoth is abolished, and the ce∣lebration of it translated to the first day of the weeke. Translated, by whom? By any commandement of God? Where is it? The holy Scripture wee know to Sol. be sufficient; it containeth all the commandements of God, whether of things to be done, or to be avoided, or to be beleeued. Let me heare either one precept, one word of God out of the olde Testament that it should be translated, or one precept, one word of the sonne of God, out of the new Testament, command∣ing it to be translated, I say one word of any of his Apostles intimating that by Christs commandement it was translated. It is certaine that there is none. Therefore it is evident that the solemnity of the Lords day was not established Iure divino. Not by any commandement of God, and consequently that to worke on that day, is certainly no breach of any divine commandement. How then hath the first day of the weeke gained the celebration and solemnity to become the Sabaoth of the Christians? By the con∣stitution of the Church, and only by that, yet of that most ancient Church, I confesse that next followed
the ascention of our redeemer. But yet all this is but Ius humanum it is but the decree of men, which must not equall it selfe with Gods commandement, and must be content with a lesse degree of authority and obligation then the commandement touching the Sabaoth, might challenge that was pronounced in the eares of men with the voice of God, and written in tables with the finger of God. What then doe I doubt of the iust abolishment of the Iewes Sabaoth; no in no sort; it is abolished and that iustly I confesse; yet not by any repeale of any contrary decree; but only by expiration, because it is growen out of date; It was established for a signe * Exod. 31. 13. of difference betwixt the people of God and the prophane nations, the Iewes and Gentiles: but this difference is ceased, the parti∣tion wall is broken downe, Iewes and Gentiles in Christ are made all one: all are become the people of God, the Sabaoth was (saith the Apostle) a shadow * Ezech. 20. 12. of things to come, whereof the body was in Christ, the body therefore being come, what should the sha∣dow be expressed? For was it the shadow of Christs Colos. . 17. resting in the graue that day? That is past; or was it a shadow of rest and liberty from the slauery of sinne in the kingdome of grace, that is obtained; or is it a shadow of the eternall rest of the blessed in the king∣dome of Glory? That is sure to be obtained (Christ hath giuen his word, and wee haue receiued the pledge of his holy spirit) These things are shadowed in Sabaoth. And these things are already performed in Christ. The first is past, the second is present, the
third is assured. The Sabaoth therefore that was the shadow of these things, when the things themselues were come, vanished of it selfe. But might not the celebration of the Sabaoth, which thus ceased, bee justly translated by the Church to the first day of the weeke? Yes certainly both might and was iustly. For I consider that the generality, was of the morall law, of the law of nature, namely that men should sequester sometime from worldly affaires, which they might dedicate to the honour of God, only the speciality, that is the limitation and designement of that time, was the churches ordinance appointing first one cer∣taine day, & that in relation of Christian assemblies, namely that they might meete and pray, and praise God together with one voice in the congregation. And secondly defigning that one day to the first day of the weeke, for some speciall reasons and remem∣brances. For first it was the day of Christs resurrecti∣on from the dead. Secondly it was the day of the ho∣ly Ghosts descention from Heauen to powre infinite graces vpon Christians. The first of them for our iu∣stification as the Apostle speaketh. The second for the sanctification, and edification of the whole Church (to omit some other reasons of lesse importance) iust∣ly therefore was the consecration of the Sabaoth translated to that day. But what of that? What if the consecration of the Sabaoth was by the Church trans∣lated to the first day of the weeke? Was therefore the commandement of God translated also? That that day ought to be obserued vnder the same obligation
with the Sabaoth? For if the commandement of God were not translated by the Church, together with the celebration from the seauenth day to the first day, then is working on the first day no violation of Gods commandement; was the commandement of God then translated from the Sabaoth to the Lords day by the decree of the Church? No: the Church did it not, let mee see the act. The Church could not doe it, let me see the authority: the Church could not translate the commandement to the first day, which God himselfe had namely limited to the seaventh. For could the Church make that Gods commande∣ment which was not his commandement? Gods commandement was to rest on the seauenth day and worke on the first; therefore to rest on the first and worke on the seauenth was not his commandement: For doth the same commandement of God enioyne both labour and rest on the same day? Is there fast and loose in the same commandement with God? Thou shalt worke on the first day saith that, and worke on the seaventh saith this. Can the Church make these the same commandement? But say the Church hath this incredible & vnconceivable power: Say it may forbid to worke on the first day, by the vertue of the very same precept. That doth neither ex∣presly cōmand or license to worke on that day. Say that the Church of God may translate the comman∣dement of God from one day to another at their pleasure, did they it therefore? I spake before of their authority whether they might doe it. I enquire now
of the act, whether they did it; did the Church (I say) ever constitute, that the same obligation of Gods commandement which lay on the Iewes, for keeping of the Sabaoth day should be translated and laid vp∣on the Christians for keeping of the Lords day? Did the Church this, no no, they did it not; all the wit & learning in the World will not proue it. But you may obiect, if the old Sabaoth vanished Obiect. and the commandement of God was limited & fixed to that day only, then is one of Gods commande∣ments perished. I answere that the generality of that commandement to keepe a Sabaoth wherein God Sol. might be honoured, was morall; But the speciality of it, namely to keepe, (1) one day of seaven, (2) the seaventh, (3) one whole day, (4) with precise vacan∣cy from all worke, were meerely ceremoniall; the spe∣cialities then of the commandements are vanished: But for the generality of it, it is a law of nature, and remaineth. But, as the speciality of that commande∣ment implyeth plaine contradiction, with the sabaati∣call of the Lords day, so the generality of it can en∣force nothing for it, for these are miserable conse∣quents, (indeede plaine fallacies of the consequent) that God hath sometime commanded vacancie, for his honour, therefore he hath commanded the first day of the weeke to be that time, or this, God hath commanded vs some time to rest, therefore that time we must precisely abstaine from all māner of workes: can the Church make these good consequences? If it cannot, the celebration of the Lords day, can with
no enforcement of reason be deduced out of the mo∣rality of Gods commandement. But if you will reply: that the Church hath established the first day of the weeke to be the Christians sabaoth not by way of consequence, as deducing it out of commandement but meerely by authority, appropriating and fixing Gods morall commandement to it; you may say your pleasure, but I shall neither beleeue, nor you proue that such authority belongs to the Church: or that such an act hath beene established by the Church: which I am sure you can neuer doe neither of both, for seeing that all divines acknowledge that the singling out of such a day to be sanctified, namely the seauenth rather then any other was meerely cere∣moniall, although it was Gods owne designation. I hope that you will confesse the speciall designement of the first day of the weeke to that honour, before other daies, being made only by the Church, to bee also but ceremoniall. But certaine it is that no cere∣monies, which come not vnder the obligation of Gods morall law, should oblige to the obseruation of ceremonies. Therefore it will never consist with reason, that the morall law of God can by any au∣thority of the Church oblige Christians to the cele∣bration of the Lords day. It is not therefore the translation of the old com∣mandement of God from the one day to the other (which yet if it were translated) can oblige servants no otherwise then it did vnder the old law) but the institution of a new commandement, of the Church
her selfe (yet guided by the spirit of God) that con∣secrated that day to the solemne seruice of God; what then doth not the constitution of the Church, for the celebration of the Lords day, binde equally the consciences of men as the old commandement did, for the celebration of the Sabaoth? Binde it doth, but not equally: for the Church is no way equall vn∣to God; the authority of it is lesse then the authority of God, therefore is the obligation of the Churches ordinance, lesse then the obligation of Gods ordi∣nance. But yet binde the conscience it doth, and that firmely and effectually, (even the conscience of every member of the Church) to true and exact obedience. For he * Mat. 18, 17. that heareth not the Church is no better then an heathen or a publican. And neuer was Church on earth more vndefiled then that that ordained that institution. He that despiseth the Apostles of Christ despiseth Christ himselfe, and the Apostles were go∣vernours of that Church: for acknowledged it is that the celebration of the Lords day, was the ordinance of that Church and of those gouernours. Therefore it is sure that that ordinance doth oblige the consci∣ence of every Christian man; but if you aske me how farre doth that constitution of the Church oblige the conscience? I answere you as farre as it doth com∣mand, (you will desire no more) further it cannot: It cannot oblige further, then it doth ordaine; it can∣not bind the conscience for guiltinesse, further then it doth for obedience; because all guiltinesse doth presuppose disobedience; now that the Church or∣dained
solemne assemblies of Christians, to be cele∣brated that day to the honour of God, and in them the invocation of Gods holy name, thankesgiuing, hearing of the holy Scriptures and receiuing of the Sacraments, is not denied; It is out of question, all antiquity affordeth plentifull remembrance of it. But that it inioyneth that severe & exact vacation, frō all workes on the Lords day, which the commandement of God required in the Iewes Sabaoth, you will never proue. It relisheth too much of the Iewish ceremo∣nies, to be proued by Christian divinity. For this is no proofe of it, that the Lords day is succeeded in place of the Sabaoth. Or as some diuines tearme it, as the heyre of the Sabaoth. It is I say no proofe at all, (except it were established by the same authority, and the observance of it, charged with the same strict∣nesse of commandement) for if it succeede the sabaoth in place, must it therefore succeed in equall precise∣nesse of obseruation? (So if the Pope succeedeth Pe∣ter in place, must he therefore succeede him in equa∣lity of power?) the Lords day therefore succeedeth the Sabaoth in the point of sanctification, for cele∣bration of the assemblies, for the Church hath pre∣cisely commanded that, but not in the point of exact and extreame vacation, from every kinde of worke, for that the Church hath not commanded: and so al∣though the Lords day may well be tearmed the heire of the Sabaoth, yet is it not ex asse haeres as the civill lawyers speake. It inheriteth not the whole right of the Sabaoth, for that right and prerogatiue of the Sa∣oth
was not giuen to the Sabaoth and its heires; it it was no fee simple (and if I may speake in the law∣yers stile) it was only a tenure for tearme of life: namely during the life of the ceremoniall law, which life ended in the death of our Saviour. This reason therefore of the succession of the Lords day in place of the Sabaoth is no reason. Any other reason besides this or else authority which I might in your behalfe obiect to my selfe, I know none worthy mentioning: for the commandement of God as I haue proved is not of this day. The commandement of the Church is of this day, but not of these workes, neither will all the histories of the ancient Church, nor cannons of the ancient councells, nor any other monuments or registers of antiquity afford you (as I am certainly perswaded search them as curiously as you can) re∣cord of any such constitution of the Church for the generall restraint of workes on the Lords day; you may finde I know in some of the ancient Fathers much sounding the prerogatiue of that day: as that it was a holy day in Hist. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 22. Eusebius: a day of Christian as∣semblies in Apolog. 2. Iustin Martyr; and a day of reioycing in Apologe. cap. 16. Tertullian: a festivall day in Epi. ad mag. Ignatius; and some more of the like, but doth any of all these import or imply a generall restraint? a desistāce from all worke? No, they doe not; neither shall you finde in these, nor in any other records of antiquity any constituti∣ons of the Apostles; and of the first Church extant to haue effect; no nor any relation or remembrance that such a constitution had ever beene made by them
nay I finde cleare evidence to the contrary, for would Constantine the Great (that most holy Em∣perour and the best nursing Father of Christian religi∣on that ever Prince was) would he I say haue licensed by his decree, the country people freely (libere lici∣te{que} are the words of the constitution) to attend their sowing of graine, setting of vines, and other husban∣dry on the Lords day, if those workes had beene forbidden by the commandement of God, or de∣cree of the Apostles, and first Church? Or would the Fathers in the councell of Laodicea (one of the most ancient & approued councells of the Church) enioyne the vacancy of the Lords day with this condition; And if men can? Certainly servants full ill can if they bee constrained by their Masters to worke: would they I say haue added such a conditi∣on, had it beene simply vnlawfull, for all sorts of peo∣ple by the ancient sanctification of the first Church to doe any worke that day? It appeareth therefore that there were no such vniversall constitutions of the Church. The actuall forbearing of all workes by some Christians that day I stand not on: nor on the exhortations of some ancient Fathers to that pur∣pose, some remembrances of both are to be found I know, but these are particular examples, and perswa∣sions; constitutions of the Church they are not, edicts of sundry Princes likewise, and decrees of some pro∣vinciall councells are extant I confesse in record to the same effect, and those are constitutions indeede but partly, not of the Church, partly not vniversall,
nor very ancient, and therefore are no sanctions to oblige the whole Church, which beside the law of God and decrees of the Apostles (to whom the go∣verment of the whole Church by our Saviour was committed) and the canons of the vniversall Synods no positiue constitution can doe. What then? Would I set at liberty that euery man may freely prophane the Lords day with extraordinary labour? No, I would not, I confesse it is meete Christians should abandon all worldly affaires that day and dedicate it wholly to the honour of God, that Christians should not be lesse devout & religious in celebrating of the Lords day, then the Iewes were in celebrating of there Sabaoth, for the obligation of our thankfulnes to God is more then theirs, although the obligation of his commandement to vs in that behalfe is lesse; Meete it is I say. And wish with all my heart it were most religiously performed euen with all abstinence from worldly affaires, and all attendance to Godly devotion. But yet notwithstanding I deny that toge∣ther with the institution of the Lords day there was any such constitutiō of theChurch established where∣by men were obliged to the strict desisting from all worke. But what doth the honour of God then stand at the courtesie of man to prophane that day (if they list) with worke at their pleasure? Not so, for beside the constitutions of some ancient councells both the edicts of christian Princes haue every where restrai∣ned that prophanation: neither of which (for mat∣ters that fall vnder their power) can bee transgressed
without sinne and disobedience to God, whose com∣mandements although not directly yet reductiuely) those constitutions are: for God hath commanded all men to honour their Parents (the parents of their country) stand in the first ranke. The sonne of God hath commanded all Christians to heare the Church, and that vnder forfeiture of communion of Saints, but they that despise the Canons of the Church, or edicts of the Prince, heare not the one, honour not the other, therefore they that transgresse either of these constitutions, transgresse also Consequently I say though not immediatly the commandements of God, but yet neither of them both (to come neare home) are transgressed by servants if they worke by their Masters commission, and not of their owne ele∣ction, for neither doth the one law or the other giue liberty and warrant to Servants to be rebellious to their Masters touching point of service, that day more then others. But in forbidding of worke, first they intend not your precise abstinence from any light and labourlesse worke as both the censure of the Church, and iudgement of temporall Magistrats make manifest, which neuer tooke hold on any man for such manner of workes. And secondly they pur∣pose to forbid the Masters commanding or allowing of worke and not the servants obeying if he be com∣manded; for the law is intended and taketh hold of them that haue the liberty and power to keepe it, not of them that haue not, but are meerely vnder the power and disposition of another man, wherefore if
Servants worke on the Lords day of their owne choice, it is their owne sinne, but if their Masters com∣mand, it is their masters sinne. And he standeth bound to answere the law, no warrant therefore, nor incou∣ragement haue servants by any of these lawes, to re∣iect their commandements touching matter of worke or service on the Sabaoth or any other day. And is not this more agreeable to the doctrine of the holy Apostles of our Saviour, every where deli∣vered touching servants? Doe they not often, and with exceeding earnestnes command and exhort them to obedience, no where permitting them any point of liberty, and that without exception of Ma∣ster, of labour, or of time? for (that we may take a ve∣ry short view of their doctrine touching servants o∣bedience) what masters are they to whom servants ought to be obedient? Infidells and beleeuers saith Paul . Tim. 6. 1. 2. Covetous and froward saith Peter 1. Pet. 2. 18. that is, even to all, obedient to all. How? In what sort? From the heart saith the Apostle, Collos. 3. 23. in singlenesse of heart as vnto Christ in another place: Ephes. 6. 5. without any replying, not so much as answering againe. In a third Titus. 3. 9. That is in all readinesse and humility, obedient to all in such sort: how farre? In what points? Even in all things: ser∣vants be obedient to your Masters in all things. Colos. 3. 22. please them in all things, Titus. 2, 9. thinke them worthy of all honour. 1. Tim. 6. 1. In all things? Yea in all things belonging to the condition of Servants; that is in all service, in all labour which is the proper
character of all servants, and (obedient to them in all things) why? That the name of God and his doctrine be not evill spoken of, 1. Tim. 6. 1. which two last points of the Apostles doctrine touching servants obedi∣ence I would advise you Sr specially to consider, for whereas it is out of question, that infidells exacted workes of their Christian servants (as in the begin∣ning of the Church many beleeuing seruants had vn∣beleeuing masters) on the Lords day no lesse then o∣thers; if their yeelding to that exacting of their Ma∣sters had beene sinne; would he haue commanded them to obey their Masters in all things? And to please them in all things without excepting of any day or of any labour? For that heathen Masters would exact of Christian servants their ordinary labour and service on the Lords day as well as on others you haue no reason to doubt, except you thinke that hea∣then men would tender and respect more the religi∣on of their Seruants (that religion which themselues esteemed to be superstition & folly) then their owne profit. And then if Christian seruants should haue withdrawen their obedience that day reiecting and resisting their Masters commandements, whereas their vnbeleeuing servants willingly obeyed them, and laboured for their profit, had they not caused the name of God which they worshipped to be blas∣pheamed and the doctrine which they professed to be evill spoken of? (which was the point of the Apo∣stles doctrine I especially remembred you of) That God I say which commanded and that doctrine
which instructed servants to disobey their Masters, & by depriving them of their seruice caused their hin∣drance? The Apostle knew full well this was not the way to propagate the Gospell, and enlarge the king∣dome of Christ, he knew it was Christian meekenes & obedience, & humility, & patience that must doe it: & therefore he commandeth Christian servants to giue their Masters all honour, to obey thē in all things, & to please thē in all things that so their Masters seeing them more serviceable & profitable servants, & with∣all more vertuous then others were, might sooner be drawen to like of the religion that made them such, whereas the cōtrary would haue bin manifestly a scan∣dall, and grievous impeachment to the propagation of the gospell, & defamed it, for a doctrine of contumacy and disobedience, and for a seminary (as it were) of disturbance and sedition of families and common-wealths. And not only alienated the affections of Masters from their Christian servants: but inflamed all men with indignation & hatred against the Chri∣stian religion and the professors of it. Such therefore evidently is the importance and intendment of the Apostles doctrine (as vnpartiall men whom preiu∣dice or selfe-conceipt leads not away, may soone dis∣cerne) very farre differing from this doctrine of yours. Touching which point of the Apostles instruction giuen to servants for this effectuall and generall obe∣dience, you will not reply (I hope) as some haue done; that at first indeede it was permitted for the good of the Church least the increase of it, and pro∣ceeding
of the Gospell should be hindred by offence given to the Gentiles. For would that haue beene permitted if it had beene vnlawfull? Or could the Church of God be increased by the sinnes of men? His Church increased by that whereby himselfe was dishonoured? Or would the Apostles haue permitted men to sinne (as now Iesuits doe) for the good of the Church (nay exhorted and commanded to it) who had himselfe expresly taught that wee must not doe evill that good may come of it. No neither of both can be, because either of both were a staine, and de∣rogation to the righteousnesse of God: the intention therefore of the Apostles was simple, without all tricks of policy to teach servants all exact and entire obedience to their Masters, touching all workes that belong to the duty of servants, namely that were in themselues honest and lawfull without excepting of any day. Neither shall you finde (as I am verily per∣swaded and I speake not at randome) if all the monu∣ments of antiquity be searched through either the practise of Christian seruants, or the doctrine of Chri∣stian preachers to haue beene any other, I say you shall not finde any remēbrance in the ancient Church (if you search the bookes of histories) that it was the custome of Christian seruants to withdraw their o∣bedience from their Masters on the Lords day, no (if you search the bookes of doctrine) that every any Father or teacher of the Church so perswaded or in∣structed them: no, nor yet if you adde to them the Heathen writers also, that liued in the age of the an∣cient Church, and whereof diverse were sharpe and bitter enemies to the Christian religion, and apt to
take every advantage to calumniate and disgrace it (such as Lucian, Porphyrie, Iulian, Libanius; Eunapi∣us and others were) you shall never finde the detra∣ction of servants obedience, obiected to Christians; And certainly if in all antiquity, no history be found to record it, no father to perswade it, no enemy to∣obiect it, it may well seeme evident that this doctrine of seruants withdrawing obedience from their ma∣sters, for worke on the Lords day was neither taught nor practised in the ancient Church. And therefore Sr to draw to an end (for I grow weary, & haue already both dulled my penne and my selfe) I would advise you in the name of Iesus Christ, whose Minister you are & whose worke you haue in hand, to examine this doctrine of yours, what founda∣tion it may haue in the word of God & what effect in the Church of God; least the foundation happily be your owne phantasie not Gods word & the effect proue the poysoning not the norishing of the church. I know Sr you are not the first that set this doctrine a∣broach, nor the only man that drawes of the vessell, although few draw so freely as you. But I would ad∣vise you sir in the name of God to beware betimes & draw not too deepe. It is all nought, it relisheth alrea∣dy with them that haue good tasts, like the water of Marah. It will proue like that of Meribah a little lower & if you happe to draw to the bottome you will finde the dreggs to be nothing but disturbance and sedition both in Church and Commonwealth. But I say in the beginning, I would neither cen∣sure nor divine of the evill consequence of this Doctrine: let them censure (if they will) to
to whom the goverment of the Church and Com∣monwealth, and provision of peace in both doth be∣long. And to divine (me thinkes) there is little neede; the events are too evident euen to meane foresights already to require divination: for who (when he seeth that seede sowen) doubts what graine will be reaped in heavinesse? I will therefore neither censure nor di∣vine of the fruits of your doctrine, but omit both and make an end. If the reasons which I haue produced against your opinion satisfie not you, you may doe well to satisfie them. And to establish your doctrine with better. It is the part of Christs minister, to giue a reason of his doctrine when it is called in question, and accused of novelty and of sinfull consequence, as I accuse yours: and if you take me to be in an errour and bee able to reforme it, it is your duty to doe it. If your brothers beast went a stray, you were to re∣duce it homeby Moses law. Christs law will lesse suffer you, to see your brother goe astray and not restore him. Wherefore if you be assured that your doctrine is truly Christian and be able to iustify it; you are bound to doe it. The faith you owe to Christ, whose minister you are, the charity you owe to Christians, whose pa∣stor or doctor you are, exact it of you, and I especially chalenge it, that haue felt my selfe specially greeued, and (as I thinke) wronged by occasion of it, I looke therefore you should both answere my arguments, if they perswade you not, and produce better to per∣swade me; but first in your answers, I must intreat
you to deale with me (as I would with you) honestly and ingeniously, and without either perverting or shifting of any arguments; to answere directly to the force of them. And secondly in your reasons to let me haue as few words as you will, but direct and ma∣teriall arguments; For if they be light and haue but small force, they will not moue me. If sophisticall & haue but seeming force, I shall espy the deceit, I thinke and be able to discerne betwixt a visard and a visage; both the one sort and the other of such arguments will but preiudice your cause with me, & were better kept for some other disciple; but if you finde your selfe not able to establish and iustify this doctrine wherewith I take my poore kinsman to haue beene corrupted, then I challenge you as you will answere it at the judgement seat of almighty God when your accounting day shall come, to repaire the ruine you haue made in his conscience, and (remoouing his scandall which hindreth him in his vocation) to esta∣blish him in his former obedience to his Master. So fare you well; and the spirit of truth bee with you. May 16. 1611. At Gresham house in London.
