3752 99842289 6933
A TREATISE, vvherein is decla∣red the sufficiencie of English Medicines, for cure of all Diseases, cured with Medicines. Whereunto is added a col∣lection of Medicines growing (for the most part) within our English Climat, approoued and experimented against the Iaundise, Dropsie, Stone, Falling-sicknesse, Pestilence. AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Tho. Man. 1615.
TO THE RIGHT Honourable, the Lord Zouch. T. B. vvisheth prosperitie in this world, and eternall life in the vvorld to come. I Haue been (right ho∣norable and my verie good Lord) since the time your Honour vouchsafed to take knowledge of mee, & to shew both by benefits and other wayes, especiall fauour towards mee, desirous that some testimonie might remain of my duty, & thankfulness again to your Lord∣ship: vvhich although it be not able either to carry with it the vvhole affection of my minde, or in any sort match with your
L. bountie, yet may it be, as it were, an as∣say & taste of the performance of that du∣tie, wherto both I am bound, and my heart gladly yeeldeth vnto. This assay I present you in this my simple New years gift, being a defence of our natiue medicines, with dis∣proofe of those of forrain nations. The que∣stion I once disputed in open place: & being required of certain to shew my mind more at large therin, I thought good to cōmuni∣cate it with moe then one or two, adding thereto my reasons to be examined by men of wisdom & vnderstāding, that if I erre in this point, I might haue the moe refor∣mers: if my sentence be approoued, the be∣nefit therof might be reaped of many. Now, my request is vnto your L. that this my simple gift be accepted with regard of my hearty good meaning, rather then of the thing it selfe, beeing too base in respect of your Honors person & desert. You knowe wel the price of schollers gifts, who as their treasures are of the mind, & not of gold, or
siluer, so therin lieth the recompence of all good turnes; in which kind I cōfesse in deed my gift might haue been greater then it is: yet presuming of your Lordships taking in good part that which proceedeth from an entire affection, and considering whatso∣euer could be on my part, were too little in comparison of your merits, I am bold to sa∣lute your Honor with this poore present at this time, publishing the same vnder your Honors name, that if any commodity re∣dound to the Common-wealth thereby, the thanks might be your L. herein, who pric∣ked me to take such kinde of acknowledge∣ment of your goodnes towards me, as ther∣with some benefit might also arise vnto o∣thers. The Lord of Heauen & Earth bless your Honor with many good New yeares, vvith increase of Honour and good daies, euen to see peace vpon his Israel all your life long. Your Honors bound in the Lord, T. B.
To the gentle Reader. I Would not haue thee igno∣rant (gentle Reader) of the affection wherewith I sette foorth this small Treatise. It is not with any carping minde, I as∣assure thee, against any person or state, or with desire to publish a new toy, thereby to seeme to bee some bodie. But considering the benefits which might arise of the truth of this matter, which seemeth to me most true, I was willing easily to yeeld vnto the re∣quests of certaine, vvho thought it good I should make it common with thee: which so much the more wil∣lingly I doe, in that I hope this my enterprise shal be a meanes to prouoke others to deale with the same Argu∣ment more plentifully, and kindle in
vs a greater diligence to inquire after the medicines of our owne Countrie yeeld, & more care to put thē in prac∣tice. The case is neither mine nor thine onely, but the Common-wealths, the benefit whereof all are bound who are members thereof, according to their place & calling, most diligently to seek. And this I desire of thee: if thou art of another mind then I am in this matter, thou wouldest keepe moderation of thy affections towards my person: & in the searching out of truth ioyn with me: and as I giue thee leaue to thinke in this point what listeth thee, so dis∣daine not him who easily giueth his eare to reason, and hath dedicated his daies to serue thy commodity; which if he misseth of, his good will yet re∣maineth with thee, which hee also re∣quireth to bee yeelded on thy part to him againe. Farewell.
A briefe Table of the principall matters or heads, contained in the Treatise of English Medicines. THE preseruation of health consisteth in the true vse of meate, drinke, and ex∣ercise. pag. 2 The vertue of Celendine, herbegrace, ver∣uin and grasse. pag. 6 Opium hath a stupifying and benumming nature. pag. 18 Cōparison of Metheglin with Malmsy. 29 The vertue and properties of Milk. 37 The vertue of Trifolium, or three-leaued grasse. pag. 39 The vertue of all manner of Mast. 39 The vertue of Penyrioll. eadem. The vertue of Garlicke, Onions, & Leeks, beeing newly gathered. eadem. The essence of Primrose and Couslips, good against the French-pox. pag. 39 Earth-wormes close and ioyne wounds. 40
Sows or loups, good against the Iaundies, & the difficulty of making vrin. pag. eadem. Corns of horslegs, good against the Epilep∣sia and Falling-sicknes. 41 The vertue of frogs decocted. 41 The cure of Cankers. 46 The Gangrene and Sphacelus, cured by the same. pag. 46 Plantain, whe, vvith a hedghog dried and drunke, cureth the Leprosie. 46 Misselto of the oke, the unnet of an Hare, the Piony roote, Enula campana, the scalpe of a man, and an Asse-hoofe, is good against the falling-sicknes. 47 Plantain, penyrioll, and herbgrace, are good against the suffocation of the Mother. 47 Wormes, and the infection thereof, are cu∣red with Coriander seed, Colewort seed, Gar∣licke, vvormwood, the iuyce of Purslan, and Stags-horn. pag. 47 Peachleaues, hyssop, mynts, purslan-seede, is also good against vvormes. 47 Butter, vvarme-water, the decoction of flxseed, Fenugreeke, or Mallowes beeing ta∣ken inwards, are good against poyson. 47 Sothernood, Seahuluer, Nepseed▪ iuyce of Horchound, the seede of wilde Rue, vvalnuts,
turnops, herbgrace, &c. doe expell poyson. 47 Read the 37 and 38 pages against poyson. Barly, sowre-grapes, roses, violets, the oak, quinces, damsons, pellitory of the wall, docks, peares, apples, hartshorne, with the herbe and flowers of Mallowes, cureth hot diseases. 50 For moist diseases, Cabbage, beets, camo∣mell▪ fenell, beanes, fenugreke, &c. pag. 51 These simples purge either by vomit or stoole. By vomit, Radishroots with the seede, the Pepon-root, and nettleseed, folefoot leafe and rot, the middle barke of the vvalnut-tree, and the long blossoms thereof, the seed of broome, and the flowers thereof purge vehe∣mently. To purge by the stoole, the flowers and leaues of the Peach-tree, Violets flowers and seeds, the great garden docke, or Munks rhu∣barb damaske-roes, wild saffron, the powder of Fetherfew, &c. read pag. 52. and 53. For wounds, plantain, hounds-tongue, wild yarrow, Cardus benedictus, Betony, Scabios, Elme-leaues, Adders-tongue, Moonevvort, &c. pag. 57. FINIS.
A Treatise, wherein is de∣clared the sufficiencie of English Medi∣cines, for cure of all diseases cured with Medicine. ALTHOVGH I be not igno∣rant that truth oft purchaseth hatred, not of her own nature, (then which nothing is more amiable and gratious, but by reason of the great corruption of mankinde, whereby, as men are plunged in blindnes & errour, so they dasle with their eyes at the light of truth, & sauour the things onely which agree with their corruption) although I say this hath beene alwaies the condition of truth in the world, and such euill grace findeth it with the most of men, especially when it first offereth it selfe to be acknowledged for that which it is indeede: yet for the loue I beare it, being a Philosopher by profession, and for the publike benefit, being borne vnder that condition of men, whereby one is bound to imploy his gifts for the benefite of another: I haue ventured vpon the displeasure and disgrace of men, and haue taken some paines to bring to light one daughter of Truth, of Time, seeming to haue beene forgotten, which if she be receiued and em∣braced
of thee gentle Reader, as she deserueth, shall requite thee with no lesse pleasure and profit, then many of her elder sisters. For what can bee more pleasant vnto thee, then the inioying of medicines for cure of thine infirmities out of thy natiue soyle, and countrie, thy Field, thy Orchard, thy Garden? and what more profitable vnto thee, then thereby to avoide the infinite charges rising vpon the vse of straunge and foreigne medicines, whereby not one∣ly thy substance is wasted, but thy health oft times greatly impaired? This is then that truth which I commend vnto thee. As England aboundeth plen∣tifully with all things necessary for thy maintenance of life, and preseruation of health; so needeth it not, partly through natures instinct, partly by the indu∣strie of men, sufficiencie of medecine to cure the sicknesses and infirmities, whereunto our nation is subiect: which my opinion and iudgement, consi∣dering the vse and custome hath long bene to place greatest value in strange medecines, and the practise of the most doth ratifie the same, I knowe must needs seeme strange vnto thee, but read, consider, and then iudge, and at the least let me enterchange my paines with thy attentiue waying of that which thou shalt reade, preiudice set aside: and that a way may bee made for the playner handling of this matter, I briefly define a remedie, a medicine, a dis∣ease after this sort as followeth. First beginning with a remedie, which I call the work of the Physician, whereby health may be repaired. Physicke is an art which taketh charge of the health of man, preser∣uing and mainteining it present by the right vse of meate, drinke, and exercise, with other such helpes
of nature: and restoring the same decayed, by diet, medicine, helpe of hand, or surgerie instrument seuerally vsed, or by ioynt force applied. Which three are Physicke instruments, whereby the ac∣tion of curing is performed, which action I call a re∣medie. And the second of these instruments name∣ly a medicine, I define an aduersarie force of some naturall thing, equally matching the proper or next cause of the disease. Of which medicines, Hearbes, Trees, Stones, Mineralls and metally, Barthes, Wa∣ters, and all Fruites, are matter onely, and not the verie medicines them selues: for as Physicke it selfe is an art, and the action artificiall, and not of na∣ture, so are the instruments of the same action arti∣ficiall, and not naturall. And as nature affourdeth not to vs of her owne worke, either garments, or houses, or any kinde of instrument, but onely the matter whereof such instruments may bee made, leauing with vs an industrie rightly to frame them, and wisedome to vse them: so, no more is Lettis, Poppie, Rhewbarb, or Scammonie a medicine, then an Oake a Table or Ship, or a quarrie of stones, an house. Moreouer, all medicines standing in a kinde of relation to the disease which by meanes of the patients age, sexe, time of the yeare, custome, and such like occasions greatly varie, no nature which alwaies keepeth constant in the own kind can there∣fore either bee a medicine, or properly beare the name thereof: which I wish to be noted, least it be thought the simples, and such other naturall things were medicines, because commonly they carry the names of them. And thus much shall bee sufficient to haue said of the nature of a medicine.
Now a disease (which remaineth last to be defined) is such state of the body, as thereby it is vnabled to performe aptly the actions thereto belonging, or those actions which the soule doth accomplish, by the instrument of the bodie. Thus much briefly concerning the explication of the tearmes wherein this trueth is propounded. Now the reasons, whereby both I am moued to be of this iudgement, and am so hardie as to pro∣pound it to others to be receiued, whereof the first riseth from the Christian doctrine of Gods proui∣dence, which as it serueth greatly to establish the chief points of Philosophie, so being drawne and more particularly applyed to the maintenance of mans life, carieth with it as a sufficient prouision for maintenance and preseruation of health, a like fur∣niture, and as aunswerable to the necessitie of the patient, health being decayed; I will not stand to inireate of prouidence being well knowne to Chri∣stians: and being a truth in Diuinitie, and Christi∣anitie, cannot be false in Philosophie. Although the best of the auncient Philosophers and Poets haue alwaies kept it as a sure ground, who as they serue little to establish vs, hauing a surer foundation, yet may they iustly condemne the Atheist of this age, who so farre hath quenched those remnants of the light of the first creation, that all things seeme to him Fortune and Chaunce. There is no nation vnder heauen so poore and de∣stitute, but it hath of the owne countrie soyle suffi∣cient to content nature with, of foode and apparell, which as they be two pillars of life, so from them are taken the means of preseruation of health, which
as to beasts are applied by naturall instinct, so are they vsed of man by reason, the temperer of appe∣tite and affection. This prouision of sustenance is most agreeable with the goodnes of the Creator, who as he is au∣thor of being to the Creature, so fayleth hee not to maintaine and preserue the same Creature the whole terme of the being thereof: and because the neces∣sitie of the Creature is perpetuall, his wisedome hath also foreseene, and prouided a perpetuall sup∣plie of such sustenance, as is fit for that nature which standeth in neede thereof: and because the neede is not once for all, but parted into times, varying, ac∣cording to the diuers disposition and nature of that for which this prouision is made, he hath also so be∣stowed his goodnes in this point, that at all times to all things, necessarie sustenance should not be to seeke; and this extended not to men onely, but euen to brute beasts, and all things which require nourish∣ment. The end of this prouision is the preseruation of the Creature, which Nature most carefully stu∣dieth (if it might be perpetuall and eternall) there∣to to bring it, the goodnesse of the Creator, will nothing wanting, his wisedome will haue it waite vpon the necessitie of the Creature: wherefore as the Earth is called the mother of all things, not because it bringeth them forth onely, but yeeldeth them perpetuall nourishment, so is the countrie of all people to them named, the parent of all parents. Then by natures lawe, all things being abundantly ministred vnto vs for the preseruation of health at home in our owne fieldes, pastures, riuers, &c. how can the wisedome of God, and his goodnesse
stand with the absence of Medicines and remedies necessarie for the recouerie of health, the neede be∣ing as vrgent of the one as of the other: and so as great an occasion of practise of the same goodnes and wisedome in the one as in the other? which be∣ing most plaine and euident, it followeth necessarily that the medicine should be as reade for the sicke, as meate and drink for the hungry and thirstie: which except it be applied by the natiue countrie, can not be else performed. It is knowne to such as haue skil in nature, what wonderfull care she hath of the smal∣lest of creatures, not onely giuing to euery part of them a carefull discharge of sundrie duties, as of at∣traction, retention, concoction, expulsion of ex∣crements, distribution, and such like, but also to the whole creature, a knowledge of medicine to helpe themselues, if haply diseases annoy them: nei∣ther out of India, nor Arabia, but from their verie haunt: which being not denied to them, much more is graunted to vs, in so much as (the worke of na∣ture being most excellent in man) she is more vigi∣lant ouer mankinde then ouer other creatures, as by the shape thereof most plainely appeareth. The Swallow cureth her dimme eyes with Celendine: the Wesell knoweth well the vertue of Hearbgrace: the Doue the Veruen: the Dogge dischargeth his mawe with a kind of Grasse: the Spider is Triacle to the Munkey: the Hippopotamus dischargeth the a∣boundance of his bloud by opening a veine: and Ib is said to haue shewed the vse of the Clyster: and too long it were to recken vp all the medicines which the beasts are knowne to vse by natures direc∣tion onely, and those not so farre fetched as our
drugges, but familiar with them, and taken from the place of their foode: it being very probable she hath bestowed this gift euen vpon all, one hauing interest in natures care as well as another. By this then may wee gather, if nature faile not the verie beasts in this behalfe, neither sendeth them to bor∣rowe a farre of, much more is that performed vnto vs the Lords of all the creatures, and for whose vse all things were created: except we be thought lesse subiect to diseases then they, wherein we be so little priuiledged, that no creature in that respect is so fraile as we, and those most subiect to infirmities which are gouerned and dieted by vs. So that wee of all creatures haue greatest neede of Natures libe∣rall hand in this behalfe. For be it for the most part, we are more healthfull then sickly, and so haue grea∣ter vse of the meanes of keeping health, then of re∣storing, yet hardly can a man say which of them is more necessarie to be readie and prest at hand, the daunger of diseases being alwaies imminent, al∣though diseases themselues be not alwaies present. Now if to any the reason seeme weake from that which should be to inferre a being thereof, we are to vnderstand in the workes of God, whatsoeuer should be, is; hee being a workman of an absolute pow∣er and cunning. But saith one, the East and West Indies Arabia, Barbarie, the red Sea, are the Mines, as it were, and the fountaines of medicines; and Spaine, Protugale, and Venice, the vents of such things, and Nauigation the meanes to obtaine them. It cannot be denied, but those countries yeelde many straunge things, whereof wee take vse with
great delight, and Nauigation serueth greatly for communicating of commodities and enterchange of merchandise: but how farre, and of what com∣modities? Verely of such as if our delicacie would giue vs leaue, we might well spare, being things ra∣ther of superfluous pleasure then necessarie reliefes, and seruing rather for a certaine pompe, then for maintenance of life: and which without great wor∣king of the wittes, might be proued to bring more harme to our countriemen, then commoditie: both in respect of the diuersitie in complexion of our bodies from those of straunge nations to whome they properly belong, the corruption of their outlandish wares, the selling of one thing for an o∣er, & the withholding from vs the best of choyce: but of this hereafter. Moreouer, Nauigation being of a later inuention then the necessitie of medicine, neither practised of many nations at this day, cannot supply this want, or if men beganne then first to be diseased, when they began to find waies in the Sea to those far countries, doth it not greatly detract from that prouidence wherby all things are guided, to lay the recouerie of mans health vpon the adventures of Merchants? & the disease being in the one part of the World, to haue the medicine in the other, yea, as farre distant as the East is from the West, and the life and death of a man to stand vpon a halfepe∣nie weight of Scammonie, or a dramme or twaine of Rhewbarb? Nay, which is yet more absurd, that the health of so many Christian nations should hang vpon the courtesie of those Heathen and barbarous nations, to whome nothing is more odious then the very
name of Christianity? And who of malice do with∣holde from vs such medicines as they knowe most for our vse? Whereupon the Turke denieth vnto the Christians at this day the Terra Lemnia, a medicine to be preferred before the chiefe of those wee per∣swade our selues to enioy. The corruption of their drugges, is it not so great, that in this light of all knowledge, scarce is one able to discerne the right Bolus Armena, from the Ocre of Apulia, or to disco∣uer the adulterating of Ambergreece, & Muske, with a number of other corruptions, which haue got∣ten strength by custome of errour? Thamarinds, are counterfeited with Prunes, Scammonie with the milk of Spurge, Manna with Suger and the leaues of Sene, Aspalathum with the inward part of the roote of an Olue tree, Frankencense with Rosin, Bdellium and Sar∣cocalla with goomes: for Bolus Armena is sold a red earth out of Apulia, for Malabatheum a leafe of a Li∣mon or Orange, for Turpeth some other other roote dipped at both ends in Goom. Which bee as like in vertue to the simples whereof the bear they visard & maske, as Chalke to Cheese, according to the pro∣uerbe. And greatly thou art deceiued to thinke our Nauigations store vs with ancient Medicines, wher∣with Physicke in olde time hath beene furnished. For at this day neither is Balme known vnto vs, nei∣ther Xylobalsamum, nor Cardamomum, nor Amomum, neither Costus, neither Calamus odoratus, Aspalathus, Agallocum, Narcaphthum, with the most of the no∣ble ancient Medicines: so that Nauigation hath not at any time supplied this want vnto vs, and how it should hereafter I knowe not, except Galen take paines againe to saile into Cyprus, into Palestine, and
Lemnos, to gather and make choice with his owne hands. For what hope is there to be had of the pro∣uision made by Merchants? who buy to sell onely, and thereof to reape gaine; and by reason they be vnlearned, if they should be faithfull, yet must they faile greatly in this poynt, and then must wee vse such medicines as wee can come by, and the patient recouer such health as he may. For the most part these drugs come out of Spaine or Portugale, eyther fetched of vs or brought of them, yet neither of them hath borne name of yeelde of the best simples, so that if they bee of those countries, then they are not such as they should be: If Spaine and Portugale fetch them else where, then lyeth the assurance vpon their credite. Or let me know how they discerne the Coriander of Ethio∣pia, the blacke Helleborus of Cyrene, the Amomum of Scythia, the Myrrha Trogloditica, the Opium of A∣pulia, (which are counted the best) from the same growing in other places, which neuer carried name of commendation for such simples. The Coloquintida growing alone vpon the plant, is much suspected of good Physitians, the Squilla that hath no fellows, is thought to sauour of a vene∣mous nature, likewise the Thymelea: now, when these are gathered to the Merchants hand, who shall tell him how they grewe, or who shall inquire but the Philosopher that knoweth what may come ther∣by to these simples, neither is the daunger lesse in the manner of laying them vp, and keeping them ouerlong: besides the iust time of gathering being either ouerpassed, or preuented, greatly diminisheth the vertues of the Medicines. As the vse of Euphor∣bium
is perillous before it bee a yeare olde, and after three yeeres it is nought worth, so Agaricke gathered before it be ripe, or kept past two yeeres, becommeth vnwholsome. And as the Peonie roote is to be gathered in the wane of the Moone, and the Crayfish to be taken after the rising of the Dog starre, the Sun entering into Leo, so are there ma∣ny other, which if they misse their due time of ga∣thering, faile greatly in their vertues. To these cor∣ruptions moreouer may bee added the washing of the sea, the long iourneys they are brought, where∣by it should seeme nature had denyed vnto vs the vse of them, as to whome they were not of her yeel∣ded; with such difficultie, and as it were, by con∣straint, they come to vs. Then if the best of anci∣ent simples be partly vnknowne and wanting, partly adulterated, partly by age and other meanes spent before they come to our vse, what shall wee say to our compounds and mixtures, which rise of these simples? Can the temper mend them? or a quid pro quo, as they call them, serue the turne? No ve∣rily, not our turnes, to whome the substitute Me∣dicines, as I may call them, were not appointed, be∣ing in great part as hard to come by, as the Medi∣cines whose substitutes they are, and as much vn∣knowne vnto vs. As for Agallocum Calamus odoratus, for Amomum Acorus, for Castorium, Bilphium, for Crocamagmo, Agallocus, with a number of the same sorte, which these fewe leaues of paper will not ad∣mit. Neither is it to bee thought these Lieutenant Medicines serue at all turnes in the place of the right Medicines, for so should Ginger serue the turne of Folesoote to purge by vomit, which it can no more
then curds of Cowe milk can soften and supple like butter, or the dung of the stocke Doue purge like Euphorbium, or the Dock root draw flegm from the head like Pellitorie, which Galene notwithstanding maketh substitutes of these medicines which haue such operation. I conclude therefore, seeing Na∣uigation can not affoord vs either the simples which wee seeme to neede, and those which it doth, both corrupt and counterfet in the greatest part, we haue neither to craue thereof in this point aide, much lesse to trust thereunto. Now the simples being (but for the most part) bastard ware, how can the com∣poundes that amount of the same bee other then counterfet? Whereupon as Cardanus saith in his Methode of curing, the wise Magistrates of Venice haue often times forbidden the making of Triacle and Mithridatum, because the simples could not be had, whereby they should be compoūded: which if Venice, the greatest Mart in this part of the world of such wares can not auouch, what can we hope for from other places? that a man would maruell to see the great store of them in all shops of Apothecaries vnder the names of Triacle and Mithridatum of An∣dromachus: and it being required in Triacle before it be vsed, it should haue a time, as it were, of mel∣lowing, which of Galene in his booke of Triacle to Piso is extended to 12. yeares, and of Paulus Egine∣ta in his 7. booke by 7. yeares, for those that are bitten or stong of venemous beasts, or haue drunke poyson, or are infected with the pestilence, and in o∣ther diseases, from ten yeares till it be 20. of age; I maruell what assurance we haue of the age of this Triacle, which is ordinarie in vse; or if we haue none,
how we dare vse it at aduenture, knowing by age the vertue thereof hath no small alteration. I would these inconueniences were the smallest, which I haue but briefly, and as it were, for a taste run ouer, yet were euen they sufficient to stay our ouer hastie vse of such strange Merchandise, and to moue vs to betake vs to those wee knowe both in the blade, and in the seede, in the roote, & in the fruite, & know the aire, the hill, the valley, the medowe or Marish ground where they growe. But this trust vppon outlandish Medicines hath much more neerely tou∣ched vs then so. If a man would say by this ouerha∣stie embracing whatsoeuer straunge nations doe as it were, purge ouer vnto vs, we drinke diuers times ranke poyson in steede of wholesome medicine, I trow it would iustly moue vs to bee aduised, and not to passe ouer the enquirie of a reason, why such a one should thinke so, being one whose vocation tendeth to the charge of the health of mens bodies. The right Hermodactils are commended for excel∣lent medicines against all paines in the ioynts, as the Gout, the Schiatica, and such like, from which they purge grosse flegme. Doronicum Romanum hath great commendation for comforting the heart, expel∣ling poyson, against the Cough, for auoyding of humors which ouercharge the Chest, which are great vertues doubtlesse in them both. Now if they in the shops, as they beare the name of these medi∣cines, so caried not with them in steed of these ver∣tues daungerous poyson, then should I haue lesse cause to exhort our nation to betake them to their Gardens, and Fields, and to leaue the banks of Nilus, and the Fens of India. The common Her∣modactils
being a kinde of poyson called Epheme∣rum, so named, because with such swiftnesse it char∣geth and ouerchargeth our vitall spirits, that it kil∣leth him that hath taken it in one day. The other commonlie called Doronicum Romanum, and vsed for an especiall cordiall, so that it hath place in the electuarie of pretious stones, in the electuarie of Amber, in the cordiall pouder, this Doronicum, I say, called of Mathiolus Demoniacum, that is to say, diuelish, noting there by the vertues thereof, is no baser poyson then a verie kinde of Aconitum, by Mathiolus experience, which he confesseth himselfe (before hauing bin abused by the common errour) first to haue learned of Iacobus Antonius Cortusus, a man verie skilfull in the nature of simples, which Iacobus taught him the experience by giuing it to dogs, which it killeth. Now if by reason no such daunger hapneth to vs, by the vse of them, they seeming not so daungerous: wee are to vnderstand they bee giuen in small quantitie, and mixed with diuers remedies against poyson, the good proui∣dence of God prouiding so, that otherwise they should not be ministred, as in the purging electu∣ary of Diacnicu, Hermodactils are bridled with Cina∣mon, and the pouder of Diatragatanthum frigidum, where indeede it hath somewhat too large scope, being better tempered in Benedicta, with Cloues, Parsely seede, Galanga, and Mace, and in the pilles of Hermodactils with Aloe, Mirobalans, Bdellium, the seede of Herbgrace, which haue force against poyson, the which small quantitie of them being bridled, & dulled with other medicines, especially such as resist the force of poisōs, is not deadly to vs, although great hurt therof must needs ensue. I haue
stood the longer vpon this point of strange medi∣cines, in answering the supplie by Nauigation, the rather, because it seemes most to make against vs in the maintenāce of our home medicines, & breedeth, as it were, a lothsomnes of those blessings of God, which we may daily at commandment enioy. But hi∣therto hath only bin shewed the corruptions & coū∣terfeting of foreigne medicines which belongeth to certaine only, & not to all▪ (although those certaine be the chiefe, & of greatest price) & that being fore∣seene, the prouision out of strange & far distant nati∣ons, may seeme well to stand with that prouidence we speak of: and except they be in respect of their strangenesse hurtfull or vnprofitable vnto vs. the skill of sayling being a meanes to present them at our need, natures care should seeme no whit to be blemished. The reasons which I haue before alledg∣ed, I leaue to the indifferent Reader to consider of: & because I am so far vrged, I easily sticke not to hold, we receiue no smal hurt from all the kinds of strange medicines, whereof I yeeld these fewe reasons which followe. Our English bodies, through the nature of the re∣gion, our kind of diet & nourishment, our custom of life, are greatly diuers from those straunge nations, wherby ariseth great varietie of humours, and excre∣ments in our bodies from theirs, and so the causes of diseases rising vpon breach of diet, the (diet being of an other sort) must needes bee vn∣like. Wherevpon, although their humors bee in kinde, and in a generalitie agreeable to ours, as bloud, choler, flegm, melancholie, and such like, yet rising vpon other matter then the same in vs: and
otherwise framed by a farre other state of bodie, by reason of a diuers kinde of life, the Medicines which helpe them must needs hurt vs, not finding the like causes to striue with: and this no doubt is the cause why wee are not able to beare such dose or quantitie of their Medicines as those nations are to whome they be natiue. Besides, they worke in our bodies after a farre more vnkind manner then they report them to doe in theirs: nay, they destroy vs, and helpe them, which is an argument to me, that euery Medicine hath a relation to the diseases of the inhabitant, which if it be profitable to straungers, yet doeth it by a constraint and not halfe so kindely. The Greekes, as it may appeare by Dioscorides in his fourth Book & a hundreth & two & fiftie Chapter, entreating of Scammonie, are able to beare a greater quantitie, yea, double, then we of Scammonie, which is an ordinarie purger with vs. Who saith, thirtie graines thereof may be giuen with 20. of blacke Helleborus, and 60. of Aloe to make a iust purgati∣on, & of Scammonie alone 60. graines. Now com∣mon experience teacheth vs the great oddes betwixt Scammonie rawe, as they call it, and the same cor∣rected, which we name Dacrydium, both in vehe∣mencie of purging, and tormenting the bodie: yet hardly dare we passe aboue 20. graines of the same, and this mixed with Cordialls, and stomach Medi∣cines. Moreouer, their slender correcting of it, doth argue it to be farre lesse noisome to them then to vs, who correct it onely, or at the least, are con∣tented with the correction thereof by a little Salt and Pepper, or a little Ginger: who for the plenty of excellent simples, which we both want and know
not, and for their skill in the nature of those wee correct with, might as well haue qualified it as we, whoe first wash it in Rose-water, wherein Cytrea Myrobalanus, Spike, and Cinamon haue beene boiled: in which also we let it steep foure & twentie houres, then drie it, then mixe it againe with oyle of sweet Almonds, and some Goom for Tragacantha, and last of all bake it in a Quince▪ couered round with paste. Who hath not horror of the torments which both the Hellebores bring to the body? yet sayth Pau∣lus Egineta in his seauenth Booke, and fourth Chapter, the blacke Helleborus purgeth yellow choler from the whole bodie without paine: which cannot bee verified of our bodies, howsoeuer it be in theirs, and therefore we feare to minister the pouder thereof in any sort, but the steeping onely of the barkes of the roots, from 0. graines to 6. they being bold to take a whole dramme there∣of in substance which is more then treble the quan∣titie, for one dose. These strange workings of these foreigne drugges in our bodies, and a more gentle and kinde working in theirs, doth it not manifestly declare vnto vs, that they were not created for vs? doe they not force vs of∣tentimes with perill of our liues to giue them o∣uer? that the patient knoweth not diuers times whether he should stand rather to the courtesie of his disease, then of his potion? There is a simple which hath not many yeeres beene in vse, brought out of India, and highly commended, called Mechoaca, it purgeth gently say they, without vexing or grieuing the bodie, without annoying the stomacke greatly, and ceseth purging at your
pleasure, with a little supping. These be great ver∣tues doubtlesse, and I wish wee could finde them in Mechoaca. For experience the touchstone hath bewrayed it in our bodies, to bee of a farre o∣ther operation: it tormenteth the body, it an∣noyeth the stomacke much, neyther doth a sup∣ping stay the vehemencie of purging, and this haue I patly by mine owne experience found in Mechoaca, & partly by the experience of my friends, who vpon the vse thereof haue much complai∣ned of these accidents. That iuice or rather milk of Poppie, which is brought out of Asia named O∣pium, it is not vnknowne to all the world, what a maruellous force it hath in benumning the sense of feeling, and vtterly extinguishing the naturall heate of the body, so that we feare to giue there∣of into the body aboue the weight of two graines; and those corrected with Safforn, Castorium, and such like, least it cast the patient into such asleep, as hee needeth the trumpe of the Archangell to awake him. Now, the same Opium beeing taken of the Turkes, Moores, and Persians, bring∣eth to their wearied and ourrauelled bodies, a maruellous recreation, in such sort, as they or∣dinarily vse it therefore as a present remedie, not in the quantitie of two graines or twentie, but euen an whole ounce or twaine at once. And Hol∣lerius in his Scholia vpon his Chapter of Phren∣sey, saith, that Konelet a learned hysitian, and the French Kings professour at Montpellier, re∣ported vnto him, that hee had seene a Spaniard take thereof into his bodie halfe an ounce at one time, without hurt.
Wherefore if the difference of our bodies from those of strange nations bee so great, that the thing which helpeth them, destroyeth vs, that cureth them without annoyance, doth vehement∣ly torment vs: I would wish vs to bee better ad∣uised, then to bee so readie to embrace them, a to contemne in comparison of them, the medi∣cines which receiue, a it were a taming, and are broken vnto vs by our own soyle: neither art thou heere to looke the wisedome of the physi∣cian should consider the varietie and diuers dis∣positions of the bodies by age; complexion, re∣gion, sex, &c. and thereafter to emper these medicines, and so to avoide the daungers; for the question is not of the manner of vsing these things, for then should such consideration haue place, but euen of the verie nature, which no manner of vse can alter. Yet are these simples ex∣cellent creatures of God, made for the vse of men, but not for all men: and although we may receiue helpe from them, by a certaine generall commu∣nitie that our bodies haue with those of Arabia. Bar∣barie, and the rest, yet no doubt as I haue shewed in a fewe, so we receiue by the vse of them so much the lesse good by them, as we most dffer from them, and that which wanteth of the performance of good to vs, must needs turne vs to much harme, the vn∣helping part, (as I may call it) alwaies working, & so euer harming. Neither doe I see why the medi∣cines of India▪ or Aegypt should be laide vpon vs, more then the Indian or Aegyptian diet, which is to eate Lizards, Dragons, and Crocodiles: for if the proper medicine doth alwayes regard his proper
aduersarie, which causeth the disease (as no doubt it should doe) then there being a great difference be∣twixt our humors and theirs, a much in a manner as is betwixt the flesh of a Crocodile and of a ten∣der Cpon, our medicines which are to fit vs, must needes be of another kinde then theirs, which in our bodies not finding such humours & excrements, as that strange diet doth ingender, must neede seize vpon the very substance of our bodies to haue some∣what to worke on: which painefull working espe∣cially of the purgers, causeth the common saying among the people, to the great discredit of our art: There is not a purgation but it hath a smack of poy∣son. Truth it is, no purgation can worke without natures annoyance, being in part a pricke of nature to auoyd her excrements: but when she is so prouo∣ked that shee sweateth colde sweates, that shee giueth ouer, that the patient swouneth not by the excesse of purging onely, but for the most part through the euill qualitie of the medicine, it is surely an argument, it wanted his proper sub∣iect to worke in. If needes wee will take vn∣to vs the practise of such strange medicines, (I call them medicines according to the common phrase, else properly bee they matter onely) it were to bee desired (which in part is performed) that such medicines as bee so perillous, might be planted in our naturall countrie, that through the familiaritie of our soyle, they might first growe into acquaintance with vs, before wee entertaine them not into our bosomes, but into our hearts, and chamber them with our vitall spirits. And as it is saide of the tree Prsea, which in Per∣sia
beeing poyson, translated into Egypt, be∣commeth wholesome, bearing fruite to be eaten, and good for the stomake: to those natures re∣ceiuing such mitigation of our soyle, might in time better itte vs then they doe. Which as it can not alter their nature beeing impossible to bee done by change of place, so doubtlesse might it purge away that euill qualitie which annoyeth vs, and seemeth rather to bee an euill complexion, and as it were a cachochimie and disease of the thing, then any necessarie propertie belonging to the nature. This which hath beene said of Persea, is also to be seene in other simples, which in other places are poyson, and kill with the verie sha∣dowe, yet brought into England and plnted with vs, cleane change that venemous qualitie. Vgh called Taxus, of Dioscorides is said to bee so dan∣gerous, and of such venemous nature, that in Nauarre the verie shadowe thereof poysoneth him that sleepeth vnder it: and Egineta saith, being ta∣ken inward, it strangleth and swiftly killeth. This Taxus notwithstanding, being so perillous in other places, our English soile hath so reformed, that boldly our children doe eate of the fruit thereof without danger: the like may bee verified of our Hemlocke, which although it bee to bee numbred among the poysoning hearbes, yet it is farre be∣hinde that which groweth in Candie, or Megara▪ or Cilicia, scarce to bee accounted poyson in com∣parison of that in those countries. Now if thou shalt thinke (gentle Reader) as the change of re∣gion altereth some qualities, so all, and thereby empayreth the vertue of the medicine: thou maist
easily bee deceiued. For as they depend not one vpon another, so may the one bee well without the other, though by one common forme, they seeme to be linked together to make one nature. Rhewbarb is knowne to haue two qualities, one contrarie to an other, of purging the bodie, and stopping: yet by steeping may the one bee sepa∣rated from the other, the purging vertue beeing drawne out by steeping, and the stopping still re∣maining in the substance steeped: so likewise may the noysome qualitie of the medicine bee es∣chewed, the wholesome and medicinable vertue notwithstanding, being in full force, yea grea∣ter retained, in so much as the hurtfull qualitie would hinder the operation of the healthfull, which being freed, and vnyoked from the other, doth farre better accomplish his worke. Of all kinds of Honie that of Greece, and namely of Attica and Hble are most commended, the next price is giuen to the Honie of Spaine and Nauarre: yet it is certainely knowne by experience, that the Eng∣lish Honie is most agreeable to our English bo∣dies, and greater quantitie thereof may be taken, with lesse annoyance, yea none at all to those which are not of too hot a temper; the other kindes beeing more siee, more apt to ingender choler, and to inflme the bloud, and more vn∣fit to loose the body. Whereby wee may euident∣ly see, that Nature vseth not one shooe for eue∣rie foote, but either ministreth a diuers commodi∣tie in kinde, or else by the countrie, aire, and soyle, doth so temper it, that greater vse may bee thereof to the inhabitant of the same countrie. By this
then which hitherto hath beene said, it is mani∣fest wee receiue great hurt by the vse of strange medicines, and not vpon reason onley, but from plaine experience, euen with hurt to our owne bodies, which as it is the greatest price of know∣ledge, so therefore ought wee the more to sette thereby, and more carefully to seeke to auoyde the daunger. Againe it is euident, that the plan∣ting of strange simples frameth them more to our vse. Wherefore as there bee many excellent Gardens in England, especially in London repleni∣shed with store of strange and outlandish simples, it were to bee wished such indeuours were of others followed, that so we might acquaint vs better with these strangers, and by vsu capio make them our owne. But what soyle will brooke all things' It is true, yet no doubt of those that it will brooke, which I dare say are foure or fiue hundreth, this fru∣galitie of nature towards vs as it is thought, might beare a greater shewe, and we more safely vse them, especially the purgers, which carie with them grea∣test annoyance. Now if it be obiected, the force of outlandish simples are thereby more feeble, as wee finde the Organ of Candie surpassing ours in strength, I meane the same kind with that of Can∣die planted in our Gardeins, which may bee saide also of other strange hearbes planted by vs: It can not be denied but they are so, neither can the strange simple in all poynts bee equall with his kind kee∣ping his natiue soyle, yet is the difference scarce halfe a degree vnder: or if it were a degree full out, what reason were it to fetch that one de∣gree with much perill, and charge, as far as Candie,
Spaine, or Venice, or from another world: where∣as a little increase of the quantitie of the thing, would easily suppli the want, though I mention not the gaine of the freshnesse of the same, which maketh no small recompence of wanting in the force: neither is the nature or vertue of a medi∣cine to bee esteemed by taste or smell, neither by the force it hath against the disease, the nature of a medicine lying in an equall matching of the cause of the disease: which if it ouer-match, so far off it is from the praise of an wholesome medicine, that it becommeth a cause of a contrarie disease. Wherefore the commendation of a medicine lyeth not in force, but in such force. And therefore the counsell of the best Physitians is, if the disease will beare any delay, as the most doe, rather to apply a medicine of a weaker force, then at once with a vehement one, to shake the frame of nature. And the weaker medicine being weake, either in respect of the nature of the simple, or the small quantitie, they counsell rather to vse that kinde of curing which is by the feebler medicine in kinde, then by reason of the vnder quantitie. For what skilfull Physician would cure a small distemper of heate, and as it were in the first degree, with a small quan∣titie of Opium, or Mandrake or Henbane, beeing colde in the fourth degree, rather then with the just quantitie of Endiue, or Succorie? or diminish a small excesse of humors, with an vnderquantitie, of Coloquintida or Scammonie, rather then with the iust quantitie of a feebler medicine? Wherefore vpon good reason they conclude it to bee farre sa∣fer for the patient, to cure with contraries of feebler
force, either often repeated, or in a greater quan∣titie applyed, then with a maine force of a medi∣cine of equall strength at once to expell the disease, nature abhorring all vehement and souden eyther emptying or filling, heating or cooling, or any o∣ther kinde of souden alteration: which being groun∣ded vpon good reason, the delaying of the force of strange medicines by our soyle, serueth greatly for the commendation both of planting them with vs, and of the medicines them selues planted; The simple still keeping within the compasse of mat∣ter of a medicine, neythr beeing so diminished, but that by increase of the quantitie it may match with the disease, which no man with reason can denye. Now, if the greatnesse of the quantitie happely procure loathsomnesse to the patient; by extraction, that inconuenience may easily bee avoyded: by which menes a pound may bee brough to an ounce, an ounce to a dramme, and a dramme to a fewe graines, to please the patient with. Such of strange medicines as will not brooke our climate, thereby declare the euill disposition they haue to cure the infirmitie of our bodyes. Euery Medicine is as it were a meane betwixt nourishmentes and poysons, excepting those medicines which are applied outwardly, which may both bee of nourishments and poysons. In this meane betwixt these extremes, there is such a scope and breadth, that some medicines incline to the one, and some to the other. Now, the best are such as rather incline to nourishments then poysons, which as they doe fight against the dis∣ease, so haue they a certaine token and pledge
of agreement betwixt our bodyes and theirs: where∣by they acknowledge vs for friendes, and not common enemies with the disease; the other me∣dicines which haue no such token and earnest, being apt, as well to destroy vs, as to take away the disease, and so ioyne fellowship with ranke poy∣sons. Then our natiue soyle beeing by the ordinance of God the fittest to yeelde vs nourishment, from which our cattell and fruites haue a nutritiue or nourishing iuice, which render the same againe to vs, what canne wee thinke of those medicines to whome our soyle hath not a droppe of iuice to yeelde vnto, and giueth no entertainement? Ve∣rily wee are both to learne thereby, that nature doeth furnish vs otherwayes, and also greatly to suspect them to bee of an extreme kinde of me∣dicines, the spices onely excepted, and such as are saide to bee sympatheticall to certaine partes of our bodies. Which notwithstanding▪ lesse serue that vse, the more strnge and foreigne they be. What should I speake of the vnmeaurable charge and cost these strange medicines put vs vnto? in my opinion, if it were but that, wee might bee stirred vp to this or such like consideration: Hath God so dispensed his blessings, that a medicine to cure the iawndies, or the greene sicknesse, the rheume, or such like, should cost more often∣times then one quarter of the substance that the pa∣tient is worth? and the prouision of an whole yeere, whereof wife and children, and the whole familie, should with things necessarie bee mainteined in health, be wasted vpon the curing of a Palsey, or
a Cholike, or a swimming of the brain, or any other disease whatsoeuer? is Physicke only made for rich men? and not as well for the poorer sort? doth it onely waite vpon Princes palaces, and neuer stoope to the cottage of the poore? doth it onely receiue gifts of the king, and neuer thankes & prayers from him that hath but thanks and pars to bestowe? or doth the Lord goodnesse passe ouer them of low degree? hath hee respect of persons? yea, hath God giuen the beast a remedy out of his owne food and pasture (as it is most certainely knowne) with a skill to vse it, and hath hee set a iourney as farre as from the Sunne rising to the going downe, as it were a wall of Brasse, and the fierie sword of a Cherubim to keepe vs from the attei∣ning of salues for our sores? iustly may wee thus complaine, especially those of the poorer sort. And if Physicke (as it is in deed) bee an art common to all kinde of men, all sorts of nations, all estates, and conditions of men: I would knowe why the meanes also of performing the actions belonging to the same art should not bee as common? And if it be ordinarie to all nations to fetch their medi∣cines farre, let me know why, as we cease not to tra∣uell for to store vs with outlandish dugges, we carie not thither also our countrie medicines for change, or they of those nations giue not the like aduenture for ours? but they are contented with their owne store, and so ought we with ours. If it be not ordina∣rie, why should it bee more extraordinarie to one then to an other. The most of our Apothecarie wre is brought from the most vile and barbarous nations of the world, and almost all from the
professed enemies of the Sonne of God: shall wee say the Lord hath more care, or setteth more store by them then by his owne people? that hee so furnisheth them, and leaueth vs destitute? or shall we rather condemne the vanitie of our owne mindes, who vnsatiably desire strange things, lit∣tle regarding, or rather loathing that which is alwaies at commandment. But God (saith one) hath not bestowed all things vpon all nations, but hath left some thing to bee supplied by the com∣modities wherewith one nation aboundeth, and an other wanteth, that thereupon mutuall dutie arising, the societie of men might bee vphol∣den. Which obiection, if it carried with it what things they were, and of what kinde, that one nation supplyth to an other, and what sort of commodities they bee that one nation needeth the helpe of another in, a more direct answere might bee made then otherwis I may hitte vpon: But I ghesse it is neyther of water nor fire, nor of aire, nor of any thing necessarie for mainte∣nance of life, otherwise should the natiue coun∣trie of each one bee rather a stepdame to vs then a naturall mother: but it is of those things only which with healthfull, and lustie bodies we might bee without, if custome had not too much pre∣uailed with vs. And to goe no further then to the vse of Wine in England, in many respects it greatly hurteth vs, yet our ordinarie vse there∣of hath giuen vs such a longing thereafter, that we thinke if wee should want it, many of our daies were thereby abridged. Whereby notwithstanding hewmes are mightily increased, the sinewes fee∣bled,
the naturall moisture and heate of the bo∣die ouerhastily wasted, and swift olde age brought vpon vs, with an infinite number of discommo∣dities besides. Which the nations finding where wee haue it, do so delay it, that rather they seeme to drinke wined water, then watred wine, except the Aged or such as are feeble stomached, And di∣uers nations which may haue of the best, because they would be sure to banish the vse of it, count it sacriledge, to taste it: as the Turkes at this day, who vse in steede thereof a distilled water of Rice steeped in Milke, thereby supplying the vse of wine. Neyther doe wee finde this discommoditie of wine by the abuse of drunkennesse or surfeting onely▪ but euen keeping within the three cuppes that Euulus powreth out to wise men; whereof the first is of health, and nourishment: the second of myrth, and ioy of heart: and the third of sleep, so that a draught or twaine doth maruellously dis∣temper our bodies: which inconuenience wee finde not by our ordinarie drinke, yea, though it bee stronger then wine. If I should compare our Mede with the best wine, and the Metheglin of the Welch∣men, with Malmeey, I could take great argu∣ments from the nature of Honie to proue it; es∣pecially beeing tempred with certaine wholesome hearbes, which haue vertue to strengthen the parts of the body. And by experience it is knowne, that Honie mixed with water, turneth in time to a wholesome liquor, in taste much like to wine. Whereupon Pena in his Chapter of Honie, folio 2. doubteth not to affirme, that the Mede of the Plonians and Muscouites, and the Metheglin of the
Welchmen, are more wholesome and pleasant, then many of the best kindes of wines, hee him selfe beeing a French man, and therefore in his iudgement lesse partiall. Wherefore to conclude this argument, seeing wine (which is the glorie of strange merchandise) is but an hurtfull superflu∣itie, the rest must needes hee farre other then necessaries. But medicines being such as without which our health and lfe runneth into infinit perills, by causes inward and outward, through breach of diet, vnwholesomenesse of meate, woundes, bi∣tings of venemous beasts, infections of the aire, and such like, it followeth necessarily, that they bee not such as God would haue one nation grati∣fie another with: which if they were, greater rea∣son were it to charge the neighbour nations there∣with, that thereby their mindes might with per∣formance of such mutuall dutyes so necessarie, bee in straighter amitie and peace linked, who ceae not for the enlarging of limites to vexe one another, rather then the nations so faire distant, who haue neither fellowship of loue, nor quarrell of hatred equall with the borderers. Neyther would I be so taken, as though I knew not at some times that one nation hath neede of an other, euen in things necessary, as the supplie made by Ioseph to his father Iacob, and other nations out of the store of Aegypt: but the controuersie is of an ordinarie course, which the Lord vseth in bestowing his bles∣sings, wherewith he doth fully satisfie the neede of all nations with things necessarie, sauing when he punisheth with famine or want of victualls, which is extraordinary in respect of his accustomed course
of preseruing his creatures. Now if the strange medicines (for the most part hotte) should seeme rather in the whole kinde, then by reason of a∣boundance, superfluous to them, and so more fit for vs, beeing of a colder temper: we are to con∣sider the vse of them is manifolde to the inhabi∣tants, and not onely to warme them: as the Aethi∣opians called Troglodites, although they bee par∣ched with vehement heate of the Sunne, are said to liue with Pepper, not to correct the distemper of their bodies, which would rather increase it then diminish, but to correct their euill waters, and watrish fruites, wherewith they in part do liue. Againe, wee are to vnderstand, that the dis∣ease which is most agreeable with age, sxe, re∣gion, custome, complexion, is alwaies most daungerous, as ingendered by an exceeding ve∣hemencie of the cause, whereto nature hath yeel∣ded, and so requireth a like vehement medicine: wherefore if the Arabian, the Indian, the Spani∣ard, fall into colde diseases▪ or such as follow colde: no maruell though nature hath ministred vnto them plentie of strong wines and spices, which the Nor∣thren nations neede not. Who as they bee more apt to fall into such diseases then they, their temper thereto agreeing, the aire and region furthering the same, so are they not thereof so dangerously sicke as they of the South countries, and therefore re∣quire not so forcible a medicine. But I minde not to stand to shewe the vse which foreigne nations haue of their commodities, let them see to it. Hitherto hath beene shewed, both that they be hurtfull vnto vs, and that it is not absurde for hot
region, to abound with hot simples, the vse of them being diuers, both in respect of curing their bodies, and other vses without the compasse of Physicke. These be the reasons which mooue mee to suspect the vse of strange drugges, and driue me to thinke, that Nature hath better prouided for vs: and as the Indian, Arabian, Spaniard, haue their Indish, Arabian, and Spanish medicines, so also the Germane hath his, the French man his, and the English man his own proper, belonging to each of them. I know gentle reader nothing doth more hinder the accepting of truth diuers times. (especi∣ally with such as see wth other mens eyes) then the person of him who first propoundeth the matter, be∣ing taken rather to bee an opinion of one, then an vndoubted truth to be cherished of all, as who haue interest therein. Wherefore that such might be sa∣tisfied, I will adde to my former reasons taken from the nature of the thing, the authoritie of moe doc∣tours then one, who agreeing with this which I holde, may be a meanes to drawe the gentle reader the more seriously to consider of this matter, and truth may take some strength thereby, and winne the more credit▪ Plinie in his foure and twentie Booke of his historie, and first Chapter, hath this sentence, thus much in English: Nature would that such onely should be medicines, that is to say, which easily might be come by of the common people: easie to be found out, without charge, taken from the things whereby we liue: but in processe of time, the craft of men, and sleighte of their wits, found out these shoppes of strange drugges, in which a sale of mens liues is offered, whereupon confec∣tions,
and infinite mixtures beganne to bee extol∣led, India and Arabia a man would thinke he were in them, and for a little gall or small vlcer, a me∣dicine must be fetched from the redde Sea: where∣as euerie day the poorest doe suppe with true me∣dicines. And in his two and twentie Book and foure & twentie Chapter, We doe not meddle (saith he) with the medicines taken from the marchandise of India or Arabia, or of the new world, they are not fit for medicines and remedies, they growe too farre off, they are not for vs, no, not for the nations where they growe, else would they not sell them away. If wee shall needes vse them (saith hee) let them bee bought for sweete per∣fumes, and sweete oyles, and dainties, or to serue superstition, because when we pray we burne Fran∣kensence and Costus. And thus much out of Plinie, whose iudgement as it is auncient of a 1000. yeares, so is it of him, who most diligently sought out the mysteries of nature, and published them for the vse of posteritie. Now if haply it bee obiected, that Plinie might well verifie that of Italie which Eng∣land can not performe, wee must vnderstand, that Plinie reasoneth from nature, which serueth for all nations of the world as well as for Italie, and direc∣teth his penne not onely against the medicine strange to Italie, but euen against all that are farre fetched and dearely bought, as appeareth plaine∣ly by his words. To this sentence of Plinie, I wil adde the iudgement of two Physitians of late time, least Plinie beeing no physitian, should be thought an vnsufficient testimonie. Fuchsiu in his first Book of compounding of medicines and 76. Chapter,
thus agreeth with Plinie. If we were not so carried a∣way with the admiration of strange things, and were not fooles (saith hee) who had rather vse medi∣cines fetched from strange and farre countries, con∣temning our natiue Medicines) then such as grow in our gardens: we might make Honie serue in steed of Manna. But with the exceeding cost and charge which those medicines put vs vnto, wee are wor∣thily punished for our folly. Loe, heere two wit∣nesses, the one a great Philosopher, and the o∣ther both a Philosopher and a Physician, compara∣ble with the best of late daies. The third witnesse with Plinie and Fuchsius, is Martine Rulandus, to whome the students of Phy∣sicke owe much for his Medicina practica, and o∣ther workes. This Rulandus in his preface to Me∣dicina practica, hath these words: thus in English: Wee haue simple medicines (easily had, homely, of our owne countrie of Germanie, to be bought with little monie or none at all): ready (saith he) and intreated of in writing, by which onely all kinds of diseases are certainely and vndoubtedly cured, oftentimes better and much more easily (beleeue reason and experience saith hee) (and that with no hurt or danger) then with the long compoundes of the Aposthecaries, which are costly, euill gather∣ed without knowledge of the Physician, oftentimes vnperfectly mixed, and vnskilfully confused, and as vnskilfully boyled, oftentimes putrefied, and by age of force wasted, slouenly and with great negligence confected. In which words Rulandus briefly hath comprehended in a manner all the dis∣commodities of strange medicines.
These testimonies I rather haue alledged, gen∣tle reader, that thou mayest knowe this my opini∣on is not mine onely, and new sprung vp from the leasure of a student, who might easily be ouertaken with a speculation which neuer could be showne in vse and practise, but hath with it the voice of autho∣ritie, and suffrages of excellent Philosophers and Physitians, although they haue not of purpose and an a sette treatise handled this argument, as thou seest: which notwithstanding contayneth in∣deede the matter of a great volume. Hitherto hath beene shewed the great inconueniences and dangers which rise of the vse of strange medi∣cines, by reason, by experience, by authoritie of Philosophers and Physitians. If my reasons bee euill gathered, the experience false, the au∣thoritie not authenticall, what haue I lost there∣by▪ a fewe houres meditation, and a fewe lines writing, or my credite impaired will some say. If my credite could eyther buy such vertues to strange medicines as they carrie the name, or purge the shops of counterfet stuffe, or redeeme the harmes they haue done, I would verily esteem as much of the chaunge, as hee which made exchange of brasse for golde. Although I weene it be a pro∣prietie to mans weaknesse vnauoidable of any, to erre, and therefore if obstinacie be not therwith coupled alwaies found pardon. But if my arguments rise from the causes and effects of these foreig∣ners, and causes and effects of our bodies, which are of all arguments the most forcible to establish or ouerthrowe any thing to bee decided by rea∣son, and the authorities such, as iustly exception
cannot bee taken against: blame mee not (gen∣tle reader) though I bee carried into this perswa∣sion my selfe, and of a loue and zeale to benefite thee, haue published that which I haue conceiued of this Argument. If I bee deceiued in my iudge∣ment of strange drugges, (which I wish with all my heart I were) these reasons, the woefull experi∣ence, the authoritie of such men haue induced me. All which if they may bee answered, that which seemed more thn doubtfull before, shall by this controuersie shine most cleare, and truth as it were wrought with the fire of reason, receiue greater strength nd perfection. Thus much touching the vnablenesse of strange merchandise to performe vnto vs sufficiencie, yea, any measure of medi∣cines, as belonging vnto vs properly, and the discommodities of them. Now if strange medi∣cines serue not our turnes, and all medicines bee eyther strange or home borne, it must needs fol∣lowe, that the home medicines are most naturall and kinde to vs, except a man would say all medi∣cines bring harme vnto vs, which is not of the nature of a medicine, being an instrument of per∣fourming remedies vnto vs: or if it were so, yet haue wee this by experience, that strange medi∣cines doe more annoy vs then strangers, yea, de∣stroy vs, and restore them: wherefore home me∣dicines and of our countrie yeelde, of equitie must necessarily performe the same to vs, which their medicines doe to them. Else I would knowe why we should bee inferior vnto them, or one nati∣on more priuiledged that way then an other, the neede beeing common, and the prouidence of God
all one, yea such as rather then remedie should neede the chariot of the Sunne to fetch it from one end of the world to the other, or be so farre to seek as our common drugges are, he hath linked the remedie in many things so streightly to the cause of our hurt, that euen the selfe same which har∣med vs, carieth with it amendes. As the Scorpion rubbed vppon his stinging, cureth the same. Like∣wise the Ranie diuided & applyed hot to the wound, cureth her venemous biting, and so the Pastinaca marina as it bringeth most dngerous hurt, it re∣fuseth not (being thereto applyed) to minister re∣medie. Which practise of nature might veriie moue vs to thinke her meaning is not to send vs either into Arabia or India for aide of our griefes, but thereby to commend her care vnto vs, and giue occasion of praising Gods prouidence, and stirring vs vp to make diligenter search into our owne prouision, and to take better triall then wee were wont of the same. Wherein the great libera∣litie of God appeareth in such large measure, that rather superfluitie then spating may be noted here∣in; in that both one simple nature carrieth with it the vertue of many medicines; and many simples, remedies against such diseases as wee might bee thought like neuer to bee subiect vnto: and such things as in respect of their nature might seemevile vnto vs, affoord vs (beeing skilfully applied) most souereigne medicine: whereof for a taste I giue two or three examples: Milk is either to be considered in all the parts together, or them seuered. All kind of Milke boyled, especially burned with stones token from the sea shore, helpeth all inward vl∣cers,
chiefely of the iawes, the lungs, the gutes, the bladder, and the kidneyes, it is good against the itch and wheales, and it helpeth bloudie flixes. New Milke is good against frettings made with poysons receiued inward: as of Cantharides and such like: it is profitably gargled against swellings and frettings in the rawes. The whay of Milke is good to pulge the bodie, especially of such as bee melancholike, and disposed to the falling sickenesse, leprosie and breaking out with scabbes. The cheesie part of it, as curds, fresh without salt, softneth the bellie which pressed and broyled stayeth the laxe. Cheese laide on, helpeth the inflammation of the eyes. The but∣ter of Milke drunke, softneth the belly, and ser∣ueth against poyson for want of oyle; rubbed vp∣on their gooms with honie, helpeth the toothing of children, and cureth the itching of their gooms and soares of their mouthes, It helpeth such as are bitten of the serpent called Aspis. The soote of butter is very effectuall against watering eyes, and swiftly skinneth sores. Thus thou leest reader what treasure is hid in Milke (euen an excrement) beeing vsed both whole and in partes. That which I haue said of Milke, belongeth also to most of creatures, which both all serue for medicine, and each of them for sundrie purposes. Whereby Natures endeuour to furnish vs with all helpe of medicine may euidently appeare, yea, most of all when shee seemeth to bee so iea∣louse ouer our health, that shee prouideth against Drinus, against the Scorpion; the viper, and Ce∣rastes, and the most of venemous bitings of Ser∣pents, wherewith notwithstanding we are not as o∣ther
nations encombred, and those not common, medicines onely, but euen proper vnto them. As the venome of Drysmus is abated and vtterly extin∣guished with the Trifolie, and with all kinde of mast, be it of the Beech, o the Oake, or of any kinde of tree that beareth Acornes. Peneriall cureth the Scor∣pions sting: against the byting of a viper, Garlike, Onyons, and Leekes newe gathered, are principall triacles: wherwith also the venom of Cerastes is ouer∣matched. Ergo, if Nature faile vs not against the ve∣nomes of strange Serpents, from which we be freed by reason of the temper of our region, repugnant to their natures, (All things beeing done in the actions of nature in exquisite wisedome, & by a precise rule of Gods prouidence) much more are we furnished against the diseases bred in our bowels. What hath been said of venemous beasts, may also bee shewed in the cure of strange diseases, wherein nature see∣meth to be as carefull as in the other. The French Pockes is an Indian disease, and not knowne to this part of the world within this hundreth yeares, be∣fore that voyage of Charles the Emperour, which he tooke against Naples, where being brought ouer with the Spaniards which returned with Christopho∣rus Columbus, who first discouered the West Indies, it hath since infected the whole worlde. Now this strange & Indian disease hath nature prouided reme∣die against, not only out of India, as the Guaicum, & Salsa Parilla, but euen out of Europe as effectuall: as the Smilax aspera, wherewith Fallopius saith at Pis he cured diuers of the French pockes. And La Riui∣ere in French his Apologie, affirmeth the same to be done with the essence of the Primrose and Couslip.
The anoyntings with Mercurie are knowne by daily practises what force they haue, against this most grieuous disease, which although some doe mislike, because vndiscreetly vsed, it is somewhat daungerous: yet Antonius Chalmeteus, a skilfull Surgion, in the fift Booke of his Enchiridion and 5. Chapter, affirmeth, that therewith hee hath per∣fectly cured diuers without daunger, and if it hath otherwise fallen out with some, that it hath rather proceeded of vnskilfull vsing, then by the nature of Mercurie. Now, gentle reader, thou art to vnderstand the Pockes in India, being the same disease with that wee call the French Pockes, is there a gentle disease, not much differing from the Scabbe, voyde of such grieuous symptoms as it bringeth to these quarters, corrupting not only the fleshie partes of our bodies but euen the verie bones also. This testifieth Fallopius in his Booke of the French Pockes. Yet neede not our medi∣cines craue the helpe of India for the cure thereof, no, not although it rage farre more fiercely (as it doeth) against vs then against them. Which be∣ing euident, let vs consider how iustly nature may bee blamed to fayle in the prouision of medicines. Scarce would a man looke for any great vertue of medicine in the wormes of the earth, being a creature so abiect: yet ioyne they, and cleaue toge∣ther wounded sinewes, they cure tertians, they help the paines of the eares, the toothache, and the pouder of them dronke prouoketh vrine. The little vermine called Sowes, which being touched runne together round like a pease, who would thinke they cured the difficultie of making water, the lawnes,
the Quinsey, for which purposes they be of great force, and for to discharge stuffed lungs, with tough and grosse humorus, nothing may be com∣pared. Likewise the cornes of horse legges called Lichenes, although they bee base and vle excre∣ments, yet helpe they such as are taken with the falling sickenesse. The decoction of Frogges with salt and butter, is a triacle against the bitings, sting∣ings, and poysons of all serpents, and the ashes of them burnt, stayeth the flux of bloud being thereto applyed. These base creatures the rather I propound, that beeing knowne, the treasures which Nature hath hid and layde vp in them, with such varietie of vertues, wee might, the better esteeming of her benefites, and the blessings of our owne countrie, both acknowledge them, accept them, and bee more thankfull vnto God for them. The which base creatures the viler they seeme to be, the more commend they the goodnesse of the Crea∣tor, who would not the abiectest thing that is, should altogether bee without wherewith to serue, and doe homage to his Lord and maister: which if these things affoord vs, what may wee iustly promise to our selues, and require of the rest more excellent creatures? Let not the reason seeme strange and weak to thee reader, who art a Christian, which is taken from the prouidence and wisedome of God, to proue the sufficiencie of his execution and performance of the same. For if Galene thought it reasonable, (as it is most rea∣sonable.) to gather the wisedome and prouidence of the Creator by his work in the Creature & main∣tenance thereof, which he in the end of his bookes
of the vse of parts, calleth a poynt of diuinitie, farre to bee preferred aboue the whole Art of Phy∣sicke: much more reasonable is it for mee, and the reason sounder which is drawne from that di∣uine prouidence, to the practise thereof. And if Galene had that religion in him, beeing a Gen∣tile; and groping onely in the mist of naturall knowledge of God▪ could not satisfie himselfe with a Psalme or Hymne (as hee himselfe cal∣leth it) of seuenteene staues, euery staffe contay∣ning a whole booke (for thus hee himselfe calleth his Bookes of the vse of parts) of the wisedome of the most wise God, esteeming that dutie more ac∣ceptable vnto him then sacrifices of an hundreth Oxen, or the most costly perfumes and incense; let it not bee harsh in thine eares gentle reader, to heare now and then the goodnesse of our God, his wisedome and prouidence, to bee both intreated of and aduanced of a Christian Physitian, and to Christians, to whome the sunne of righteousnesse hath shined and scatterred those mists of naturall darkenesse, and hath giuen the earnest of immor∣talitie. And bee assured there is no truth in Philo∣sophie, but may stand with, yea rather may rest, and bee vpholden of Christianitie. But let vs proceede. Iulius Bassus, Nicerates, and Petronius Niger, as saith, Dioscorides, thought their countrie medicines, and those which their natiue soyle yeelded, most worthy to bee exactly intreated of by them, be∣like either thinking them sufficient for the inhabi∣tants, or more agreeable with them. Which homely practise of the naions where he trauelled, Dioscorides confesseth to haue beene the matter
whereof he compounded his golden book of medi∣cines, which at this day remaineth a rich storehouse to all Physitians. Now then I would know why we should more bee prouided of medicine against one disease then another, of our countrie yeeld? is it be∣cause such diseases which require strange medicines are more daungerous, or lesse? if more daungerous then should the remedy for them be more at hand, then for other: if lesse, why are then the strange me∣dicines esteemed as most forcible? and if we be lesse subiect to such diseases as are cured with them, & so the absence of them may seeme tolerable, why then are tertian agues chiefly cured with Thamarines and Rhewbarbe? wherof the one commeth out of India, & the other for the most part out of Barbarie. What so euer nature is yeelded to any nation, it serueth either for nourishment or medicines, or being ney∣ther nourishment nor medicine, is plaine poy∣son. Now a subducction beeing made of each of these, one from the other, what part shall we thinke wil nourishments leaue to medicines? a far greater doubtless then they them selues be: & as they exceed nourishments, so greatly do they & beyond al com∣parison exced the poisons. Wherefore if the most of creatures in euery nation, be a fit matter of medicine, greatly no doubt are all nations stored with them: which store declareth, that as diseases partly rise of breach of diet, & partly through poisons, so Nature would furnish vs with medicines in nūber answera∣ble to the causes of both: which being not sufficient, argueth that Nature misseth of her purpose, hauing sufficiently declared her endeuour: but Nature alwaies bringeth her workes to perfection, ex∣cept in case of monsters, which are not ordinary.
Wherefore her will, (she being an instinct of Gods) euer going with the execution thereof, must needs performe that to vs which she pretendeth in the varietie. But that thou maist (gentle reader) haue better holde and greater assurance of the sufficiency of thy countrie medicines. I will set downe brief∣ly according to the variety and sorts of all diseases cured with medicine, medicines taken from our natiue soyle aunswerable vnto them, and effectu∣all to cure them. And because medicines haue relation to diseases, I will first touch the diseases, and thereto ioyne the medicicines. All diseases are either in the complexion, or frame of the bodie, such as are in the complexion are all cured by medi∣cine; which I named in the beginning of this trea∣tise one of the instruments of Physicke. Of disea∣ses in the frame, these onely are cured with medi∣cines; Quantitie superfluously increased, or dimi∣nished: obstructions, ouerstraightnesse or ouer∣largnesse of passages in the bodie. These are one∣ly the diseases properly to bee cured with medi∣cine: other diseases which rise of these, either of their owne accord vanishing by the cure of these, or else to bee cured by surgerie, as euill figure and shape through want of proportionall quantitie, that beeing restored, the figure forthwith returneth; or if not, ather is to be cured with helpe of hand. And luxation of ioynts, and euill coupling of partes, if they rise of distemper onely, that beeing taken a∣way with medicines, returneth oftentimes with it good situation of partes. Likewise, the situation peruerted through distemper, the complexion be∣ing restored, the other consequently do followe.
Now, hauing declared in generall the diseases which onely require medicine; that euerie disease may haue his proper one, I will subdiuide them more particularly, ioyning to euery disease that medicine which thereto belongeth▪ The diseases in the complexion are either in all the parts of the temper thereof, or else in one or twaine. In the whole complexion are such as are ingendred of venemous causes: and those either ingendred in the body, or happening thereto outwradly they which are ingendered in the bodie, are Cankers, Leprosies, falling sicknesse, Suffocation of the matrix through nature corrupted, Swounings through corruption of Wormes ingendred in the body. And these bee the diseases of venemous causes bred in the bodie. Such as happen there∣to by outward occasions, are either by poyson taken into the bodie, or by outward touching procured: taken into the bodie, as the poyson of Toades, Henbane, Nightshade, Hemlocke, Rats∣bane, Quicksiluer, and such mineralls, and last of all infected aire causing pestilence, and Carbun∣cles. Such as are outwardly procured, are either without woundes or with woundes: without wounds, infection passing from one to another, as the French pockes. With wounds, venemous bitings and stingings of beasts, as of Serpents and madde Dogges. And these are all the diseases said to bee in the whole temper of the bodie, which ha∣uing first shewed to be sufficiently cured by home medicines, in like maner will I prosecute the rest. And heerein (gentle reader) thou art not to looke I should set downe all medicines which our natiue
soyle is knowne to bestow vpon vs for cure of these diseases, which would growe to an infinite vo∣lume, I heerein referring thee to the workes of those who of purpose haue written of the nature of simples, and are authors of practise, but it shall I hope suffice for this purpose to picke out amongst a great many, those of choise for these diseases. And first to begin with Cankers, which being not exulcerated but remayning humors, are cured (if with any medicine) by the iuyce of Nightshade, all the sortes of Endiue and Succorie, with Agri∣monie, with Saint Iohns wort, wilde Clarie, called Oculus Christi, the flesh of Snayles boyled, Cray∣fishes, greene Frogges, and to conclude, with all kinde of metalls and mineralls; and among them Leade, how so euer it be vsed, is most souereigne. If it bee exulcerated, then heerein haue the mine∣ralls and metalls the chiefe place. o the exulcerate Canker belongeth the Woolfe (which is nought else, but a Canker exulcerated.) The Gangrene and Speacelus, are cured by the remedies of the Canker and Woolfe, the one beeing a degree of an Vlcer in which the partes begin to bee morti∣fied, the other when they haue now lost life altoge∣ther. The leprosie is an vniuersall Canker, and for outward medicines requireth no other: among the inward, Plantine, Whay, Hedgehogs dryed and drunke, helpe greatly. And thus much for Cankers and Leprosies, which as they be disea∣ses hard to bee cured by any medicine, so receiue they as great helpe by these our home medicines, as by any of strange countries. The falling sicke∣nesse, if it be in such as are aged, and haue beene
long diseased therewith, is a disease hardly or not at all to be cured. But where it is curable, these medi∣cines bee comparable with the best: the roote of the Missleto of the Oake, the runnet of an Hare, the Peonie roote, Enula campana, the scalpe of a Man, an Asse hoose, Hyssope, the mylt of an Horse, the stones which are found in the mawes of the first broode of Swallowes, fiue leaued grasse, the iuice of the Couslippe, the iuice of Horehound with Hon. All suffocations of the Matrix are cured with Plan∣tine, Periall, Herbgrace, and by an infinite num∣ber of home medicines. Wormes and that infection, is taken away by Coriander seed, Colewort seed, Gar∣like, Wormwood, & in a manner with all bitter hearbs, with the iuice of Purslane, with the fylings of Stags horne, little inferiour in vertue to that which is commonly taken for the Vnicornes horne. Peach leaues, Hyssope, Mints, Purslane seed. Thus much tou∣ching medicines against diseases ingendred of vene∣mous causes within the bodie. Now touching such as happen by outward occasions: and first of those that by mouth are taken into the body. Against which generally it helpeth greatly to drinke store of butter in steed of oyle, with warme water or the de∣coction of Flaxe seed, Fenigreeke, or Mallowes, and theupon a vomit: which done, Sothernwood, the root of Seahuluer, the seed of Nep, the iuice of Horehound, the seed of wild Ru, Walnut, Turnops, Herbgrace, ie leaued grasse, with an infinite number of natiue me∣dicines, expell the poyson, and restore the patient. More properly to the poyson of Cantharides, belong Peneriall, to Buprestu all kinds of Peares, and wo∣mans milke: to the Salamander, Chamepitis, Seaholy
rootes: to the wormes of the Pine tree, such as cure the poyson of Cantharides: against the poyson of of the Toad, the rootes of Redes and Cyperus: against the Chameleon, radish roots and Wormwood: against Ephemrum Asses milke or Cowes milke, hot: against Dorycm, Goats mike, Asses milk, Cockles, and Cray fishes: against the poyson of Aconitum, Organ, Hearbgrace, Horehound, the de∣coction of Wormwood. Against hriander, Worm∣wood, salt both made with a Goose or Hen, which expell also the poyson of Flewort: the poyson of Hemocke is cured with Mint, Hearbgrace, Nettle seed, ay leaues, which  cure the poson of Vgh, and Carpasus. The poyson of that kinde of Crowe∣oote, called Sardonia, is cured with drinking store of Mede, and Milke:  me with Nettle seede, wilde Endiue, Mustard sede, and Rock: Cearuse, with Mede, hot milke: Peach stones, with the de∣coction of Barley, with the decoction of Mllows: Quicksiluer, with store of Milke drunke. Mercuie sublimed with Crystall: Lime, Orpiment, ars∣ane, and such like, wit the decoction of Flaxe ede, and Milke with Mde. And to conclude this point, there is no ind of poyson, but it findeth cure by ou countrie medicines without borrowing. Ths much for the cure of poysons taken into the bodie by eating or drinking of them: Pestilences are cued (if with any medicine) with Angelica, Car∣duus benedictus, Arske, worne about the bodie, the roote of Pimpinell, of ormentil, Hearbgrace, Setwall, Walnuts, the pouder of S. Iohns wort, uniper berries, Veuen, and the chiefe of all, the oble smple water Germader, and the Duarfgen∣tian.
For pestilent sores and Carbuncles, Scabi∣ous, Ofbit, Lousestrife, and the Marigolde: to the pestilence may bee referred the small pockes and such like, which agree in medicine also with the pestilence. And thus much for the cure of poi∣sons. Against bitings and stings of venemous beastes, and poysoned weapons, there are also both generall and particular remedies. The gene∣rall are these: the ashes of the cuttings of the Vine and of the Figge tree, with Lee, Leekes, Onions, Garlicke, the Sea water, mustard seede, Endiue, Heth, the roote of the Sea Huluer, Bay berries, Hearbgrace, Dill, Sowse breade, Fe∣nell, Peneriall, the runnet of an Hare, the We∣sell, and these generall: particulars, are such as follow. Against the bitings of Phalangium, the seede of Sothernwood, Aniseede, the seede of Tri∣folie, the fruite of Tamariske. Against the Scolo∣pendra, wilde Rewe, Thyme, Calamint: against the Scorpion, Basil seed: against the biting of a Vi∣per, Adder, Snake, &c. Sothernwood, Bayes, green Organ, the Bramble, the braines of an Hen, Cole seede. Against the bitings of a madde Dogge, Crowe garlike, the riuer Crabbe, Balme, an actuall cauterie, the liuer of the madde Dogge broyled, the bloud of a Dogge drunke. And thus much for the bitings and stingings of venemous beasts, which also serue against poysoned wounds, else to be cured with the medicine which respecteth properly the poyson wherewith the weapon hath beene infected. The infection without wound is the French pocke, whereof (sufficient hauing beene saide before) I will heere say nothing.
This then shall suffice to haue written of the cure of all diseases rising of venomous causes, wherein (if Nature of her owne accord as it were, and in this great neglect of our Country & natiue medicines) hath shewed her selfe so liberall, how large would shee be▪ if with sette purpose and carefull endeuour greater triall of things were had, and proofe made by learned and discreet men. Now follow the dis∣eases which are by the excesse or defect of one or two parts of the temper, which are hot, cold moist, and drie, simple or compounded: which if they be not procured by euill humours, then require they altering onely by contrary qualities. If by them, as fleame, choler, melancholie: then are these hu∣mors first to be auoided and diminished. Such as require altering, are cured by natures of contrarie qualitie, not onelie generally, but euen answerable to all degrees of excesse. And first to be∣ginne with hot diseases of the first degree, they are cured with such contraries as follow: Barley, sowre Grpes, Roses, Violets, the Oake, Quinces, Dam∣sings, Pellitoy of the vvall, Docks, Peares, Apples, Hartshorne, the flowers and whole herbe of Mal∣lowes. Of the second degree; the vvater Lillie, Ducks∣meat, Knotgrasse, Vine leaues, the Bramble, Plan∣tne, Cheries, Lead, Crusse, Barberies, Covv∣combes, Mellons, Courds, Citralls, whites of Egges, Medlers, and Seruices. Of the third; Purslane, Housleeke, Mandrake, Henbane. Of the fourth; Hemlock, Poppie. Thus much for hot diseases.
Medicines for cold diseases, are these hot which follow. Of the first degree; Buglosse, Borage, Fu∣mitorie, Sage, Horsehoofe, Maydenhaire, Butter, Lillies, Flaxe-seede, marrow and fat, Chamomile, Fenigreek, &c. Of the second; Dill dry, Mugwort, Parseley, Saffron, Honie, Balme, Salt, &c. The third; Anise, olefoote, Calamint, Com∣mine, Fenell, Hyssope, Mints, &c. The fourth; Garlicke-cresses, mustard, Celendine the great. For moist diseases these medicines are good; Of the first degree dry: Cabbage, Beetes, Chamomile, Fenel, Beanes, Fenigreek, &c. Of the second; Dill, Mugwort, Shepheards-pouch, Doddard, Lintls, Hony, Rosemary. Of the third; Wormevvood, Germander, Hyssope, Iuniper, Fiue leaued grasse, Organ, Horehound, &c. Of the fourth; Garlick-cresses, mustard-seed, wilde Rue. Dry diseases haue these medicines, Buglos, Ma∣lowes, Turnops, Endiue, for the first degree. The second; Violets, Water-lillie, Lettice, Purselaine, &c. The third, and fourth degrees, as these are e∣uill supplied by strange simples; so are they re∣compenced by increase of quantities of moyst in the two first degrees. And thus much touching medi∣cines belonging to the cure of diseases in one part of the temper, which beeing in two parts, and with∣out humour, require either temperings the simple qualities aforesaid, in diuerse simples, or natures vvherein such two do exceede; vvhich because they be as plentifull as those I haue before mentioned, and that heereof none makes doubt, I vvill not touch. If this double distemper rise of humor, as for
the most part of it doth: Then is that humor to bee diminished or altogether to bee voyded out of the bodie, and then the distemper remai∣ning to bee altered. The humors are properly to bee voyded by purgation, other waies there bee diuerse: as exercise, fastinges, sweating, vrine & such like. But properly the vacuation of fleme, cho∣ler, melancholie, which are the causes of this dou∣ble distemper, belongeth to purging medicines: which purgations, as the greatest doubt is of na∣tures prouision in them, so they beeing suppli∣ed by our countrie soyle, the greatest part of this controuersie may seeme to bee decided. Purgations are eyther by vomit, or by stoole: by vomit our natiue soyle ministreth great choice, as, verie gentlie, the radish rootes with the seed; the pepon roote and nettle seede: with more ve∣hemencie, solefoote, leafe and roote, the middle barke of the wall nutte tree, and the long blos∣somes thereof: and yet most vehemently the seedes of broome and the flowers thereof: and these for vomit. By the stoole, and first to purge choler: the flowers and leaues of the Peach tree▪ Violets flow∣ers and seedes comparable with Rheubarbe, the great garden docke called the Munkes Rheubarbe, Damaske roses, wilde Saffron, the pouder of Fe∣thefewe, all the kindes of spurges, the root of the wilde Cowcumber, the roote of Bryonie, and Coloquintida. Melancholie is purged with Co∣loquintida, the oke fearne, the iuice of Man∣drake, the flowers of broome, bearefoote, and Antimonie. Fleame and water are purged with Co∣loquintida, the iuice of Rhineberries, the grosse
barke of the Elme, the iuice of the root of Wal∣worte, of Elder, the gardine Flowerdeluce roote iuyced. The dry leaues of Laurell, the seawythwind, scurby weede. These are a showe of our Enlgish store of purgers: which if they bee too strong, then are they to bee ministred in smaller quanti∣tie mixed with those of feebler working; if too weake, then are they to bee sharpened with quic∣ker. If they offend any part, they are to be cor∣rected partly with cordialls, and partly with me∣dicines respecting such partes as they annoy. Which wantes are not onely to bee charged vpon our countrie medicines, seeing euen the best of fo∣reyne purgers are to bee touched with the same. As scammonie is corrected with quinces, other∣wise troubleth it the stomach with a griping and gnawing, it purgeth ouer vehemently, it hurteth the liuer, and is enemie to the heart, and doth exulcerate where it passeth, and procureth dysente∣ries, that is to say, vlcers in the guts. Turpeth is cor∣rected with ginger and long Peper, Mastich with oyle of sweete Almonds, and Suger, else ouerthrow∣eth it the stomach, troubleth, & ouerdrieth the bo∣dy. Coloquintida with oyle of sweet almonds, goom, tragacant, or mastich, else troubleth it vehemently the whole bodie, procureth the bloudie flixe, and miserably tormenteth the guts. So, Agaricke requi∣reth to be steeped in wine with ginger & cloues, yet scarce abstaineth it from ouerthrowing the sto∣mach. Cassia marreth the stomach, and requireth to bee mixed therewith stomach medicines. The excessiue drinesse, and binding of Rheubarbe is corrected with some moystening syrope. Aloe re∣quireth
Mastich and Goome Trageacanth to mi∣tigate the fretting thereof. Sene marreth the sto∣mach, and either through windiness, or through ve∣hemency of scouring, tormenteth the body, and therefore needeth Ginger, Cinamon, or Spike, sweet Prunes, fatte broth, and Raisins. Hermodactiles offend the stomach, & cause winde, and require Ginger, Cumine, or Spike: and to be short; there is no purger of strange drogues which requireth not correction of great faults; which cor∣rection is taken frō such medicines as respect those parts chiefely which the purgation dooth annoy, whereof such is our store, that in all parts we be suf∣ficiently armed therewith. But of these shall heere∣after be spoken. Now, if any man thinke, for want of Cassia, Man∣na, Sene, Rheubarb, these humours cannot be voy∣ded, or not so well; let mee then knowe how the Grecians wanted them, and yet found no lack, vsing onely Scammonie, Helleboru, and Colocynthis, Aloes, and Agaricke, for their chiefe purgations: The o∣ther beeing brought in of late in comparison, by the Arabians; vvho both in knowledge of Physick, and in the works thereof, were farre inferiour to the Gre∣cians, to whom I say (I meane the ancient of them in Galens time and before) neither Manna, nor Cassia, nor Sene, nor Rheubarbe, nor Hermodactiles, vvere known either at all, or at the vttermost for purgers. And as for Manna, Fuchsius saith, that certaine ha∣uing beene about the Mount Libanus, made report that the inhabitants of that mountaine, hauing ea∣ten their fill thereof, neither feele themselues any whit troubled there-with, nor their bodies loosed,
but vse it for an ordinary sustenance. Whereby again appeareth a great diuersitie of working of strange medicines according to the variety of countries. But what should wee say of the nature of purgers, it is doubtlesse one of the hardest points at this day in all naturall Philosophie, neither minde [at this present to deale therein: but this may I say, as by preparation, one nature may according to the vari∣etie thereof, receiue diuerse, yea contrary vertues; so seemeth it to me that this vertue of purging may be procured to natures of themselues destitute ther∣of, by preparation. Diuerse and in a manner all the metalls, and mi∣neralls, beeing burnt and washed, giue ouer their fretting nature, and quicksiluer (which of it selfe it is not sublimed, or precipitated) becommeth a ve∣hement scouring medicine: so likewise Antimonie, before it be turned into glasse or oyle, is not known to purge the bodie: vvhich beeing done, is greatly commended against the Dropsie, the French pocks, melancholie, and diuerse other diseases, vvhich it cu∣reth by purging. So that it seemeth, art of preparati∣on, as it maketh no nature (that beeing a vvorke of the vniuersall nature) so may it not onely bee a preparer, but euen a maker of medicines: vvhich medicines are not natures, euen as health, and sick∣nes are not of the nature of mans body, but euen ac∣cidents thereto. Which being certaine, let vs then consider what an infinite variety of medicines wold arise of things, the same being vsed not only entire, but diuersly prepar'd & euen corrupted: wherin the industry of Alchmists
is verily greatly to bee commended, and farre more excellent then the common Pharmacopolla rather so to bee called then Pharmacopolya, by the skill whereof diuerse natures in one thing are so exactly seuered, euery one hauing a diuerse o∣peration. Now oftimes because the humor to bee purged is grosse and tough and so hardly yeeldeth to the medicine, or hath some other euill qua∣litie wherewith it might greatly hurt the partes, whereby it passeth; nature not forgetting this point, hath as aboundantly supplyed such helpes in this behalfe, as neede requireth: as for the pre∣paring of choler, Plantaine, Roses, the verdiuice of the grape, endiue, suchorie, sorel, sperage, &c. For melancholie: violets, borage, buglosse, baulme, umitory, doddar, ceterach, or fingerfearne, &c. For fleme: fenel, persely, beonie, neppe, penetial, thyme, sauerie, germander, &c. Of these I lesse stand vpon, because the preparers of humors are least in controuersie, although from hence may an argu∣ment bee drawne not lightly to bee passed ouer, to proue the store of purgers, seeing nature hath miniistred sufficiencie of preparers, and as it were harbngers to the purgers of countrie yeelde. But I wil drawe to an end: and thus much shall suf∣fice for this present purpose to haue said of medi∣cines, belonging to the cure of all diseases in com∣plexion. The other kinde of diseases are in the frame of the body: and of those, if quantity bee superfluously increased, and that in the whole body, medicines which do vehemently waste, as those of the third degree hot, diminish the same. If in the part onely, medicines which we call eaters, and fret∣ters,
dispatch the same: as coperous, the ashes of spurge, burntalum, mercurie sublimed and precipi∣tate, verdigrece, burnt salt, &c. If measure be di∣minished, and that without losse of substance, the glewing medicines bring cure: whereof our natiue soile is so stored, that for wounds, the Surgions need neither to send into Barbarie, nor India: as Plan∣tane, Hounds tonge, the flowers and leaues of wil∣lowes, yarrow, carduus benedictus, betony, sca∣bious, veruen, elme leaues, adders tonge, moone worte, hearbe turpence, Selfe heale, and these if the wounds bee in the fleshie partes. If it be breaking of bones, such are ioyned with fine flower, the brayne of a dogge, with woll, and the white of an egge, the holyhocke roote, the mosse of the oke, glewe, roses, worme woode, &c. If there be losse of substance in the fleshie parts either by wound, or vlcer, Incarnatiues fayle vs not: as barlie meale, fenegreeke flower, fighene meale, and to bee short all such as bee of the first degree hot and drie, with∣out egernes or felnes. Now the diseases in straight∣nes of passages or obstructions, if they arise of the humors afore said, and in those places whereto the medicine may conueniently come, then are they to be sette free by purging. If vpon other causes, or in such places wherto the force of the medicine which purgeth cannot come, or hardely entereth, or of such causes as be no humors, but through some o∣ther strange matter, or by straightnes of the ves∣sells, where though the passage is, then are other remedies to be vsed whereof we haue great plentie, as softners, loosers, and such as doe enlarge tho pores of the bodie, of which sorte are such a bee
not aboue the first degree hote: as Chamomile, Lil∣lies, new butter, Swines greace, Linseed, Fenigreek, Brionie root, all marrowes: Also medicines which make the matter thin, or cut it, and diuide it into sun∣dry parts, of which sort are they of the second de∣gree hot to the third degree, as Dill, Peneriall, Sa∣uerie, Organ, Thyme, Marioran, Saint Iohns wort, Worme-wood, &c. Now, if the humour prepared be to be voided by place medicine, then salt, salt wa∣ter, Lie, Ashes, Alume, and Lime, take place; and if more vehemencie bee needfull, Calamint, vvild Cresses, Triacle, mustard, Garden Cresses, Mustard seed, nettles, dragons, all the spurges are to be num∣bred among the best: and if these serue not, the root of Crowfoot will make the supply. If the humour cannot be voided conueniently, except it be altered into another matter, of which sort is pent bloud out of the veines, then are ripening medicines first to be applyed: as butter, wheat-flower, Sorel, Horsehoof, Lillies, Marchmallowes, Onyons rosted; which all are singular ripers. If the matter be rough & clam∣mie, these scourers auoyd that inconuenience; En∣diue, Suchorie, Red-roses, Plantaine, Houseleeke, Agrmonie, Betony, Hony, Horchound, Worme-wood, Baulme, Pimpernell, Watergermander, &c. Now, if the matter which stoppeth be the stone, as in the kidneyes, or bladder, then are these medi∣cines most conuenient for that vse: Grummell seed, Goates bloud, the iuyce of Mugwort, Seahuluer∣root, the stones found in the great snayles heads, ra∣dish roots, Saxifrage, &c. If any hard matter be in other parts, the softners and wasters, & dissoluers are to be applyed.
Thus much touching the cure of obstructions and straight passages, which according to the varie∣tie of place where they light, cause sundry diseases, or rather take to thē sundry names. As in the braine, the Apoplexie; in the bladder of Gall, the yellovve Iawnes; in the Splene, the black: in the synewes of motion, the palsey or trembling; in the lungs Asthma, and so foorth. Now, if these passages be too large, they are to be stopped and streightned with cooling and drying medicines, of which sort in a manner are all of sharp and sowre taste; as Vine-leaues, the Brier, and the Bramble, Barbaries, Medlers, and Seruices, Quin∣ces, & such as are of themselues, or by mixture with liquor clammie, as wheat flower, beane flower, the white of an egge, plaister, washed lime, Litharge, and Ceruse. Now moreouer, because in all good cure, not onely the cause of the diseases is to bee oppugned, but the part also to bee strengthened, which must needs (partly by the cause of the disease, and partly euen by the conflict of the same cause with the me∣dicine) befeebled; that nothing be wanting vnto vs for the restoring of health, nature hath prouided e∣uen speciall munition for euery part of the body, that the whole furniture against all diseases might be complete. As for the head, Aniseedes, Folefoot, Betony, Calamint, Eyebright, Lauender, Bayes, Marioran, Piony, Sage, Rew, or herbgrace, Lettise, the leaues and flowers of vvater Lillies, Roses, gar∣den nightshade. For the lungs, calamint, dragons, li∣coras, Enula campana, hissop, linseed, horehound, the lūgs of a fox, scabious, water germander, barly, gardē
poppe violets, horsehoofe. For the heart, bu∣glosse, borage, saffron, baulme, basill, rosema∣ry, violets, the bone of a stagges harte, roses. For the stomach, wormewood, mints, betonie, baulme, mint, quinces, medlers, Sorell, purselane. For the Liuer, Dartspine, or chamepitys,, ger∣mander, agrimonie, fenell, endiue, suchorie, liuer worte, barbaris. For the splene: Maiden heare, sperage, fingerfearne, dodder, dodder of thyme, hoppes, the barke of the ash tree. For the kid∣nies: Sea huluer, Grumel, Parseley, Knecolme, saxifrage, Mallowes, Plantane, Pellitorie of the walle. For the wombe: mugwort, peneriall, fe∣therfewe, sauine, walwort, Iuniper. For the Ioynts: chamomile, saint Iohns wort, organ, rue, multen, and coweslips, the lesse centaurie, and chamepitys. Thus haue I (gentle reader) briefely run ouer the diseases cured by medicine, hauing passed by those which eyther rise of these, as euill figure by immo∣derate excesse, or defect of quantitie, vnequally in∣creasing or wanting, or number, euill situation for want of good couplance through distemper, & such like, as also the compounde of those, which require (onely composition excepted) the same medicines. Whereby euidently maist thou see, the goodnes of God towards thee, in so plentifully furnishing thine owne soyle with such varietie of medicines: which if it yeeld thee such plenty in this neglect & lothing of our countrie remedies, what fruite wert thou to looke for, if diligence and paines were vsed? Ve∣rily right well might wee both auoyde the daun∣gers before declared, ease our selues of immoderate charge, and haue better assurance of our medicines
then wee haue: yea verie well satisfie our dainti∣ness euen with strange simples, or finde out such as should not only in vertues match with the spices of India (which is a plaine case) as Rosemarie match∣eth Cinamon: Basill, Cloues: Sage, the Nutmegge: Safforn Ginger: Thyme, Muske: Sauerie, the leafe called Malabathrum, but euen in pleasantnes of rast expresse the same. And as Auens doth most liuely re∣present the taste of cloues vnto vs, so likelie is it if search were made, and this enterprise of exami∣ning and trying our natiue simples taken in hand by men of wisedome, and vnderstanding, wee should no more be destitute of spices then India or Arabia, although neither Indish, nor Arabicke: and as the small iagges of the rootes of Auens, faile little from cloues in taste, so might wee as likely find that which were little inferiour to Cinamon, ginger, nut∣megges, and mace, not onely in likenesse of wor∣king, but euen in similitude of nature: but I will re∣ferre this to that time, when either men shall bee more carefull for publike benefit then priuate gaine, or sufficient allowance bestowed on such men as shold spend their daies only in searching out the ver∣tues of natures, which at this time is greatly wan∣ting, euen as for all other professions of artes. Our English soyle is greatly commended, as it iustly deserueth, for temper of the aire: & of such as haue experience thereof, of strangers, and great masters of simples, for varietie of excellent medicines car∣rieth great praise, who report they finde such sim∣ples in the valleys and woodes of our North parts, as they finde in the toppes of mountaines in the South countries. So that certaine gardine in Eng∣land, especially in London, are able to affourd great
varietie of medicines euen of forraine simples to all diseases. And if the Dittany of Candie, the Cipres ree, the Nicotian out of India, Coloquintida, the Almon tree, the Pomegranate tree, will brook our soyle, and flourish therein, as they doe, wee need not doubt, but certaine and sufficient prouision of all medicines, (I meane all kindes, but not all of euery kind, which were vnnecessary, neither can any coun∣try challenge the same) might bee made partly of a voluntary yeeld of the same, partly by planting, and sowing, with iust temper of the mould, and situation of the plant, out of our own country, both with lesse charge and lesse danger, for all diseases. Now, if it bee demaunded, vvhy then both the practise is, and hath been hitherto otherwise; I will onely say thus much for answere, although much more might be said: The whole art of Physick hath been taken partly from the Greekes, and partly from the Arabians. And as the precepts of the Art, so like∣wise the meanes and instruments wherewith for the most part the precepts of the same art are executed: which hath bred this errour in times past, now by a tradition receiued, that all dutie of the Physician touching restoring health, is to bee performed by the same remedies, not in kinde onely, but euen specially with those which the Grecian and Arabian Masters vsed, who wrote not for vs, but for their Greekes and Arabicks, tempering their medicines to their estates, although their rules be as common as reason to all nations. Galen saith in his first booke of preseruing health, he giueth the rules therof no more to Germans, then to Boares and Beares, but to the Grecians. Which
declareth, they respected their owne nation both in rule and medicine; whom also the Arabians in the same poynt followed. Now, we receiuing the same medicines with the rule, must needs fall into the absurdities afore-saide: Much like to the euill Musitian, which playeth one∣ly vpon the instrument whereon his Master taught him, which if he assay vpon another, committeth diuerse discords among other euill graces in mu∣sick. But the wise and learned Physitian, being fur∣nished with other arts more generall then his owne, whereto naturall philosophie most nighly approa∣cheth, beeing a knowledge of all naturall things not of Arabia, or India, or Greece, but vniuersally, find∣eth in all Countries medicines for diseases, nature yeelding sufficiencie of contraries to all sorts of them, wherto the inhabitants are subiect, at the least, in all quarters, which rise not of a blinde tradition, but from a certaine knowledge of nature. This then I take to be the chiefe cause of this custome in vsing strange medicines, which ignorance of nature doth feele, & nourish daily. I blame none, neither tax I a∣ny man, & I dare say there is not a learned Physitian in this land, who is not able to performe this poynt with English medicines, if they would take the mat∣ter in hand: whereto I rather exhort them, then in∣struct them, beeing a thing sufficiently known vnto them. For it is not the Nutmegge, or the Mace that strengtheneth the braine, and cureth cold disea∣ses, and moyst diseases thereof: but a drying and warming vertue, with a secret agreement which they haue with the braine to preserue the same, which being found as sufficient in Sage, in Rosemary, in
Betony and such like, the nutmegge and the mace, with such other spice, for that turne may bee dis∣charged. The same may bee said of all strange na∣tures, which although wee want, yet haue we such as are as sufficient to serue in stede: for as euerie nation hath a peculiar condition of the same disea∣ses, so must the medicine also needes bee of another sort: and as the medicine varieth, so why the mat∣ter of the same medicine should not also varie I knowe not. The medicine varieth in respect of the complexion of the patient being other in one coun∣try, then in an other: which medicine is as it were seated in nature, which hath many qualities besides the medicinable, which qualitie if the medicine be good, must agree with the patients complexion▪ if not, then hurteth it greatly. If it agreeth with the complexion of a Moore, an Indian, or Spanyard, then must it needes disagree with ours, which dis∣agreement and want if it bee patched vp vnto vs by correctours, yet declareth that patching, that the medicine is rather by force constrained, then naturally yeeldeth it selfe to the remedie, and so of it selfe vnmeet. Wherefore as well the matter ther∣of is to be changed, as the medicine it selfe. And if those correctors neede also correction, what then? I will not say that all simples neede their correctors, although it be auouched of some, and such as car∣rie great authoritie for their skill in Physicke. Thus haue I (gentle reader) for thy benefite I hope, made a way to the greater vse of our home medicines, wherin if I haue said freely my mind against strange drogues, thou maist vnderstand that otherwise the way were stopped to our English medicines, and
blame me not, if I say asmuch for ours, as the stran∣gers say for theirs. And if as yet by custome it seeme hard to alter the common course, let each practicer looke to that, I set no lawes to any, onely I craue li∣bertie in this point, both pleasant and profitable to English men. Wherein I haue examples of excellent Philosophers & learned Physitians, neither broach I any idle conceites of my owne. Of this mind is Plinius Secundus, Fuchsius, Rulandus, Symphorianus, Campegnis, Octauianus Horatianus, Physitian to Va∣lentinian the Emperor, that all countries haue suffi∣cient medicines for all diseases. I know much more might be said of this point. But this I thought suffi∣cient for the present time, breaking as it were the yse I hope to others, who hereafter shall more copiously deale in the same argument, or at the least, drawing the first lines (of a more large treatise to my selfe which as leasure, and opportunitie shall serue may hereafter be accomplished) this gentle reader I de∣sire thee to accept in such sort, as I offer it vnto thee euen with a minde to spend my daies according to my small talent, for thy benefite. God keepe thy soule and bodie for euer. FINIS.
A COLLECTION OF Medicines, growing for the most part within our English Cli∣mat; approued and expe∣rimented against the Iaundise, Dropsie, Stone, Falling Sickenesse, and Pestilence. Set downe alphabetically, for the ease of all, that shall haue occasion to vse them. Arnold. de villa noua. Qui potest mederi simplicibus, frustrae quaerit composita. At LONDON printed, 1615.
A Collection of English Medicines, &c. ABsinthium, Wormwood the infusion de∣coction, or iuce thereof,Worm∣wood. draughts. being taken the quantitie of three cyaths or draughts eue∣rie day, cureth the Iaundise: Dioscorides, it thrusteth out the cholericke humors of the bellie, and auoideth them by vrine; wherby it cureth the Iaundise: Galen, Paulus Aegyneta. The creame of wormwood giuen by it selfe, is profitable to them that haue the Iaundise. Anton. Donatus ab alto mari. Wormwood giuen in meat and drinke is profitable, to them that haue the Iaundise. Adam, Lonicerus. Wormwood boiled with Smallage or mayden haire, is with great profit giuen against the Iaundise. Ant. Mizaldus. If hee that hath the Iaundise, doe drink two ounces of the iuice of wormwood, for the space of ten daies togither with sugar, hee shall bee cured of the Iaundise. Gualtherus Riffius. Wormwood boyled in wine and drunke, cureth the Iaundise: Nicholas Spindlerus. The seed of wormewood if it be boyled with the roote of the Flowerdeluce and drunke, doth verie much auaile against the Iaundise:
Anton, Mizaldus. I haue giuen (saith the Author) that potion of wormwood which Iohn Wierus hath prescribed for the Scuruie,A potion a∣gainst the Iaundise and Scuruy & haue very happily cured many of the Iaundise, and this is the forme of the potion. Take Comarum of wormwood, our drie common worm∣wood, Iuniper berries brused, goats milke, or for want thereof cowes milke or whey of milke, the quantitie of foure pyntes, boil it to the consumpti∣on of the third part, and let it be strained with ex∣pression, then mixe therewith a drachm of saffron in pouder, then againe let it boile another walme and straine it, this decoction must be giuen some∣what warme, thrice a day, viz. in the morning fa∣sting, and at three of clocke in the afternoone, and at entrance into bed: by our owne experience wee knowe that wormwood wine doth cure the Iaun∣dise. Actuarius saith that the sirup of wormwood doth cure the Iaundise, as witnesseth Vitalis de furu, and Adolphus Occo. Abrotanum,Sothern∣wood. Bearefoot. Sothernwood: the wine of Sothernwood being drunke, is verie good for the Iaundise, Docorid. Acanthum or Bearefoot: the ootes whereof which the Romans doe call tri∣crdumcan three or foure rootes greene or drie boy∣led in water to the consumption of the one half, and expressed, and strained from the roots; giue there∣of to drinke against the Iaundise: Galenus. Acetosa:Sorrel. eaten by it selfe and the decoction of the root boyled to the thirds, doth suddenly helpe those that haue the Iaundise: Actius. It is approoued in the Iaundise to giue the rootes of Sorrel: Auicenna,  Valescus. The roots of Sorrel drunke with wne helpeth those that haue the Iaundise: Antonius
Mizaldus. A certaine man that had the Iaundise, vsed to eate the condite of Sorel, which he did eate in the morning fasting, and dranke thereupon a little en∣diue water, and so became hole as witnesseth Ama∣tus Lusitanus. Acetum, Vinegar: If he that hath the Iaundise, and sitteth in the sunne,Vinegar. and doth draw vp into his nostrels most sharpe venegar, and do con∣taine the same a little while, pressing his nostrels; it doth carry away the reliques of the Iaundise, which doe remaine about the eyes and the face. Aetius. Paulus Fuchsius and many others. For the yellow∣nesse of the eyes it is good to smell to vinegar actu∣ally hot, because those subtile parts do ascend vp to the head, afterwards by reuerberation they do des∣cend to the eyes, and there they ratifie the pores of the eyes, and after they exhale. Marcus Catinarius saith, it is our experiment. Acorus, or Galengal:Galengal. the decoction thereof and redde Cicers giuen to drinke, is a present remedie for the Iaundise. Petrus Hispanus, Leonellus Fauen∣tinus. Make a bath of the water of the decoction of Acorus, and it doth the same. A draught of the de∣coction of Acorus in water, cureth the Iaundise Quintus Appollinarius. Adiantum, Mayden or Venus haire: euery kinde of them, is profitable for the ouerflowing of the gall. Dioscorides. Mayden haire boyled in wine or aqua mulsa, and drunke for some fewe daies together helpeth the obstructions of the liuer, and therefore consequen∣ly is good against the Iaundise: so sayth Ada∣mus Lonicerus And, generallie, Omne adiantum, quia Iecoris obstructiones aperit, Ictericis confert.
Euery mayden haire because it doth open the ob∣structions of the liuer, is verie good against the Iandise: Fernelius. Agarieke.Agaricus: agaricke, is giuen the quantitie of two drachms, to those that haue the Iandise: to those that feele a feuer, it must be giuen with aqua mulsae, but otherwise in vino mulso. Dioscorides. Agarike hath a digestiue facultie, and doth cut and incide grosse humors, and doth purge from the tournings of the bowels, and therefore it doth cure those that are troubled with the yellow Iandise, through the obstruction of the liuer. Galen. Agarike doth migh∣tily open obstructions in the Iaundise. Nicholas Pi∣so. Agaricke with rheubarb is an excellent medicine in the Iandise. Gualtherus Bruel: the often vse ther∣of is good against the Iaundise, whether it be in po∣tions, or in pils. Agrimoni.Agrimonia (called commonly Eupatorium) the decoction of common Eupatorium or the iuice is with greate profit giuen to them that haue the Ian∣dise. Mathiol. The distilled water drunke, cureth the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus. Aiuga: (or Chamaepitios) the leaues beeing drunke for seauen daies together in wine,Camaepit. cureth the Iaundise. Dioscor. Chamaepitios is a good remedie for them that be troubled with the Iaundise. Galen. The decoction thereof cureth the Iaundise. Mesue. Fernelius affirmeth that it is a good remedie for the Iaundise; and Petrus Bayras saith that it cureth the Iaundise: Being giuen to drinke with melicrato it cureth those that haue the Iaundise. Iacobus Sylum. alekengiAlcechengi: the berries thereof being drunk with some conuenient liquor, doth purge the Iaudise by
vrin: Anthon. Fumanellus. Allium or garlicke:Garlick Praxagoras doth mixe gar∣lick with wine and Coriander against the Iaundise. Anton. Mizald. Aloes being giuen the weight of a drachme to drinke, doth purge the yellow Iaundise, Dioscorides.Aloes Adam Lonicerus, if the cause of the Iandise doe pro∣ceede from obstruction of phlegme or grosse cho∣ler, as for the most part it doth, take one drachme of Aloes in the forme of pils, an houre before sup∣per and it is an effectuall remedy if it be continued euery other day: & if it be too weak to purge let it be strengthned with three or fowergraines of Diagridi∣: Io. Arculanus. Aloes taken with goats milke cu∣reth the Iaundise: Quin. Apollinares. To euacuate choler in the Iaundise, Aloes in the forme of pils is verie much commended. Leonellus Fauentinus. Ambubeia, Common succorie:Common Suchorie. The whole plant boyled and drunke, helpeth those that are troubled with the yellow Iaundise. Mathiolus. see Intybus. Ammoniacum: gum Ammoniack being giuen to the quantitie of two scruples with mulso & the roots of Cappars or with Aromaticall wine, it is good a∣gainst the Iandise, and helpeth them that bee falling into the Dropsy, auoiding wonderfully by the belly, the obstructions of the bowels: Iacob. Hollerius. Ammoniacum is commended against the Iaundise, for it is verie forcible to deliuer from obstruction, for it cureth the Iaundise, and those that are readie to fall into the dropsy through the same. Nich. Piso. Amygdalae, Almonds: the kernells of wilde Al∣monds brused with vineger, and strained,Almonds. and the liquor expressed, and giuen in the morning to the
sicke patient, vpon a fasting stomach, or in the eue∣ning at the entrance into bed, is good against the Iaundise. Hieronimus Bruswicensis. Anagallis, pimpernel: some vse the iuice therof to purge the head by the nostrils,Pimpernel. if any of the Iaundise doe rest about the face & eyes: Aetius, Fuchsius, An∣ton. Donatus. Buglosse.Anchusa, red buglosse, (so called in shops) the first decoction thereof is giuen to them that haue the Iaundise: and if there bee withall a feuer, it is giuen with aqua mulsa. Dioscorides: Adamus Lonice∣rus. Anchusa called Onoclea, hath the propertie to clense and purge bilous,Onoclea. and cholericke humors, wherfore it is giuen to them that haue the Iaundise: Galenus. Two spoonefuls of the de roots, taken in three draughts of water to drink, is good for the same pur∣pose: idem Galenus. The root of red buglosse boy∣led in water to the thirds, is drunke for the Iaundise: or contunde and bruse one drachme in odoriferous wine and drunke, is good for the same. Aetius. A full spoonefull of Anchusa brused and giuen with mulsa for the Iandise. Nich. Myrepsus. Anchusa, called by Dioscorides, Onoclea, & by some is the root of red buglosse: let it be boyled with mul∣sa if there be a feuer, or in water or thinne wine, ad∣ding thereto sugar or honey, and giue the decoction thereof to them that haue the Iaundise, or two drachms thereof reduced into pounder, and giue it in foure ounces of mulsa, or thinne white wine: Iaco∣bus Hollerius. Anseris stereus Goose doung: It is a countrie medicine to cure the Iaundise,Goose dung giuen the weight of
two drachms in wine for som daies: this is prooued. I sayth the Author am wont to cure with this fol∣lowing medicine the Iaundise (which medicine is vsed in Frisia by the common people in the Scuruie) but especially if it be the black Iaundise: I take goose dung, and oxe dung, such as haue fed onely vpon grasse, of either a like quantitie, that it to say the quantitie of three acorns, or two chesnuts, and I macerate them for a fewe houres in foure pintes of Rhenish wine for the richer sort, and in stale beere for the poorer, afterwards I straine it through a linnen cloth gently and so let it settle; then I take two ounces of Radish roots sliced and brused, then infuse it in some fit liquor, wine or beere, and let it macerate for a night, then in the morning straine it, and mix it with the first liquor of the goose and oxe dung, and so being mixt together vse them: and that it may be the better for the taste, bruse lightly nutmeg & cloues and let it hang therin tyed in a peece of linnen: of this liquor as often as the sicke will, let him drinke thereof, so that in the whole time of his cure, let him drinke no other drinke: This medicine although it bee somewhat rutical and common, yet is of great vse in this busi∣nesse, as we finde by experience, so that neuerthe∣lesse those things aperitiue bee not neglected, which by the art of Physicke ought to be giuen. And if we consider the ingredients of this medicine, it ex∣pelleth the Iaundise by vrin, for this potion doth consist of diureticks and of subtill parts: for we see how much the Radish auaileth, that being taken by any manner of meanes cureth the Iaundise. The goose dung is of that hot faculty that it burneth the
grasse where it lyeth: heerehence wee may gather how, and of of what subtile and thin parts is is, and how mightily it moueth vrin, being transfused, with some conuenient liquor. The dung of a bull hath al∣so the same vertue, cheefely if it bee gathered in the fields. Some that are superstitious will haue that dung gathered that hath redde haires; but that is not needefull, so that it be gathered in the field where they feede on grasse: Some gather it in the winter whiles they feede on hay, but euery man may doe as they please: And this saith the Author is my ex∣periment. Aparin: goose grasse the distilled water thereof, taken twice or thrice a day,Goose grass the quantity of three spoonefulls, is an excellent remedy against the Iaun∣dise. Adam. Lonicerus: Nich. Spindlerus. Smallaga.Apium: Smallage. he roots of Smallage boy∣led in some Apozem, and being strained and drunk, helpeth the Iaundise: Fernelius. Garden Smallage, or the seed of common parsly, is giuen in white wine for the Iaundise: Anton. Mi∣zaldus. Aqua salsa, salt water: Asclepiades ministred saltwater for two daies together against the Iaun∣dise:Saltwater. Celsus. Aquilegia: Columbine: the roots thereof giuen being bruled, the weight of a drachme, with Saffron the weight of halfe a drachme, drunke in wine, & the body couered forthwith and caused to sweat, it doth very much auail against the Iandise: Adam Lonicerus. The seeds of Columbine, as those that doe write of the vertue of herbs, giuen in the wine of Candy the quantitie of 2. drachmes adding thereto a little
saffron, cureth the Iaundise; but the sick must forth∣with sweat in his bed. Mathiolus. Take the seed of Columbine the quantitie of a drachme, of Saffron a Scruple, and with an ounce of vineger and two ounces of Celendine water, mix it and giue it in the morning fasting, and in the euening at the en∣trance into bed, and drinking nothing thereupon, it purgeth the Iaundise by vrin, but with the draught taken in the morning wee may mixe sugar. Hier. Brunswick. Arthemisia, Motherwort:Mother∣worte. some giue the distilled water to drinke, against the Iaundise: Gualtherus Ruff. Artemesia with the leaues of harts tonge and a little wormewood boyled in wine and drunke, is good against the Iaundise: Quint. Apollin. Asarum Asarabacca:Asarabac∣ca. cureth the Iaundise by o∣pening the obstruction of the liuer and splene: Fer∣nelius. Asarabacca put in sit up, cureth the Iaundise through oppilation, and properly the infusion ther∣of, Pet. Bayrus, put into must or newe wine so that it may boile therewith, cureth the Iaundise: others put Asarabacca in Must for three months, then they straine it, and giue the same wine, and it is wonder∣full against the Iaundise, Idem. Wine of Asaron, cu∣reth the Iaundise: Dioscorides. Beere of Asarabacca is exceeding good for the ouerflowing of the gall: Ioan. Placotamus. Asparagus:Sperage Sperage the root therof boyled with figs or Cisers and so taken doth cure the Iaundise: Dioscorides. The wilde root thereof is good against the Iaundise, the seede thereof also giuen in drinke is good for the same: Carolus Clusius: the roote of Asparagus boyled in wine by opening the
obstructions of the liuer, cureth the Iaundise. A∣dam. Lonicerus. As well the root as the seed hel∣peth the Iaundise. Fernelius. The rootes of Asparagus boyled with thinne white wine, is giuen the quantitie of foure ounces for a time, against the Iaundise. Marcus Gati∣naria. Asphodelus, Daffodil, the roote drunke with wine helpeth the Iaundise.Daffodil. Mathiolus. Coporaes.Atramentum sutorium, or Calcanthum called in shops Vitriol, I finde very effectuall to purge the head in the Iaundise. Vitriol also dissolued in wo∣mans milke. Aetius. Atriplex, Orache, or Orage, the seede drunke with aqua mulsa,Orach. cureth the Iaundise. Dioscori∣des. The seede of Orache, helpeth the Iaundise, that commeth by obstruction of the liuer. Galen. When there is a feuer with the Iaundise, Atriplex is verie good, because it openeth: Mesue. The seede of Orache giuen the weight of a drachme with fero lactis, is also good. Nonus. Mouse eareAuricula muris, mouse eare: the kindes of these are pilosella maior, and minor: euery kinde of them taken morning and euening fasting boyled in wine, helpeth those that are troubled with the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus. The decoction of Pilocella cureth the Iaundise. Nich. Piso. The water of the decoction of Pilosella being drunke, or the wine thereof doth presently helpe them which haue the Iaundise. Petrus His∣pan.
Diuers doe commende Pilosella against the Iaundise, because it doth strengthen the liuer. Ma∣thiolus. B Barberries: the middle rine of the barberrie tree the quantitie of an Acorne beeing bound in a cloth and boyled in water,Barberry. let the sicke drinke thereof in the morning and euening, or mix that liquor with wine, it cureth the Iaundise. Hier. Bruns∣wick. Nich. Spindlerus. Beta, the beete: whose iuice beeing taken vp in∣to the nostrels purgeth the yellow colour that re∣steth about the face and eyes.Beets. Aetius. Betonica,Betony. Betonye releeueth them that be affected with the Iaundise. Dioscorides. The powder of Betonye giuen with wine the weight of a drachme, helpeth verie much those that bee troubled with the Iaundise. Adamus Loni∣cerus. Betula, or birche,Birch. the sweete iuice of the birch tree gathered in the spring, and beeing drunke, is re∣ported to be verie auailable against the yellow Iaun∣dise. Adam. Lonicerus. Bos, the oxe:Oxe. the stone which is ingendered in the gall of the oxe some times the bignes of an egge and of a saffron colour, and verie easie to bee broken, is giuen in pouder to be drunke in wine for the Iaundise. Mathiolus.
Brassica, Coleworts: the iuice thereof is giuen with great profit against the Iaundise: to those that are feuorous it is giuen by it selfe, but to those that want a feuer it is giuen the quantitie of a spoonefull with wine. Aetius. The iuice of the Colwort with wine, cureth the Iaundise. Mesue. it is also giuen against the Iaundise in red wine for forty dayes together: Ant. Fuma∣nellus. And Mizaldus saith with white wine; which I think better: Bupthalmus, or oxe eye called by A∣pothecaries cotula soetida, restoreth the natural co∣lour to them that haue the Iaundise: Dioscorides. The decoction of the flowers drunke for some daies to∣gether cureth them that haue the Iaundise. Adam Loni. C pennyroyal.Calamintha: wilde pennyryole the decoction ther∣of being drunke cureth the yellow Iaundise: Di∣oscorides. Calaminte through his inciding and abstersiue fa∣culty, is good against the Iaundise. Galenus. Calamint cureth those that haue the Iaundise, clen∣sing and purging the oppilations of the liuer. Canis. or the dung of a white dogge the quantity of two ounces,Dogs dung. with the fourth part of hony giuen to drinke for three daies together, cureth the Iaun∣dise: Galenus. Dogs dung, only fed with bones, dry and beaten to pouder and giuen to drinke, cureth the Iaundise: Valescus. A white dogs turd, feeding vpon bones, dryed and powdered, taken in drinke,
is good against the Iaundise. Auicenna. Marcus Ga∣tinaria. Nich. Piso. Centaurim, the lesser Centaurie,Centaury. boyled in wa∣ter to the thirds, and then drinke a good draught thereof, and it shall cure the Iaundise. Apuleus Pla∣tonicus. Cepae, the Onyon: Take a great white onyon, make him hollow,Onions. and fill the hollownesse with as much Triacle as an acorne or chesnut, and two or three drachms of Saffron, wrap it in a sheete of Browne paper moistened, and let it roste vnder the inders, and being rosted stampe it and straine it and take of the iuice thereof, and let the sicke take some thereof fasting in the morning, as hotte as may bee, and couer his body warme that he may sweate, and this medicine shall cure the Iaundise. Ioan. Iacobus Weckerus. Cerasia: The leaues of the cherrie tree,Cherrie tree a handfull of them boyled in a sufficient quantity of milke, or rather wheye, and let the sicke drinke a good draught of the strayning, twise euerie daie, in the morning, and at entrance into bed. Hierons. Bruns∣wick. for it cureth the the Iaundise by expelling it by the belly, Nich. Spindlerus. Chamedrios, or Southernwood,Southern∣wood. the decoction thereof cureth the Iaundise. Mesue. The seed ther∣of drunke is good for the same. Mathiolus. Camomel being drunke purgeth the cause of the Iaundise. Dioscorides. Camomel,Camomel. boyled in water and drunke, driueth away the Iaundise. Galenus. cureth those that haue the Iaundise. Pet. Bayrus. The decoction of Camomel with the toppes of wormwood, liquirish, Fenel, persly,A medicine for the Iaundise. Asparagus
with the foure cold seeds, the wine of granots with Iuibes and Sebesten and endiue water sweetned with sugar, halfe a measure taken in the Morning, the stomach fasting, cureth the Iaundise. Ioan. De Vigo. D Ciccory.Deuslonis, white Succorie euerie kinde thereof, the iuice thereof being taken, if the sicke drinke thereof the quantitie of foure cyaths or draughts, cureth the Iaundise. Galenus. The iuice of Cichorie & endiue, is profitably giuen to those that haue the Iaundise, and to those which haue a feuer therwith, by it self, and to those that haue no feuer, with wine. Aetius. E Eruca, or Rocate: wilde rocate cureth the yellow Iaundise.Rocat. Adam Lonicerus. Euphrasia, Eybright: the decoctiō therof with wine is good against the Iaundise.Eyebright. Hieronimus Tragus witnesseth that he vsed it himselfe. The herbe boy∣led in wine and drunke morning and euening, with∣out doubt cureth the Iaundise. Nichol. Spindlerus. F Filipendula, called in shoppes Saxifraga rubea, drunke with wine cureth the yellow Iaundise.Filipendula Ada∣mus Lonicerus.
The weight of a drachme of the root drunk with aqua mulsa cureth the Iaundise. Nicholaus Spindle∣rus. Ferrum, Iron:Iron▪ The Iaundise is verie happily cu∣red with wine wherein gads of steele or yron being made red hot is quenched, and the wine giuen for to drinke. Gesnerus. Foeniculum, Fenell:Fenel. The seed of fenel & the root drunke, driueth a waie the Iaundise: Dioscorides. The roote thereof drunke in some decoction is good for the same, Galenus. Paulus. Fraxmus, the Ash,Ashe. the distilled water of the Ash rinde beeing drunke, is a most effectuall remedy a∣gainst the Iaundise. Ad. Lonicerus. Fumaria, Fumaterrae:Fumaterrae. the decoction thereof and of send opneth the obstruction of the liuer and cureth the Iaundise, purging it by vrin. Adam. Lo∣nicerus. The rootes of the same herbe boyled in wine is giuen for the same purpose. Gual. Bruel. Of the iuce of Fumaterrae and sugar, is made a sir∣up, which cureth both kinds of Iaundise. Adol∣phus Occo. G. Gallina, the Henne,A Henne. the inward skinne of the sto∣mach of hens being well washed with wine, dryed and poudered, and a drachme of the same pouder being cast vpon a toste of bread dipped in wine and so giuen to him that is sicke, fasting, and in the eue∣ning when he entreth into bed, cureth the Iaundise. Hieronimus. Brunswic.
Gramen, grasse or vulgarlie called Cooche: the wa∣ter of the decoction of the root is giuen with great profit to them that haue the Iaundise.Coocligrasse Rondoletius. We vse the gramen roots with good successe in o∣pening decoctions against the Iaundise. H Hyssopus, Hissop, the leaues drunke with wine, doth cure the Iaundise:Hyssop. Petrus Bayrus. Hypericon: Saint Iohns wort boyled in water to the third part,Saint Iohns worte. or poudered & searced, and a drachm thereof giuen with some sweete wine, cureth the Iaundise. Actius. Ant. Donatus. The decoction of hyperion, is giuen against the Iaundise. Donatus. Nonus. Saint Iohns worte, and maiden haire boyled in water is giuen to drinke a∣gainst the Iaundise. Galenus. I Iris, the waterflower deluce, the rootes whereof being boyled and drunk is giuen with great profit to them that haue the Iaundise.Flowerde∣luce. Mathiolus. Iuncus Odoratus, the sweet rushgrasse, a bath made thereof is vsed against the Iaundise. Galenus. L Lactuca, lettice: two drachms of the iuice of let∣tice is drunke euerie daie against the Iaundise.Lettice. Sym∣phor.
Campegius. Mesue. Against that disease the dissolued water of the same being drunke, is verie good. The same Authors. The decoction of lettice, of wilde lettice, is a∣vailable against the Iaundise, if it be giuen with earth wormes prepared and dried. Valescus. Lauendula, Lauender, the flowers boiled in wine and drunke hot for some daies fasting,Lauender. driueth a∣way the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus. Nichol. Spind∣lerus. The decoction of Lauender, with the flowers prepared, is profitably giuen against the Iaundise, that commeth through the stopping of the liuer; especially if horehounde, Cinamon, and the roots of fenell, and Asparagus bee added. Mathiolus. M Martubium, Horehound:Horehound. the iuice thereof taken vp into the nostrils, purgeth the Iaundise. Dioscori∣des. and Galenus. The iuice of horehound drawne into the nostrils, purgeth the Iaundise: or the same iuice dryed and mixed with honie and put into the nostrils, doth cure the same. Pet. Bayrus. The decoction of horehound cureth all kinds of Iaun∣dise, if the decoction be made with white pure wine, and giue foure ounces of the straining with sugar in the morning. Marcus Gatmaria. Millipedae▪ the loop,Loops. or the worme with many feet drunke in wine, cureth the Iaundise. Dioscorides, Paulus. Vnder vessels of water there are found loops which being brused and drunke with mulsa, cureth
the Iaundise. Galenus. Those millepedae drunke in wine, cureth those that are sicke of the Iaundise. A∣dam. Lonicerus. I (saith the Auth or) haue bruised those loops lightly, & bound them in a thinne peece of linnen, adding thereto wine, or the decoction of horehound, and being pressed, I giue thereof to the sicke in the morning, as he lieth in his bedde, and this I doe for some daies together; and for the taste sake, I adde a little cinamon and sugar, and this saith the Author is our experiment. N Nasturtium, Watercresses: The iuice of water∣cresses drawne vp into the nostrels,Watercres∣ses. taketh away the colour of the Iaundise. Mesue. The seede of garden cresses, and radish, of either of them a drachme giuen in wine, is vsed for a secret against the Iaun∣dise. O Ouillum stercus, sheeps dug taken with an ounce or an ounce and a halfe of persly,Sheeps dung. in broah, cureth the Iaundise. Adamus Lonicerus. P Pastinaca Erratica, or wild persp▪ boyled in wine to the thirds, cureth the Iaundise. Paulus. Pentaphillon, fiue leued grasse, three draughts
of the iuice thereof for some daies together doth verie quickly cure the Iaundise. Dioscorides. The iuce of the roote of fiue leaued grasse, is effectuall a∣gainst the Iaundise. Mesue. The iuice of the leaues of fiue leaued grasse, drunke with wine, cureth the Iaundise. Petrus Bayrus. Pimpinella, Pimpernel condite,Pimpernel. doth helpe those that haue the yellow Iaundise. Anton. Fumanel. Porrum, Leekes, cureth the Iaundise.Leekes. Vitalis de Furno. Pulegium, Pennyroyall,Pennyriol. the decoction therof doth cure the Iaundise. Mathiolus. Wine of pennyriol is good for them that haue the Iaundise. Dioscorides. Q Querus, the Oake:Oake. A medicine of the burning coles of the oake, cureth the Iaundise. R Raphanus, the Radish:Radish. one part of the iuice of the radish roote, with two parts of sweete wine mix∣ed together, or one Ciath of wine, with one Ciath of the iuice mixed together, is good for the Iaundise. Aetius. Fuchsius. The decoction of radish leaues, is profitable against the obstruction of the liuer, and therfore the Iaundise. Ant. Mizaldus. The distilled water of the leaues of radish, being drunke is good against the Iaundise. Marc. Gatinarius. We saith the Author in diuers that are sick of the Iaundise do mix
the iuice of radish with white wine or aqua mulsa, or it hath been tried by it selfe with great profit giuing it for some daies together. Rosa, the rose: the iuice of redde roses and cheef∣ly of white roses,Roses. mixed with whey or made into a kinde of sirup with sugar, is good against the Iaun∣dise. Fernel, water wherein fresh roses be macerated, or a draught of the iuice thereof doth cure the Iaun∣dise. Antonius Mizaldus. Ioan. Huerinus. Rosemarie.Rosmarinus, rosmarie: The seede of rosmarie giuen with wine and pepper, cureth the Iaundise. Di∣oscorides. The decoction of rosmarie being drunke cureth the Iaundise Galenus. Rosmarie boyled in water to the thirds, or a drachme thereof giuen with sweete wine to drinke cureth them that haue the Iaundise. Aetius. Anton. Donatus. The Seede of Rosmarie giuen with wine and pepper, and so drunke, bringeth great help to them that haue the Iaundise. Anton. Mzaldus. S Sabina, Sauin▪ drunke with hony and wine cureth the Iaundise.Sauin. Galenus. Adam. Lonicerus. Sambucus, the eldern, the oyle thereof is good for him that hath the Iaundise.Elder. Adolphus Occo. Saluia, Sage, the decoction thereof cureth those that haue the Iaundise.Sage. Q. Apollinarius. Srpillum: Sauorie, or wilde Thime being boy∣led in water,Sauory or in sweete wine, and the decoction
thereof giuen to drinke, or a drachme of the pou∣der giuen in wine to them that haue the Iaundise cu∣reth them. Aetius. T Tamarinds,Tamarinds the decoction of tamarinds is giuen to them that haue the Iaundise. Mathiolus. It cureth them that haue the Iaundise. Adam. Lonicerus. Tormentilla: the iuice of the greene roote,Tormentil. and the iuice of the leaues drunke with wine cureth the Iaundise in a short time. Adam. Lonicerus. V Valeriana, Valerian:Valerian. the wine of the decoction of valerian, drunke in the morning, remoueth the ob∣struction of the liuer and splene, and thereby dri∣ueth away the Iaundise. Weckerus. Vermes,Earth-wormes. Earth-wormes dried giuen for three daies in new wine, purgeth the Iaundise by vrin. Fuchsius. Earth-wormes dryed and taken with white wine, cureth the Iaundise. Nich. Piso. Earth-wormes dri∣ed remoue the yellow Iaundise. Auicenna. Wormes dryed in an ouen and poudered, and ta∣ken with white wine and Sugar, cureth the Iaundise. Thomas Erastus. Vrina, vrin: If a man that hath the Iaundise doth drinke his owne vrin for some daies together,Vrin. being fasting, it helpeth verie much the Iaundise. Hermes. Anton. Mizaldus. It is approued to be very auaile∣able
in the Iaundise to giue euerie morning, fasting, this potion following: Take the vrin of a boy that is found, and not polluted, fiue ounces, white sugar, halfe an ounce, mix it and giue it to drinke, which must be continued for tenne daies together in the Iaundise. Benedict. Victor Fauentinus. Take the vrin of the patient, with a radish root bru∣sed and strained, and giue thereof to drinke Euening & mor∣ning, Hieron. Reus∣nerus. FINIS.
A Catalogue of simple English Medicines, easie to be prepared, against the Dropsie. ABsinthium, Wormwood:Wormwood. an excellent me∣dicine against the Dropsie, which wee call aquaintercus, and is to bee prepared after this manner: take the leaues of wormwood newe, let it be sea wormwood, or com∣mon, the quantitie of a pounde, sugar three pounds: bet it in a stone morter, and the sugar being well powdered, mixe them, and worke all well together in the morter, vntill it be all one bodie, then reserue it to your vse, halfe an ounce thereof being taken three houres before supper. Mathiolus. Wormwood cureth the dropsie. Mesue. Sea wormwood is a singular remedie in the weak∣nesse of the liuer, so that by the onely vse thereof it doth sometimes cure the Dropsie. Iacobus Sil∣uius. If one ounce of the iuice of wormwood with sugar be drunk for ten daies together it doth deliuer a man from the dropsie. Gualt. Riffius.
Allium, Garlike the vse thereof is profitable a∣gainst the dropsie, when it proceedeth of a colde cause, because it doth drawe drie, and consumeth the moisture betweene the skinne, Vitalis de Furno. The vse of garlik, if it bee familiar to men of poore estate that haue the dropsie, it cureth them. Wierus. Garlike with the lesser centaurie boyled in wine and giuen to drinke, is good against the drop∣sie. Quint. Apollinarius. Alumbe.Alumen, Alum liquid giuen the quantitie of a beane, being dissolued in water and strained, giue thereof to drinke against the dropsie. Aetius. Anagallis, Pimpernel, boyled in wine helpeth them that haue the dropsie. Adam. Lonicerus. The iuice of yellow pimpernil taken by it selfe or in wine,Pimpernil. is giuen for the dropsie. Anton. Donatus ab Alto mari. Apium. Smallage: The rootes of smallage boy∣led in wine with the rootes of persly,Smallage. and the liquor strained, it is giuen to drinke to them that be hydro∣pical, because it procureth vrin. Columbine.Aquilega, Columbine, the roote boyled in wine and drunke, doth profit them that haue the Drop∣sie. Mother∣wort.Artemesia, Motherwort. A certaine man gaue the distilled water to drinke, to them which haue the dropsie, and the quantitie is two ounces for a time for fortie daies together. Asarabac∣ca.Asarum: Asarabacca, is good against the drop∣sie. Dioscorides. So is the wine of Asarum. Idem. Asarum put in Mst or newe wine, or boyled with the same, cureth the dropsie. Pet. Bayrus. Asarum purgeth the dropsie Ascites by vrin. Anton Fumanel∣lus.
The decoction of Asarum drunke, doth only profit, especially if there be a little Cinamon ioyned therewith. Leonh. Iacchinus. Asclepias, Vincitoxicū of som,Swallow-wort. but called truly swal∣low worte: the decoction of this plant by it selfe cureth the dropsie: or else take halfe a pound of the roots thereof, and let it be marerated in white wine for a night, then boyle them to the thirds, and giue of the strayning thereof in the morning fa∣sting, and there will follow sweats by the soles of the feete, whereby the dropsie will auoide, as experience declareth. Mathiolus, Adam. Lonicerus, Alexan∣der Petronius. Asphodil, Daffodil,Daffodil. the roote thereof drunke in wine helpeth the dropsie. Mathiolus. B Betonica, Betony,Betony. the leaues and flowers there∣of boyled in aqua mulsa, and giuen hot to drinke for some daies together, doth helpe those that haue the dropsie, wonderfully. Adam. Lonicerus. Brassica marina, or Soldamella,Soldanel. the decoction thereof with Rhubarbe being drunke, it auoideth the water of those that haue the dropsie, so doth the pouder thereof with Rhubarbe and cubebs often giuen. Mathiolus. Bryonia Syluestris, Wilde Bryony:Bryony. the roots there∣of are verie profitable in the dropsie giuen mixed with sea water and wine: and when they drinke it, let them drinke two measures at a time. Dioscori∣des.
The roote of Bryony is some times cut in small peces, and infused in wine▪ whereof the patient doth receiue a draught in the morning, to which is some times added a little cinamon and maces, that it may do the lesse harme.  Wierus. C Centaurie.Centaurium, Centaurie, the lesse: the decoction therof is vsed against the dropsie, some giue halfe a drachme thereof in pouder, adding thereto anise seedes, and caraway seeds, of either of them halfe a drachme with wine. Arnoldus de Villa noua. The roote o the greater centaurie, is giuen for the drop∣sie maceated in wine, as also drunke in powder. Mathiolus. Onions.Cep., the Onion: the iuice of the onion, with the iuice of senel, is giuen with great profit, in the beginning of the dropsie. Anton. Mzaldus. The Iuice of onyons distilled with tracle adding thereunto a little saffron, it cureth the dropsie if there be giuen euerie morning daily, the quantitie of two drachmes for a time. Nich. Richi. Cuscuta, Dodder, a handfull thereof boyled in wine,Dodder. is good against the dropsi. Adamus Loni∣cerus. D Carret.Daueus, the Carret: the seede is good against the dropsie because it pugeth the warish humor by v∣rin
if one ounce thereof bee boyled in halfe a pint of Rhenish wine, to the consumption of the third part for three doses, and this is an experi∣ment. E Ebulus, Walworte, it driueth forth by the belly, water, of those that haue the dropsie,Walworte. and somtimes it worketh by vomit: the iuice thereof is drawne forth either from the roote or from the middle rine being brused, pouring thereon aqua hordei, or the decoction of reasons, with a little cinamon, or nutmeg, with sugar, the dose is one ounce. Fernelius. Eringium, Eringus,Eringus. the decoction of the rootes helpeth the dropsie. Mathiolus. Eupatorium: the decoction,Liuerwor. or iuice of the com∣mon liuerwort is profitably giuen for the dropsie. Mathiolus. F Faae, Beanes: of the burnt stalkes of beanes, there is made Alixiuium, or lye,Beanes. either with white wine or Rhenish wine, the vse whereof is against the dropsie, and there is giuen inward the quantity of three ounces for a time. Ioannes Hurinus. Ferrum, Iron:Iron. The water of yron is giuen for the dropsie, especially if there be hardnes of the liuer and spleene, or daylie obstructions or when the dropsie followeth the laundise, and it must bee
prepared after this manner: extinguish yron in wa∣ter, so long as it shall leaue behinde it a certaine taste of the yron and a sharpnes thereof; as for example, take common water twelue pints, then quench yron glowing hotte in it, and let it be quenched so long till there remaine but foure pints of this water, mix with wine or other fit water to drinke. Alexander Petronius. Filix, Ferne, the decoction of the roote, or the iuice thereof is an excellent remedie against the dropsie.Ferne. Iulius Caesar Arantius. But beware of the vse thereof in women, because as Dioscorides witnes∣seth it induceth bariennesse and sterilitie. G Broome.Genista, Broome, doth verie much euacuate wa∣ter, in them that haue the dropsie, which is done by Alixiuium made in this manner: take one part of Broome ashes, wine three parts, and adde thereun∣to Nutmeg and Cinamon, both for taste and also for the stomach, giue three ounces for a time. Io∣an. Huerinus H Helenium, enula campane, the rootes being brused and the iuice expressed,Elicampane and mixed with hony and so taken for eleuen daies the Moone decreasing: the quantitie to be taken, is the quantitie of a Chesnut, morning. Walherus Riffius. Hypericon, Saint Iohns worte, one drachme of the
seeds in wine, is profitably giuen for the dropsie. An∣ton. Donatus ab Alto mari. Saint Iohns worte with garlicke boyled in wine, and the wine drunk, it pur∣geth water by vrin exceedingly; this is an experi∣ment. I Iuniperus, Iuniper:Iuniper Three handfuls of Iuniper berries, boyled in pure wine to the halfe, let it bee strained, and giue thereof sixe ounces hotte, and it prouoketh sweat, and this must bee continued for some daies together. Martinus Rulandus. Alixiutum framed of the ashes of Iuniper, and wine, and so drawne through an Ipocrasse bagge, and and so often infused, and so drawne. Ioan. Wierus. A lye made of Iuniper ashes, and white wine, the quantitie of foure or fiue ounces, doth exceedingly purge by vrin, so that many hydropicall bodies, haue beene cured by this onely remedie. Mathiolus. L Laurus, the Baye: wee vse bay berries with hony, in the forme of a Cataplasme, to the swollen testicles.Baye. Lumbrici terrestres, Earth-wormes:Erth-wormes. it is giuen with profit, boyled in broath, or some other con∣uenient liquor, against the dropsie, Anasarca. Gas∣parus Hoffmannus. M Maiorana, Marioram,Marioram. boyled in wine and drunk in the beginning of the dropsie, cureth it. Nichol. Spindlerus.
Marrubium, Horehounde, the decoction thereof with wine, is marueilous against the Dropsie. Ma∣thiolus. P Paracentesis: is the last remedie in the dropsie, and is not to be vsed without vrgent necessitie; but the belly being once well, and orderly opened, it wor∣keth great effect,Opening of the belly. for the water is thereby euacuated, which cannot otherwise bee carried from that regi∣on, neither is that Apertion so daungerous, if it bee rightly done. For we often see, some that are woun∣ded in the belly to recouer, so that the small guttes be not wounded; besides, it is profitable to them to whom an eruption hapneth by chance through the nauell, for thereby the water is auoided, and they are cured. But neuerthelesse, this kinde of cure is not to bee assaied in those whose facultie of the liuer is dead, and that cannot ingender good blood: or in those that haue a Schirthus of the liuer or splene confirmed, or in those that haue this disease bred from an vlcer of the lungs: for experience doth teach vs, that all those doe die with this remedie, neither must this remedie be tried, in verie olde or weake men. But indeede all the time of the cure, we must studie to strengthen the liuer and bowels, as much as may bee. Ioh. Wierus. This cure which we call paracentesis, is not fit for any kindes of the dropsies, but that which wee call Ascites. Paulus. Hippocrates doth commend paracen∣tesis in the dropsie. Galenus. And all other Physitians▪ when they haue tryed o∣ther remedies without profit, so that the sicke bee
young and strong and other things thereto agree∣. Nevertheless, the water must not be auoyded all together, but by little and little for some dayes together, by degrees, according to the Aphorism of Hippoc. In which he counselleth to auoyd all speedie euacuation. And how the incision must be made, Paulus, and Aetius, and many others do teach vs. Q Quercus, the Oake: the tender leaues or rather buds of the Oake are infused by some in wine,Oake. & of this wine we must giue for some dayes together to those that haue the Dropsie. This is an experiment. A bath made of the leaues of the Oake in the fall of the leafe, or in Autumn, doth cure the dropsie. A water distilled of the buddes or tender leaues of the Oake and drunk, doth help the dropsie. Ioh. Hu∣ernius. R Raphanus, the Radish:Radish. The vse of the Radish is commended in the dropsie, because it hath power to purge by vrine. Ricinus, or Palma Christi,Palma Christi. purgeth the water in the dropsie by vomit and stoole. There is giuen fiue graines, or at the most eight, in the decoction of Fenell and Raisins, adding a little Suger and Cina∣mon. Also the graines whole in Suger melted, and rapt in Hony, and so swallowed, gently purgeth water with little or no offence of the stomack. Fer∣nelius. Rosae pallidae, whiteroses, or damask,White∣roses. the iuice therof
doth euacuate yellow water in the dropsie. Ferneli∣us. But because they prouoke the menstrues, we must take heed how we giue it to women with childe. Io. Hernius. Rue.Ruta, Rue: the decoction thereof taken for ma∣ny daies together, is reported to cure the dropsie Timpanites. Anton. Fumanellus. S Sambucus, the Elder: the iuice of the roote of the elder,Elder. being drunke in wine the weight of two ounces, driueth out water. Paulus. The roote of the elder boyled in wine, and giuen in meate, hel∣peth those that haue the dropsie. The common sort are wont to prepare this fol∣lowing decoction against the dropsie: They take two handfulls of the inward rinde of the elder tree with a pint and a halfe of Rhenish wine, and they suffer it to boyle to a pinte, then they aromatise the straining with a drachme of cinamon, and giue it to drinke. T Tormentilla: a water distilled of the herbe and rootes of Tormentil,Tormentill. it cureth the dropsie, if it bee continued and drunke for nine daies together. Ges∣nerus. For it doth mightily procure vrin.
V Valeriana, Valerian.Valerian. A certain man boyleth the roots in wine against the dropsie, and doth giue the decoction to drinke: this is an experiment. Vitriolum, Vitriol: Some there are that do giue certaine drops of the oyle of Vitriol,Vitrol. to those that haue the dropsie, and is giuen in a draught or cyath of wine, and is a great secret. Ioan. Wierus. Vrtica, the Nettle, the seede thereof clensed and mixed with hony is giuen against the dropsie,A Nettle. Asci∣s. FINIS.
A Catalogue of English Medicines, a∣gainst the stone of the kidnies, and blad∣der; written alphabetically for the case of those that shall haue occsion to vse them. Sothern∣wood.A Brotanum, Sothernwood: the seed ther∣of doth breake the stone, if i be giuen with pepper nd white wine. The decoc∣tion of Sothernwood made with Smal∣lage, and sugar, and so drunke, breaketh and expel∣leth the stoe of the kidns, and bladder. Q. A∣pollinaris▪ in libello German. Adiantes, Maiden-hae: the decoction thereof doth breake the stones.Maiden-haire Dioscorides, and Mesue. All maiden-haire doth verie much purge the reynes, so that it is supposed to diminish the stone. Fernelius. It doth diminish the stone both of the kidnie, and of the bladder, if it be drunke▪ Paulus. The de∣coction breaketh the stone, and bring once broken, with often vse it doth wonderfully expell it. Anton. Fumanellus.
B Betony breaketh the Stone in the reines.Betony. Mathio∣lus. Betony with Mulsa and Pepper giuen to drink, sendeth foorth the stone of the kidnies and bladder. P. Hispanus. One handfull of Betony, with three measures of water boiled to the thirds, or Betony water distilled, breaketh the grauell and stone. Geor∣gius Pictorius. C Carduus benedictus, the leaues thereof being boi∣led in wine, and drunk hot, breaketh the stone.Carduus. A∣dam. Lonicerus. Baths and incessions to sweat in▪ fra∣med of Carduus benedictus, are profitable against the Stone. Idem. Carduus benedictus breaketh the stone. Fuchsius. The rootes of your vulgar Carduus bene∣dictus being new taken out of the ground, or dry, being boyled in pure White-wine, are giuen to them that haue the stone: but wee must giue a good draught at a time. Aetius. Cepa▪ the Onion;Onion. The distilled water of the white onion breaketh the Stone. Marianus Sanctus. When the stone causeth great paine and intollerable, take two or three Onions, and let them be cut very smal, and make them very hot vpon a tilestone, then sprin∣kle them with white wine, and let it be applied pla∣er-wise vpon the reines, or vpon the perinaeon. Ges∣erus. Citrim, the Oringe;Oringe. being cut into smal peeces or parts, let it be boiled in a hens belly, the bowels takē out, let the patient drinke of the broth thereof for
twelue daies in the morning, after the vse of tur∣pentine in the stone of the reines. Nich. Piso. The oyle of the graines of the citrou, drunke or anoin∣ted, driueth out the stone of the kidneis, and blad∣der: Adolphus Occo. D Carret.Daucus, the yellow Carret, first the seede and af∣ter the roote, doth vehemently expll vrin, and exclude the stone. Fernelius. The carret root, and the seed, howsoeuer taken, cureth the stone of the kidneis, the same vertue hath the distilled water. A∣dam. Lonicerus. E Walwort.Ebulus, Walworte: the leaues thereof stamped driueth out the stone. Plinius. The same herbe boy∣led in water for a bath▪ after the boyling of the herb, put the herbs into a bagge, and so apply them hot to the bottom of the belly, for the stone of the blad∣der; and vpon the reine, for the stone of the kidneis Hieronimus Braunsweig in libello germanico. F Fenel.Foeniculi semina, Fenel seeds▪ decocted and boy∣led in wine▪ cureth the stone▪ Adam. Lonicerus. The roote and seed of fenel, doth breake the stone. Ga∣lenus. Wilde fenel called hyppomarathrum, breaketh
the stone of the bladder. Fraga, Strawberries, being verie ripe, put them into a glasse of hotte water for 40. houres space,Strawber∣ries. then straine them, and againe put in fresh strawber∣ries into the same hot water, and so leaue it verie well couered and stopt, that no breath goe forth the first strawberries, after a strong expression through a linnen cloath, keep the liquor by it selfe: when any man will vse it, he must take three or foure spoonefuls, in a month, taking a spoonefull in the morning, adding thereto a little pouder of sugar∣candie: this is a most gratefull and acceptable me∣dicine, and an effectuall remedie against the stone, which some that haue beene tormented therewith, aboue more then twentie yeeres, hath commended aboue all other remedies, but the patient must bee carefull of his diet, that hee auoide such meate as may ingender grosse and viscous humors. The Au∣thor heereof is Gesuerus. The distilled water of ripe strawberries drunke, is verie good against the stone. Petrus Pena. G Genista, Broome: the seede of broome doth cheefely diminish the stones of the kidneis & blad∣der.Broom seeds Pernelius. The seede of broome doth mundifie and clense the reines, and doth not suffer any thing that may be conuerted to the stone, to rest there: it breaketh the stone of the reines, and bladder, the Dose is two or three drachmes with mel rosarum with roses and
Mastich, because it hurteth the stomack▪ Pet. Bayrus. Grasse∣rootes.Graminis radices, being boiled in drinke, doth di∣minish the stony excrements of the bladder. Dioscor. Take the rootes of Gramen three ounces, make a decoction with Aqua Mulsa, despumated to on pint, and let it be aromatized with Cinamon, or the like. Io. Huernius. H Hircinus sanguis, Goates bloud of a young Goate strangled,Goates-bloud. about the time that grapes grow ripe, ex∣cludeth the Stone. We must receiue the middlemost bloud, and cast away the first and the last: wee must receiue it in an earthen vessell glazed and set in the sunne, beeing stopped with a peece of linen, that by the heat of the sun the vertue may not vanish away. Let it be dried and faithfully reserued for your vse. And when you wil vse it, take halfe a drachme of the pouder, with some White-wine or Malmsey. Holle∣rius ex Aetio. You shall obserue that the bloud will be more effectuall if the Goat be nourished before with Diureticks Ant. Valetius. Hyssop.Hyssopus, Hyssop; to stirre vp the stone of the kid∣nies is a very easie and familiar remedy; which may appeare by the syrup of Hyssop, with a double or 3d part of Parietarie water: with which remedy, giue in the winter fasting for tenne or twelue daies togther, it sendeth forth stones and sand from the bdies of many men. Anto. Mizaldus.
I Imperatoria, Pellitory, The roote,Pellitory of Spaine. seed & leaues boiled in wine, auoideth the stone of the kidnies & bladder. Adam Lonicerus. Iuniper berries scowreth and clenseth the kidnies from Snd and slme. Fernelius.Iuniper. The Duke of Witenberg▪ taught Doctor Luther a present remedy against the stone, viz. That he shold take an earthen pot glased, and fill it halfe full with fresh Iuniper berries, which shall be afterwards filled vp with wine and water, wherein shall be boyled the Iuniper berries to the cōsumption of the third part, & of this potion let him take a draught or two, then shall he feele ease, and after feele the stone to auoid. Io. Manlius. L Ligusticum, Louage,Louage. in baths and incessions hel∣peth the Stone. Adam. Lonicerus. The wine boiled in wine, driueth out the stone. Idem. Limonum succus,Limons. the iuyce of Limons is very much commended against the stone. Hollerius. The distil∣led water of Limons, or two ounces of the iuyce, with three ounces of the decoction of Radish, dri∣ueth out the stone. Anto. Fumanellus. Take an ounce of the vnripe iuyce thereof, with three ounces of Malmsy, mix them, and giue all to the patient. B. Victor Fauentinus. M Marrubium. Horehound;Horehoūd. One gaue the iuyce therof with good success in the suppression of the v∣rin: or th pouder may be giuen in white-wine.
Mel, Hony, is good for those that haue the stone, and it is taken to hinder the increase.Hony. Simeon Sethi. And to stop the increase of the stone, take 2. pintes of fresh hony, and one pounde of Venice turpen∣tine, let it be distilled, and take the water thereof, and drinke thereof an ounce for a time: this is an experiment. N Nuces, Nuts: filberd nuts, with their inward rindes,Filberds. or membranes, eaten daily at the beginning of dinner and supper, doe remoue the matter of the stone from the kidneis: but it is doubtfull by what propertie they worke, whether it be found in its denesse, or in the inward skinne▪ but some doe affirme it to be in the oylie part. Amatus Lusitanus. Auicen doth number those filberds amongst the medicines, that doe take away the matter of the stone: and some doe commend the shels of filberds against the stone. Hollerius. A medicine to bee pre∣pared, approued against the stone in children; Take seuen filberds new and greene, beat them with their outward rindes, and take a handfull of leekes vn∣washed, & draw the iuice from them both, & straine them, and mix them both together, and giue  the childe seuen daies together▪ and when the chil goeth to sleepe, anoint his yarde, and testicles,  the whole perinaeum with oyle of Been hotte, or wit old oyle. Petrus Bayrus.
O Ouorum Cortices, Eggeshels, from whence chickins haue beene hatched, being beaten to pouder,Egge-shels. take two drachms with the iuice of parietarie, and it dri∣ueth forth the stone. Anton. Fumanellus. P Paeonia, the Pionyes,Piony. are good against the stone of the kidneis: and if there bee stopping of vrin, through the greatness of the stones the herb drunk with musa, is an excellent remedie. The root ther∣of is giuen the quantitie of two or three scruples▪ Alxander Trallianus The graines thereof drunke, breake the stone in children. Dioscorides. Pimpinella, Pimpernil conde,Pimpernil. helpeth them that haue the stone: the root there of is good against the stone of the kidneis. Mathiolus. R Raphanus, the Radish,Radish. helpeth those that haue the Nephretic passion through the stone, especially if a man boyle the outward part thereof with white wine and water, or brued and strained, and so drunk in the morning fasting, and so continued for cer∣taine daies together. Anton. Mizaldus. There is also Acetum Raphanatum to bee framed
against the Stone, to consume them of the kidnies, and deturbe them in generall, and is made after this manner following. Take Radish roots dried and brought into powder, then poure it into a vssel that hath wine in it, & mix▪ them, and so let it rest for some daies; and so haue you the Acetum raphanatum pre∣pared, which is very profitable against the Stone. I∣dem. For the Nephretick proceeding frō the stone, and for the collick comming through winds, Take the rides of very sharp Radish an ounce, 2 drachmes of the stones of Medlars or open arses, stamp them well, and macerate them for eight houres in foure ounces of white-wine, then straine it, and giue it a little warme at the entrance into bed, & in the mor∣ning when he riseth, and o repeat the drinke againe if need be. The doss may be diminished or increased for the state of the body and age. Alexander Petro∣nius. S Saluia, Sage, I haue prooued that he which doth vse to eate Sage in the morning,Sage. eating two or three tops brused with white-wine in the forme of an elec∣tuary, hath beene preserued from the stone. Vales∣cus de Tharanta. Saxifrage.Saxifraga, Saxifrage, doth diminish the stones of the kidnies and bladder. The herbe and root beein boiled in white-wine, breaketh and driueth out  stone of the kidnies and bladder. Neuerthelesse,  is more effectuall, if we giue a drachme of the dried powder in a draught of white-wine. Mathiolus.
Serpillum, Sauery. The seed of either of the Saue∣ries drunke in wine, the quantitie of halfe an ounce,Sauory. expelleth the Stone. Petrus Bayrus. V Verbenaca, verum,Verum. The roote thereof brused and giuen in Mulsa lukewarme, doth exceedingly helpe those that haue the Stone▪ Anto. Fumanellus. The iuyce of the root and herb Verum or the de∣coction, helpeth those that haue the Stone. Qu. A∣poll. The distilled water thereof being drunke, hath the same vertue. Idem. Vrtica, the Nettle is of that abstersiue faculty, that it doth very much clense the reines,The nettle. and is exceeding good against the Stone. Fernelius. The seed of Nettles drunke with wine, auoydeth the stone of the kidnies. Christoph. Wirsung. For a praecaution of the Stone new nettles are very good. I∣dem. Honoratus Castellanus doth chiefely approoue the decoction of the nettle being new, for a preseruatiue against the stone, especially from the beginning of the Spring vntill May. The decoction of the nettle and the iuyce breaketh the Stone. Plinius. The distilled water bring drunk is commended a∣gainst the Stone. Michael Schrick. The roote of the dead nettle boiled in wine, and drunk, is commen∣ded against the Stone. Q. Apollinarius. FINIS.
A Catalogue of English Medi∣cines, against the Epilepsie, or Falling sick∣nesse. AIuga, Chamaepiteos: the decoction of the whole plant,Chamaepite∣os. if it be giuen for many daies togither with rhodomel or oxymel, is good against the falling sickenesse. Mathiolus. Pimpernel,Anagallis, Pimpernel: the flowers of red pim∣pernel, hath a proppertie against the falling sicknes. So hath the iuice thereof with hony. Hollerius by the authoritie of Apuleus, hangeth the red flowers of pimpernel, to defend from the falling sicknesse. Ioan Wierus. Angellica.Angellica two or three spoonefuls of the water of Angellica, is giuen in the itte of the falling sick∣nesse, we must macerate in the best wine Angellica, for two or three daies together, and mix it with la∣uender, water a like portion. Euonimus. Aper, the Bore: the bladder with the vrin of the bore,Bore. being baked in an ouen, or any waies dryed,
and brought to pouder, and the quantitie of a beane thereof giuen in an ounce of Oxymel in the morning, is approued against the falling sicknesse; as witnes∣seth Alexander, who sawe a man in three daies per∣fectly cured. Mesue. Asinus, the Asse: The hoofe of an Asse,Asse. being made into pouder, and two spoonefuls drunke for many daies together, cureth the falling sickenesse. Dioscorides. The Asse hoofe burnt, cureth the fal∣ling sickenesse; and also the weight of two drachms of the pouder burnt, is verie auailable against the falling sicknesse. Arnoldus de Villa noua. B Betonica, Betony:Betony. A drachme of Betony in wa∣ter, cureth the falling sicknesse. Dioscorides. Lonicerus. Betony is good for them that haue the falling sick∣nesse; as witnesseth Galenus. The seede, of Betony drunke with aqua mellis, or with vinegar of Squils, doth auaile much. Hugo Se∣mensis. Bryonia, White vine: the roote thereof taken,White vine. the quantity of a drachme daily for a whole yeere, is giuen against the falling sicknesse. Dioscorides. C Canis, the Dogge. Feede a white dogge tyed vp for 14. daies together with bones onely, and the fif∣teenth daie take a spoonefull of the dung burnt, and giue it fifteene daies together, against the falling-sicknesse.
Alexander Trallianus. Chamaedris, Germander, is verie good against the falling sicknesse.Germander Mathiolus. Take Germander in May, as much as you please, let it bee dried in the shadow and reduced into pouder: then when you wil vse it, take one or two yolks of egges, and a spoon∣full of the saide pouder, with which being well mix∣ed and cocted, let it bee giuen to the sicke to eate for eight daies together, morning and euening, but in the meane time, let him abstaine from venerie, sallets, beanes and peason, and other meate, that breeds ill iuice and vitious: and this is a most noble secret and a good one. Alexis Pedemontanus. Cichorie.Cichorium, Cichorie. Some giue the sirrup of Ci∣chorie day and night to infants to licke thereof. Ci∣chorie of its owne propertie, is supposed to bee an enemie against the falling sicknesse. Nicholaus Pi∣so. Harts horneCornu Ceruinum▪ Harts horne, poudered & drunk with wine, cureth those that haue the falling sick∣nesse. Pet. Hyspan. Harts horne taken with wine is verie effectuall. Syluius. The fume of hearts horne burnt, doth recreate those that are in the falling sicknesse. Adamus Loni∣cerus. Cranium hominis, a mans scull: wee finde that by a naturall propertie the scull of a man,Mans cull. is good against the falling sicknesse. Gerardus hath this se∣cret, and he himselfe doth giue it against the falling-sicknesse, and they are deliuered, and so they take a mans scull for a man, and of a woman for a woman, the scull must be burnt vntill it bee verie white, and then poudered, and being drunke daylie, it cureth
the falling sicknesse. Gerardus a solo et Gal. Simpl. de ossibus lib. 11. A medicine vsed against the falling sicknesse by Christian the third King of Denmarke: Take the scull of a man, especially of a theefe hanged, that di∣ed of no disease; broile this vpon a gridiron, and then reduce it into pouder, then take three grains of piony, with one drachme of the said pouder and a spoonefull of lauender water, and giue it to the patient early in the morning, also three daies after do the same, and take the pouder fasting, and for three daies let him keepe himselfe at home, with a small quantitie of meate and drinke, and such as is pure and easie of digestion, as newe laide egges: and it will not bee amisse, that the sicke euerie daie in the morning, take downe a spoonefull of lauen∣der-water. Henri. Rausouius. Against the falling-sicknesse the pouder of a mans scull is approued, and especially the oyle distilled of a scul, doth verie much helpe. Vide Ossa humana. E Enula campana:Elecampane of its whole propertie Enula cam∣pane is good against the falling sicknesse. Holleri∣us. Equus, the horse: the horse hoofe being burnt is good to cure the falling sicknesse. Bayrus. Eringium, the rootes of Eringus beeing drunke with Hydromel, cureth the falling sicknesse.Eringus. Diosco∣rides.
F Filipendu∣la.Filipendula▪ is verie good to bee vsed against the falling sicknesse. Bayrus. The pouder of the root mix∣ed with the meate, is good against the falling sick∣nesse. Mathiolus. Filipendula, is a remedie against the falling sick∣nesse: the pouder thereof vsed in meate, is good for that purpose. Hortus Sanitatis. G Gagates, Ieate, drunke and smelled vnto, is good against the falling sicknesse.Ieate. Rosa anglica, the eate stone burned, and the fume taken, doth raise them vp that are in the falling sicknesse. Cardanus. The oyle of Ieate is most healthfull for those that are troubled with the falling sicknesse. Euonimus. H Hyssopus, Hyssop: the sirup of Hyssop, is verie auailable in the falling sicknesse,Hyssop. and so is the decoc∣tion of the said herb▪ Iohn. Agricola. The decoction of the saide herbe with Oxymel Squilliticum, doth also profit against the falling sick∣nesse. I. Heurnius. Galen in his experiments wit∣nesseth, that he cured those that had the falling sick∣nesse with the decoction of Hyssop, Asaruin and both the Aristolochia. Bayrus affirmeth that Alex∣ander cured many with the onely decoction of Hys∣sop,
but sometimes he gaue it with Oxymel of Squils. Hieronimus Cappiuauius. Hypericon. I he decoction of Hypericon when it flowreth, is cheefely preferd by some against the falling sicknesse, if it be drunke. Mathiolus. Hypericon, is saide to cure the Apoplexy, and the falling sicknesse▪ Iodac. Harchius.Saint Iohns worte. The distilled water of Hypericon, is giuen to them that haue the falling sicknesse. Adam. Lonicerus. Manardus doth verie much commend the distil∣led water of the rootes of Hypericon while it flow∣reth. Ioan. Manardus. L Lilium Conuallium:Lilly. An aqua vitae distilled of the flowers of Lilium Conuallium, by Balneum Mariae, af∣ter this manner, is exceedingly commended against the falling sicknesse. And is after this manner. Rec. Vini Cretici lib. xvi. Flores Lilium Conuallium. lib. iiij. Mixe them in a glasse body, and let them so remaine in the Sunne for nine daies together; and then distill it: afterwards, take all the saide distilled water, flowers of greene lauender lib. i. mixe them and let it stand againe for nine daies in the sunne as be∣fore, then distil it according to arte by Balneum Ma∣riae, and thereof is wont to be giuen three or foure drops to the sicke, euen in the verie fitte. Apollonius Menabenius. M Marrubium, Horehound:Horehound. Let him drinke three spoonefuls of the iuice of Horehound, and so much
of hony for one time, and it shall cure him. Petr. Hisp. M Balme.Melissa, Balme, let it be put in wine to distill, and thereof giue a spoonefull with a little of the best Triacle fasting, and it will perfectly cure the falling-sicknesse. Euonimus. Melissa.Melissa, brused and macerated in wine for a night, let them drinke of that water distilled euerie day, or let it be contained in the mouth, they saie it cureth the Apoplexy, and also the falling sicknes. Remaclus. O Ossa humana, the bones of a man: some haue giuen the bones of a man burnt,Bones of a man. and haue cured the falling sicknesse and Ioynt-ache, so that the sick was ignorant, that they were the bones of a man, least the sicke should abhorre it, by this remedie many haue beene cured. Galenus. The bones of a man being burnt, hath a naturall propertie against the Epilepsy. Weckerus. Oxalis, Sorel, is giuen from the first of the newe Moone,Sorell. for xxx. daies together being greene, and is good against the falling sicknesse. Symphorinus Campeius. P Piony.Peonia, Piony: The roote and seedes of Pyo∣nie according to euerie administration, is a verie
great medicine against the falling sicknesse; for if we giue euerie day thereof, from two drachm to foure, with aqua mellis and Hyssopi, or with Oxymel, it is ex∣ceeding good against the falling sicknesse. Peonia hung about the necke of children cureth the falling-sicknesse; But that is found most true of the male Piony. The male Piony that is sweete, doth won∣derfully refresh and comfort the braine, and cureth the falling sicknesse. Fernelius. Palma Christi, or Recinus: one drachme of the pouder of the seede being drunke with wine,Palma Christi. cureth the falling sicknesse. The same thing doth the de∣coction of the root in wine long mixed, which must be giuen to drink as wel at dinner as at supper. Ma∣thiolus. Passer, the Sparrow: the braine and flesh of sparrowes, according to Gerardus Cremonensis, is ve∣rie good against the falling sicknesse. Valescus. A∣tuarius doth affirme that the braines of sparrowes of the fields, haue a great propertie against the falling-sicknes. Actuarius. Q Quinquefolium, Fiue leaued grasse:Fiue leaue grasse. the leaues thereof being, drunke thirtie daies do much pro∣fit. Dioscorides. Fiue leaued grasse drunk with wine, for the space of thirtie daies, cureth the falling sick∣nesse. Auicenna, Arculanus. Fiue leaued grasse drunke for thirtie three daies doth perfectly cure. P. Hispanus. The leaues of fiue leaued grasse a drachme thereof beeing daily drunke cureth the Epilepsia.
Altomarus. The leaues of fiue leaued grasse beeing drunke with wine, is auailable against the falling-sicknesse. Hortus Sanitatis. R Rosmarinus, Rosemarie: the seede thereof doth help the falling sicknesse.Rosemarie. Dioscorides. Rosmary with a lit∣tle Fenell, is also commended by Serapon. Ioan. Bapt. Theodosius. Rostrum Porcinum, Wilde Endiue: the distilled water thereof,Wild En∣diue. especially if it bee macerated in wine for some daies, it doth profit verie much in the falling sicknesse, both in children and others. Gesnerus. Vide Hieracium. Ruta Siluestris, Wilde Rue, is good for them that haue the falling sicknesse.Wild Rue. Dioscorides. Wilde Rue being beaten or stamped and cast in∣to the nostrels doth helpe in the sitte: the same doth the pouder thereof, and if wee cannot get the herb fresh, for want thereof we may vse the common gar∣den rue, and the iuice thereof. Valescus. If the pou∣der of dried Rue bee snuft into the nostrels at the houre of the sitte, he that is sicke will presently a∣rise out of the sitte. Bertrusius. S Sage.Saluia, Sage, is good against the falling sicknes. Mathiolus. Sage is conuenient for those that haue the falling sicknesse. Ioan. Bapt. Theodosius. Wine of the decoction of Sage is also good against the falling sicknesse. Platcarius. By what manner soe∣uer wine of Sage is prepared, whether it be by de∣coction of the plant or by hanging thereof in a bag
it is of maruelous vse and power against the falling-sicknesse, which groweth by fault of the stomache, or the mother, by the simpathy and consent of the parts. Mizaldus. Sinapi, Mustard-seede being beaten and applied to the nostrels, helpeth the falling sicknesse:Mustard-seede. Mus∣tard-seede being snuft into the nostrels causeth to sneese, and doth raise him vp that hath the falling-sicknesse. Bayrus. A certain Physition doth vse to put into the mouth of him that hath the falling sicknesse mustard, wher∣by he is presently raised vp & much fleame is forth∣with auoided out of his mouth. Nostrum. A Collection of Medicines against Venom, and the Pestilence, easie to be had, and growing within our English Clymate. ABrotanum, Sothernwood,Sothern∣wood. a drachme of the seeds therof with some of the leaues, being macerated in white-wine, adding thereunto a walnut, & bole Armoniack, and then strained and drunke, it hath a maruellous force against poyson, and the pestilence. Ant. Mi∣zaldus. Absinthium:Worm∣wood. The pouder of the leaues of worm∣wood eaten in the morning, openeth the liuer that is obstructed, hindreth putrefaction increasing in the stomache, and is a most effectuall preseruatiue in the pestilence. Ioan. Vochs de Colonia. Greene
wormwood with salt eaten in the time of the pesti∣lence, or the water thereof, is drunke for a preser∣uatiue. Acetosa, Sorrell, is commended by Marsil. Fici∣nus in his sixt Chap. of Epidinial diseases,Sorrel. saying that sorrel hath a maruellous force against the pestilence: if it be macerated in vinigar, & taken in the morning it is an approued remedie: neither shall it be amisse to report, what Ant. Guainerius hath written hereof, as touching the pestilence: Sorrel saith he, hath an excellent vertue against the pestilence, as I haue vn∣derstood by a certaine faithfull friend, which was sicke of the same, which neuer changed place, but receiued help only by that plant, wherof he receiued euery day a bolus before dinner & supper, & gaue to euerie one of his houshold in like manner, and if there wanted green sorrel, he took the dried pouder thereof in white-wine, and with all hee sometimes vsed the pils of Rufus against the pestilence, where∣by hee preserued himselfe and his whole housholde from infection.pil. com∣munes. Ant. Mizald. in horto medico. Pimpernel.Anagallis, Pimpernel, both kindes of them are maruelous against the pestilence beeing boyled in wine, or so vsed that the patient may drinke halfe a draught, and then bee well couered in his bedde that hee may sweate, and so shall all the venome bee thereby expelled, Hieron. Trag. lib. 1. Histo∣riae, plantarum. Angelica, the roote thereof is a singular remedy against poyson, and against the pestilence: a peece of the roote held in the mouth or chewed, it dry∣ueth away the pestilent aire. Angelica is an enemie against poyson, and cureth
pestilent diseases if it bee vsed in time, a dragme of the pouder thereof is giuen in a draught of white wine; but if the patient haue a vehement feuer, with the distilled water of Carduus benedictus, or of tor∣mentil, with a small quantitie of vinegar, and some∣times alone, or with Triacle of Andromachus. Aron, Cuckopinte, the root thereof taken in meat, is verie holesome in time of pestilence.Cuckopinte Author est Plinius lib. 24. Cap. 16. The roote is best that hath spotted leaues, whether it bee drie or fresh brused, and there must bee a drachme weight therof at the least taken, and it is a present remedie against venome and the pestilence. Some ioyne thereun∣to as much Triacle of Venice. A spoonful or more of the iuice expressed, of the herbe being drunke, hath the same facultie, and if to the same a little vinegar be admixte, it causeth lesse biting of the tongue. Tragus. lib. 2. Histor. Plant. et Tarq. Schneleberg. Tract. de 20. Herbis pestilentiae vene∣no aduersantibus. Arthemesia, Mugworte,Mugworte. is verie much commen∣ded against the pestilence by diuerse well lear∣ned. They take a bundle of Mugworte, and burne it vnto ashes, and with foure pintes of run∣ning water they make a lixiuium, which must bee put into anolde potte close stopped, and sette it ouer the fire that it may boyle to the consump∣tion of the liquor, that which resteth in the bot∣tome like salte make trochisks of, of the weight of a scruple, or halfe a drachme: dissolue one or two of those trochisks, according to the strength of the sicke in three ounces of the best Malmsie, & let
him drinke it, and after he hath drunke let him walk halfe an houres space, then let him goe to bed and sweate there two or three houres, then shall he vo∣mit and goe to stoole as though he had taken Anti∣mony; in this manner for the most part, all that haue taken it in due time, before the venome hath got∣ten to the heart, haue beene deliuered: this experi∣ment is of Ambrose Pareus, which hee practised in Paris. Betonica, Betony: the leaues poudered and mixed with sugar in the forme of a dredge,Betony. and vsed the weight of halfe a drachm or a drachme, or the fresh leaues eaten in the morning, is a greate preseruatiue. Gasperus Reglerus. If the leaues bee carried about the body they profit much. Manarclus. Betony doth maruailously auaile against the putrefa & ion of the aire, and resisteth venom. Sauonarlae. He that will preserue himselfe from the contagi∣on of the pestilent ayre, et him take in the morning fasting, the pouder of Betony with wine, or the distilled water of Betony: it is tried and approued by many testimonies, and especially by Ioannes Pis∣torius obserued in his experiments. Tarq. Schnelle∣bergius. Betonie is good against the pestilence, and euerie venome. If a man in time of pestilence, doe take the pouder of the leaues of Betony often with wine, he shall purge the poyson of the pestilence by vrin. Henr. Dobbin. Bistorta, Snake-weede, the roote being reduced into pouder,Snake-weed and a drachme thereof taken i drink, doth resiste the pestilent venome, and expelleth the same through sweates. The same vertue hath the di∣stilled water: and the decoction of the root in wine,
is good for the same. Tragus lib. 1. Histor. Plant. Brunswicencis giueth an ounce of the water in the Morning. Bruns. Butirum▪ Butter, in the time of the pestilence, it is a good preseruatiue for the housholde to eate in the morning a tost and butter. Gasparus Reglerus.Butter. Some there are that take butter for a preseruatiue in the beginning of their meate. Anton. Sebergeus. Calendula, Marigold,Marigold. doth comfort and streng∣then the heart, and withstandeth poyson, and is good to bee taken any waie against the pestilence. Fuchsius. Alexand. Benedict. telleth that hee hath proued by his owne experience, that if from the be∣ginning of a pestilent euer, the patient drinke two ounces of the iuice or three at the most, and then afterwards be well couered with clothes to sweat, he shall be deliuered from the same, Symphor. Campegi∣us. The distilled water of Marigolds, doth resist the pestilence, and venome: Iodothus Harchius. Carduus benedictus, the blessed Thistle:The blessed Thistle. the pou∣der of the leaues ministred the quantitie of halfe a drachme, is verie good against the pestilence, espe∣cially if it be receiued within twentie foure houres after the sickenesse is taken, so that the patient sweat vpon the same: the like vertue hath the wine wher∣in the herbe hath beene sodden. The Italians make great account of this herbe, especially against the pestilence. Mathiolus. The pouder of the leaues as much as will goe into a walnut shell, being drunke with wine, is a great preseruatiue against the pesti∣lence. The same vertue hath the leaues boyled in wine and drunke. Tragus lib. 2. Histor. Plant. et Adam. Lonicerus.
Onion.Cepa, the Onion: some giue the iuice of white onions with vinegar. Masil. in epid. Cap. 9. an onion with milk or butter being eaten, is verie good in this disease of the pestilence. Ant. Guainer. de peste diff. 2. Cap. 3. There are some labouring men that be∣fore they goe forth in the morning, are vsed to eate a rawe onion with salte & breade insteed of Triacle, against the infectious aire, perswading themselues that then they were safe for that day, that vsed this remedie: neither did their hope fale them, for it appeared by experience, that as there was nothing more common, so there was nothing more effectu∣all against the distemperature of the aire, for this is as good as a Triacle. Trag. lib. 2. Histo. plantarum. Auicen sheweth that he which eateth a rawe onion betimes in the morning fasting with milke, shall be all that day preserued from Epidemial diseases. Celidonsum, Celendine: the water of the greater Celendine,Celendine. driueth away venome from the heart by sweate, therfore it is good in the pestilence. Ant. Famanellus. Cichoria, Cichorie, Mars. Fic. in epid. Cap. 6. the wa-of Cichorie is drunke against the pestilence.Cicoree. F. Lym. in historia aquarum. The weight of an ounce, or halfe an ounce at a time. Brunswe. Doues dungColmbarum stercus, Doues dung: it is holden that a sume made therof is good to deliuer him that is infected, & to prouoke vomit. Ant. Snelbergerus. Comfry.Consolida maior, the greater Comfry: they say there are fiue herbs, very conueniet in this case to be vsed both inwards & outwards, which doe resiste venom, and are is it were temperate, that is to say, Consolida maior, Scabiosa, Agrimonia, Britanica. Aristolochia,
Mars. Ficinus in epidem. cap. 15. vseth these words, Some say that Consolida being brused between two stones, cureth the Anthrax and Carbuncle by di∣uine miracle. Ioan. de Vigo. These three plants are commended by all learned Physitians, to bee appli∣ed vpon the Anthrax or Carbuncle, Morsus Diaboli, Scabiosa, and Consolida maier, if they may bee had fresh: bruse the Scabios and Consolida with a little salt, and fresh pork-larde, and let it be applyed hot, and remaine for a day naturall, in the forme of an Emplaster. Learned Chirurgians doe teach, that these plants do maruelously resist the Carbuncle, also if Comfry brused betweene two stones be applied. Io∣an. Crato. Cornu ceruinum, Harts horne:Harts horn. Some vse the sha∣uings of Harts horne, or the bone found in the heart of the Hart, for they hold opinion, that it strength∣neth the heart and preserueth from poyson. Anton. Fumanellus. That same bone founde in the heart is exceeding pretious against euerie venome, & is mix∣ed with euerie Antidote that is prepared against ve∣nome. Mathiolus. The first head or horne of the Hart, is thought maruelously to resist venome, no lesse then doth the Vnicornes horne: the bone of of the heart is verie auailable against venome and the pestilence, for so witnesseth Andernacus. The pouder of the Harts horne being often taken, doth preserue from the pestilence: the often drink∣ing in a cup wherein is hearts horne, is a greater helpe in the pestilence then any other medicin. Ioan. Crato. FINIS. In page 111, line 5. for verum, reade Veruin.
