4536 99843205 7920
A particular declara∣tion or testimony, of the vndutifull and traiterous affection borne against her Maiestie by Edmond Campion Iesuite, and other condemned Priestes, witnessed by their owne confessions: in reproofe of those slaun∣derous bookes & libels deliuered out to the contrary by such as are malitiously af∣fected towards her Maiestie and the state. Published by authoritie. ❧Imprinted at Lon∣don by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie. AN. DO. 1582.
DIEV ET MON DRO IT 1. Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selues vnto all maner ordinance of man for the Lordes sake, whether it be vnto the King, as vnto the supe∣riour, or vnto gouernours, as vnto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of euill doers, and for the prayse of them that doe well.
❧To all her Maiesties good and faithfull subiects. ALthough the course of proceeding in the late inditement, araignement, tryall, iudge∣ment and execution of Edmond Campion and others, being as well vpon sundrie of their writings, letters and Confessions, as al∣so vpon other good and manifest proues found guilty of high treason, was such, as ought in trueth and reason, to satisfie all indifferent persons and well affected subiectes, to whome her Maiesties merciful and gratious in∣clination towards offenders, is so well knowen: yet hath it bene found that some disloyall and vnnaturall subiects haue vntruely spread abroad sundry rumours and reportes, and haue published diuers slaunderous pamphlets and seditious libels, as well in this Realme as in foraine partes, in sundry strange languages, in excuse and iustification of the sayde Traytours so iustly executed, with purpose to defame her Maiesties honourable course of iustice, so much as lyeth in them, setting out those condemned persons as men of sin∣gular vertue and holines, and as her highnesse true, loyal, de∣uote, & obedient subiects, and in no wise spotted with any staine of ill disposed affection towards her Maiestie, being not otherwise to be charged, then with certaine points of re∣ligion that concerneth only matters of conscience, that were no way preiudiciall to her Maiesties state and gouernement, with diuers like vntruthes, which are ment shall bee hereaf∣ter answered more at large, whereby both the malice of the writers may bee made knowen to the worlde, and her Maie∣sties most mercifull and gratious gouernement may bee pre∣serued from the malice of such vnnaturall and vndutiful sub∣iects. In the meane time notwithstanding, the Lords and o∣thers of her Maiesties most honourable priuie Counsell, be∣ing desirous that the dutifull subiectes, may bee preserued
from the vndermyning of such seditious slaunderers, where∣by otherwise they might happely by such wicked illusions be caried into some hard conceites, touching the due and lawfull proceeding against the sayde Traytours: haue found it very expedient, that as well certaine confessions taken of the said Campion and others before his arraignement, as al∣so certaine answeres lately made to certaine articles pro∣pounded to those that were at that same time condemned of high treason, but yet spared from execution, should bee published truely & sincerely, in such precise forme of words, as the same haue bene acknowledged and subscribed, not onely with the proper hands of certaine persons of publique calling and credite that were present at their examination & haue subscribed thereunto, but also with the proper hands of the offenders themselues, (Hart onely excepted) as appea∣reth by the Originals extant to be shewed, wherby it may be most euidently seene, euen by them selues still persisting in their most Trayterous affection, howe vntruely the said per∣sons are reported to haue bene and to bee true and faithfull subiects in matter of her Maiesties estate and Crowne, and howe iustly they were condemned for treason and not for points of religion, being those, that hauing bene by her Ma∣iesties clemencie so long spared vpon hope of repentance, continue yet still in such Trayterous disposition of heart to∣wards her highnes, two of them only nowe acknowledging their true duetie of allegiance, though in pointes of religion not recōciled, as also one other named Edward Rishton, that did before, openly at the barre at the time of the arraignment (varying from Campion and the rest of his fellowes therin) acknowledge his said duetie & alleagiance to her Maiestie: towards whom (to thend it may appeare vnto the worlde that the said Campion & the rest that were executed, were not put to death for points that concerned matters of con∣science, but for treason:) Her Maiestie doth meane to extend her grace & mercie, hoping that as it hath pleased God to frame their consciences to acknowledge towards her that
duetie of allegiance that by the lawes of God and man they owe vnto her as their most lawful prince and Soueraigne: so hee will hereafter open their eyes to see, howe dangerously they haue bene hitherto through false and erronious doc∣trine seduced, as well in matters concerning their dutie to∣wardes God, as in their alleagiance towards their Prince. It is also looked for, that all such as make profession to bee dutifull and well affected subiects, howsoeuer they be affec∣ted in religion, seeing the most dangerous and pernicious o∣pinions that are helde and maintained by these Iesuites and Seminary men sent into this Realme, wil hereafter as wel in respect of the duety they owe vnto her Maiestie, as for the care they ought to haue as good members of this Re∣alme to preserue the tranquilitie thereof, as a thing that im∣porteth euery mans particular duety, not onely refuse to re∣ceiue and harborough such disloyall persons, but also doe their vttermost indeuour to apprehend them, and to present them to Iustice, whereby they may receiue such condigne punishment as is meete to bee inflicted vpon disturbers of the publike peace in Realmes and Kingdomes.
D. Sanders de visibili Monarchia, lib. 7. Pag. 730. DOctor Sanders reporteth, that in the yeere 1569. Pius quintusThe Pope. Pontifex Maximus, sent Nicholas Morton Englishman Doctor of Diuinitie, into England, to admonish cer∣taine Catholique Noblemen, Elizabetham quae tunc rerum potiebatur, haereticam esse: ob eam{que} causam omni dominio & potestate, quam in Catholicos vsurpabat, iure ipso excidisse, impune{que} ab illis velut Ethnicam & publicanam haberi posse, nec eos illius legibus aut mandatis deinceps obedire cogi. Which is to say, That Elizabeth which then gouerned, was an heretike, and for that cause hath by very law lost all dominion & power which she vsurped ouer the Ca∣tholiques, and may freely be accompted by them as an heathen and Publicane, and that they are not from thenceforth bounde to obey her lawes or commandements. Whereupon he sayth, that many Noble men aduentured to deliuer their brethren ab haereticorum tyrannide, from the ty∣rannie of the heretiques. And although things fell not out to their expectation, yet he sayeth, Illorum nobilium laudanda consilia erant, quae certo suo, eo{que} foelici successu non caruerunt. Quanquam enim omnium fratrum suorum animas, è schismatis puteo educere non potuerunt, tamen & ipsi fidem Catholicam e∣gregie confessi sunt, & multi eorum animas pro fratribus (qui summus est charitatis gradus) posuerunt, & reliqui seipsos, tum ex haereseos, tum ex peccati seruitute in libertatem vendicarunt eam, qua Christus nos liberauit. That is to say, The purposes or endeuors of these Noblemen were to be praysed, which wan∣ted not their certaine and happy successe. For though they were
not able to drawe the soules of all their brethren out of the pitte of schisme, yet both they themselues, nobly confessed the Catho∣lique faith, & many of them gaue their liues for their brethren, which is the hyest degree of Charitie, and the rest of them re∣skued themselues from the bondage both of schisme & of sinne, into that freedome, wherewith Christ hath made vs free. Bristowe in his booke of Motiues, published with allowance of Doctor Allen, in the 15. Motiue. fol. 72. c. 73. FOr a full answere to them all, although the very naming of our Catholique Martyrs, euen of this our time, to any reasonable man may suffice, as the B. of Rochester, Sir Tho∣mas Moore, the Monks of the Charterhouse, with many moe vnder King Henry: and now of late time, all our holy Martyrs that haue bene and dayly are made, by losse of their liuings, by poyson, by whipping, by fa∣mishing, by banishment, Bishops, Priests, Deanes, Archdea∣cons, Canons, Ecclesiasticall persons of all sortes, Knightes, Esquires, Gentlemen, laymen of all sortes: so many likewise that haue openly suffered, the good Earle of Northumber∣land, D. Storie, Felton, the Nortons, M. Woodhouse, M. Plumtree, and so many hundreths of the Northren men: such men both in their life and at their death, as neither the e∣nemies haue to stayne them, as their owne consciences, their owne talke, and the worlde it selfe doeth beare good witnesse: many of them also, and therefore all of them, (because of their owne cause) being by God himselfe approoued by miracles most vndoubted. Although I saye, no reasonable man will thinke those stinking Martyrs of the heretiques, worthy in any respect to be compared with these most glorious Martyrs of the Catholiques, yet supposing, &c.
Sanders lib. 7. pag. 732. SPeaking of the Northren commotion, he saith, Certè quidem illud miraculo imputetur necesse est, quòd cum viri ferè quingenti exijs, qui arma pro fide sumpserunt, ab haereticis capti, & morte affecti essent, nemo illorum repertus sit, qui aut fi∣dem Catholicam deseruerit, aut belli eius authores alicuius cul∣pae accusarit: that is to say, Verely this must needes be impu∣ted to a miracle, that whereas nere fiue hundred men of those that tooke armes for the faith, were taken and put to death by the heretiques, yet there hath not bene founde any one of them, which hath either forsaken the Catholique faith, or hath accused of any blame the authors of that warre. And a litle after, Nobile etiam Martyrium in eadem causa subierunt duo viri Nobiles de familia Nortonorum, ex quibus alter dicebatur Thomas Nortonus, alter verò Christopherus: & Christopherus quidē Thomae nepos erat ex fratre, ille autem huic patruus. Qui ambo nec à fide sua dimoueri, nec vt Elizabetham confiterentur legitimam Reginam adduci potuerunt, &c. That is to say, There suffered also a noble martyrdome in the same cause, two worshipfull Gentlemen of ye house of Nortons, of whome the one was called Thomas Norton, the other Chri∣stopher, and Christopher was Thomas his brothers sonne, and Thomas was Christophers Vncle, which both could neither be remooued from their faith, nor be brought to confesse Eliza∣beth to be lawfull Queene. Sanders. lib. 7. pag. 734. AFter a long recitall of the causes that moued Pius quintus to excommunicate her Maiesty, he sayth, De Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine declarauit, praedictam Elizabethā haereticam & haereticorum fautricem, ei{que} adhaerentes in praedictis Anathematis sententiam incurrisse.
Quin etiam praetenso regni praedicti iure, necnon omni & quo∣cun{que} dominio, dignitate, priuilegio{que} priuatam. Item{que} proceres, subditos & populos dicti regni, ac caeteros omnes qui illi quomo∣docun{que} iurauerunt, a Iuramento huiusmodi, ac omni prorsus do∣minij, fidelitatis & obsequij debito, perpetuo absolutos, prout illos tunc sententiae suae authoritate absoluit: & priuauit eandem Eli∣zabeth. praetenso iure regni alijs{que} omnibus supradictis: praece∣pit{que} & interdixit vniuersis & singulis Proceribus, subditis, popu∣lis & alijs praedictis, ne illi, eiusue monitis, mādatis aut legibus au∣derēt obedire. Qui secus agerent, eos simili anathematis sentētia innodauit. That is to say, Of the fulnesse of Apostolike pow∣er hath declared the said Elizabeth an heretike, and a fauourer of heretikes, and that such as adhere vnto her in the promisses, haue incurred the sentence of Anathema accursed. Moreouer, that she is depriued of her pretensed right of the said kingdom, and also of al and whatsoeuer dominion, dignitie & priuiledge. Furthermore, that the nobles, subiects, and peoples of the said Realme and all other which any wise whatsoeuer haue taken othe vnto her, are assoyled for euer from such othe, and vtterly from all duetie of allegeance, fidelitie and obedience, euen as he then assoyled them by authoritie of his sentence, and depri∣ued the same Elizabeth of her pretensed right of the kingdom, and all other things aboue sayd. And he hath commaunded and forbidden all and euery the nobles, subiectes, peoples and other aforesayde, that they be not so bolde to obey her, or her aduer∣tisements, commaundements or lawes: and whosoeuer other∣wise do, he hath bounde with like sentence of curse. Bristowe in his 6. motiue. fol. 31. WHereby it is manifest, that they do miserably forget them selues, who feare not excommu∣nications of Pius quintus of holy memorie, in whome Christ him selfe to haue spoken and excommunicated, as in Saint Paul, they might consider by the miracles that Christ by
him as by Saint Paul did worke. In his 40. motiue vnder the title, obedient subiectes. ANd if at any time it happen, after long toleration, hum∣ble beseeching and often admonition of very wicked and notorious Apostates and heretiques, no other hope of amende∣ment appearing, but the filthie daily more and more defiling him selfe and others to the huge great heape of their owne damnation, that after all this the soueraigne authoritie of our common pastor in religion for the sauing of soules do duely discharge vs from subiection, and the Prince offender from his dominion: with such griefe of the heart it is both done of the Pastor and taken of the people, as if a man should haue cut off from his bodie for to saue the whole, some most principall, but rotten part thereof. Sanders lib. 7. fol. 744. VNder this title, Insigne martyrium Iohannis Feltoni, The honourable martyrdome of Iohn Felton, &c. he sayth of Felton in this maner. Is enim Catholicae fidei studio zelo{que} adductus, cùm penè desperatam patriae suae valetudinem non nisi acerbissima aliqua medicina restitus posse animaduerteret, noluit committere vt haec sententia summi pastoris ciues ac proximos suos lateret. That is to say, For he, led with the loue and zeale of the Catholique faith, when he saw that the (in a maner) desperate health of his countrey could not be restored, but by some most bitter medicine, would not suffer that this sentence of the soueraigne pastors should bee hidden from his countreymen and neighbours.
And after the further report of his facte, thus, Cum, vero de hac re diligentissimè quaereretur, Iohannes Feltonus tandem ap∣praehensus, dignum se Iesu Christi, & Primatus ab eo instituti te∣stem exhibuit. But when most diligent inquirie was made thereof, Iohn Felton being at length apprehended, shewed himselfe a worthy witnesse of Iesus Christ, and of the Supremacie by him ordei∣ned. Vnder this Title: Illustre Martyrium Iohannis Storaei Angli, &c. The noble Martyredome of Iohn Storie En∣glishman, &c. Anno autem Domini. 1571. 25. die mensis Maij productus in iudicium, perduellionis reus peragitur, veluti qui coniurationem cum certis viris apud Belgas in ciuitate Antuerpiensi contra Elizabetham iniuisset, religionem{que} schis∣maticam quae iam in Anglia regnat, in Catholicam commutare tentasset. Facta vero pro se dicendi potestate, fori tantum excep∣tionem proposuit, negans iudices ipsos vllam in se potestatem ha∣bere, qui iam non Anglicanae principi, sed potius regi catholico subiectus esset. That is to say, In the yere of our Lord 1571. The twentie fiue day of the moneth of May, being brought to the barre, hee was araigned of hie treason, as he yt had conspired with certaine men in the lowe countrey in the citie of Antuerpe against Eli∣zabeth, and had attempted to change the schismaticall religion which now reigneth in England, into ye Catholique religion. Being permitted to speake for himselfe, hee onely pleaded to the iurisdiction of the court, denying that the Iudges them∣selues had any power ouer him, which was now no subiect to the English Queene, but rather to the King Catholique. And after further discourse of the speach of Doctour Sto∣rie, and of his condemnation, hee addeth thus: Storaeus au∣tem biduo pòst, cum ad vxorem Louanii agentem scriberet, de{que} huius sententiae iniustitia quereretur: significauit perfacile sibi fuisse, si apud alios iudices actum esset, id quod de coniuratione contra Elizabetham facta obiiciebatur confutare. Cuius rei testes citabat illos ipsos, quibuscum Antuerpiae hac de re egisse
dicebatur. Verum quia hoc quod probe sciret nescire non posset, integrum sibi non fuisse aliter causam dicere quam dixisset. In∣tellexit vero probe se scire, praetensam Angliae Reginam per declaratoriam summi Pontificis sententiam ob haeresim mani∣festam omni iure Regni, Dominio{que} priuatam esse, ac propterea magistratum nullum ab illa creatum, ei{que} adhaerentem a se ag∣nosci posse, ne forte ipse etiam eodem Anathemate innodaretur. That is to say, Storie two dayes after, writing to his wife who then remayned at Louaine, and complaining of the vn∣iustice of this sentence, he aduertised her that he could easely, (if the matter had bene tryed before other Iudges) confute what was obiected against him, touching the conspiracie made against Elizabeth, whereof he alleadged for witnesses, those with whome he was sayd to haue dealt at Antuerpe about this matter: but because he could not be ignorant of that which hee well knew, he could not otherwise pleade then he had pleaded. His meaning was, that he well knewe yt the pretensed Queene of England by the declaratorie sentence of the Pope, was for manifest heresie depriued from all right of the kingdome, and from Dominion, & that therfore no magistrate created by her, and adhering to her, could be acknowledged by him, least him selfe also should be bounde with the same curse. And in the ende. In ipsis ergo Calendis Iunii, tantus dei mar∣tyr iniectus crati, ad locum supplicii trahitur. Therefore the first day of Iune, so great a martyr of God, was throwen vpon a hardell, and drawen to the place of execution. And so conclu∣deth with the report of his execution. The first of August. 1581. EDmond Campion being demāded whether he woulde acknowledge the publishing of these thinges before recited by Saunders, Bristowe & Allen, to be wicked in ye whole, or in any part: & whether he doeth at this pre∣sent acknowledge her Maiestie to be a true
and lawfull Queene, or a pretensed Queene, and depriued, and in possession of her Crowne onely de facto. He answereth to the first, that he medleth neither to nor fro, and wil not fur∣ther answere, but requireth that they may answere. To the second he saith, that this question dependeth vpon the fact of Pius quintus, whereof he is not to iudge, and there∣fore refuseth further to answere. Edmond Campion. This was thus answered and subscribed by Edmond Campion, the day and yere a∣boue written, in the presence of vs. Owyn Hopton. Robert Beale. Jo. Hammond. Thomas Norton.
Short extracts out of Briant and Sherwins confessions. Alexander Briant. HEe is content to affirme, that the Queene is his Soueraigne Lady, but he will not affirme that shee so is lawfully, & ought so to be, and to be obeyed by him as her subiect, if the Pope declare or command the contrarie. And he saith, that that question is too high, and daungerous for him to answere. The 6. of May 1581. before Owen Hopton Knight, Iohn Hammond, & Thomas Norton. Whether the Pope haue authoritie to with∣draw from obedience to her Maiesty, he know∣eth not. The 7. of May 1581. Alexander Briant.
Ralphe Sherwins examination. BEing asked whether the Popes bull of de∣priuation of the Queene were a lawful sen∣tence or no, he refuseth to answere. Being asked whether ye Queene be his law∣ful Soueraigne, and so ought to continue not∣withstanding any sentence that the Pope can giue, he doth not answere. Being againe asked whether the Queene be his Soueraigne, notwithstanding any sen∣tence that the Pope can giue, he prayeth to bee asked no such question as may touch his life. The 12. of Nouember. 1580. Ralphe Sherwin.
Articles ministred to the Iesuites and Seminarie priestes, which are in the Tower, and were condemned, with their answeres to the same. 13. Maii. 1582. WHether the Bull of Pius quintus a∣gainst the Queenes Maiestie, be a lawfull sentence, and ought to be obeyed by the subiects of Eng∣land? 2 Whether the Queenes Maiestie be a lawfull Queene, and ought to be obeyed by the subiects of England, not withstanding the Bul of Pius quintus, or any other Bul or sentence that the Pope hath pronounced, or may pronounce a∣gainst her Maiestie? 3 Whether the Pope haue or had power to authorize the Earles of Northumberlande and Westmerland, and other her Maiesties subiectes, to rebell or take armes against her Maiestie, or to authorize Doctour Saunders, or others, to inuade Irelande, or any other her dominions, and to beare armes against her, and whether they did therein lawfully or no? 4 Whether the Pope haue power to dis∣charge any of her highnes subiects, or the sub∣iects of any Christian prince from their allegi∣ance or othe of obedience to her Maiestie, or to their prince for any cause?
5 Whether the said Doctour Saunders, in his booke of the visible monarchie of ye Church, and Doctour Bristowe, in his booke of Mo∣tiues (writing in allowance, commendation, & confirmation of the saide Bul of Pius Quintus) haue therein taught, testified, or mainteined a truth or a falsehood? 6 If the Pope doe by his Bull or sentence pronounce her Maiestie to be depriued, and no lawful Queene, and her subiects to be dischar∣ged of their allegiance and obedience vnto her: & after, the Pope or any other by his appoint∣ment and authoritie, doe inuade this Realme, which part woulde you take, or which part ought a good subiect of England to take? Luke Kirbyes Answere. LVke Kirby. To the first he saith, that ye reso∣lution of this article, dependeth vpō the ge∣neral question, whether the Pope may for any cause depose a prince: wherein his opinion is, that for some causes he may lawfully depose a prince, and that such a sentence ought to be o∣beyed. To the second, he thinketh that in some ca∣ses, (as infidelitie or such like,) her Maiestie is not to be obeyed against the Popes Bul and sentence, for so hee saith he hath read, that the Pope hath so done, de facto, against other prin∣ces.
To the third he saith, he cannot answere it. To the fourth, that the Pope (for infidelitie) hath such power, as is mentioned in this ar∣ticle. To the fifth, he thinketh, that both Doctour Saunders, and Doctour Bristowe, might bee deceiued in these poynts of their bookes, but whether they were deceiued or not, he referreth to God. To the last he sayth, that when the case shall happen, hee must then take counsel what were best for him to doe. Luke Kirby. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. Iohn Hammond. Thomas Cottoms Answere. THomas Cottō. To ye first, in this & al other questions he beleeueth as the Catholique church (which he taketh to be the church of Rome) teacheth him. And other answere hee maketh not, to any of the rest of these articles. Byme Thomas Cottom Priest. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. Iohn Hammond.
Lawrence Richardsons Answere. LAwrence Richardson. To the fifth article hee answereth, that so farre as Doctour Saunders and Doctour Bristowe agree with the Catholique doctrine of the church of Rome, hee alloweth that doctrine to be true. And touching the first, and all the rest of the ar∣ticles hee sayth, that in all matters not repug∣nant to the Catholique religion, hee professeth obedience to her Maiestie, and otherwise ma∣keth no answere to any of them, but beleeueth therein as hee is taught by the Catholique church of Rome. Lawrence Richardson. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. Iohn Hammond. Thomas Fordes Answere. THomas Ford. To the first he saith, yt he can∣not answere, because he is not priuy to the circumstances of that Bull, but if he did see a Bul published by Gregory the thirteenth, hee would then deliuer his opinion thereof. To the second hee saith, that the Pope hath authoritie to depose a prince vpon certaine oc∣casions: and when such a Bul shalbe pronoun∣ced against her Maiestie, he will then answere what the duety of her subiects, and what her right is.
To the third he saith, he is a priuate subiect, and wil not answere to any of these questions. To the fourth hee sayth, that the Pope hath authoritie vpon certaine occasions (which he wil not name) to discharge subiects of their o∣bedience to their Prince. To the fifth he saieth, that Doctour Saun∣ders, and Doctour Bristowe, bee learned men, and whether they haue taught truely in their bookes mentioned in this article, hee referreth the answere to them selues, for him selfe wil not answere. To the last he sayth, that when that case shal happen, he wil make answere, and not before. Thomas Forde. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. Iohn Hammond. Iohn Sherts answere. IOhn Shert. To all the articles he saith, that he is a Catholique, and swarueth in no poynt from the Catholique faith, and in other sort to any of these articles he refuseth to answere. Iohn Shert. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. John Hammond.
Robert Iohnsons Answere. RObert Iohnson. To the first he saith, he can not answere. To the second, he cānot tel what power or authoritie the Pope hath in the poynts named in this article. To the third, he thinketh that the Pope hath authoritie in some cases, to authorize subiects to take Armes against their Prince. To the fourth, he thinketh that the Pope for some causes, may discharge subiects of their al∣legiance and obedience to their natural Prince. To the fifth he saith, the answere to this arti∣cle dependeth vpon the lawfulnesse of the cause for the which the Pope hath giuen sentence a∣gainst her: but if the cause was iust, then hee thinketh the doctrine of Doctour Saunders, and Doctour Bristow to be true. Whether the cause were iust, or not, hee taketh not vpon him to iudge. To the last, he saith, that if such depriuation and inuasion should be made for temporal mat∣ter, he would take part with her Maiestie: but if it were for any matter of his faith, he thin∣keth hee were then bounde to take part with the Pope. Robert Iohnson. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. John Hammond.
Iohn Harts answere. IOhn Hart. To the first he saith, that it is a dif∣ficult question, and that he cannot make an∣swere thereto. To the second hee saith, that her Maiestie is lawful Queene, and ought to be obeyed, not∣withstanding the Bul supposed to be published by Pius quintus. But whether she ought to be obeyed and taken for lawful Queene, notwith∣standing any Bull or sentence that the Pope can giue, he saith he can not answere. To the third he cannot answere, and fur∣ther saith, that he wil not meddle with any such questions. To the fourth he saith, he is not resolued, and therefore he can not answere. To the fifth he saith, he wil not deale with a∣ny such questions, and knoweth not whether Saunders and Bristowe haue taught wel herein or not. To the last hee saith, that when such a case shall happen, hee wil then aduise what becom∣meth him to do, for presently he is not resolued. This hee did acknowledge to vs, after hee had fully perused the same, but refused to sub∣scribe to it. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. Iohn Hammond.
William Filbee his answere. WIlliam Filbee. To the first he saith, the Pope hath authoritie to depose any prince: and such sentences when they bee promulgated ought to be obeyed by the sub∣iects of any prince: but touching the Bul of Pius quintus he can say nothing, but if it was such as it is affirmed to be, he doth allow it, & saith that it ought to be obeyed. To the second he saith, it is an hard question, and therefore he can not answere it, but vpon further aduisement, hee answereth as to the first. To the third, he knoweth not what to saye thereunto. To the fourth hee sayth, that so long as her Maiestie remayneth Queene, the Pope hath no authoritie to warrant her subietts to take armes against her, or to disobey her, but if he should depose her, then hee might discharge them of their allegence and obedience to her Maiestie. To the fifth he sayth, he will not meddle with the doctrine of Doctour Saunders and Doctour Bristowe. To the last, when this case happeneth, then hee saith hee will answere: and if he had bene in Ireland, when Doctour Saunders was there, hee woulde haue done as a priest should haue done, that is, to pray that the right
may haue place. William Filbee. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. Iohn Hammond. Iames Bosgraue his answere. IAmes Bosgraue. To the first he sayeth, that in his conscience and as hee shall answere before God, hee thinketh that the bull or sentence of excommunication of Pius quintus against her Maiestie, was at no time lawfull, neyther was at any time or is of any of her Maiesties sub∣iects to be obeyed. To the second he sayeth, that her Maiestie is lawfull Queene of this Realme, and so ought to be takn, notwithstanding any bull or sen∣tence that the Pope eyther hath, can, or shall hereafter giue. To the third, he thinketh the Pope had no power or authoritie, to license the Earles of Northumberland and Westmerlande or any other of her Maiesties subiectes, to rebel or to take armes against her Maiestie: and like hee saith of Doctour Saunders: but hee holdeth both Doctour Saunders and all other that shal vpon such warrant take armes against her Maiestie, to bee traytors and rebelles. To the fourth hee sayeth, that the Pope nei∣ther
hath, nor ought to haue any authoritie, to discharge any of her Maiesties subiects, or the subiects of any other Christian prince from their allegiance, for any cause whatsoeuer, and so he thinketh in his conscience. To the fifth hee affirmeth in his conscience, that Doctour Sanders, and Doctour Bristowe, in the bookes here mentioned, and touching the poynt here specified, haue taught, testified and mainteined an vntrueth and a falshode. To the last he sayth, that whatsoeuer the Pope should doe, he would in this case take part with her Maiestie against the Pope, what cause soeuer he would pretend, and this he ta∣keth to be the duetie of euery good subiect. And this to bee his opinion in all the pointes aboue recited, he wil be ready to affirme vpon his oth. Iames Bosgraue. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. Iohn Hammōd. Henry Ortons answere. HEnry Orton. To the first, he sayth that he thinketh the Bull of Pius quintus was at no time a lawfull sentence or of force, to binde any of her Maiesties subiects, and that notwithstanding, her Maiestie was, and is to be obeyed by euery of her subiects.
To the second, he thinketh that her Maie∣stie is to be holden for lawfull Queene of this Realme, and ought to be obeyed by all her sub∣iects, notwithstanding any thing that ye Pope eyther hath done, or can doe. To the third, he thinketh the Pope neither hath, nor had authoritie to warrant any of the persons here named, to doe as they haue done, or any other of her subiects, to take Armes a∣gainst her Maiestie, and that those which haue taken Armes against her vpon that or the like warrant, haue done vnlawfully. To the fourth, he thinketh the Pope hath no authoritie to discharge any subiect, from his al∣legiance and obedience to his Prince. To the fifth, he thinketh that D. Saunders, & D. Bristowe haue in the poyntes mentioned in this Article, taught and maintayned an vn∣trueth and a falshood. To the last he sayth, that in the case here sup∣posed, he would take part with her Maiestie against the Pope, or any other inuading the Realme by his authoritie. Henry Orton. Iohn Popham. Thomas Egerton. Da. Lewes. Iohn Hammond.
❧Imprinted at Lon∣don by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie.
