5195 S117729 99852939 18294
¶ A CAVEAT for the Christians a∣gaynst the Arch∣papist. Ioh, iii. This is the condemnation, that lyght is come into the worlde, and men loued dar∣kenes more then lyghte, be¦cause their dedes wer euyl. Mat. xvi. Take hede and beware of the leuen of the Pharises. 1548 illustrated border
O Englyshe men, that runne so well, let no man you forspeake. For God (no doubt) shall iudge the man, that you to stop shal seke. Temper your selfes,1. Cor. 14. than runne the race, that ye may wyn ye crown. And not the crown ye perissheth, but that shall neuer downe.
¶ An admonition for all Christi∣ans to beware of the Pharisaicall le∣uen, of the Archepapist,Hereis not half his worthy style. the gloriouse Hipocrite the subtile Sophester, and the fraudulent coū trefeyctour of Gods holy worde: Where the absurditee of his late abused termes of Con∣secratinge himselfe in remembraunce of himselfe is merely well refelled, confuted and audyded: And at the last the selfe wor∣des (thorowe the conference of ton∣gues) restored to these olde sin∣cere and trewe meanynge. SVrely good Christiā bre∣ther I can do no lesse of Christiā cha∣ritie thā toad monishe you of a certayne notable Papist who (accordyng to hys accustomed maner) dyd priue∣ly truste in to a greate lump of dowe euen a lytle leuen but truely no lesse than leuened the whole doughe. The confection and ma∣kynge of the leuen was after thys
sorte, Consecrating himself in remem∣braunce of him self. Nowe you maye¦se the leuen is a very lytle pece in quantitee but yet veray greate in qualitte (I meane of sowernes. For it was digged vp of the slimy pyttes of mannes doctrine, and seasoned not wyth the water of life but with very poddel water which hath bene so long kepte in the Po∣peg fylthye cesternes that nowe it stynketh agayne, not in the Pa∣pistes noseg (who haue euer be brought vp with it, and haue sea∣soned euen their mooste delycate wafrons therwith) but in the chri∣stians sense that lyue on the newe water of the welsprynge that so swetely sauoureth of Christ. Ther∣fore (I save) let vs with all ende∣uour go about to auoyde thys vn sauerye leauen, for it is nothynge worth but to be eiecte and cast out and troden downe of men vnder∣foote.
For it hathe in it no whit of the salt of trew wysedome, but al∣together smellyng of carnall wit, worldely inuention, and deuely she imaginacion. Pourge therfore the olde leuen, that ye maye be newe dowe, as ye are swete breade. But I praye you where shall a manne fynde suche wordes or any equiua lent to those leuenouse woordes of his, among all ye wordes of Christ spoken at his last supper: And ve∣rely I would neuer haue thought that a man beyng no lesse polityke than learned woulde so pertly and so portely, so openly and so opini∣ously vtter his Phransye and dis∣close either his heresie or ignorācie after suche sort as he dyd, and that before the chiefe in earthe of Chri∣stes churche, and before the eyes & wysedome of al the wholeroialme. But yet I praye you holde the mā¦cxcused for he nedes muste so do,
els his perled mytre shulde haue maxed lyke a Christenmans cap: his pontifical maiestie shuld haue bene more ministerlyke, his holye crochear must haue be more shepe∣hoke lyke. Els the God of the Al∣tare shulde be remetamorphosed, vniuggled, and vnconiured again into a wafron cake: The Iewyshe stony alter shulde haue no longer stande in stede. The leuiticall dys∣guysed vestimentes with the Re∣liques of the Hopysh churches ce∣remonies, shulde cleane haue vani¦shed away, and the whole flocke of popyshe secre (of whom he was the chiefe and surest leanynge post) shulde haue fall down into a dead¦ly swone: and all Eardiners garde shulde neuer be regarded. But yet I say I woulde neuer haue expec∣ted suche newe founde termes to haue gushed out at his mouth be∣yng a man no lesse ware, than wy∣ly,
no lesse wyly, than circomspecte, no lesse circomspecte than worldly wyse: Sauinge onelye the sacred Scripture muste be true, and ne∣des muste be fulfylled which sai∣eth. I will destroye the wis∣dome of the wyse / and wil¦cast a way the vnderstan∣dyng of the prudent.Esa. xxix. Therfore let vs geue thankes with oure Lorde Iesu vnto God the father, that he hath hyd his de∣uine inisteries from the wyse and sheweth them vnto babes: verelye we se nowe that it so pleaseth hys moost druine maiestee. But to you master Craftye (and pleaseth your consecration) me thynketh ye were a lytle to folyshe hardy to bragge out your self before so couragious a Lyon who could dasihe, quayle,
& hwisht al your bragginges with the lest rorynge of his mouth.Prou. 20. Me thynketh, ye toke a lytle to muche payne, to go about to cast dust in∣to suche mens eyes as there were: for they cold clearely forse whether tended your dusty endeuour wyth out any forayn spectacles. O syg (I am sorye for youre chaunce) ye were a lytle ouer sene that ye woulde playe the Sophe∣ster so kyndly, before so many per∣fect Logicians (as there were) who colde espie out your solemne sub∣tile sophesmes, and entryp you at their wyll and pleasure. But you knewe well ynough that ye shoulde not be disputed nor reso∣ned wyth all, nor yet interrupted for ye while, and that by lyke made you so bolde to lashe out what so∣euer came vpon your tonges ende. But syra shall I be sorye or you and the Papistes that ye spente so
vaynely your Rhetorical colours? for there were in that Auditorye to greate a nombre that coulde es∣pye thorowe (for all youre freshe colours and darke shadowynges) the rotten postes of the Romyshe churche. But I promyse you mayster Sophester and ye hadde besto∣wed the saine goodly ambiguouse sermon of yours, in anye place elles in Englande (bothe the Vni∣uersities excepted) you shoulde haue lefte youre audyence in a greate doubte whether ye were an Archepapiste or a microchri∣stian, and whether ye lesse fa∣uoured mannes lawe or Goddes lawe. But in deade ye semed than, rather to kepe youre selfe wyth∣in the prescripte boundes of man∣nes lawe, than to leane to the sure postes of Goddes lawe.
Yea it was wyttyly done of you to kepe you styl with in the reache of youre cauell, for thence you mought safely snarre and snatche at whom you woulde, if they dyd myslyke your lordshyppe: But I trust you wyll saue one, yf mans pollecie can preuayle. But alas I am sorye that deade mens boues (I do not meane. Barnes moare than others) are nowe sene in your whyted sepulchre: Yet I praye God (and his pleaser be not ye con∣trarye) to auerte the vengeange of Saynetes prayers from you,Apoea. 6. and to directe yet your harte to cleaue to the immaculate lawe of the Lorde, & receyue the head cor∣ner stone into your buyldynge. I praye God euen hartely to make you a new Christian brother, of an old papistical Saul: I pray God that we maye haue iust occasiō to prayse God of youre godly cōuer∣sion.
And I pray God that ye haue not the power to play the .ii. pyked staffe no more. For ye haue dalyed to long, ye haue dissimuled to lōg, ye haue haulted on both sydes to long: I pray God that you maye yet remembre the cōmen prouerbe that affirmeth euer to be better than neuer: yet may you be Paul, yf Christ wyll. And I praye you to be no more offended with thys my wrytyng than ye woulde haue me to be offended with youre ser∣mon: I forgiue you on my parte and I pray God forgeue you also: & I pray you to do lykewyse vnto me. For surely if ye be so wise a mā as ye are estemed, ye woll rather couet to loke in a trew glasse, than in a flatteryng myrrour: But tho∣row your good pacience I muste go about to pourge out that same lytle leauen that you hyd of late purposely in ye dowghy lumpe of
your pharasaicall sermon. Why do not you yourselfe knowe (but euery Christian knoweth) that it is a sower leuenouse doctrine to alter the institution fo the Lordes supper? And you knewe wel y∣nough that all papistes and al the vnlearned people take this worde (consecratinge) for transubstantia∣tyng, changing, or alteryng of the sacramental bread and wyne into the very natural bodye of Christe (and as they call it) fleshe bloude and bone: But I praye you was this well done of you? or where foūde you ye worde (Consecrating) of yours. But I am sure ye wyll say that it counteruaileth benedixit whiche signifieth also in Englysh (he blessed.) Wel I wyl graunt al that: but why than dyd you wrest the blessynge into consecration? Mary bicause it was a more glad some euangeli for your disciples &
a more to the some swillig for your hoggy she Massers: but (thākes be to ye lord) ye triumph was but short and the banket but a dreame. But paraduenture you wyl relent som what, and yelde so far (by cause ye can donone other) as to forgo this worde Consecratynge, so that ye maye haue blessynge for it: Than ye wil procede and say that (he bles∣sed hymselfe) whiche (after youre mynde) is all one in effecte, as the Euangelist, had said he consecrated hymselfe: why than be it so, for a whyle yet. But than from whence conueyed you in, that worde (him∣selfe) for there is no suche woorde in ye texte: but thā wil you straight way say there is panis breade in the texte: That do I graunte also neuērthelesse you spell to wel, and put to gether to fast, if that ye wyl saye (he blessed the bread). I praye you of whence haue you ye woorde
(he blessed) Mary of benedixit but I pray you farther (by cause ye be learned in the tongues) tel me yet of whence had you that benedixit? you wyll say of eulogese the Greke worde whiche betokeneth in En∣gloshe he blessed, he praysed, or he spake wel of. Wel in so much, that you tolde me what answered to benedixit in the Greke texte: I wyl lykewyse tell you what answereth to it in the Hebrue. For I am as∣sured, ye wil not denye but Mat∣thew wrote his Gospell in he∣brewe: And wryteth ueieuarech for et benedirit and he blessed. How be it the Hebrue verbe barech betoke neth as wel and as indifferentlye (gratias egit) he, gaue thankes, as he blessed: whā that soeuer ye place may suffre to be so vnderstande: And I praye you what place els in the whole scripture may better suffer yea or rather dothe require
barech, to signifie to geue thankes more than this same place dothe I praye you was not euen ye same Iesus Christ before this tyme of his laste supper, accustomed to geue thankes vnto his heauenly father at receyuyng of his bodely sustenaunce or not? you woll par∣aduenture say nay: No, but than on what shall we grounde oure godly custome of saying Grace or geuyng thankes vnto God, at meate tyme? It semeth to me that that laudable and godly ceremo∣uye (as an imitacion of Christes owne maner) came vp, emong the Christians euen from his tyme. For the Euangelist Matthew in the .rxvi. cap, sayeth Wcheshamer weth-tehillah, that is: whan they had sayde prayse, whā they said grace, or whan they had geuen thākes: erge, there were more than Christe hymselfe: And who shoulde, they
be but ye Apostles whiche (as it be cōeth a disciple) folowed their ma∣sters trade, & so successiuely ye chri∣stians accustomed thēselfes after ye maner vntyll this day. Yee but thā wil you say ye ther be .ii. kynd of Graces, one sayde after meate named Gratias actiorū a thankes geuyng: and an other sayd before meate called Consecratio mense the consecration of the table, the bles∣syng or halwyng of ye meat. Now by all halowes it passeth my brai∣nes to auoide thys blyssynge and halowyng of yours, onles I ha∣lowe out on the Angell of heauen who (and you will accepte it) shall answer you with the same wordes as he spake to Peter whā he was of your opinion, his wordes were these: what God hath clensed call not thou comun or vncleane. To the which Sainct Paule subscri∣beth on this wyse:
All the treatures of God are good:1. Tim. iiii Than yf all maner of fourfoted beastes of the earth, and vermen,Actuū .x. and wormes, and foules of the ayer be cleane: And yf all the crea∣tures of God be good, what neade thei than so muche of our blessing and halowyng? but we oughte in very dede to render most hyghest thankes vnto God for his boun∣teouse lyberalitee of his creatures whom we haue the fruitiō not on∣ly in our dayly fode but in the rest of our sustentatiō. Agayne Mat∣thew writeth in the .xv. chapter of his gospell. That Christ toke se∣uen loues in his handes and seuē fyshes & gaue thankes: But here the Euangelyste ded not vse uaie∣barech (whiche you expounde al∣ways he blyssed) but uaiomer todha which is after the hebrue phrase)
and sayeng knowledge, (and after the Englyshe speache) & he gaue thankes: But paraduenture you wyll englyshe it, that he was con∣fessed than, or sayd his confiteor. But what should I make so ma∣ny wordes of the hebrue phrase of barech? for haue not we borowed ye same phrase of the Hebrues and do euen vse it right well in the cō∣men speache whan we speake on this sorte: Nowe we haue dyned blessed be God, or thus: My Lord Protectors grace hath had a faire day on our enemyes (blessed be God) and sende vs styll scoch ne∣wes. And what do we meane by this (blessed be God) but thankes be geuen vnto God for his benefi∣tes that he vouch saued to bestow theym on vs that so vnworthely haue deserued them at his hand? And therefore we can do no lesse at the rehersal of so many benefi∣tes
(seyng we acknowledge that that we receyued them al together of him) as it wer in a recompence but saye, blessed be God, or thāked be God, which is all one effecte, sauing the one is the phrase of the Hebrues, and the other the verye englyshe phrase. And after this maner is the woorde (blissed) take in the .xlvii. chapter of: Genesis: wheare it is wrytten: Ioseph brought in / Ia∣cob his father & set him before Pharao: and bles∣sed Pharao. which was as who say in english, he thanked Pharao for so manye benefites shewed vnto his father. Lyke wyse is it most euident that (blesse) must be taken for geuyng thankes in ye Psalm. C.iii. whiche begynneth. Blesse the lorde (O my
soule) and al that is with in me / blesse his holy na∣me. Blesse the Lorde O my soule / and forget not all his benefits. whiche forgeueth all thy synnes / and healeth al thyne in∣firmites. Whiche saueth thy lyfe from destructiō / and crownethe the with mercy & louing kyndnes. whiche satisfieth thy de∣sire with good thinges / makynge the yonge and lusty as an Egle. &c. Wo therfore be to al the wresters of the worde of God. And twyse wo vnto him ye purposelye depra∣ueth the same. I praye you why woulde you not call the woordes
of consecration, ye wordes of christifi eng? or the wordes of creatyng of Christ? or ye wordes yt make christ a new? No, no: ye wer wyser thā so for than dame Hypocrisye coulde neuer so smothely haue crepte in, nor so manye hundreth yeares haue continued. And euen lyke sleyght ye practysed whan ye vsed ye straunge vocable Exorcizo te: for coniuro te, I coniure the &c. for we shoulde neuer haue strayed so far (the coniuryng terme knowen) as to say. A qua benedicta sit nobis salus et uita. The holy water be oure health and lyfe. Alas alas what seas of myschiefes haue we runne headlyng into by reason of youre straunge termes? whiche yf I should prosecute to reherse one by one I shoulde rather be tediouse vnto the reader than perswade you to take your penne & to wryte for to redresse ye same. Such stiffe
obstinacie (the more to be pytyed) is so euidetly seene in you. I pray God yet of his tender clemencye to souple a lytle ye Pharao hard∣nes of your flynty harte. But a∣way than with your papistical cō secratyng: away with your hypo∣critical Necromancia & coniuryng? Away with al such couloured ho∣lynes: God can not be mocked.Galat. vt. Therfore it wyl not preuayle you to prattle to hym saycnge. Lorde Lorde haue not we prophecied in thy na∣me: haue not we cast out deuiles thorow thi name? And done many mira∣cles thorow thy name? For than wyll he answere you, euē thus: For all youre phantasticall preachynge for all your holy con∣secratyng and for all youre colou∣red
cuniuryng. I neuer knew you departe from me, ye that worke in∣iquitie. But how long wyll you de voyde of the Lordes feare-how long wyll you defye hys louynge kyndnes? And how long wyll you abuse his most holi word? But yet take hede, take bede, in the meane whyle, lest an euil sprite saye vnto you Iesus I knowe & Paule I know: but who are ye? And with that (for deprauynge of their woordes) haue power to runne on you and wounde you. But to returne to the propose. Nowe paraduenture for all this spelling of the mater, the papistes be scant yet wholy resolued: wher∣fore we must diuine by what mea∣nes Christe woordes at his laste supper, began to be called, nerba consecrationis the workes of conse∣cration:
And I saye they mought wel be called so yf thei wer vnder∣stande, ment, and construed, after the true meanyng of the Hebrue speach, that is: uerba consecrationis .i. uerba cōsecrata hoc est uerba sacra: the sacred words: And So ought all the woordes of the holy scrip∣ture be named, as well as they. But now to confirme that the he∣brues vsed suche maner of speach neadeth no probacion: But yet, for their sake that be not much cō ucrsant in readynge of the holye scripture (which euery wher is euē ful of suche phr ases (we wyl adde an example or two: Math. xxiiii. Whan ye shall se the abo∣mination of desolation. Whiche shulde be englyshed whan ye shall se the abhominable desolacion. And after the maner of the same language spake Paule
(thoughe he wrote in an other tongue) to the Romaynes. cap. vii. O wretched man that I am (sayeth he) who shall delyuer me from this bo∣dy of death: That is frome thys deadlye or mortall body. So Dauid hath in the fyrst verse of the .xv. Psalme. Lorde who shalbe recei∣ned into thy pauilyon: or who shall dwell in the mountayne of thy holy∣nesse. Wher the Englyshe tongue woulde requyre it to be translated, in thy holye mountayne. But yet in as moche as euery mā (for whose behofe the holye scrip∣ture is indifferently wrytten and
preāched) doth not vnderstand the same Hebrew phrase: let vs no more chop & change with speches: Let vs no more make ye vocables and termes of the hyghe mysteries of our Religion more mysticall & and confuse than Christe hymsel e∣uer made theim. Let vs neyther adde nor take ought awaye frome the worde of God, lest we shalbe ac¦cursed not of the Pope (whiche is not wont to accurse for suche mat∣tiers) but of GOD. Therefore I praye you for the reuerence that ye owe vnto the trueth (I meane) vn∣to Iesus Christ the verye truethe, that ye wyll no longer vsurpe nor practice the darke termes and (as they be comenly taken) wicked, the termes I say of consecratynge, (or as (you commenly call theym) the wordes of consecration. I praye you euen for Iesus Christes sake to forgo suche popyshe termynge.
And call theym whan neade shall requyre to talke of theym) whether soeuer ye will, the holy woordes, or the woordes of holy scripture. And if ye must neade yet a whyle name theym by a diffuse and a straunge terme, call theym the Sacred wor∣des: and I am assured ye maye a∣waye wyth Sacred because he se∣meth to be nere of kinne to maister Sacryng your good lorde. The Popes owne derely beloued coun∣trey papistes who made and sette fourth of late the Romyshe Con∣stitutions (called for the meane sea¦sone) were euen ashamed to vsurpe any longer the termes of verba con∣cecrationis in their booke,Called Interim. but the same haue they (as it were) abholy∣shed & abrogated namynge theym by a newe terme, but more tollera∣ble & lesse odible to christē mens ea¦res. Yet are not these popish priest∣lynges nothing abashed to terme
Christes wordes as they wil them selfes. Therfore O ye al godli prie stes yt pretende to be of Christs con¦gregaciō, do away such fonde ter∣mes: Play no more the popish prie stes wt so many external blessing & crossing, & wt your outwarde was∣syng & shauyng. Cesse of your mū∣bling of straūgelangages before ye congregaciō. Play no more (I sai) Aarons priestes wt your dedicated tēples, with seuered chaūcels, with your carnal frequented sacrifices: wt your prescrpition of vestures, of time, of meates, of fasting, & fasting dayes,Hebre. x. for these wer but shadowes of good thinges to come whiche be also come already: the cloudi night is past ye gladsom dai is sprong,Iohn. xii. let vs walke in ye lyght while we haue ye lyght among vs, lest ye darknesse come on vs. For he yt walketh ī dar¦nes, woteth not whether he goeth. And while we haue light, let vs be¦leue
in the lighte, that we maye be chyldren of lyght. And this is the condempnation that after the lyght hath come into the worlde men haue yet styll lo∣ued darkenes rather than lyghte. We be past chyldehod, away than wyth childish phantasyes. For the houre, commeth and now is,Iohn. iiii. whan the true worshippers worshipp the father in spirite, and in truth. For he as a sprete: and therefore loueth he no carnal thynges, nor outward thynges, but spirituall thynges, and inwarde thinges. Therfore al you that be called and chosen to be the ministers of Christe, and the Stewardes of hys secrets:1. Cor. iiii. whan you shall ministre the Lordes sup¦per, you may teherse and alledge Christes holy woordes vnto them after this maner: Good Christen brethren this godly Institucion of eatynge the Lordes supper: came
not vp at the fyrst of mannes inuē¦tion, nor was not maintened bymā¦nes pollicie nor continued so many yeares (as diuerse other blynde ce∣temoniall customes dyd) withoute playne auctoritie of GODS mooste holy worde. Therfore dare not I no more than Saynt Paul (for feare of beinge founde an vn∣faytheful stewarde, and a counter∣fayte executour of the Lordes new Testament and last wyll) alledge and bryng in, for thastablyshment of receyuyng this moost comforta¦ble supper, any wordes ymagined of mannes braynes, (appeare ne∣uer so eloquent, neuer so holylyke, or neuer so gloriouse) but euen the veray pure and holy woordes spo∣ken of Christe himselfe, (the same nyghte that he was betrayed) and afterward most faythfully wryten by his owne disciples & our Euan∣gelistes: and nowe at the laste (by
GODS grace) by me pronoun∣ced worde for woorde as the texte of the Lorde Iesus Christes newe Testament declareth theym: Ther¦fore good Christians, lyft vp your hartes to Godwarde, that ye maye heare his holye woordes wyth the eare of faythe: and that you maye take them for the stedfast ground-werke of your buyldyng, for the o∣riginall auctoritie, for the trew re∣port, the directe lyne yt iust squiere, the vndeceyuable compasse and ye verye lymites of the true vnder∣standynge and sincere meanynge of the effectualll signification of eatyng the Lordes supper. But hearken nowe to the holy wordes of the auctoritie, whiche ye shall fynde wrytten in the .xxvi. chapter of Matthewe, the .xiiii. of Marke: the .xxii. of Luke, the .vi. of Iohn and in the eleuenth chap∣ter of ye first epistle to ye Corinthi,
And as they dyd eate / Iesus toke bread: & whā he had geuen thankes he brake it / & gaue it to the disciples / & sayd: Take / eate / thys is my bodye / whiche is geuen for you. This do / in the remem∣braunce of me. Lykewise also whā he had supped / he toke the cuppe & than∣ked / sayeng: drynke ye all of this. For this cup is the new testament in my bloude / whiche is shedde for many / for the remissiō of synnes. Verely I saye vnto you I wil drinke no more of the frute of the
vyne tree: vntill that day I drynke it newe in the kyngdome of God. Vere∣ly verely he that putteth his trust in me / hathe e∣uerlastinge life. I am that bread of life / whiche came doune from heauē: If any man eate of thys bread he shal not die / but shall haue life for euer. And the breade that I wyll geue / is my fleshe / whiche I wil geue for the lyfe of the world. Verely verely I saye vnto you / excepte ye eate the fleshe of the sonne of man / and drinke his bloud / ye haue
no life in you. whosoeuer eateth my fleshe / & dryn∣keth my bloud / hath eter¦nall lyfe / and I wil rayse hym vp at the last day. For my fleshe is meate in dede / and my bloud is drinke in dede: He that eateth my fleshe / & dryn∣keth my bloud / dwelleth in me / & I in him. Doeth this offende you? What & if ye se the sonne of man ascende vp thether wher he was before? It is the sprete that quickeneth / the fleshe profyteth no∣thyng. The wordes that I speke vnto you / are spi∣rite
and lyfe. But there are some of you / that be∣leue not. Hetherto haue I rehersed vnto you the veray wordes of ye Lorde, as for moost infallible principles of the chyefe Authore of ye Christi∣ans doctrine: as a veray testimo∣niall of his inestimable loue to∣warde mankynde: and as ye wor∣des of C̄hristes cōmission wherby we dare enterpryse to approche to the Lordes table, and there to eate the Lordes body as it was crucy∣fied on the crosse: and drynke his veray bloud ye was shed for oure redemption who wer borne by na∣ture the children of wrath and his veray enemyes. This must we do for the remembraunce of his most beneficial death: and neuer ceasse vntyll the Lorde come. For there is not a more odiouse, nor so hate∣full
a thyng: eyther vnto God or man, as the vice of ingratitude & beastely vnkyndnes which is no∣thing els but the forgetfulnes of benefits employed? & the vnthan∣kefulnes for good tournes vnde∣seruedly shewed. And as he that yet bāketeth being not an hōgred hapneth some tyme to take surfet vntyll the death of his body: Euē so he that eateth this supper not dryuen to with spirituall hongre taketh deadely surfet of his soule And contraryly as ye bodely meat eaten of our hongry stomackes is sone disgested and norysheth our bodyes: so the fleshe and bloud of Christ eatē of vs with a spirituall hongry desier norysheth our sou∣les into euerlastyng lyfe. Amen. Here haue I treacted somwhat largier of the Lordes supper than I had entended, for I proposed nothynge els but to touche a lytle
euen superficially of the termes yt wer so impudently and vnshame∣fastly abused of the Archepapist, which termes ye preacher at Pau∣les Crosse (as I heard saye) pre∣termitted to speake of, though he (questionles) ful entierly & pyth∣thely handled and confoūded the rest of his sermon. But by like ey∣ther the prescription of the accu∣stomed tyme beynge scarce for to repete in, the whole rablemente of that papistical sermon & the same vtterly to cōfute: either els ye chil∣dyshe and vnlerned rudenes of ye sayde termes made hym (as he is verely a mā so highly learned) ra∣ther to wynke at theim, & neglect theim, than vnworthely to spende any tyme in disputyng aboute so grosse, so playne, and so tryflynge a matter. Therfore I praye God sende vs lesse acquayntance with suche preachers as the fourther
was: and more familiaritee with al those that be of that christian crudition and godlye conuersacion as the later was Amen. FINIS. O ye folyshe Galathi∣ans / who hathbe witched yon / that ye shuld not be∣leue the trueth:Gala. 3.5. ye ranne wel / who was a let vnto you / that ye shulde not o∣bey the trueth: Suche coūsell is not of him that called you. A lytel leuen sowreth the wholelompe of dowe. I haue truste to∣warde the Lorde that ye
wylbe none otherwise min¦ded. But he that trou∣bleth you shall beare hys iudgement / what so euer he be. Whatsoeuer thynges are wrytten afore tyme / they are writen for oure learnyng.Rome .xv. Beware of false prophe∣tes / whiche come to you in shepes clothing / but in wardli they are rauening wolues. Ye shall knowe theym by their fruites. ¶ Imprynted at London in Foster lane by Iohn Wally.
