5197 S109838 99845482 10387
THE ESTATE OF CHRISTIANS, liuing vnder the subiection of the Turke. And also the warres betweene the Christians and the Turke, be∣ginning 1592. and con∣tinuing till the end of 1593. printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed by IOHN WOLFE. 1595.
The estate of Christians, liuing vnder the subiection of the great Turke. DIuers Countries and Nations are in sub∣iection of the Turke, and among the rest, all Greece, saue a ve∣rie little parte of it, which is vnder the Segnorie of Venice: insomuch that there be many thousandes of Christians subiect to Turkish tyrannie. Where∣of euen the best and greatest are oppressed with great toules and taxes, and pestered with infinit ex∣tortions and paimentes yeerely. All the male chil∣dren of Christians are written vp at the day of their birth, and comming to ten or twelue yeres of their age, are presented to the Turkes officers, who take all such as they finde well made, and like to proue fit men for seruice in warre, from their parents, and conuey them to the Turkes, to bee brought vp in warlike exercises, and to become Turkes, and ene∣mies
to God, and their owne fathers and mothers, and kinsfolke, standing the Turke in more sted than his own naturall people. And for each one of them that the Turks officers leaue at home, not thinking them fit for their turns, must be paid yerely as good as eight shillinges English, by their parentes, howe poore so euer they be, for they must find it or smart for it. If anie christian chance in anger or hastines, (as who is so patient as not to be moued beeing so stinged) hauing receiued wrong, do strike a Turke, he is sure to be so punished, that if he doo liue after, he liueth to lament his life, & to wish death. When the Turkes officers come to anie Christians house when they go in progresse, and make their visitati∣ons, there must be great store of cheere, and much cost prouided to welcome them withall, or they wil be but ill come to the christians that they come vnto. If anie Christian releeue, or giue anie succor, aide or assistance to another Christian fugitiue, he is taken prisoner, & besides the losse of all his goods and possessions, kept in extreame miserie, and most barbarouslie handled till he paie for his ransome as much as they shall appoint. Neither wil the Turks oftentimes be brought to release them for any ran∣some, but after a thousand martirdomes wrought vpon them, they put them to death. Their punish∣ments are diuerse, some Christians are tied hand & foote, and laide on the ground, with a stone almost of insupportable waight on their backes. Others are put in gallies, where they be galled in deed and vsed most doggedly. Others they tie hand & foote
and laie them on their backes, and let a long rag of cipres or fine linnen dipped in pickle or salt water, sinke by little and litle into their throats, till it reach downe to their stomackes, and then they plucke it out againe, and so put the poore Christians to vn∣speakable paine and torment, When the Turkes haue taken anie Citie or forte of the Christians, or haue ouercome any great armie, they lead all them that they put not most cruelly to the swoorde, into most lamentable captiuity, tormenting them in the foresaid manner, and inflicting a thousand woorse martirdomes vpon them, which I will omit, they requiring a longer discourse: & I will rather praie vnto Almightie God to haue mercie vpon vs, and to defend all good people from the like afflictions. And howbeit that it pleaseth his diuine maiestie to punish our wickednesse with such temporall tor∣ments, yet that of his gracious mercifulnes he wold not suffer so many poore innocent children, being carryed awaie by force to me their fathers offences by loosing their souls: with which cost many chri∣stians besides are dangerously menaced, being part¦ly mis-lead by the vanitie of Turkish pompe and pride entising them, and partly oppressed with po∣uertie and miserie, constraining them to forsake the true fountaine of life, to drinke of the puddle of in∣fidelitie and paganisme, therfore to abide euerlast∣ing thirst. Wherefore we are bounden to pray vn∣to Almightie God, to turne awaie so much harme from his people, & not only to keep them perpetu∣ally in the way of the truth, that are alredy brought
vnto it, but also so to lighten the heartes and vnder∣standing of the blinded, that seeing the light of the Gospell, they may imbrace it, and know that with∣out the cleere Sunne-shine of the same all light is but darknesse. A praier vnto GOD for the peace of Christendome, to defend and preserue it from Tur∣kish inuasion, to the destruction & ouer∣throw of all Infidels. O God Almightie and most merci∣cifull Father, whose power and greatnes is knowen vnto all men, and whose glorie shineth most brightly ouer the whole face of the earth, as the beams of the Sun from the East to the West, cast down the eies of thy soueraigne mercie on vs poore wretched sinners, & howbeit we haue by our manifolde wickednesses deserued not onely temporall punishment, but also euerlasting damnatiō, yet we beseech thee ô Lord, not to regard our innumerable offences, as in num∣ber, so also exceeding in greatnes and hainousnes, but to bestowe on vs thy most gracious and merci∣full pardon, considering that our onely mediatour and thy onely beloued sonne Iesus Christ hath re∣deemed vs with his most precious bloud, & made satisfaction by that most acceptable sacrifice for all our sinnes & offences. Grant vs therefore thy peace O Lord, and poure downe from heauen on Chri∣stian
Princes and the rulers of thy people, thy grace to embrace concord and vnitie, that they being by thee inspired with wisedome and heauenly coun∣sels, may so gouern the people and maintaine their callinges, that all may bee surely defended from Turkes, Infidels, and other enimies of thy faith and most holy truth. Suffer not O Lord, the prophane∣nes of thy sacred Gospell to inlarge theyr proude dominion and tyrannicall Empire, with the pos∣sessions and territories of thy people. Let not Pa∣gans, and such as seek to violate and to ouerthrow thy heauenly constitutions and ordinances, to be∣dew the earth with Christian bloud, for the establi∣shing of Idolatry, Superstition, and Atheisme. Per∣mit them not most merifull Father, to triumph o∣uer thy seruants, whome they leade into captiuity, allot to the verie worst manner of bondmanship and slauerie, and oppresse with most barbarous and ineffable crueltie. O Lorde, indue our Kinges and rulers with true feeling and vnderstanding, to con∣sider and perpend how dangerously we are mena∣ced and threatned by those that beeing worse than the worst of badnes, esteeme of thy seruantes as of dogs, and how like we are to become the subiects of theyr wrath and furie, if by thy gracious merci∣fulnes order be not taken to crosse their desseignes and to destroy their purposes. Giue vnto our Cap∣taines and men of Armes true valour and courage to contemne and scorn the force, strength, & pride of their presumptuous enimies, and to omit no op∣portunitie of reuenge which may be taken on thē,
for their insulting & perfidious brauery, their ma∣litious rancor and cankred spite. Well do we know O Lord, that our owne pride, ambition, hatred, ci∣uill discord, and what not? doeth crie vp vnto hea∣uen for iust punishment and abundance of wrath, and worlds of vengeance to fall vpon vs for our de∣testable wickednes. But yet (ô God) whose mercie is greater than the sea is deepe, or heauen high, or the world wide, as being in deede infinite, if not for our sake, yet for thine owne glories sake pardon vs, and take from our shoulders the heauy burthen of thine anger and indignation, we not being able to conceiue the vnmeasurable greatnes of the punish∣ment which our sin deserueth, much lesse to beare it. For thy honors sake, and most glorious deserts of thy sonne our Lord, and the worldes true son Iesus Christ, deface the enemies of his Gospell, eclipse their vanting, ouerthrow their proud ostentations of worldly pomp and roialtie. Let them know that thou art the God of heauen and earth, and art plea∣sed with nothing but with the true worship of thy onely begotten sonne Iesus Christ, that all pompe, pride and glorie without him, is basenes and vaine folly, yea, wretchednesse and miserie. Defend thy Church (ô Lord) and let thy people most victori∣ously triumph ouer thy enemie, plant thy truth in all parts of the world, that thy mercie & glory may ouershade the earth, and all the inhabitants therof sing praise & honor vnto thy name among all na∣tions and countries from age to age world without end. Amen. FINIS.
THE VVARRES BETWEENE THE Christians and the Turke. printer's or publisher's device LONDON Printed by IOHN WOLFE. 1595.
THE VVARRES BETWEENE THE Christians and the Turke. THe yeere 1592, Ha∣zan, Bassa of Bosse∣na, beeing Generall of the Turkes, go∣ing out of Bossena into Croatia, so∣dainly besieged, & within a while toke the towne and Ca∣stell of Wihitz, the which had now 150. yeeres bene a strong and sure defence for the Christians in that Countrie against the Turkes, who after the taking thereof, in fewe dayes built a blocke-house and a bridge a litle way of, vpon the riuer Calapis: which being done, they
burned and spoiled all the Countrie ouer between Calapis and Sauus. This soddaine assaulte of the Turke, stroke great feare into the minds of the Au∣strians and Germanes. But Thomas Erdeud the Ban of Sclauonia, that hee might defend his owne Countrie Thuropoly from these inuasions, muste∣ring his owne forces, and getting certaine aide of the Austrians, and other his neighbours, incamped himselfe right ouer against the forte of Patirnia, which (as earst I sayd) the Turkes had lately build∣ed with the bridge. There he expected further sup∣ply of men and munition, from the kingdomes of Sclauonia and Croatia. Which things Hazan Bas∣sa being certified of, by a trechour, a familiar of the Ban aforesayd, retired by the neerest waie, and so∣dainly assalted the christians, who as yet knew not well what the number & furniture of the enemies were. He came on the rereward with a huge pow∣er, & the horse men being put to flight, he slaughte∣red the infanterie, and chiefly the Austrians, and so became master of their ordinance. Then marched he forward without impeach∣ment thorough all Thuropoly, and alonge the most populous bankes of Calapis and Sauus, where hee gaue vnto death, and vnto bondage worse than death about foure thousand men. Hee thought also to haue beene master of the castle of Sissek, scituate at the concurrent of the two riuers Calapis and Sauus, because it was a fit place for passage into Austria, Carinthia, and Carniota, a
thing which had sometimes afore bene attempted, but then hee was nobly repulsed by the rare worth of Nicholas Miccatius the gouernour, and the sin∣gular valour of the garrison souldiers, so that after a fewe idle assaultes, hee was forced to giue it o∣uer. In Summer this present yere 1593. Aazan Bas∣sa, with certaine of the Sangiacbeges, whereof hee hath nine vnder his commaunde, returning to the besiege of Sissek, first razing Treschina, a castle of the Bishop of Zagabria, came before it about the beginning of Iune, & hauing made many breaches by continuall battery night & daie, there was now no hope of safetie for the beleaguered, vnlesse God beyond all thought, had succoured them. For al∣though Casars troupes, which were now mustered of the Austrians, and the borderers thereabouts, were much fewer than the Turkes, yet the Ban of Sclauonia, and Auers Pergius, and Rupertus E∣kenberger, & diuers other nobles, amongst whom was Melchior Reder, Baron of Silesia, a man fa∣mous both for learning and martiall affaires, ha∣uing the leading of them. When they behelde and sawe the Christi∣ans besieged, and brought to such distresse, with heroike worth, and resolute courage, bringing first their armie into Sissec, they sallyed out on the Turkes, who had made a bridge ouer Calapis, and pitched theyr Tentes both on this and that side of the Riuer: they put them to flight that
were on this side of the riuer, & making themselues masters of a parte of the bridge, they cut it downe, so that this part of the Turkes armie coulde not re∣tire to the other, they still perished, and driue the retiring Turkes euen to the riuer, who rather com∣mitted themselues to the mercie of the water, than to the mercie of the victours. The other that were on the other side of the water, quite amazed by this slaughter of their fellowes, committed their safetie to their feete. There were drowned in the riuer, Hazan Bassa aforesaid, with his brother, and Sinam Beg or president of Clista, the sonne of Amurathes the Turkes sister, and Memy Beg or president of Hertzegouin, which was the chiefe Citie of highe Bossina, sometime a Dukedome, as Bagnia Luca, the seate of Bassa, was the Metropolis of the kingdome of base Bossina. Amurath the Turke was so grieued with this o∣uerthrowe, wherein his sisters sonne, and the Bassa of Bossinas selfe, with many other valiaunt men, were either slaine or drowned in Calapis, that part∣ly through the wofull lamentations of his sister, who at his feet desired reuenge of her slain sonne, and partly by the perswasion of Sinam, Bassa, and partly for the disdaine and griefe of the aforesayde ouerthrowe, hee presently denounced open warre vpon Rodolph the Emperor, and made Mahumet, Bassa of Temes warre, Deputy of Bossena & Cro∣atia, with authoritie to prosecute the warre, and caused the Deputie of Greece to aide him with an
armie, and commanded the Bassa of Buda and the rest, to put garrisons in the castells of the frontries, and to be at the command of Sinam Basshau of Ve∣sirian, whom he sent as his lieutenant generall into Hungarie. Now the Christians after the Turkes ouerthrow at Sisek, taking respite for two moneths, began at last, though too late, to besiege the castle Petrinia, neere to Hrastowiz vpon Calapis, which the Turks had fortified the yere before: for hearing by a Turk a spie (who came voluntary vnto them, and so at his pleasure went a waie) that the Deputie of Greece marched thether, though the Turkes in the Castle besieged were in great distresse, wanting pouder, & consulting to come to a parlie of surrendering the holde, they raised their siege and departed. When this fame of the Turkish warre, renued and pro∣claimed in Constantinople and Buda, was bruited in Germanie, the yeerely pension which had not beene paide rwo yeeres together, was without de∣lay, the first daie of August, carried from Vienna to Gamorrha. But presently newes came that Sinan Basshau the Generall, marched into Hungary nere to Buda, & that the forces of the deputie of Greece which were alreadie come into Croatia, had not onelie raised the siege at Petrinia, but had al∣so wonne Sisck, and had cruelly massacred and put to death all the garrison souldiers, among whome were some Germanes, and had throwen their carcases into the riuer Calapis, and that after∣wards
passing ouer Sauus, euen to Sagabria, spoyl∣ing & burning as they went, they had taken about fiue thousand men, whome they made theyr mise∣rable bond slaues, & that the siege of Sagabria was expected euerie houre. Therefore they thought it best to take some other course to withdrawe the e∣nemie, and to vndertake a better courage of war∣like defence. Therefore there went post to Prage Frances Nadastus, the noble Duke of Hungarie, & Deputie of Iaurin, Ferdinard Earle of Hardec, and diuerse others of Austria, Carniola, Carinthia, and other places, who did aggrauate the greatnesse of the danger by reason of the Turkes, & complained that vnlesse they had present aides, they shoulde of necessitie be constrained to yeeld vnto them. The Emperour therefore gaue commandement to mu∣ster the Bohemians, Siluesians, Moracians, Austri∣ans, and other of his hereditarie princes, for seruice on horseback and on foot, and to augment the gar∣risons in the limitanie holds, and sent Embassadors to the electors of the Empire, for the holding of a parliament at Rauenspurg, for the vniting of the forces of the Empire, to with-holde the Turkish crueltie from Germanie, and from other partes of Christendome. He hired also great forces of horse and foote men against the next spring, because Bas∣shaw Sinam hauing taken Wespria and Palatta, threatned that he would without faile march into Vienna. Ferdinand Samaria, and George Andrew of
Hofkirchen were gouernors of Westpriu, and had a garrison of twelue thousand soldiers. Sinam Bas∣sa laide siege to it the two and twentith of Septem∣ber: he made three skonces vpon the high waies to Raba and Palatta, in the night he cast his trenches, and raised twelue barricados on them, and began to batter the wall with the Canon, and slue the ma∣ster of the Ordenaunce of Westpriu with a shot. They did little that daie, and therfore the next daie they intrenched themselues neerer to the wall, and from sixe seuerall places so thundred vppon them, that almost no man could stand in safetie either on the wals or in the fortresses. Then after certaine as∣saultes to scale the wall, they were at last repulsed with a large hail of the muskettiers. The next mor∣ning had no sooner giuen light to the fourth daye of the siege, but the Turks fiercely renued the bat∣trie, & hauing scaled the wals, they began there to aduance their colours, but our souldiers put them to the foile. Being so defeated, they threw balles of wilde fire on the gate, and on the wooden houses adioyning, and razed the wals neere to the gate, e∣uen vnto the grounde: and giuing fresh onsets a∣gainst the gate and the castle, and other places, they so discouraged the gouernor and the souldiers, that being now desperate to defend the towne any lon∣ger, because there appeared no hope of succor from the gouernours of Raba and Pappa: the night fol∣lowing they secretly issued out of the citie, & soght to saue themselues by flight: but the Turks percei∣uing
it, pursued them as they fled: many of them they slue, and tooke Ferdinand Samaria the gouer∣nor himselfe, and some other prisoners. There escaped to Pappa in safetie about fortie Germanes, and foure and fiftie Hungarians. On Saint Michaels euen the Turkes besieged Palatta, where two Hungarians that ranne awaie to them, are recorded to haue told them whence the castle might best bee battered. But whereas the Bashau hauing sent letters into the castle, wherein hee per∣swaded the garrison souldiers which were foure hundred to yeelde the Castle vnto him, sith it should be a bootlesse matter to make resistance, & promised them life and safe conduit if they would departt hauing voluntarily surrendred it, they had in deede safe conduite for one mil, but after∣wardes at a signe giuen, they were almost all mur∣thered, so that of all, only foure & twentie escaped. The thinges which followed had better suc∣cesse. For when intelligence was giuen by the cap∣tiues and the spies which Basshau Sinam by reason of the winter nowe approching, had disposed his armes to their winteringes, and that himselfe reuo∣ked by Amurath, was gone poast to Constantino∣ple, because the Persians and the Georgians had certaine newe complots in hand, Ferdinand Earle of Hardec, Generall of the armie of base Hunga∣rie, ioyning to his, the Armies of Peter Husan go∣uernour of Pappa, and of Nadastus Earle of Serin, and of Palfius, and other Captaines, marched to∣wardes
Albie-royall, hauing some hope to get the suburbes thereof, and the house of the gouernor of the Citie, and the demaines. He therefore sent Hu∣sar Peter to the further side of the Citie, with com∣mandement that at midnight he should assault the suburbes, at what time hee himselfe would giue a signe, that he also made an assault on the other side, that so they might more easily ouercome them, whome they did assaile in the suburbs, their minds and forces beeing so distract, and Husar tooke and burnt one of the suburbs, but the Turks defending the Citie, our men thought best, beeing destitute both of victual & munition, to forsake it: and when as they had scarse retired two miles, the next daie word was brought, that the Turkes in great troups followed them, and were determined to set vppon them as they fled. Thereupon our men staie, pause vpon the point, marshall the battell, and beard the enemy to his teeth, fighting valiantly, and God stri∣king amazement into the enemies heart, they turne the Ianizaries into flight, and obtain a noble victo∣rie the four and twentith of October, according to the olde stile. The Aga or Captaine of the Ianiza∣ries being taken prisoner, reported that the Bassa of Buda disswaded them from fight, but that at last he was constrained to go out to fight by the importu∣nitie and threates of the souldiers. It is thought that hee hauing receiued three woundes with musket shot, died afterwardes at Buda. There were in this skirmish besides the Basshau of Buda, the Sanzach
or gouernour of Albie-roiall, of Strigon, of Pestis, of Fiukirks, of Moach, of Fillek, of Newstair, of Zes∣chen, of Copau, of Zolnock, of Zegedin, &c. But I cannot tell whether anie of them were kilde or no. Ferdinand Earle of Hardec after this victorie at∣chieued, returned to Raba in Iaurin. In high Hungarie, Frederike Baron of Tieffen∣bach, by force wonne from the Turkes the castle of Zabacca, which they had fortified, where resting onely one daie, he brought his armie before Tillek a famous castle and towne, the seate of the Turkes Deputie, and two miles from the place aforesayd. There on the twelfth of Nouember he put to flight the Turkish armie, which was raised of the Coun∣tries adiacent, and came thether to raise the siege. The next daie they raised their rampires agaynst the towne, and began to batter it, but the Turkes themselues burnt that, and abandoning the base skonce, the garrison souldiers about eight hundred betooke themselues to the gard of the high castle a∣lone, but at last with condition of their liues, they yeelded it by composition. The fame of this sur∣render, caused the Turkes which held the castles of Diun and Hamaske neere thereto, to forsake theyr holdes, and vnassalted to flie awaie. Then was the armie brought before the towne and castle of Zet∣chen another holde of the Sangiachag, and wonne it with certaine of her castles adioyning, of Holloc, Samos, and Plauesteine: which the garrisons wil∣lingly forsaking lefte, to defend themselues agaynst
the approching enemie. Towardes the ende of the moneth, Nogard (so they commonly call it) and Sangiacaf, a famous towne became ours, and cer∣taine Turkes of Albie-roiall bringing a new Depu∣ty into the castle of Palatte newly surprised, were in December by Huzar Peter valiantly put to the worse. But sith the time of the yeere was so vnfit, & the continuall raine made the waies so deepe, that their ordinance could not cōueniently be haled frō place to place, and that the armye could not indure to lie incamped anie longer, they were on both sides inforced to go to their wintering places. In the meane time Sinam the Bassa of Vesirium was earnestly expected at Buda, but he beeing gone to Constantinople, the deputy of Greece is recorded to haue come to Buda at last with a certaine power not of greatest importance. FINIS.
