6132 S109157 99844807 9652
A SERMON PREACHED at WHITE-HALL, on the 28. of April, 1622. By WALTER CVRLL, D. in Diuinity and Deane of Lichfield. Published by speciall command. LONDON, Printed by IOHN BILL. M.DC.XXII.
HEBR. chap. 12. vers. 14. Follow Peace with all men, and Holinesse, without which no man shall see the Lord. THese wordes commend vnto our Christian pra∣ctise a double duty: the one of Peace towardes men; and the other of Holinesse towards God. Wherein wee may obserue two things in generall. First, the combination and con∣iunction of these two; not peace alone, or holinesse alone; but peace and holinesse both together. Secondly, the order and dis∣position of them: First peace, then holinesse.
First for the coniunction of them. Thus we often finde them in the Scripture, like Ionathan and Dauid in the fielde, meeting and kissing each other: So Dauid himselfe speakes of them in that very phrase, Righ∣teousnesse and peace haue met and kissed each o∣ther, Psal. 85.10. And Saint Peter would haue them such inseparable companions to vs, that hee would not haue vs found without them: Be carefull that yee may bee found of him in peace, without spot and blame∣lesse, 2. Pet. 3.14. Therefore, Quae Dens coniunxit, nemo separet: Those things which God hath ioyned together, let no man se∣parate. But as they are ioyned together in precept; so let vs ioyne them together in practise: as we finde them tied together in the Text; so let them bee knit together in our hearts, and meet and kisse each o∣ther in our liues: So following peace, that we doe not forsake holinesse, and so follow∣ing holines, that wee doe not breake peace: As some who will neede bee great friends and fauourers of holines, but are vtter ene∣mies to all peace: Or as others, who will
seeme to be in great league and loue with peace, but are at defiance with all holinesse. For holinesse without peace will proue but factious singularity; and peace without ho∣linesse, but prophane conspiracie. There∣fore follow peace and holines; not peace a∣lone, or holines alone, but peace and holines both together. And in this order; first peace, then holines. So Christ himselfe seems to giue peace the precedency: If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother hath ought against thee, leaue there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come & offer thy gift, Mat. 5.24. Where he sends vs from his owne altar, and will not accept our oblation, till wee haue sought peace and reconciliation with our brother: thereby preferring an act of peace before an act of piety; and shewing, that euen the holiest of our actions are not acceptable to God, when our affections are not peaceable to∣wards men. Nil placitum sine pace Deo, non munus ad aram. There is nothing pleasing to God without peace, no not the gift vp∣on
the Altar. Againe  goes before , as that which prepares and makes way for it, for, Pax opportuna pita. Peace giues a great aduantage and opportunity vnto holines. It is therefore the Apostles exhortation, that we should pray for kings and all that are in authority, that vnder them we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all god∣linesse and honesty, 1. Timoth. 2.2. Protecti∣on in peace, is a great meanes to prosper and promote religion and godlinesse. In signification whereof, happily it was, that the doores of the oracle, or holy of holies were made of Oliue tree, 1. King. 6. which is the Embleme of peace, to teach vs, that by peace we haue an entrance into holinesse. As on the contrary, there cannot be a stronger barre, or a more fatall and forcible opposition to holinesse, then strife and contention; for such as are in the gall of bitternesse are vncapable of the spirit of holines, Act. 8.23. Therefore as we must follow peace and holines, so in this order, first peace, then holinesse, as that which makes vs both capable of holines, and acceptable
to God in our holines. And thus much in generall for the order and connexion of those two together, Peace and Holines. In the words more particularly we may obserue two things, an Acte, and an Ob∣iect, whereupon this acte is to bee excerci∣sed. The acte vehement, to follow, pursue, and prosecute. The obiect excellent, Peace and Holinesse. First Peace, and that with a latitude and extent, peace, and peace with all men, a generall and vniuersall peace. Se∣condly Holinesse, and that vnder a heauie conditio or commination, no lesse then the losse of eternall saluation, as without which no man shall see the Lord. First for the acte.  is the word here vsed, which signifies not onely to follow, but to follow hard, with an earnest and eager pursuit: To runne after, So some translate it here, Cur∣rite post pacem & Sanctitatem, Runne after Peace and Holinesse: And 1. Cor. 14.1. Cur∣rite post charitatem, Runne after loue, with power and speed, euen as they that runne in a race. So the word is vsed, Philip. 3.12. Not as if I had already attayned, but I fol∣low,
pursue, or runne after, that by all meanes I may attaine. And the 14 I presse, or follow hard toward the marke, which signifies an earnest, and vehement desire, and indeauour of attayning. And there∣fore some translate it more significantly, and with a stronger Emphasis, Persequimini Pacem & Sanctitatem, Persecute Peace and Holinesse, that is, follow and follow them home, pursue and prosecute them with all possible diligence and indeauour, as those things which yee most desire to haue and enioy. First for the obiect of Peace. It is, or ought to be, the desire of all hearts; all the earth calleth for it, and the very heauens cannot be without it: Sidera pace vigent, consistunt terrea pace, Peace it is the glory of Heauen, and the ioy of the whole earth. Pax summa bonorum, Peace it is, as it were, the Breuiary and Abridgment of all that good is: Insomuch that the Iewes expresse all good, plenty, and prosperity by the name of Peace. At least, Pax optima rerum, Peace is the chiefest and the choicest good,
the best of all earthly blessings, the blessing of blessings, a mother-blessing, as I may say, as that which blesseth all other bles∣sings, and without which they are no bles∣sings. Tam bonum, vt sine ea nihil bonum, So good, that there is nothing good with∣out it. To which purpose the Iewes haue a saying, Cum non est Pax, nihil est, when there is not Peace, there is nothing; as if all were nothing, or nothing worth without Peace. So good, that the Prophet Dauid cannot tell how to expresse the goodnesse of it; So sweete, that he cannot tell how to ex∣presse the sweetnesse of it; and therefore breakes out into a kind of admiration of it. Behold, how good, and how pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to liue together in Peace, Psal. 133.1. For profit, it is as the dew of Heauen, that makes all fatt and fruitfull where it falles: for so where Peace doeth but set her foote, her steppes drop fatnesse vpon the land: And for plea∣sure, it is as the sweet oyntment powred vpon Aarons head, and running downe to the skirts of his clothing, filling and re∣freshing
both Prince and people with the sweet comfort of it: In the sweet sauour whereof, how ought we to follow and runne after it? Yet such is the contentious dispo∣sition, and quarrelling condition of our nature; so apt and easie are we to fall out and quarrell vpon euery occasion, that the Apostle is here faine to take the peace of vs, and to bind vs to the good behauiour; saying, Follow peace with all men. Now Peace may be considered, either in respect of the Church, or of the State, or of priuate men one with an other; In all which respects, wee must euery one in his place Follow peace. First, for the peace of the Church in matters of Faith and Religion. It is the Apostles rule, to follow after Faith and Loue, 1. Tim. 6.11. and Ephes. 4.15. To follow the trueth in loue, with peaceable and louing affections; not with fiery, fierce, and fu∣rious spirits, as the maner of many is, who thinke there is no Religion, but in conten∣tion; and that a man cannot loue the truth, vnlesse hee hate peace. But the Prophet
speaketh with another spirit, Loue the truth and peace, Zach. 8.19. And the Apostle entreateth vs, to forbeare one another in loue, indeauouring to keepe the vnitie of the spirit in the bond of Peace, that there may be one Body, and one Spirit, and one Lord, and one Faith, and one Baptisme, and one God and Father of all, who is aboue all, and through all, and in vs all. Ephes. 4.3. And 1. Cor. 1.10. Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that yee all speake the same thing, that there be no diuisions amongst you, but that yee be perfectly knit together in one minde, and in one iudgement. And againe, most passionate∣ly and pathetically; If there be any consola∣tion in Christ, if any comfort of loue, if any fel∣lowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercie, fulfill my ioy, that yee be like minded, hauing the same loue, being of one accorde and of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife and contenti∣on, Phil. 2.1. But is it thus in the Church of Christ? Is there nothing done through strife and contention? yea rather, what is there, but strife and contention in the Church? Wit∣nesse
the miserable distraction of the Chri∣stian world in point of Religion, wherein not onely the vnseamed coat of Christ is diuided, but his owne blessed Bodie is rent & torne into many pieces, as if it were no better then the body of that harlot which was chopt in pieces, flesh and bones, and cast into all the quarters of Israel, Iudg. 19.29. For so, there is nothing but Fraction and Faction, Schisme and Separation in the Church of Christ, which is his bodie: Church against Church, Altar against Altar, Priest against Priest, Religion a∣gainst Religion, Christian against Chri∣stian; Nay, if I may so say, Christ against Christ, and God against God, while Christ is set vp against Christ, and God himselfe opposed vnder the colour of diuine au∣thoritie. And that in such bitternesse of Spirit; that one is become a Curse and Execrati∣on to another, blowing the trumpet of Sheba in defiance one of another, and say∣ing, they haue no part in God, nor in the Inheritance of his Sonne Iesus Christ:
Euery man to his tents O Israel. So that euen Religion it selfe is in a maner lost in the quarrels and questions of Religion; It faring with Religion, as it did with her in Plutarch, who hauing many Suiters, when euery one could not haue her to himselfe, they puld' her in pieces, that so none might haue her. For so men in Religion, Malunt nullam habere, quam non suam, they had ra∣ther there should be no Religion, then that their owne should not take place. And so distraction in Religion is the destruction of Religion: for while euery one sayeth, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, I am of Caluin, I am of Luther, I am of Ar∣minius, I am of Francis, I am of Dominicke, I am of IESVS, Nemo fere Christi est, there is none almost of Christ. Thus Religion is turned into faction, and conscience of Religion lost in the controuersies of Re∣ligion: For who is there, that had not ra∣ther seeme learned in the controuersies of Religion, then conscionable in the practise of Religion; and that sets not more, by a subtile head, then a sanctified heart? in a
word, that had not rather disputare quam viuere, dispute well, then liue well. For the redresse whereof, and for the setling of future peace in the Church, it were to be wished, though it be not to be hoped, that the pen and the presse might be lesse set on worke, that there might not be so many bookes of controuersies writ∣ten as there are. For while men thus wran∣gle and write, and print one against ano∣ther, there can be no peace in the Church: And I thinke I may safely say, that it were better for the Church, to want some trueth, then to haue no peace. And I doubt not, but a man may bee saued, though he neuer reade, or study contro∣uersies. It is sayd of Themistocles, that be∣ing requested to play vpon an instru∣ment, he made answer, that he could not fiddle; and being againe asked what hee could doe, answered, that he could make a great City of a little one. So sayth Saint Augustine, epist. 56. If thou beest questio∣ned in points of subtilitie, perplexitie, and controuersie, answer that thou knowest
not what to answer, that thy learning lies not that way. And if thou beest further vr∣ged, & asked what thou know'st, & wher∣in thy learning lies; Responde, nosse te quo∣modo etiam sine istis, homo esse possit beatus; Answere, that thou hast learned to know, how a man may be saued without these. And it was the iudgement of Sisinnius a learned man, hauing speech with the Em∣perour Theodosius, touching the pacificati∣on of matters in religion; that a speciall meanes to make all quiet, was to forbid all dialecticall disputations, as whereby the rent of Schisme is euer made greater, but neuer lesse; and the fire of contention more kindled, and increased, but the heat thereof nothing quenched, or abated. Dis∣putations and disceptations of controuer∣sies, for the most part, being vndertaken magis animo malignitatis, quam studio verita∣tis; rather for contention, then for truthes sake; rather in an eagernesse of spirit, to vent their owne passions, and vpholde a side, then in any true zeale of the spirit, to iustifie and vphold the trueth. Quibus po∣tior
est victoria, quam veritas, who had ra∣ther haue the victory themselues, then the trueth should. Such being the loue of men to themselues, vt nemo patiatur se vin∣ci, licet sciat vera esse quae audit, that no man will suffer himselfe to bee ouercome, though he know it to be true that is said against him. Nec veritati, nec paci cedere norûnt, as Saint Augustine saith of the Ro∣gatians, They will yeeld neither to trueth nor peace. And, Inanis omnis disputatio sine cedendi voluntate: where there is no mind of yeelding, there is no end of disputing: but that end, which the Apostle speakes of, enuie, strife, raylings, and gallings one of a∣nother, 1. Timoth. 6.4. And therefore the 2. Tim. 2.14. hee chargeth Timothie to charge his hearers, and that deepely, before our Lord Iesus Christ, that they contend not in words which is to no profit, but to the subuerting of the hearers. As whereby the whole are many times wounded, and the weake sel∣dome or neuer strengthened. And if we must not contend in words, much lesse in writing and printing. The tongue (sayth
Saint Iames) is able to set the whole world on fire, if once it bee kindled with the coale of contention. What then is like to bee the flame, when as if the tongue could not make it burne fast enough, they put paper to it, and set and send foorth books set on fire from hell, to cast the coales a∣broad, and to carry the flames where the tongue cannot reach? Books fraught full of nothing but pestilent and bitter malice, and the most shameles, desperate vntruths, that the Deuill the father of lies can helpe them to deuise. As if they were not writ∣ten in defence, but in defiance of the truth, and of all peace and loue, modesty, and honesty, religion, God, and all that good is. And in which they spare not, to spit their poyson in the face of Princes. Of all which, if there were a fire made, as was of the bookes of curious Artes, Acts 19. we might truely say of it, as Agesilaus said of the Vsurers Billes and Bonds, when he saw them all of a light fire, that he neuer saw a brighter, or a better fire in his life. The flame whereof perhaps might expiate
some part of their offence, which other∣wise will one day helpe to increase their flame; when they shall wish with him, that they had neuer had so much learning, as to know how to write a letter, hauing done more harme to the Church of God by their writing, then euer they were able to doe good by all their learning. Not that I think it not lawfull to write in matters of controuersie; for it is not only lawfull, but expedient and necessary in some cases, that Truth should bee iustified of her children; so it bee done in Season, with learning, grauity, moderation, and iudgement. But I hold it neither necessa∣ry, nor fit, for euery man in defence, or pretence of the trueth, to answer euery dog that barkes with barking againe. And it is but the distempered passion of some, to thinke the truth betrayd, except they write and fight for it. For he that enters vpon the publike defence and mainte∣nance of any cause, without necessity compelling, or authoritie calling him thereunto, is either contentious, or in dan∣ger to be contentious.
But I say no more in this point. If any man list to bee contentious, wee haue no such custome, neither the Church of God, 1. Cor. 11.6. For the Churches custome hath beene, and euer ought to bee this; to fly conten∣tion, and by all meanes to follow peace. And if no other meanes bee left vs, yet by our prayers, lifting vp our eyes, and hands, and hearts vnto the God of peace, and bowing our knees vnto the Father of our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, that he would settle peace in his Church, that therein wee may all of vs ioyne hearts, and hands, in the true know∣ledge, and worship, and seruice of God, and of his Sonne Iesus Christ. And forasmuch as the Peace of the Church depends much vpon the Peace of the State, we must also follow that. Which Peace of State, may be considered, either in respect of a State in it selfe, or in respect of one State with another. For Peace of, or with States abroad; the care thereof be∣longs properly to Princes, and publique persons; such as haue in their hands the Soueraigne power of peace and of warre.
And how that hath beene followed by him that professeth himselfe, no lesse a maker of peace, then a defender of the Faith, the world can witnesse. For which his blessed, and christian care of the Common peace, whatsoeuer the successe be, blessing and a∣bundance of blessing shall bee vpon his Royall head. For if the mouth of Christ hath pronounced them blessed that make, or but endeauour to make peace betweene man and man, betweene one man and a∣nother; blessed, and thrice blessed, and euer blessed, shall hee bee, that makes, or seekes to make peace betweene Kings and Kings, betweene Nation and Nation, & betweene Princes and their people; blessed shall hee be of God, and blessed of man, blessed in this life, and blessed in the life to come. And for the Councellours of peace; Ioy shall bee vnto them, Prou. 12.20. And the blessing of Dauid vpon Abigall shall bee vpon their heads: Blessed bee their Coun∣sels, and blessed bee they of the Lord, that keepe Kings from shedding of blood, 1. Samuel 25. But for vs that are but priuate
persons, our part is onely to pray for the peace of States, that God would giue vnto all nations vnity Peace and concord. And neuer was there more need of this prayer, then in this fearefull combustion, and confusion of the Christian world, wherein there is nothing but warres, and rumors of warres; nation against nation, and king∣dome against kingdome, as if those last times were come vpon vs, spoken of by our Sauiour, Matthew 24. The Kings of the earth are risen vp, and the Princes take counsell, and are assembled together against the Lord, and against his Christ, Psal. 2.2. There∣fore pacem spiremus, & suspiremus coram Do∣mino, let vs breath out prayers, and sighes for peace before the Lord; that it would please him, who hath the hearts of Kings in his hand, as the riuers of water, to turne them whithersoeuer he will, so to go∣uerne the gouernours, and so to rule the rulers of the world, that their hearts may be enclined vnto peace, and that they may thinke the thoughts of peace and rest vnto his Church and people. Yea, so ought we
to bee affected vnto Peace, that euen then when the weapons of warre are in our hands, peace should bee in our hearts, and prayers for peace in our mouthes. And that our prayers may speed the better, and be the more effectuall with God for peace, let vs ioyne with them the practice of re∣pentance, and good life: let vs first make our peace with God, that wee may the bet∣ter preuaile with him for peace with men. For the worke of righteousnesse is peace, euen quietnes and assurance for euer, Esay 32.17. And where a mans wayes please the Lord, hee maketh his enemies to bee at peace with him, Prou. 16.7. As for the peace of our owne State; whe∣ther in respect of peace abroad, or peace at home, this exhortation, to follow peace, may seeme needles vnto vs; peace hath so long followed, and doth yet hold and em∣brace vs in her armes, the terrours of the sword are not vpon vs, but we dwell in the tabernacles of peace, and sit in safetie euery man vnder his vine, and vnder his figtree; wee build and plant, and sowe and reape,
and buy, and sell, and lie downe, and rise vp, and liue, and die, and goe to our graues in peace, and there is none to make vs afraid. Blessed be the God of peace for it, and hap∣py we if wee knew the blessing of it: but we haue so long fed vpon the sweet plen∣ty of peace, that many haue taken a surfett, and grow weary of it, (as the Israelites did of Manna) wishing for war, and com∣playning that their soules are withered, and dryed vp with this long Peace. But did the heat of war beat vpon our heads, as it doeth vpon other nations, wee would make more account of the sweete shade of Peace, vnder which wee now sit, as Ionas did of the shadow of his goard, when the Sunne beat vpon his head. For peace is one of those good things, whereof wee know not the worth, till we feele the want. Ther∣fore though we haue peace, yet let vs follow peace, follow it with our prayers, and with our thankes: with our thankes to God, for that blessed peace, which we haue so long inioyed, and for our peacefull King, vnder whose gracious gouernment wee haue so
long enioyed it, and so many good things with it. And likewise with our prayers to God, for the happy continuance both of it and him; that peace, and abundance of peace may dwell in our land, and bee continued with vs foreuer, as long as the Moone en∣dureth. For the better keeping and continuing whereof, Solomon giues vs this rule, not to meddle with them that are seditious, or, that are giuen vnto change, Prou. 24.21. For desire of change and alteration, it is the mother, and mouer, and maker of much sedition; and they that are troubled with this itch of In∣nouation, they cannot but be rubbing vp∣on Maiestie it selfe, and could be content to turne Monarchy into Anarchy, or into any thing, so they might be doing. And some such turbulent Tribunes there are in euery State, who out of their glorious, vaine glorious humour of popularity, would be counted Angels, though it bee but for stirring and troubling of the wa∣ters. Yea not onely the desire, but the very feare of alteration, and toleration, may
some time prooue seditious, when busie men will be busying themselues, and buz∣zing into others, a feare of that, whereof there is no feare. Which priuie murmu∣rings, and mutterings what are they, but the spirit of sedition, speaking low out of the ground, and whispering out of the dust? as the Prophet speaketh, Esa. 29.4. and would speake out, if it durst: But into their Councels let not our soules come, if wee will be the true followers of Peace. Lastly, we must follow Peace among our selues, one with another: Of which the Apostle saith. Be at peace among your selues, 1. Thes. 5.13. And our Sauiour, Haue peace one with another, Mar. 9.50. And surely a blessed thing it is for men, to liue in loue and peace one with another: For where Peace is, God is; Be of one minde, liue in peace, and the God of peace shall be with you. 2. Cor. 13.11. And where God is, there all good is. As on the contrary, where Peace is not, God is not; but the deuill, and all maner of euill. So saith Saint Iames: Where enuying and strife is, there is confusion and eue∣ry
euill worke, Iam. 3.16. Therefore let vs follow peace, as it is in the Text, and those things, that make for peace, Rom. 14.19. Of which Saint Augustine giues this rule, Inimicitias vitare cautissimè, ferre aequissimè, finire citissimè, To auoide strife and enmi∣tie as carefully as we can, to beare it as qui∣etly as we can, and to end it as quickly as we can. For the effecting whereof, aboue all things, let vs follow after loue, as it is, 1. Cor. 14.1. bearing and forbearing one another in loue, Ephes. 4.2. which Caluin calles fomentum Pacis, the fomentation of Peace, as where∣by Peace is especially kept and preserued amongst men. For loue enuyeth not, it boa∣steth not it selfe; it is not puffed vp, it disdai∣neth not, it seeketh not her owne things, it is not prouoked to anger, it thinketh not euill, it suffe∣reth all things, it endureth all things, 1 Cor 13. And where these things are, there cannot but be Peace: But especially, let vs labour for this fruit and effect of loue in vs; Nor to seeke our own things, For this one pos∣sessiue, (meum) is that which breakes peace, and makes strife and stirre in euery place;
and sets all the world together by the eares. Therefore let vs put on equall and yeel∣ding affections, not standing too stiffe∣ly vpon the strict rigour of our right; but sometime, for peace sake, part with some part of our right, and in all matters, to yeeld as farre, as in all reason and equi∣tie we may: For Summum ius, summa dis∣cordia, (saith Luther) Extremitie it is the cause of much enmitie. And therefore, when there was like to be strife betweene Abraham and Lot, about the feeding of their cattle; Abraham was content to pur∣chase his peace, with the price of his right; giuing him free choyce, to feed where hee would, when as the whole land belonged vnto himselfe. O si iuuenem aliquem iuristam in consilium adhibuisset, saith Luther vpon that place, O if hee had asked counsell of some yong Lawyer, he would neuer haue aduised him to such a peaceable course as this, To part with any part of his right, for peace sake; but to haue stood punctually vpon his right and title, vsque ad apicem iu∣ris, euen to the least title of the Law: But
if wee will be the children of Peace, let vs rather follow the practise of our Father Abraham, then the aduise of those coun∣sellers of contention, that perswade vs to nothing but Law and right. Yea, if we will follow Peace aright, wee must not stay till Peace come to vs, accep∣ting a peaceable hand when it is offered: But we must yeeld so farre from the pride of our hearts, and the strength of our sto∣macke, as to be Primi in Pace, first in the Peace; we must seeke it, and sue for it, and follow after it, when it seemes to turne the backe vpon vs, and to flie from vs; for so the word signifies, to follow that which flies from vs. Therefore saith the Prophet Da∣uid, Seeke peace and pursue it, Psal. 34.13. So saith our Sauiour, Goe, and be reconciled to thy brother, Matth. 5.24. Stay not till hee come to thee; but goe thou to him with an Oliue branch of Peace in thy mouth, and speake Peace vnto him, saying, Is it Peace my brother? is thine heart right to∣wards me, as mine is towards thee? If so, let there be Peace, I pray thee, betweene
thee and mee. Thus Abraham, though hee were the elder, and the vncle, and euery way the better man, and had the better cause; yet did he first seeke Peace with his nephew Lot, saying, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, betweene mee and thee; for wee are brethren, Gen. 13. And as we must thus follow all peace, so also with all men: Follow peace with all men, which is the extent and latitude of it. And a large latitude it is: so saith Occumenius, Multa est huius dicti latitudo, Its a wide word and carries a great breadth with it: yet the Apostle elsewhere, giues it the same extent, Liue peaceably with all men, Rom. 12.18. where the Syriacke translation hath it, Cum omni filio hominis, with euery sonne of man: Not only with our friends, and such as loue vs, but also with our enemies, and such as hate vs: not onely with the good, but also with the wicked; but not in their wickednesse, Pax cum viris, bellum cum vicijs, peace with the men, but not with their manners; with their persons, but not with their conditions. We must
haue peace with all the world, but the Di∣uell, and sinne. And therefore whereas it is sayd, Fol∣low peace with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, 2. Tim. 2.22. The meaning thereof is not, that wee must haue peace only with them, but especially with them: so that they much mistake the Text, and the truth, that out of a surly singularity, will haue peace with none, but the pure, and the pure in their sence: as for others, that are not of the same pure straine with them, they will not so much as inter∣changeably vse the dueties of common humanitie, nec monstrare vias, eadem nisi sa∣cra colenti: nor scarce shewe a man the way, that goes not the same way with them. And as Optatus sayth of the Dona∣tists, Docentur multi, ne aue dicant cuiquam no∣strum, Many are so taught, that they thinke it a sinne to say, God speed, to one of vs. Nay, there are who thinke it, not only no sinne, but a matter meritorious, to hate, persecute, curse, kill, and exercise all man∣ner of cruelty, not onely vpon the bodies
of the liuing, but also vpon the very vrnes and ashes of the dead, if they but differ from them in some point of Catholike Re∣ligion, as they call it: and when they haue done, thinke they haue done God good seruice therein. And to this purpose, there hath been a Trumpet blown,Gaspar. Sci∣oppius edit. 1618. Classicum belli sacri, so he cals it, the Trumpet of the ho∣ly warre, wherein hee incites and stirres vp the Emperour, and all Catholike Prin∣ces, to take armes, and make warre vpon the Protestants (heretiques he calles them) in all places; to fill all with fire and sword, and battell, and blood, and vtterly to de∣stroy and root them out of the earth, that the name of a Protestant may neuer more be heard of in the world. Yea, hee dares threaten them with the feare and commi∣nation of some fearefull and heauy iudge∣ment, to fall vpon them, if they do it not. Tantum Relligio potis est suadere malorum, So powerfull in perswasion is Conscience misgrounded and misguided in Reli∣gion.
But the Apostles exhortation is large and generall, extending vnto all, Follow peace with all men. Which extention doeth yet admit of a double restriction and li∣mitation, according to that of the Apo∣stle, If it be possible, and as much as in you lieth, haue peace with all men, Rom. 12.18. We must vse all means, to haue peace with all men; in Religion, so farre as may stand with the trueth of God, and of a good conscience; in State, so farre, as with honour and safety wee may; and in pri∣uate one with another, so farr as on our parts with any conuenient possibility we can. For some such contentious and vn∣quiet spirits there are, that wee can haue no peace with them: Not only contentious, but louers of contention, 1. Cor. 11.16. Such as hate peace, who when wee speake to them of peace, are altogether for warre, Psal. 120.6. With these, there is no peace to bee had. And therefore in this case, it is enough for vs, to seeke peace with them, to speake peace to them, and to bee peaceablie affe∣cted
towards them; and if they will not haue peace with vs, our peace shall returne into our bosomes: that is, wee shall haue the comfort of it in our selues, and the re∣ward of it with God, though wee haue not the fruit and effect of it with men. Therfore let vs Follow peace with all men. And neuer may any strife bee heard of a∣mongst vs, but who shall hate strife most, & who shal follow peace with swiftest paces. And thus following peace with men, we shall haue peace with God; euen with the God of peace, who will bee with vs for euer in peace: So that we shall liue in peace, and die in peace, and raigne with him in peace euerlasting: a peace vnspeaka∣ble and glorious; a peace that passeth all vnder∣standing, which the God of peace will giue vnto all them, that truely follow peace. And not Peace onely, but Holinesse also, Follow peace and holines, sayth the Apostle: For there may be peace without holines, nay, against holines, as Herode and Pilate were made friends, and agreed together to put
Christ to death. Est & Daemonum legio con∣cors, there is an vnholy league amongst the Diuels. But our peace, it must be ioy∣ned with holines: it must bee a holy peace. For as we are called vnto peace, 1. Cor. 7.15. so we are called vnto holines, 1. Thess. 4.7. Therefore let vs follow our calling, which is an holy calling, 2. Tim. 1.9. Holines, it is Gods owne Image and like∣nesse in vs; a very beame, as it were, of the diuine light shining in vs; therefore called by Saint Peter, the diuine nature 2. Pet. 1.4. Because therein wee resemble God, as in a speciall parte, or property of his diuine na∣ture. It is the Character of Christ, the Print of the Spirit, the signe of a Saint, and the glory of men and Angels: and without which there is no glory. For let a man haue all the glory of the world, and haue not holines, aut nihil est, aut nihil prodest, It is all nothing, or nothing worth. Therefore follow holinesse. But how must wee follow it? In the kindes of it, in the parts of it, in the
degrees of it, and in the meanes of it. First, in the kinds of it; which we may conceaue to be two, the one imputed, and the other imparted. Our imputed holines, is the holines of Christ, truely and pro∣perly inherent in him; but so imputed vn∣to vs of God, through Faith in him, that we are thereby accepted, and reputed as holy in the sight of God, as if it vvere in∣herently in vs. But besides this holines im∣puted to vs, there is another holines impar∣ted to vs: which is either Habituall, or Actuall; wrought in vs, or wrought by vs. Habituall holines imparted to vs, is a di∣uine spirituall qualitie wrought in vs, by the Spirit of God, whereby we are renew∣ed in the Spirit of our mindes, and indued with all such sanctifying and sauing gra∣ces, as are proper to the Saints. Now how∣soeuer wee must follow Holines, in both these kindes, labouring to be found in Christ, not hauing our owne holines; but that which is through the Faith of Christ, as the Apostle speaketh, Phil. 3.9. As also that holinesse,
which is wrought in vs, by the gracious working of the holy Ghost, and is there∣fore called the Sanctification of the Spirit, 1. Pet. 1.2. Praying with the Prophet Da∣uid, Creat in me a cleane heart, O God, and re∣new a right Spirit within me, Psal. 51.10. Yet the holinesse properly here meant, I take to bee that actuall holinesse, which is to bee wrought by vs, when by the power of grace giuen vnto vs of God, we sanctifie our selues, (as Saint Iohn saith) 1. Iohn 3.3. And this holinesse is like∣wise two folde; either inward in heart, in the thoughts and affections of the heart; or outward in the actions and operations of our liues. Saint Paul expres∣seth them, by being holy in body and in Spi∣rit, 1. Cor. 7.34. By cleansing our selues from the filthines of the flesh and spirit, 2. Cor. 7.1. Saint Iames, by the cleansing of our hands, and the purging of our hearts, Iames 4.8. For it is not enough, to carrie a faire shew of ho∣lines, in the open parts and passages of our life, and to haue our secret, and vnseene
parts full of all filthines: Nor yet, to haue a good heart to God, as some speake, and a lewd life to the world, as some suppose they may; And that intus sirectè, non labo∣randum, if all be well within, they need care for no more; and so they weare Holinesse next their skin, it matters not much what profane stuffe their liues be made of. But we must be like the Kings daughter, who as she was all glorious within; so her cloa∣thing also was of wrought gold, Psal. 45.13. And like the Arke of God, which was ouerlaide with pure golde, both within and without, Exod. 37.2. hauing a good con∣science, as the ouerlaying of gold within; and a good conuersation, as the ouerlay∣ing of gold without: Prouiding for honest things not only before God, but also before men, 2. Cor. 8.21. Secondly, wee must Follow holines in the parts of it, which are two. The one priua∣tiue, in reforming that which is euill: the other positiue, in performing that which is good. The Prophet Zacharie expresseth
them, by putting off the filthie garments of sin from vs; and by putting on change of new rai∣ment, Zach. 3.4. Euen that raiment of fine linnen, pure and shining, which is the righteous∣nes of the Saints, Reuel. 19 8. The Apostle Paul expresseth them, in the like phrase of putting off, concerning our former vaine conuer∣sation, the old man which is corrupt through de∣ceaueable lusts, and putting on the new man, which is created after God in righteousnes and true holines, Ephes. 4.22. As wee must cast a∣way the workes of darkenes, so wee must put on the armour of light, Rom. 13.12. As we must deny vngodlines, and worldly lusts: So wee must liue soberly, and righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11. For it is not enough vnto true holines, to depart from euill; but we must also doe good, Psal. 34.14. And for the extent of our holinesse in both these; we must not onely cleanse our selues from some, but from all filthinesse; and that both of the Flesh and Spirit; and grow vp, not onely into some, but into all holines, 2. Cor. 7.1, being holy in all manner
of conuersation, 1 Pet. 1.15. It was the saying of one, and it is the conceit of many, alijs in rebus pietatem colas, sanctitatem serues, God bee mercifull to mee in this, or that sinne, and in other things I will be holy, yea mar∣ry will I. But sanctification admitts of no such dispensation, he that makes not some conscience of all sinne, makes no true con∣science of any; and hee that is not in some measure sanctified in euery part, is truely sanctified in no part. For Holinesse it is as a leuen leuening the whole lumpe, & sprea∣ding the sanctifying power thereof through euery part and passage both of heart and life. And therefore the Apostle praying for the sanctification of the Thes∣salonians prayes that God would Sanctifie them throughout, that their whole spirits, and soules, and bodies, may bee kept blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, 1. Thes. 5.23. Thirdly, wee must follow holines, in the degrees of it, not contenting our selues with an huc vsque, thus farre will I goe in
holinesse and no farther; saying with the monke in Saint Bernard, Nec peior fieri volo, nec melior cupio, I will bee no worse, and I care not to be better. For wee no sooner cease to bee better, but we beginne to bee worse: nay, we were neuer truely good, if we desire and endeauour not to bee bet∣ter. Let vs therefore follow holines, with an vlterius, yet further, still increasing with the increasing of God, and endeauouring to a further measure and degree of holines; according to that of Saint Iohn, He that is righteous, let him be more righteous, and hee that is holy, let him bee more holy, Reuel. 22.11. And Saint Paul is vehement in this point of progresse and proceeding, in the way of holines, We beseech you, brethren, and exhort you by the Lord Iesus, that as you haue receaued, how you ought to walke, and to please God, so ye would abound more and more, 1. Thess. 4.1. And certainely, Suauissima est vita, sentire se indies fieri meliorem; It is a most sweet comfort to a mans life, to finde and feele in himselfe, the powerfull experi∣ence
of a daily growing and going on in an holy and sanctified course of life. For this, it is a true testimony to his soule, that his holines is true and sincere; euen as the Scale of God vpon it, that it is from God. Fourthly, wee must follow holines in all the holy meanes of it, whereof I will name onely two, and but name them, the Word, and Prayer. For of men it may be said, as Saint Paul saith of the creatures for meat, that they are sanctified by the Word and Pray∣er, 1. Tim. 4. First for the Word, it is the ordinary out∣ward meanes which God hath sanctified, to sanctifie vs. Father, sanctifie them with thy trueth, thy Word is the trueth, saith our Sauiour, Ioh. 17.17. And Ioh. 15.3. Now are you cleane through the Word, which I haue spoken to you. In which respect, the Word of God is called, a pure Word, Prou. 30.5. Psal. 19.8. pure, not onely formaliter, because it is pure in it selfe, and contrary to all cor∣ruption of life, but also effectiue, because it hath this power and efficacie, to make vs
pure and holy. Secondly, as the Word is the meanes from God, to worke holines in vs, So Prayer is the meanes from vs, to ob∣taine holinesse from God. A powerfull meanes, so powerfull, that the very power of Sanctification is with it: For by it is the Spirit of sanctification and holinesse giuen vnto vs: So saith our Sauiour, How much more shall your heauenly Father giue the holy Spirit to them that aske it, Luke 11.13. And to this purpose wee shall obserue in the Scripture, that the holy Ghost did then especially come vpon men, when they were at their prayers, Actes 2.1. and 4.31. As supplication is the meanes of sanctifi∣cation, so the time of supplication is the time of Sanctification. And therefore if we would be holy, and liue well; let vs bee deuout, and pray well, for hee that prayes well, can neuer liue ill. Thus must wee follow holinesse, indea∣uouring by all meanes, to separate our selues from euery knowne sinne, and to sanctifie our selues in all holy obedience
vnto God, by a hearty desire, and a holy endeauour to frame both our hearts and liues in all things according to his holy will and pleasure: So that though there fall out many intercurrent infirmities in the course of our liues; yet, it may still be the generall bent, the constant and full purpose of our hearts, and the entire desire and endeuour of our soules, in nothing willingly to sinne against God, but in all things to please him, and to approoue our selues vnto him. An exhortation, if euer, and for any, for vs, and for these times most necessary: Wherein prophanenesse hath set her foot vpon the necke of holines, and the whole world lies drowned in a deluge of vnsan∣ctified liuing: as if men had made this Law amongst themselues, and sworne to obserue it in their practice, Let no man a∣mongst vs be holy. Insomuch that he that de∣parteth from euill is counted mad, as the Pro∣phet speaketh, Es. 59.15. And it seemeth a strange thing vnto them, that others runne not
with them, into the same excesse of riot, and therefore speake they euill of them, 1. Pet. 4.4. So that if we but tell them of a holy and sanctified life, they are ready to tell vs, that this is no age for Saints; that they will not be so holy, as to goe to hea∣uen before their bones bee colde; that sanctity is but a sullen quality, that makes a man vnfit for any good company. Thus doe they scoffe at sanctification and holi∣nes, the meanes of their saluation and hap∣pinesse; and make themselues merry with their owne damnation. But we must tell them againe, that he that will not bee a Saint, a mortified Saint on earth, shall ne∣uer be a Saint, a glorified Saint in heauen. And he that will not be so sullen, as to bee holy, for feare of loosing the comfort of good company (as they call it,) shall neuer be so happy, as to enioy the bles∣sed comfort and company of God and his holy Angels. For without holinesse no man shall see the Lord. In which blessed vision of God consisteth all our happines. For so the
summe and substance of that blessed sal∣uation, which we all expect and looke for in the heauens, is expressed in Scripture, by the seeing of God with open face, 2. Cor. 3. By the seeing of him face to face, 1. Cor. 13. By the seeing of him as he is, 1. Iohn. 3. So the Schoolemen say, that visio Dei est tota merces, The seeing of God is the plenary reward promised to the Saints. The glo∣ry of blessed spirits, their euerlasting plea∣sure, fulnesse of blisse, perfect beatitude, and totall glorification. So Christ him∣selfe maketh all the blessednes of our sal∣uation, to consist in this, that wee shall see God: Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Matth. 5.8. Now thus to see God, it is fully to en∣ioy God, and in him all the good things of God, who himselfe shall bee all in all vn∣to vs, euen the vniuersall felicity of all his Saints: as in whom wee shall haue in an eminent sort, whatsoeuer may moue admiration, cause delectation, and giue contentation; euen an vniuersall colle∣ction
of all blessings, comforts, and con∣tentments: So that though wee be but men, yet seeing God, and being with God, wee shall liue as it were the life of God, in fulnesse of ioy and pleasures for euermore. Which blessed estate of saluation and happinesse, can neuer bee attained vnto, but by the meanes of sanctification and holinesse: God hath chosen vs vnto salua∣tion, sayth the Apostle, but through the sanctification of the Spirit, 2. Thessal. 2.13. Holinesse, it is as the Perspectiue, through which wee must see God. No man can come to saluation, as the end, but by sanctification as the meanes. No sancti∣fication in this life, no saluation in the life to come. No holinesse heere, no hap∣pinesse heereafter. It is as possible, to see the Sunne without eyes, as to see God and be saued without holinesse. The kingdome of God is an vndefiled kingdome, 1. Peter 1.4. Because none that are defiled shall enter into it. There shall in no wise enter
into it, any vncleane thing, or whatsoeuer worketh abomination, Reuel. 22.27. Know yee not, sayth the Apostle, that the vn∣righteous shall not inherit the kingdome of God? Be not deceiued, neither Idolaters, nor Adul∣terers, nor Fornicators, nor vncleane per∣sons in any kinde, nor Theeues, nor Couetous, nor Drunkards, nor Reuilers, nor Extortioners, nor any the like, shall inherit the Kingdome of God, 1. Cor. 6.9. Whosoeuer leades a lewd and vnsanctified life on earth, shall neuer liue a blessed and glorified life in heauen. For without holinesse no man shall see the Lord. What manner of persons then ought wee to bee, in all holy con∣uersation and godlinesse? How ought we to follow holinesse, in all the kindes of it, both in soule and body, both in heart and life? In all the parts of it, by departing from all euill, and indeauouring our selues to all good? In all the degrees of it, by growing vp vnto full holines in the feare of God? And in all the holy meanes of it, especially by giuing all diligence to the
Word and Prayer. Wherefore hee that is not yet holy, let him become holy, and hee that is holy, let him be more holy: that so hauing fruite in holi∣nesse, our end may bee euerlasting life. Which eternall life, as it is the free gift of God; So, he giue it to vs all, through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, three persons, and one indiuisible God, be all Ho∣nour, Power, Praise, and Thanks∣giuing, now and for euer. AMEN. FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by IOHN BILL. M.DC.XXII.
