6468 99845152 10037
A DEFENCE OF TABACCO: VVITH A FRIENDLY ANSWER TO THE late printed Booke called Worke for Chimny-Swee∣pers, &c. Si iudicas, cognosce: si Rex es, iube LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Thomas Man. 1602.
TO THE RIGHT WOR∣SHIPFVL SIR HENRIE COCKE knight, Cofferer to her Maiestie: and Master Richard Browne Esquire, Clarke of the Greene cloth. MVch here is said, Tabacco to defend, And much was said, abacco to disgrace: Reade, marke, and scan: then censure in the end: Both you are men, most fit to iudge the case. Esteeme of me, as you in me shall find: Craue pardon first I do: and that obtaind, Know this, that no man shall with better mynd, Each where declare to you his loue vnfaind. Come what shall come, to this poore Indian toy: Vnto you both, I wish immortall ioy.
A DEFENCE OF TABACCO: VVITH A FRIENDLY ANSWER TO THE late printed Booke called Worke for Chimny-swee∣pers, &c. Si iudicas, cognose: si Rex es, iube. THere was published of late, a cer∣taine briefe Discourse of Tabacco. By whom it was penned, I know not, I protest: no more then I know his name, that did lay the first stone at the building of London bridge. But in my iudgement, he seemeth to be a man, well read, and of sufficient learning, and vnderstanding. I am requested by some of my friends, (who rather may command me,) thoroughly to peruse it, and that being done, to giue my censure, and opi∣nion, and therewithall, to giue such defence as I can, to that poore simple, if the truth of the matter, will any maner of way, seeme to beare it. Loath I am, I confesse, to entermeddle in anie such matters: neuerthelesse, for so much, as modest, and
scholerly disputations are to be allowed, and confe∣rence betweene such, as haue bene ciuilly brought vp in schooles, are not to be disliked: for that oftentimes they do much good, and giue great contentment to the Reader, if they be done with due regard, of time, place, and person: I haue thought it not amisse to yeeld vnto my friends request: and to say something o the mat∣ter: more I assure you, to satisfie their desire herein, then otherwise, to seeke to offend anie. For I do protest, and that truly, that I am no way high minded: or do challenge anie whit so much vnto my selfe, as some per∣chaunce, rather of good will, no doubt, then of my de∣sert do yeeld vnto me. And among that number of men I do account my selfe, that rather desireth to learne of others, then to be a teacher, and an instructer of anie. But euery thing is, as it is taken: and my hope is, that nothing shalbe ill taken there, where all is well meant. And before I enter into the matter it selfe, I hold it not amisse to put downe the maine point of the Dis∣course, or the true state of the question, as they call it, and so much the rather, for that the Authour seemeth somewhat vncertaine herein: sometime in∣ueighing against Tabacco it selfe, and his manifest qua∣lities: sometime speaking but onely against the great abuse thereof. If his meaning be, onely to condemne the abuse of Tabacco: in that, I am readie to take his part, and will most willingly ioyne with him hand in hand: but yet so, as I do thinke, that a good thing should be no more misliked, for the abuse thereof: then I do thinke: that fire, is therefore vtterly to be condem∣ned, because sometime either a towne or house, is set a fire therewith, be it by negligence or malice of others:
or that good drinke is therfore to be dispraised, because some that exceed therein, and lye tipling, and quaffing at it all day long, sometime do lose, both their wealth, and wits and all thereby. Leauing therefore, the abuse of Tabacco: or at the least, touching it, as occasion shall be offered: my meaning is onely to deale with Tabacco it selfe: and therein to shew: that, neither of it selfe, or for it selfe, it is to be so mightily misliked: or at the least wise, not so much to be misliked for those causes, and reasons, which are by the Author alleaged. The order that I will obserue shall be thus: the eight chiefe, and capitall arguments, which him selfe hath set downe, I will alleage verbatim, and in the same or∣der, as he hath placed them. And that being done, I will collect and gather, as briefly as I can, the pith, summe, or substance, of his principall proofes, which he bringeth for the farther strengthening, and confirma∣tion of his said arguments, but yet not rehearsing all the Authors words, for that would be too long, and ouer tedious: but, in that behalfe, I will referre the Reader ouer to the booke that is published in print, for his bet∣ter satisfaction. And hauing answered his arguments, then will I briefly deale with such pretie by-points, and questions of learning, which shall be worth the noting, and shall be found here and there sprinkled, and scatte∣red, in all the Chapters of his booke following, in order as they lye. Touching mine owne particular fantacie and affe∣ction to Tabacco: I protest, it is no maner of way, tyed vnto it. For in all my life, either I did neuer take it at all: or else verie seldome: so that, euen in that respect also, I may be held▪ as a most indifferēt iudge for the matter.
Not making indeede, anie great reckening or account, on which side the iudgement, or sentence shall go: not much vnlike to a friends saying of mine, of late: and it was thus: This friend of mine, being not many yeares agoe, a great Courtier, and pleasant conceited Gentle∣man: but now altogether retired into the countrey, and a man of verie good woorth, and qualitie; had at that time a sute vnto his Lord and maister, whom he then serued: for the sauing of a man, that was then condem∣ned to be hanged: and but for a trifle neither, quoth he: What is that, said his Lord? Onely said he, for mista∣king of a word or two: for whereas he shuld haue bid an honest man, good morrow: he chaunced to bid him Deliuer his purse. Well said his Lord, smiling, I wil do what I can to get his pardon of her Maiestie: but yet in good faith tell me, what shalt thou haue, for thy paines? if his pardon be gotten. By my troth, quoth he: and I will not lye vnto your Lordship, the troth is, I am pro∣mised fortie pound. But if it please your Honor to make it vp ten pound more, and to giue me fiftie, as God iudge me, I care not if he be hanged by and by. And e∣uen so in a maner it fareth with me, touching the case of Tabacco now in question. For if vpon the matter, he shal be found meete to remaine still in request, in some sort, I shall be glad thereof: if otherwise, I shall not greatly be aggrieued. But yet, for that this Tabacco, is a poore gentleman, and a stranger; and, as it should seeme, of some good account in his countrey, with the high Priests, and Ru∣lers of the Sinagogues there, and can speake no word of our language to defend himselfe, being so mightily accused as he is: and now standeth vpon his triall, at the
Barre, I could wish, that for the honor of our countrie he might be both honorably, and fauorably dealt with∣all, and to be permitted to entertaine some one man or other to pleade his cause, and to speake for him: were it but in forma pauperis: or rather as my neighbours of P∣ticoate-lane, Scold, Chider, and Spend-all, are wont to call it, in forme of Papers. And for that it is a deede of cha∣ritie to succour and helpe the needie: and for that I am naturally enclined to pitie, and to fauour poore straun∣gers, I pray you giue me leaue to say something in his behalfe, and to speake that which I haue to say, franckly, and freely, without any offence. The first Argument, is: That in the vse, or custome of Tabacco, no methode, or or∣der is obserued: diuersity, and distinction of persons, times, and seasons considered: no varieties of accidents, and disea∣ses pondered, &c. The first reason dependeth wholly vpon this point: Because there is no order, or methode kept there∣in: therefore either it, or rather the daily vse of it, is to be discommended. And for proofe therof, there is men∣tioned, the decay of a Commonwealth, for lacke of or∣der, and right gouernment: and beside hat, a long dis∣course is brought in, out of Hippocrates, Galen, and other good writers, as also grounded vpon good experience: That there must regard be had, of the age, of the time, of the disease, of the sexe, of the region and place, of the complexion, &c. or else all is marred: and there can come no good either of it, or of any thing else that is
disorderly taken, &c. All this is yeelded vnto, so that there needeth no lon∣ger speech at al▪ where thre is no contradictiō. So that briefly to conclude: This Argument seemeth, altoge∣ther to driue against the immoderat, and disorderly a∣buse of Tabacco: and not much against the thing it self: and euery artificer and meane trades man, can both see it, and also say as much: that where no order is kept, there the worke cannot prosper, or come to good ef∣fect. As for example: He were a simple Cooke, that thought all meates should be dressed alike: or that a Chine of Beefe, should haue no greater a fire, nor no longer a time of rosting, then a dousin of Larkes. And he hath small knowledge in baked meate, that suppo∣seth that a good fat pastie of Venison, must haue no longer a time, either of baking, or of soaking, then an apple Tart. Neither is he to be accounted to haue any skill in baking of bread, I trow, that will first thrust in the batch of bread into the Ouen, and then make the fire afterward. So that to conclude, where all circumstances are not considered, that ought to be regarded: and where any action is to be performed, and where methode, order, and proportion is not kept and obserued, there all the labour is lost, and whatsoeuer is taken in hand, is mard for lacke of discretion. So fareth it with Tabacco: that where it is immoderately and disorderly vsed, there I confesse some offence perchaunce, may well inough grow by the abuse therof: and yet for all that, the poore Simple of it selfe, and the right vse thereof, may iustly deserue great commendation. Hitherto then, it seems we agree well inough.
But here in your farther discourse you say: That we see by experience, that some diseased of the Dropsie, and mois complexions, and maladies growing of superfluities of hu∣mors, haue receiued great helpe by the frequent vse of this Tabacco, &c. Tabacco is very much beholding to you for this, I assure you, that your selfe hath here confessed by the way: and it is almost as much, as is either to be wished, or looked for, for the great good of Tabacco. For if it be well weighed, it mightily confuteth, all the rest in a ma∣ner of your bitter inueighing against it; in other places: namely: that it hindreth digestion, it depriueth nature of nourishment, it destroyeth naturall heate, it marreth propa∣gation, it is a daungerous poison: and the like. For now in the meane while, ex confessis: Tabacco in this place is held for a thing very good for dropsies you say and moist complexions, and waterish diseases: and in some o∣ther placeshereafter, as you affirme, it is good for the scur∣uy, for weake cold stomackes, for rheumaticke fluxes, for grosse & foggy bodies, yea: and for expelling of poyson in some sort, &c. All which sayings of yours, are in my opinion mar∣uellous great praises for Tabacco: & so great, as no grea∣ter praise can well be deuised, to be attributed, or giuen, to any one simple in the garden. What? To be good to cure dropsies, and waterish diseases, and rheumes, and scuruies, and cold, and weake stomackes, &c. Why? what would you more? would you haue it good for all things? Nay: the honest stranger that praised butter so much, could neuer bring that to passe in his butter as good as it was: for when that he had said all the good that he could of it, saying, it was good to eate at all times, both morning and euening, and good for all
sorts of people both early and late, and good for pies, cakes, and spice-bread, and many other iunketing knackes; and in the end praised it so excessiuely, that at the last he confirmed it with an oath, that it was the on∣ly thing in the world, for it was good for all things: Nay, ho there, sayd a good fellow, and a stander by, Thats not so: for it is not good to stop ouens. Although Tabacco be not good for all things: no, nor for so many things neither, as butter is perchance, yet by my fay: it is well, if it be good for so many things, and so great matters, as dropsies and the like, as you haue sayd: and you shall hardly match him againe I warrat you, with his like in all points. Marry if your meaning be by this reason, onely to reprehend the abuse and disorder thereof: Then this controuersie is at an end. But yet as I haue already said: The lacke of discretion of the party that vseth it: is no dispraise to the thing that is abused. You still go on, and at the last you find fault with Tabacco, For that by the vse of Tabacco, the natuall offices and functions of the body are peruerted, as namely the mouth, throat, and stomacke, are made emunctory cleansing places, and sinkes for the filth, and superfluous excrements of the whole body, &c. But this obiection is very weake, and to little pur∣pose. For who sees not, that those parts which you haue named, are in some sort appointed by nature, to serue for the selfe same purposes, which you haue here men∣tioned: as the mouth to auoide superfluous spittle, by hawking, reaching, and spitting: the nose, by vttering such filth, as descendeth from the braine, and forepart of the head: the throate, by coughing, to rid, & make pas∣sage
for tough fleame, from the lungs, and also to cast vp and discharge ill matters from the stomacke, by the way of vomiting, either prcured by art, or otherwise comming voluntarily by natures motion, when she fin∣deth her selfe surcharged with an ouerplus. So that by these doings it should seeme, here is either no offence at all done vnto nature, neither yet her course peruerted: or at the least, nothing so much wronged, & peruerted, as is by you supposed. Marry if these excrements which are wont to be brought thither, and to be conueyed a∣way by those places, were left there to remaine, it wee another matter, and there were somewhat to be sayd▪ but daily experience maketh it manifest, and your selfe also confesseth it, that it bringeth no more thiher, then it carieth away from thence. And so vpon the reckening, it should seeme it is so farre from causing any annoy∣ance or offence, that it rather cleanseth and preserueth those places, by keeping them much better, and swee∣ter, then otherwise. The second reason is, for that It is in quality and complexion, more hote and dry, then may be conueniently vsed daily of any man: much lesse of the hote, and cholericke constitution. True it is that the good temperament, and constitu∣tion of our bodies dependeth vpon the inst, and due proportion and mixture of the foure Elements: not that each body hath a like quantity, or proportion of the sayd Elements in them, by weight and measure: but according to the rules of iustice, and sufficiency for
euery particular body to haue, they be so orderly min∣gled and proportioned, as is best for the health and strength of that particular body, to make him able to do, and performe, all those functions and actions, which are fittest for the body to do, and performe. For exam∣ple sake, as that horse is said to haue his health best, and to be of a good constitution, which is best able in run∣ning, and other actions, to performe those things best, which appertaine to a horse, for to do: and as that dog likewise is said, to be best, & soundest, which in hunting, and smelling, &c. with best strength and agility perfor∣meth his functions: so is that man sayd to be in best plight of body and perfect health, which findeth him∣selfe best able to performe, and discharge all those acti∣ons which are agreeable for his body, and incident to the nature of man: so that, they and we consist of the like elements: but not of the like proportion & mixture of the same elemēts; but yet of such a sufficient & cōue∣nient temperature, as shall be most befitting for the health and good estate of each creature in his degree. And of this due commixtion of these elements, riseth those foure compound temperaments, or com∣plexions that are so famous: The Sanguine: the Cho∣lericke: the Melancholy: and the Flegmaticke: all a∣greeing, in hauing all the Elements in them: yet all disagreeing, in hauing them proportioned a like in them; and yet euery one well pleased in that quantity & proportion, which he hath, and enioyeth in himselfe. Now, whether these foresaid Elements be in our bodies substantially, and materially, as they be in na∣ture, and essence: or only but the qualities, powers and properties of the same: so placed and conueyed, into the
mould of our temperature, as they are able to worke, and be get their like effects in vs, and our bodies: that is a darke and a tedious question, and hath bred great contention among the learned: but yet, not much mate∣riall to the purpose of that thing which we haue now in hand. But this one thing is to be noted by the way, that none of these temperatures, or complexions, are so nar∣rowly scantled, or pent vp into such a streight, but that each one of them may in some sort, admit a certaine kind either of increase, or decrease, of his principall hu∣mor, whereof he carieth his denomination, and yet re∣taine his naturall and perfect constitution still. As for example: The sanguine man may leese some bloud, or else alter some part of the same: the cholericke man likewise, may either increase, or decrease some part of his choler; and so of the rest: and yet retaine his health: and remaine of a sanguine, or a cholericke constitution still. For as the Base, and Treble in Musicke haue diuerse alterations of rising and falling in them, which I thinke▪ they call keyes, and treines, all differing in proportion, yet in sound, and noyse, making all a pleasing musicall concord: so in like maner haue these constitutions, or complexions of ours, a certaine decent scope, or lati∣tude (as we call it) to walke in: and yet for all that, each one of them, may be said to keepe his first strength, and constitution, with a sweete pleasing proportion and harmonie. Thus much being generally spoken: now let vs weigh your argument, and the materiall notes, and proofes, annexed to the same. In this place it is said by you: that, the daily vse of Tabacco, is not good for any man: much lesse for the
cholericke constitution. If you meane, by these words, daily vse: too much, or immoderate vse; I yeeld vnto it: and in that sence, it is not good, for any other complexion: be it neuer so cold, and Phlegmaticke. No more is any thing else, that I do kow. But if you meane by daily vse, the often and fre∣quent vse thereof, and then meane that the frequent and often vse is not good for any, as here you say that it is not: then you contradict your selfe. For but euen now, in a few lines going before in your first Chapter, you said: many moist complexions, haue receiued great helpe, by the frequent vse of Tabacco, &c. which is flat against that, which you do now here affirme. But it had bene well done of you, here to haue put downe, which way of taking of Tabacco you do meane, when you thus condemne, the daily vse thereof. If you meane the daily taking of it in substance, as a foode, &c. I know none, for my part, that vseth it so; if you meane, by infusion, or decoction, or otherwise, as a medicine to purge withall, &c. I thinke likewise none so mad, or so foolish, as to offend that way. But if you meane, by fume, and Pipe, as I thinke you do: how comes it then to passe, that you stand so greatly in feare of it now, when you confesse in another place: that▪ the fume of it is not any matter, of any great importance, or able to make any great impression, too or fro, to do any great good, or ill at all. Me think (as the poore old man said by his patcht torne cloke) this geere hardly hangeh well together. And whereas this misliking of yours, seemeth to rise of his two manifest qualities that be in him: that is to say, or his great heat, and drinesse: why, you know, and I know, that hotter things then this is▪ and drier too, are
daily taken of all sorts, yea and of all complexions; as Ginger, Pepper, Cloes, raines, and Mace, and other good spices, as well with meat, as also in their daily drinke, suppinses, and cawdels: and yet for any thing, that either you, or I can see; God be thanked, there comes no hurt at all in the world thereby. But why it should destroy, and consume natura heate and moisture, as you affirme, which are the prin∣cipals of our life; in truth I vnderstand not, vnlesse, as I said, the takers thereof, should make whole meales thereof, which I am sure no man doth. For then indeed it may be, it would worke that effect: and so would all your cordiall spices do also: if men should in that disor∣derly maner feede on them: as to make whole meales thereof. Whereas now being moderately taken: and yet daily too: they be great preseruers of health, in most sort of men, or rather in all kind of complexions: as al men I am sure, will confesse. That which is added out of Aristotle; One simile, ad∣ditum simili, reddit ipsum simile magis simile: maketh lite for your purpose. For as your selfe confesseth, that; Con∣traria contrarijs curantur: so I thinke you are as willing to confesse also: that, similia similibus nutriuntur. Now ir; if Tabacco be hote and drie, as you put downe that it is, and the cholericke man hote likewise; and then if ke be increased with like: as Aristotle saith: or if like be nou∣rished, maintained, and preserued with like, as Phsiti∣ons affirme: then like inough it is, that the cholerice mans complexion, is rather preserued by Tabacco, then destroyed: presupposed alwaies, if it be moderately ta∣ken. It may be, you will here haue a kind of euasion, and a certaine starting hole: and I guesse well inough what
it is, yet neuerthelesse I will not name it. But for any¦thing that is yet said of you to the contrarie, this argu∣ment holdeth; and so it shall rest for me. Moreouer, that Principle of Aristotle: Omne simile, additum simili, &c. must haue a nice interpretation, and must be rightly vnderstood: or else it is like inough, I tell you, to breede an errour. Like increaseth like, you say. It is true: but yet in quantitie it increaseth it, and not in qualitie: vnlesse that same like, be in a higher, and stronger degree, of qualitie and likenesse. And yet, how it should then rightly be called like, being by reason of a higher degree vnlike, for my part, I see not. As for ex∣ample: hote water, being put to as hote water, maketh not that hote waer, hotter then it was, vnto the which it is put. It may well increase the substance, and quanti∣tie of that hote water: but yet not the heate, and quality thereof. Then, vnlesse Tabacco, be hotter then choler, (which will be very hard to proue) it cannot increase choler in heate, and qualitie. But if it be colder in power and qualitie, (as I thinke it will fall out, that it is) then doth it rather abate, and suppresse the heate of choler, then increase it. For warme water, yea though it be good and warme water: yet because it is not so hote, as scalding hote water is, being put to scalding hote wa∣ter; it doth not increase his heate a whit: but rather coo∣leth it, I warrant you, try it when you will. Touching the great store, of vndigested, and crude hu∣mors, which are the effects of immoderate heates in vs, as you affirme; and so consequently are cause and occasion of hote feuers; I see no cause of any such feare by Tabacco. For if daily experience may serue for a sufficient proofe of the contrarie: I for my part, haue seene none
at all: neither hath any man else I am sure knowne any; or at the least, very few, among so many thousands, that daily take it, that haue fallen into agues directly vpon the taking of Tabacco: and therefore, euen by that expe∣riment also it doth seeme vnto me, that the taking thereof, especially in fume, (which as your selfe graun∣teth, hath very, small force to worke any great matter vpon our bodies) can cause no such fierie, and extreame heate in the bodie, as is by you supposed, but rather, if it do giue any heate, yet that heate is rather a familiar, and a pleasing heate, then an immoderate, extraordinarie, and an aguish distemperature. And as for them that affirme, Agues to be cured by Tabacco, as you say; if any vnlearned so say: in my iudge∣ment, it is an vnsauory speech, & without sence or me∣thode, and I leaue it to them that so say, to defend it as they can. But it may be, you mistake them. Possible it is, that their saying, yea, and their meaning too, is thus: that in the curing of Agues, Tabacco, may haue his good vse, if he be rightly vsed: as well as other purga∣tiues haue. And that opinion well vnderstood, is not greatly amisse. For if Purgations, being done in good order, and conueniently giuen in their due times, and seasons, be one of the especiall helpes, to rid and cure rotten Agues, as you know it is: then it is like inough▪ that Tabacco, by his purging facultie, may do much good, by taking away the cause of the Ague, as other Purgations do. For if you thinke it can do no good that way, because it is hote and drie: then by that reason likewise, no Purgatiues in a maner, that the old aunci∣ent writers did vse, can do any good that way. For that they were all, or most of them of the same nature, hote
and dry: as for example: Elleborus, Colocinth, Elatery, Esulus, Scammony: which was not onely vsed by them in a manner altogether: but at this day also, is one of the most common, and vsuallest things that we haue; espe∣cially, in our great, and magistrall compositions. As for the daunger that you presuppose▪ is in the of∣ten vse of Tabacco, to them that be in health, for dissipating, & consuming that wholesome humor, by often vomits, seeges, sweatings, spittings, and coughings, which otherwise would be turned to good bloud, and nourishment: and all this to be done to by the fume of Tabacco, (which by and by vani∣sheth away, as all smokes do.) In my fancy, all this is but a meere imagination: and directly against that which your selfe hath sayd already: affirming that the fume hath no great force to worke, any matter of mo∣ment in our bodies, as also flat against common and daily experience. For neither I, nor you, nor any man else, in my opiniō, euer did see, that the fume (for of that your talke must be, or else you talke to no purpose) which is the thing onely that is in daily vse, did euer worke, a∣ny great purgings, or vomits, or sweates: or if it did at any time: yet it was by a meere accident and chance; which is nothing to purpose. As for the other humidi∣ties, which as you say, it prouoketh, from the braine, and other parts of the head: a man may thinke, that those things may as conueniently be done, and with as litle hurt or danger with Tabacco, as we see them daily done by your Errhinaes, and Nasaliaes, and Sternutato∣ries, which are vsually giuen in Phisicke by the nose, to procure sneesing, and clammy filth to come downe that way: or by your Mastichatories, which you vse to chew and to prouoke the passing away of offensiue humours
by the mouth: or by your expertorating medicines, and procurers of Phleagme to be discharged, and auoided by coughings. But if your meaning be, that it consumeth only that humidity, which is layed vp in the stomach, as in a store-house, to serue to good purpose hereafter; euen in that point also, you are deceiued, considering the great wa∣terishnsse, and ouermuch moisture, of our country, and the people thereof: as shalbe more at large spoken of hereafter: in so much that there is a great deale mor feare and care to be had, of the offences, that may grow by too much humiditie in the stomacke; then any whit, to stand in feare, of any great matter, or harme that may ensue, vpon the abating of the abundance, of that hu∣miditie and moisture. And now: whereas you affirme, it maketh, the grosse, and foggy, to be leane, &c. If this be certaine, which by you is put downe and auouched, you haue giuen Ta∣bacco, one of the greatest praises, that can be deuised. And if there were no other matter, why it should be had in good regard: yet for this only point it deserueth immortall praise. You are not ignorant I am sure, how many learned men, haue of long time labored, and do daily busie themselues from time, to time, how to de∣ise remedies, to make the grosse, and foggy man, leane, in some reasonable measure, and yet notwithstanding, you see, how few haue, or can effect the same. For my part, I would I were indebted to you, in a good round summe of money, that I might be assured, Tabacco, could worke that feate. Do you but assure me, that it can do it indeed: and I will be bound to assure you, that no Consumption, or decay, either of naturall heat, or radi∣call
& substantiall moisture, shal follow vpon the taking of Tabacco. But to come something close to the point. If Phisicke haue any direct, and ordinary meanes to pull downe a grosse and foggy body, as you call it: in my conceit, it must be, by conuenient competent euacua∣tions, and drying diets, fit, and agreeable for the pur∣pose. Now sir: if those ordinary remedies which are v∣suall in the common course of Phisicke, for the abating of ouermuch foggy fatnesse, are, and ought to be of the same quality and condition that Tabacco is: that is to say, hote, and dry: and notwithstanding the daily vse of them, yet for all that, we stand no whit in feare, that either consumptions, or decay of naturall heate and moisture, will ensue vpon the vse thereof, when they are ministred: what is the reason then, why we should be so much afeard, of the vsing of Tabacco, in the like case, ha∣uing the selfe same properties, that other medicines either haue, or should haue, being vsed to the same ef∣fect, and purpose? And whereas you imagine it is very vnapt, to breed good nourishment (and vpon that hangeth the greatest weight, and moment of your reasons:) I see not well, how that can be: except it be, by one of these two meanes following: that is to say, either because Tabacco it selfe maketh not good nourishment, if it be taken in∣to the body: or else because Tabacco decayeth and de∣stroyeth, the chiefest instrument, that maketh good nourishment for our bodies, which is the stomach. If we meane, it breedeth no good nourishment of it selfe, as other good meates do: I yeeld thereunto, as I sayd before: and confee as much now: neither did I euer take Tabacco, to be any good meate at all: neither doth
any man vse it for foode, that I know. But if your mea∣ning be, that therefore it hindreth good nourishment, because it hindreth, and destroyeth the chiefest instru∣ment of good nourishment, I meane our stomach: in my iudgement, you are farre deceiued: for it is rather a principall helpe in that respect, then any hinderer at all. For if ouermuch moisture be a great hinderer of the stomach, by relaxing of it: and by dulling the desire, and appetite of meate: and if great cold be another great enemy, to the same; for that it hindereth, and de∣cayeth good concoction: then Tabacco, as Tabacco ha∣uing the contrary qualities, that is to say, being hote, and dry, is no such ill meanes to amend those foresayd defects, and infirmities of the stomach, as you presup∣posed that it is. I say, Tabacco, as Tabacco: that is, as Tabacco I meane rightly, and moderatly vsed: for too much wood, suddenly, and out of order heaped on, choaketh, and putteth out the fire: and too much good wine, being immoderatly and excessiuely swilled in, though of his owne nature it be warme, and comfor∣table, yet, so taken, it killeth and extinguisheth natu∣rall heate: and so in this, as in other things, the com∣mon saying is fulfilled: Too much of any thing, is good for nothing. Your discourse of smels, is for the most part true and pretty, and very well to be liked: but yet in all parts, but weake, and faint, to proue the matter in hand. The Ari∣stotelians, and the Galenists, are at a iarre about the na∣ture of smels: and some of the old writer; as also some of the latter to, yea, and those of the best sort, and grea∣test fame: haue much a do about this point: to proue that sweet swels do nourish, and are mightily puzzled in
it. But yet to be briefe, in this point, for my part, I do ssen vnto you, and am of opinion, as you are, that sweete smels do nourish. But yet the principall point in question remaineth still in doubt: which is this: whe∣ther Tabacco stinke, or no? Then, whether it do stinke in that high degree, that it doth breed such great of∣fence to nature, as it must needs be abhorred so much, as you do beare vs in hand it must. And by the way: if it do stinke: is it therefore to be thought vtterly vnprofi∣table, to be vsed, in Phisicke? For the deciding of this question, whether it stinke, or no: I know no better way, or directer course, then to appeale to the multi∣tude of indifferent voices. True it is, that as all noses are not alike in shape, and making but some are long noses, some short: some thin, and sharpe, as they say shrewes be: some great and botteld, as I know whose is: so is there great variety of iudgement in their smels, and that which pleaseth one much displeaseth another: as appeared by the merry tale of the Collier, that passing through Bucklersbury, fell into a kind of trance, with the sweete smels of that street, and was reuiued againe with the smell of, you wot what, if all Caunterbury tales be true. But yet thus much I do know, and I thinke your selfe also will not de∣ny; That men of great learning and iudgement, men of right good bringing vp, men of fine, and deinty diet, men of good worth, and worship, yea men, of right ho∣norable estate, and calling; do like of the smell of Ta∣bacco well inough. Why then should it be so mightily condemned by you, for such an horrible stinker? If it were possible to haue, so great an assembly, of so indiffe∣rent, and worthy Iudges for this matter, as there is now,
a most honorable meeting, at this very instant in the high Parliament for other greater matters, & if it might be put to their indgement, assure your selfe, it would go against you, and you would quite be ouerthrowne: and for one voice of your side, there would be twenty, at the least on the other; and all for Tabacco. For I can tell you, that this is held for an infallible rule, and to be one of the most perfectest signes of good Tabacco; that it be sweete, and yeeld a kind of pleasing, fragrant, aro∣maticall smell. But by the way of admittance, let it be sayd, that it hath a kind of ranke, or vnpleasant sauour. What then? shall it therefore be banished out of the vse of Phisicke? or if it bring, a greater commodity with it, shall it therefore, for a little ranke smell, be reiected? Smell me to the simple, called Vuluaria: or to your Ca∣storeum: or to your Assa foetida, called of some Stercus Diaboli, or to your great composition of Mithridat, the glory of Phisicke, and the wonder of the world: and such other, which are no small fooles in the course of Phisicke: and I beleeue, when you haue but once hand∣led some of them; you would thanke him, that would bring you a little good Tabacco, to helpe to put away those smels, and to sweeten your selfe againe. If men did cōmend Tabacco, to make Pomanders withall: or for lip∣salue, or for fine perfumes, and sweete smels, for Ladies chambers, it were another matter: and might per∣chance haue bene instly misliked. Your storie of Ambrose Pary, is farre fetcht, and to no purpose in all the world. What needed you to haue fetched your proofes out of Fraunce, to per∣swade that ill smels do offend? Euery dūghil in England, and something else too, can testifie that well inough.
And here I must needs tell you by the way, that your speeches, be a litle too much exceeding, and as I might tearme them, too farre transcendent, and your compari∣sons too vnequall, when you inueigh against poore Ta∣bacco. For when you talke of his manifest qualities, which are hot, and dry, and yet that to not excessiue: but in some measurable manner, yet you terme him to be, firy, hellish, burning, scorching, out of Plutoes forge, and the like: whereas indeede, there is no such matter: and ye vpon that hyperbolicall ground, as I may say, are most  your arguments builded. As if a man should reason thus: Because too great a fire, and therewithall standing too neare vnto it, doth burne a man: therefore, a moderate fire, with a reasonable distance standing from it, were not fit to warme a man pleasingly, and with delight. Or because scalding hot water, is fitter to scald a pig, then to trim a mans beard: therefore luke∣warme water▪ is not good to be vsed in Barbors basons: for euen much a like hang these your arguments to∣gether▪ And now, in like manner, what a comparison haue you pickt out▪ beweene Tabacco, and that most hatefull thing, the plag He that knoweth not of what a mon∣sterous deepe, filthy, corrupt, stinking putrefaction, the plague proceedeth, being able not onely to infect ano∣ther: but also to beget in a second person, in a third, yea and in a fourth man, another monsterous, stinking, con∣tagious seminarie as he calleth it (a Seminarie Priest if ye will) like to himselfe; let him but reade that lear∣ned Fracastorius vpon that point in his bookes De mor∣bis contagiosis; and he shall be satisfied. And now alas, what comparison is there betweene the smell of such a
monster, and poore Tabacco: whose smell is deemed no worse of such as loue him, and are men of good ac∣count, and of a dainty sence, then to haue a certaine, drying, odoriferous, aromaticall sauour: and of such as hate him, yet if they do him right, and be not too par∣tiall, can be thought to be but something hote in smell, and as it were a little rancke at the most. Touching the story of D. T. it dieth of it selfe: and is to as little purpose, as the other of Ambrose Pary. Yea, and if it be well scand, it is directly against your selfe. For you confesse, he would not for a hundreth pounds, but that he had vsed it: and why? himselfe answereth: for thereby saith: he found great ease, of his cold, and rheumaticke stomach. So that vpon this mans confession: Tabacco is nothing so ill a thing, or such a terrible bugge, as you haue made him, to hinder nou∣rishment, or to destroy and ouerthrow concoction. For, as you see, it mended his stomach, which was weake, and feeble before. And whereas he saies, he cannot, now leaue it: euen in that also, he seemeth by implication as it were, to confesse: That there is no such horrible ill smell in it, as you preten there is. For if D. T. be he, whom I do thinke, you meane: then do I knowe the man well, and knowe him also to be a very learned gentleman: and of a fine graine, as also to be a moderate, sweete, ciuill gentleman, in all his whole cariage of his life: and if the stinke were so offensiue, as you would make it to be, assure your selfe, a man of his gentlemanly course of life, and dainty nature, would haue the discretion in common sence, to shun, and ab∣horre it. As for the saying of the Noble man; it must be taken, and regarded, as a particular speech, of an ho∣nourable
person, that could not abide Tabacco, and as the testimony onely of one; and for that one, you shall haue a dozen, of the same order, and degree, to thinke, and to say the contrary. The third reason, is, for that It is experimented and tried, to be a most strong, and vio∣lent purgation: and for proofe of this: you appeale: To the often scourings, vomits, sweats, and other immoderate euacu∣ations incident into this simple. Tabacco to be a purgatiue, or to haue a purging facul∣tie, is no dispraise in all the world, that I know. No, nor yet to be a strong, and violent purgatiue, deserueth any whit more discommendation, then other purgatiues do, being of the same nature and degree, & which for all that, are held in such high price, and great estimation in Phisicke, as your selfe knoweth. For what is more violent, then Elleborus, Colocinth, Elatery, Euphorb, Scam∣mony: and such like; and yet what daily vse there is of them, and with what good effect, and safety also, being carefully, and artificially handled, and prepared, who seeth not? A good rider had rather haue, a strong, hote, stirring, ready running horse, then a weake, lame, slug∣gish iade, as I take it. And giue me a sharpe fine edged, cutting knife, to eate my meate withall, rather then a dull penny whittle, fit to cut butter withall, when it is warme, as the common Prouerbe is. But here perchance you will say, a meane betweene both, is best; and so perchance say I, to. But yet for all that, the strength of your argument is broken. For, as neither a strong,
stirring horse, nor a sharpe knife, is to be misliked, in themselues, or for themselues; but if any offence grow by them, it is either by the vnskilfulnesse, or by the ne∣gligence of the one or the other: so fareth it with the secrets, and mysteries of Phisicke. Againe, your selfe confesseth, and I likewise do con∣fesse, that this is true, that you haue said: that is to say: If a Purgation do not purge, that humor which should be purged, but lyeth drowned in the body without any working: then the Purgation increaseth that humor which should haue bene purged, and thereby doth rather much harme, then any good at all. So that hereby it is to be gathered, that the danger is rather in weake, and sluggish Purga∣tions, then in such, as are quicke, nimble, and actiue; if they be handled skilfully, and according to art. Let the Phisition be learned, and know how to direct, correct, and bridle him, and you may turne him loose. So that euen in this respect also, Tabacco deserueth great com∣mendation, if it be well, and skilfully vsed. I would no haue any man to mistake me here, and to thinke, that my meaning is, in these speeches, to condemne, or dis∣praise, our mild, and gentle Purgatiues, which are now so much in vse, and are called: Benedicta medicament: most holy, and blessed medicines. For that is no part of my meaning, neither doth any man more vse them, in all his practise, then my selfe doth. But all my speech tendeth to this end: that whereas it is most manifest, that there is, and may be good vse, and profite made of both medicines, as well of that which is strong, and vio∣lent, as of that which is a gentle, and a mild Purgatiue, if they be rightly vsed: therefore I thinke it great pitie, and against reason too, that where both I say, may be
well vsed, there any one of them, should be condem∣ned, or misliked. But this fault, that you do find by his purging pro∣pertie, toucheth nothing the taking of him, by Pipe, or fume: for it is well knowne, that, by that way, it worketh none of those effects, that you talke of. And yet it should eeme that the chiefest thing, that you shoote at, to con∣demne Tabacco for: is only for the great harmes and dis∣commodities, that vse to come by the smoke, or fume thereof, as your selfe termeth it. And for that cause, it should appeare, you haue entituled your Booke: Worke for the Chimny-sweepers, &c. And as for this smoke, which is the vsuall thing, that is so much inueighed against: vpon my credite, there is no such daungerous purgings or euacuations to be feared to come that way, as you talke of. Some litle deale of waterish, cold, superfluous, Phlegmaticke matter perchaunce, is auoyded that way by Tabacco, as is well knowne: not much otherwise, then is auoided by chewing of Masticke, and Mastichatories, by the mouth; but yet Tabacco doth it much better then they: or else is discharged, and auoided by sneezing medicines, and cleansings, suffings vp into the nose: but yet Tabacco performeth that also, much more plen∣tifully, and much more easily, then all they: and yet as safely too, as euery man doth see. And whereas you conclude, that hereby it is appa∣rant, that: (in regard of the harmes, that do depend vpon his violent quality in purging) it can therefore neither in health, nor sicknesse, be so vulgarly, and commonly vsed: all this is to be graunted, so farfoorth, as you meane to condemne thereby, the ouer rash, and inconsiderate vse thereof; which, I do thinke, your selfe doth meane,
by those words which you haue put downe, when you say: So vulgarly and commonly vsed. And in this point, I do agree with you. But yet for all that, I say it proueth no more against Tabacco, then it doth against all other Purgatiues vsed in Phisicke. For if they likewise, be dai∣ly, and rashly vsed: and out of season: then are they also, in like maner, for the selfe same reasons, and for the great mischiefes, that may come thereby, to be as well reiected, and condemned, as Tabacco. And as for all those authorities, which you haue cited out of Hippo∣crates: they are good rules, and good sayings I graunt: but yet they tend to no other end, but onely to put vs in mind what we haue to do: and to giue vs a friendly Caueat, as it were, to take heede that we abuse them not. And therefore your selfe said very well, a litle be∣fore: that no Purge, be he familiar, and gentle: or otherwise strong and violent, ought to be familiarly, or daily vsed. This position is most true, being spoken of all Purga∣tiues; and reacheth to Tabacco also, if Tabacco be vsed daily as a Purgatiue. But for my part, I know no man, that vseth it as a Purgatiue daily, be it, either in inusi∣on, or decoction, or in a Sirupe, or Electuarie made for that purpose, or in the way o an extract, or any o∣ther way else, to that vse and seruice. If any man do it, let him do it, at his owne perill. For he that will haue the Pigge, or Goose rosted, after his owne fashion, as they are wont to say in my countrie, and will not vse the helpe, and aduice of the skilfull Cooke therein, then if any thing chance to be amisse in the rosting, yet let the poore Pigge, and the poore Goose go scot-free. For the Goose you know, may be a good Goose, (as the good∣wife said to her goodman: (goose) let him do as he wil:)
but yet let the blame light, a Gods name, where it is; that is, vpon the ouersight, and indiscretion of the par∣tie, that would needes haue it so dressed, according to his owne mind, and fashion. So, if they will be busie, and fall a purging, without the aduice, of the honest, and learned Phisition, let them take their pleasure, in the name of God: but if they chaunce to catch copper, by the way, let them thanke themselues. The fourth Reason is; for that It withereth, and dryeth naturall moisture in our bodies: thereby causing sterilitie, and barrennesse: in which respect, it seemeth an enemie to the propagation of mankind, &c. For better strengthening of this assertion: you af∣firme, that it depriueth the bodie of nourishment, and foode. And to proue this last point, you affirme, that it spen∣deth and euacuateth, out of vs by spitting, and sweates, and otherwise, much of that matter, that in time would proue in vs, good bloud, and good foode for our bodies. I graunt, that there is in euery mans bodie for the most part a certaine kind of superfluous Phlegmaticke humor: as also one other excrement, which shall be namelesse, which though it be an excrement, yet, it is called by the name of a Profitable excrement, and may serue, and doth serue sometime, to supply the place of nourishment, and foode: and therefore may well beare the name, of Nutrimentum futurum, as some do tearme it. Albeit, there is another vse also of that said humidi∣tie, which is laid vp in the store-house of our body: as that learned Huernius, hath well noted, comparing the
bodie of man to the frame of the world; hauing the great Ocean sea so placed in it as it is, that by his sufficiēt moisture, and humiditie, he might still temper the great excessiue heate of the Sunne, which otherwise, if that were not, wold go neare happily, with his cōtinual hote beames, to set the whole world a fire. The like vse, saith he, hath that same moisture, and humiditie in our bodies, &c. But that this good matter for nourishment, should be exhausted, and consumed, in that excessiue maner, by the vse of poore Tabacco, being taken in smoke, (for so you meane I thinke, or else, you say no∣thing to the purpose) there neede no feare at all in all the world to be had of any such matter. Nay, rather in my opinion, if it be well examined, it will be found a great helper, and maintainer, of that true natural good humiditie, which in time would become good nourish∣ment, as you say; rather then a hinderer of the same: as hath alreadie partly bene shewed before in your second Chapter, and shall hereafter more at large be declared. And for proofe thereof let this reason be something regarded, which followeth. This our countrie, and na∣tiue soile of England, is an Island, and the most famous Island in Christendome, as all the world knoweth. And be it, but for that we are Islanders, yet, euen in that re∣spect, for the very situation of our countrie, we are by nature subiect, to ouermuch moisture, and rheuma∣ticke matter. Now, adde vnto this, that English men commonly are great eaters, nay rather great surfetters, and do delight much, and a great deale more, then any Nation else, in varietie, and number of sundrie meates, and dishes, whereof the Prouerbe came, Tam satur, quàm Anglus. And yet go farther. Englishmen, are now
become excessiue great rinkers, not onely of Beere, and Ale, but also, of all kind of wine, no Nation in the world, more. And moreouer beside all this: we English men, offend as much in idlenesse, in carelesse sittings vp, and watchings, and distempering of our bodies, in royotous sports and pastimes, and in loosenesse of li∣uing, as any people vnder the Sun, whatsoeuer. By all which inordinate meanes: that same good and necessa∣rie moisture, which nature prouideth, and layeth vp in store to do vs good withall, is commonly so far surchar∣ged, and choked, with another vnprofitable crude humi∣ditie, that she seemeth daily to make her mone, and to call for helpe, to haue that superfluous and combersom enemie remoued, and consumed: which otherwise wold be an impediment, to the remainder of that other good, & natural moisture, which nature would willingly pro∣uide, for the supply of nourishment, and other good v∣ses. For as Conduits, if they had not vents for to spend their wast water, would in time, either breake, or else be∣come vnprofitable: so in our bodies, this vnnaturall, and ouer great increase of vnnecessary humidities and moi∣stures, being made by those meanes which I mentioned before, would breed great annoyances, if they were not lessened and wasted, by some deuice, or other. Now, here perchaunce, you will say vnto me: Why? How did men in times past, before Tabacco was known? what helps had they then? or how liued they in those daies? All this is nothing to the purpose: and is as soone answered by me, as obiected by you. For admit they li∣ued more orderly then, then we do now, and so per∣chaunce, had no need at all, of other helpes: (which for all that I hardly beleeue) or rather ay thus: (which in∣deede
is the liker of the two) that they had other helps, and deuices, to serue their turnes; which in their opiniō, was as good as Tabacco: yet all this doth not proue, that Tabacco is not good for the same purpose now; as wel as those former things were then, whatsoeuer they were. Well it may proue, that Tabacco, is a thing later deuised and found out: but yet it proueth nothing at all, that be∣cause it was found out & deuised but of late to speak of, therfore it hath no force, & vertue at all to do good, but rather to hurt, as you would haue it. Let Tabacco, be a la∣ter deuice then the rest; if ye wil: but at my request: I pray you let it be a better: for any thing that I see. For farther strengthening of this argument of yours, you alledge, that the great heat, and vnmeasurable drinesse of Tabacco, dissipateth naturall heat, whereby concoction is hindred, & by that means, many raw humors increased, &c. In which saying in my opinion, you do far misse the cushion. And this is the very point, that in all your dis∣course, is the chiefest cause and occasion of all your er∣rors, as I haue said alreadie before. For you do reason still, as though there were such a fierie heat in Tabacc, and such an exceeding extreame drinesse, as nothing might wel be deuised hotter, or drier. You know the old schoole-saying: Vno impossibili dato, sequitur quodlibet. Grant you but that false Principle once, and then any thing indeed will follow. It is not vnknowne to you, and the learned, that superexcelling obiects, weaken and destroy the senses, be they neuer so perfect: for example sake; the exceeding brightnes, and the cleare shining of the Sunne, ouercommeth our sight, insomuch, that the more firmly & attentiuely, you do gaze vpon it (as many tried it but euen this last day, when it was eclipsed) the
linder you are. What then? and shall it therfore follow, hat his moderat, and comfortable shining, shal put out our eye-sight? Who sees not, that the extreme hot bur∣ning fire, presently killeth, and destroyeth that bodie, that is cast into it? and yet for all that, I hope the mode∣rat, and pleasing warmth of the same fire, whē we stand by it, yeeldeth no offence at all: but rather is a great cō∣fort vnto vs: if Tabacco had that superexcelling heat, or such an exceeding drinesse, as you seeme to attribute vnto it; it were another matter. But it is neither so, nor so. I neuer yet heard in all my life, that moderat heat, or things that be hote in some measurable meane and de∣gree as Tabacco is, either did, or could dissipate, or decay naturall heat. If that were so, thē are they, in a good pic∣kle, that cherish their stomacks with spices, and warme drinks. Vsquabah, and D. Steeuens water, Rosa solis, and A∣qua vitae, greene Ginger, preserued Nutmegs, and the three Peppers, and the like, might go a begging. What stronger men haue you or more actiue, then our Irish people? I hope they neuer came to that strength at the first, or maintained it, now they haue it, with drinking of snow water. And if Tabacco be not by many ods, and de∣grees beneath all these things that I haue talked of, in heate, and drinesse, then let me lose my credite. And yet for farther proofe of your argument, you al∣ledge that by the same extreme heat of Tabacco: bloud be∣ing vndigested and crude, becometh vnfit for the sperme and seed of man, & therby is hindred the propagation of mankind by this hellish smoke, out of Plutoes forge. This reason wholy dependeth vpō the same foundation that the other did, and therfore may well receiue the same answer, that the other had. So that in a matter vnnecessarie, there nee∣deth not any necessary speech to be had.
But whereas you do confidently affirme: that Ta∣bacco cureth the disease called Gonorrhaea: and there up∣pon would seeme to inferre, that therefore it hindreth propagation: good Lord, how are you deceiued there∣in? and yet in so saying, what an excellent gift, and ver∣tue haue you found out in Tabacco? and what a sigular praise, haue you put downe, on Tabaccoes side? I for my part, haue as much labored, in the curing of that disease, as perchance, most men haue, of our profession: and I hope to, with as good successe. But if I had thought, in all the time of my practise, that Tabacco, had bene such a fellow, and had had any such prerogatiue, in the cure of that disease; assure your selfe, I would haue bene bet∣ter acquainted with him then I am; & I would haue gi∣uen him right good entertainement. I will not vse many words in this matter for diuers good, & honest respects: neither enter into any discourse, to rip vp, the diuerse kinds, natures, and differences, of that loathsome dis∣ease; or once seeme to mention the causes, & occasions thereof, or to deale with any part of his remedies. But let this only suffice, for an infallible principle, & a thing to be maintained, against all gaine sayers: That whatso∣euer is good to cure that sicknesse: that selfe same thing is singular good, to helpe and farther propagation; if it be orderly administred, and rightly vnderstood. For what thing in the world is there, that is a greater enemy to generation, then that disease is? Tum quia corrumpi totum nostrum corpus, & reddit ipsum semen languidum, & effoetum: tum quia ipsa generandi etiam instrumenta, nimis flaccida facit, & ad cocundum prorsus inepta. Sed hoc in lo∣co, parcè, timideque loquendum est. Noui enim quàm sint ma∣lè morata haec nostra tempora, & in quàm audax oeuum, a
dissolutam aetatem inciderimus: Quocirca, vt & decen∣tiae, & pudoris, ac verecundiae iusta, & honesta ratio habea∣tur, arbitramur multò meliùs esse, hìc consistere, quàm lon∣giùs progredi. The fifth reason is: for that It decaieth, and dissipateth naturall heate, that kindly warmth in vs; and thereby is cause of crudities, and rheumes, occasion of infinite maladies, &c. These obiections, are much like vnto those that went before: and are already sufficiently answered. But yet for farther satisfaction: let this yet, be remembred by the way: That in another place before; your selfe hath confessed: That in cold, rheumaticke, hydropicall bo∣dies, &c. Tabacco may do much good. And now is it be∣come, the cause of increase, of these rheumes, and cold waterish humors in our bodies? here is a great altera∣tion indeed, vpon a sudden. Likewise in another place, you sayd, it cured D. T. ofhis cold rheumaticke stomach. And as I take it, that was done: by giuing of it some increase of good heate, with a sufficient drinesse: for otherwise I know, he could not haue bene cured. For this is flat, and plaine, that contraria, contrarijs curantur. And I am sure, your selfe also, is of that opinion. And is Tabacco, now found out to be a decayer, and dissipator, of that naturall kind∣ly heate, which heretofore, it did giue, and procure to others? by your owne confession? By my fay: the recon∣ciling of these, and the like speeches (whereof, there be diuerse in your booke) will put a wiser man then I am,
or your selfe either, to cast about, and to seeke the bot∣tome of his wits, how it may be brought to passe. But for that the proofe of this your fifth reason, hangeth vpon the proofe of your fourth argument, as your selfe saith, and for that cause, your selfe also is willing to re∣ferre vs ouer, to that fourth part of your Discourse: euen so will I do to: and so here rest a while. And in the meane time, if it will please you to giue me leaue to enter into the consideration, of some of your pretty odde conceits, which you haue here set downe in this chapter, I will thanke you. The troth is, I feare me, I am not very well able to conceiue your mea∣ning thoroughly, by reason, that, to my thinking, in the deliuering of them, you do vse, diuerse kinds of win∣dings, in, and out, and as it were certaine turnings to, and fro; that are not altogether voyde of obscurity: but it may be, it is my weakenesse in vnderstanding, and not your darkenesse in penning. And therfore in truth, I craue pardon, if I chance to make an offence in mista∣king, &c. One of your conceits is this: That much hardnesse, and drinesse is the occasion, that moisture, cannot enter. If you meane by these words: hard, and dry: an exces∣siue, and an extreame hardnesse, and drinesse in the highest degree: then it may be yeelded vnto. As, for ex∣ample: A hard flint, or a marble stone: or a hote, hard, dry gad of steele, will admit no moisture into it, I con∣fesse: though you powre neuer so much water vpon them. But what is this to Tabacco? or what analogie, or proportion, is there betweene our bodies, and these things? though old bodies be dry, and hard too: yet are they neuer so dry, and hard, but they can admit
moisture well inough: like as when the earth is verie dry, in so much, that it is thereby full of chaps, and chinkes, because it is a porous bodie, as we call it, and in some sort spongious, it is therfore apt, & able to receiue great moisture, and to drinke in mightie showers of raine, as daily experience sheweth: albeit, as it should seeme, you are of a contrary opinion. And euen so, fa∣reth it with our bodies. Another conceit of yours is this: That drinesse, doth not onely hinder the receiuing of moisture: but also by that meanes, it is an enemy to nourishment, as you in∣ferre vpon it. First, to answer you merily: and so I pray you to take it; all the suckgrouts in London, and all the whole company of tiplers, of which societie, I tell you, there is not the least number, will be all vpon you with open voice, and come all against you in this: to testifie: That drinesse neuer hindered as yet, the receiuing, and imbibing in of any good liquor. But in good sadnesse, I thinke you speake and meane this, of an exceeding great drinesse, and in the highest degree, and such as cannot be found in our bodies: for so it must needes be that you meane, and no otherwise. And in that sence, I assure you ouermuch wet also, is as great an enemy to nourishmēt; as by this familiar example may soone appeare. Admit a very good meddow, be ouermuch glutted with water: and altogether ouerwhelmed as it were, with continu∣all raine: and you shall see, what wise hay, and what trim grasse, you shall haue of that meddow. So that v∣pon the reckening, lay but the hare-worts, against the goose-giblets, as we are wont to say: and for my part, I see not, but that Tabacco, may worke as much good to vs, in the auoiding of too much moisture, as it is like to
bring harme, in the procuring of too much drinesse. Touching your painting out of olde age, with his stiffe, and dry sinewes, and with many other of his infir∣mities, and imperfections; I confesse them all to be true, and wish with all my hart, that I were able to re∣medie them: were it but to amend, some crooked con∣ditions in my selfe▪ and some thing else. But yet I see no reason, why that great cold, should not be as great an occasion of the increase of all these harmes, and imper∣fections in old age, as any thing else that can be named. For he that thinketh not, that cold hath a mightie strength, to worke a wonderfull hardnesse, and drinesse: let him but remember this last great frost in Nouem∣ber last past, or if he hath bene in some of these great cold countries, such as Russia, (where in very deed I ne∣uer was, although not verie farre from it, when it was) he can then tell, that the ground is so hard and dry, and all by the reason of cold onely, for one halfe yeare, or thereabout, that they are enforced to leaue their dead bodies vnburied during all that time, being not able with any instrument in the world, to enter into the earth, and to breake it vp; vntill the Sunne be come a∣bout againe to relent, and mollifie the same. So that thus I conclude: whether we take Tabacco: or take no Tabacco: yet seeing all those infirmities, and imperfe∣ctions, which you haue reckened vp, do follow old age euen by the course of nature, much like as the shadow waiteth vppon our bodies: and seeing that great cold, either is, or may be, as great, an increaser, and hastiner of those infirmities, as any one thing else is, that can be named in all the world: and seeing our poore friend Ta∣bacco, hath a good and a speciall property, to resist, that
professed great enemy, the cold: me hinke, it were a reasonable sute, to intreate, that Tabacco, might rather be esteemed as a friend, then a foe, euen to old age also: whose heate in this case no doubt, is rather a pleasure, then any offence at all vnto old men. And yet you haue one other conceit more, which maintaineth one of the strangest opinions, that euer I heard of in all my life, as olde as I am: and that is this: That by reason of hote and dry Sommers in haruest time, the greatest waters, and land flouds are most wont to appeare, &c. This in very truth, is a point beyond Eela: and I am not able to reach vnto it, or to vnderstand it. It was my chance to stand by, when it was; when that a Noble man in this land, was in an exceeding great rage, with a certaine gentleman, an acquaintance of mine, a very proper man, and a stout. The Noble man grew into such choler with him, that at the length, he all to be knaued the gentleman: and often times repeated these words: I tell thee, thou art a knaue: nay I tell thee troth, thou art a very knaue. The gentleman, stood long mute, and sayd neuer a word, but at the length, he could hold no longer, but burst out into these words: As God iudge me, my Lord: If your Lordship, should tell me neuer so oft, that I am a knaue, yet you shall pardon me: for, by God, I will neuer beleeue it, and sayd not one word more. The like answer I must be bold to make vnto you: for if you tell me neuer so oft, that dry Som∣mers, make great water flouds: yet in very truth, I will neuer beleeue it. And what your meaning is in so saying, I protest I know not: but this I wot well, & I am sure of: that vpon this last great drought that we had, as well in the Sommer time, as also in the fall this yeare, the riuer
of the Thamis, was become so shallow, and dry as it were: that the poore Westerne barges complained much of their hard passages downe the riuer, to serue her Maiestie, and her Maiesties citie of London, while she lay at Richmond: and now since her Maiestie i come to White-hall, to: I know, diuerse good farmers, that are enforced to driue their cattell two miles, and more, to water them: who were wont to haue great store and plenty of water, euen at their owne doores, be∣fore this hote, and dry weather came to drie vp their springs. And therefore to thinke that dry Sommers, is cause of great waters, in my opinion, is nothing else, but to dreame of a dry Sommer. The sixt reason is, for that This herbe, or rather weede: seemeth not voide of ve∣nome, and thereby seemeth an enemy, to the life of man, &c. I marry, this is a matter of some importance indeed, and would be well looked vnto. But by the way, this dis∣course, of venomes or poysons, would rather be tripped ouer, then much dwelt vpon, for diuerse good respects. The times being so dangerous, as they are; I think it not conuenient to meddle with any such matters, and such gaps as these be, would not, so rashly, and vnadui∣sedly be opened, to the common people. I knew a Prea∣cher once, and a verie honest learned man, who meant no harme, I dare sweare for him, yet inueighing in his Sermon earnestly, against the wickednesse of this age, and telling of the bad dealing, that lewd Ostlers vsed, a∣bout
the greasing of their horse teeth, and the like vnho∣nest trickes, that Bailifes vsed, about the altering, and changing, of cowes hornes, that were missing, and strayed abroad: did more harme in repeating these de∣ceitfull sleights, then all the rest of his Sermon could do good to his auditorie. And you also in this place, by your leaue, might, in my opinion, haue bene something better aduised, then to haue vsed, so liberall, or rather so lauishing a kind of talke, both of poysons, and of purga∣tiue medicines: still coupling of them together, in such an odious hatefull manner, as you do. Whereas, in very deed, there is no such matter, if things be rightly vnder∣stood, as hereafter shall better appeare. In the meane time, yet happie it is, that God him∣selfe, hath pronounced by himselfe, that he is the author of Phisicke, and hath therefore commanded, the Phisi∣tion, to be had in some good regard and reuerence for his knowledge sake. Otherwise, if such tales as you haue told of poysons, and of purgatiues, should be beleeued: (as indeed, God be thanked, they are not to be credited) Phisitions might say they haue spun a fine threed, and brought their hogs to a faire market: and Phisicke her selfe might haue great cause to reioyce, for bringing vp, so dutifull, and so good a child, as you are. What? hath Phisicke, hitherto bene counted the most excellent gift of the Highest, and bene called by the ancient wri∣ters, the hand, and finger of God, for his wonderfull ef∣fects, and operations: and is it now in your iudgement nothing else but a hodge podge, and a mingle mangle of poysons? If this be so: then it is more then high time, for her Maiesty and this most honorable Parliament, to take some order for Phisicke, and Phisitions too. For al∣beit
you haue brought in Tabacco, as a Rowland, vpon the stage, to make sport withall, and to be laughed at: yet, as farre as I see, poore Oliuer, which is Phisicke it selfe, beares away all the blowes, vnto whom you haue giuen the longest part, and the worst part in all the Play. But now, to come to the purpose: I will not med∣dle, as I said, with any curious, or solemne discourse of poisons, for such reasons as I haue partly alleadged: nei∣ther will I stand vpon the strict points of his definiti∣on, or enter into his manifold parts, and braunches by the way of diuision, neither vnfold the diuers waies, meanes, and fashions, of his hatefull operations. But bluntly, and briefly, to answer to so much as you haue laid downe: Then thus I say: touching your tripartite diuision: (you might haue added the fourth branch too, if it had pleased you,) I leaue it to your selfe; as a good matter, or argument, for a man to shew, his wit, lear∣ning, and reading vpon: but I esteeme of it as no direct proofe at all: neither yet to be any whit in the world more able to blemish, and hurt Tabacco, then it is to disgrace other parts of Phisicke, which haue deserued better, at your hands, then this comes vnto. And as for those particular places, and authorities which you haue cited out of Galen, and others: either they do answer themselues, if they be well marked, and rightly vnderstood: or else this one generall answer, may be sufficient for them all: and that is this: wheresoeuer you do reade, or heare in Phisicke: purging medicines, or purging remedies, to be tearmed, or rather mistear∣med by the name of Venena, or Deleteria: or the like, in Galen: or any other good writer: there is alwaies added one word, or other, to mollifie, and mitigate the harsh∣nesse
of that speech withall. Or if any such word, chance to be left out, as perchaunce sometime it is: yet the cir∣cumstances of that place being well weighed and con∣sidered, it will euidently fall out, that some one such mild word or other ought there to be vnderstood. As for example: they commonly vse to call them: quasi De∣letria▪ or, anquam venena: or else more mild then that, they will say: that they haue in them, quiddam veneno∣sum: or else yet more mild then that too: as to say they haue in them; quiddam noxium; or, quiddam inimicum humane ntur: or the like. In so much that the great Lawyer Cas himselfe, who was much bent against Phisicke: yet when he called Pharmacum: venenum: yet he added and concluded, it ought not so to be called ab∣soltely, but that you should alwaies adde this word, (bonum) vnto it: and so still with that addition, it must be called; bonum venenum said he. Now sir, thinke you, that there is no difference, or oddes in these speeches? I know not sir: whether you be married, or no: but if you be, and haue a shrew to your wife: (as if you haue not, I would you had, for now indeed, I am angry with you) is there no difference, thinke you, in calling your wife, shrew: and calling of her; good shrew: or profitable shrew: or pretie shrew: or the like? Yes I warrant you, trie it when ye will. But Galen, the only man for Phisicke that euer wrote: at the very first iumpe, putteth downe, a very learned, and a notable difference; betweene Medicamentum, and Alimentum: The one (saith he) increaseth Molem & sub∣stantiam corporis: & vincitur, or alteratur à natura: the o∣ther, minuit eam, & vincit. The one agit in corpus: the o∣ther patitur à corpore, &c. These, and the like speeches
are vsed of him, and are pretie speeches, and good spee∣ches, and true speeches. But all these speeches import no more but thus much: that purging medicines, are not fit for nourishments: and because they are not fit, to nourish, and feede a man: therefore in that respect, that they do yeeld no foode, or nourishment vnto vs, the may be tearmed after a sort things hurtfull to man, or e∣nemie to man, or things against mans nature, and ther∣fore, in a kind of large signification, as a man would say, they may be called as it were, in a certaine manner, a poison to man: because they nourish not the nature of man. And after this maner, and sort of speaking, and in this large signification, calling all those things, as it were poisons that do not nourish vs: you may well call a stone a poison, as that learned Fallopius noteth: and as I say too, so may you call, a lumpe of gold, a poison also, because there is small nourishment in it: but yet such a kind of poison: I thinke, as I do know a great sort of good fellowes, that would not sticke to venter the poi∣soning of themselues, in swallowing downe their throats, great gobbets of it, so they might haue them for their labour. But, how euer it is: These medicines, are farre from the nature of that poison, which is so hatefull a thing, and called venenum indeed. For of that sort of Venoms, a very little quantity, being taken into the body, ouer∣throweth vs, and corrupteth nature, because it is ene∣mie to nature, totâ substantiâ, as we terme it, and there∣fore can neuer be turned to good: but as a litle rotten∣nesse in an apple, can neuer become sound, and good a∣gaine, but will corrupt and perish the rest, vnlesse it be eparated from the rest, and cut away; euen so it fareth
with venims in our bodies, passing through, the whole bodie, and masse of our temperature, in like maner, as a litle Saffron, mingled in a quantitie of liquor, giueth a tincture to all the water, or as a litle Garlicke being eaten, maketh both the vrine and the spittle, and the breath of the eater to smell thereof: euen such a kind, of infection, and working in our bodie, is procured by ve∣nimes, vnlesse with all speede, they be either by vomit, auoided: or otherwise miraculously mastered. But now good sir, if you were but examined vpon your know∣ledge, how many you haue knowne in all your life, to haue bene poisoned with Tabacco: I thinke you would be put very much vnto your shifts, to find out but so many as poore one, notwithstanding it is so common∣ly, and so daily taken, as it is: and yet nothing taken a∣gainst it neither, either to auoide it, or else to correct it. Then I hope it standeth cleare, that poore Tabacco, is none of those dangerous poisons: vnlesse you call him so, in that large signification, which we haue spoken of, calling all those things, which do not nourish, or feede vs, after a sort venimes, or poisons: for that they are in some maner, contrarie to mans narure, for that they are not apt, either to increase, or preserue the substance of man: and in that sort, as I haue told you, a stone, or a peece of gold is a goodly poison too. The rest of your speech: as that it is a violent Purgati∣on, and therefore needeth good correctiues, &c. proueth no more Tabacco, to be ill, and daungerous, then other things to be euen so too, that are vsed in Phisicke. But yet it proueth very well indeed, all thē to be fools, that will vse it, or any thing else vnaduisedly, to purge with∣all. And thereto I agree with you, as I haue alreadie, at
large signified, and declared before. You build much vpon the accidents, and symptoms, that sometime do follow the large taking therof: name∣ly, as violent vomits, many, and infinite stooles, great gnaw∣ings, and torments of the guts, defect of feeling, and vnder∣standing, losse of sight, and giddinesse of head, profound, and deepe sleepes, &c. And hereupon you thinke you haue a great hand of the matter, and haue said much to proue Tabacco, to be a great, and a daungerous poison, &c. If you may make your owne accompt, it were hard I per∣ceiue, if you did leese by the reckening. But if you were but friendly examined, but vpon this point: how many you had euer seene, or known, to be in this pickle, vpon the taking of Tabacco: I thinke (to speake within my compasse) it will be very hard for you, to giue the in∣stance of fiue thousand in all your life: and yet I thinke too, that, euen that were as easie for you to do: as to giue the instance but of fiue. And farther, admit that it hath wrought any of these effects, vpon any some, at a∣ny time, as vpon some great, and some vnreasonable disorder perchaunce it hath: yet what of that? I am sure, that I haue seene for your one, that you can name that way, an hundred at the least, vpon immoderate taking and powring in of good wine, that haue bene in the same pickle, and worse too: and yet I hope, it shall not follow thereof, that good wine, is no otherwis to be ac∣counted of then a poison: if it were, it were high time to looke to our Vinteners I can tell you. But yet you still go on: and vrge farther: and say that it is the more daungerous poison: because that it hath contra∣rie qualities in it: for it hath also, say you, a stupefying, and a benumming propertie, or qualitie, which is in the extrea∣mest
degree of cold, as your selfe affirmeth. Here is good stuffe indeed. What? hath Tabacco hi∣therto bene accounted so daungerous a thing, and all for his extreame heate, and therefore called by you, the fierie, hellish, scorchingfume, out of Plutoes forge, and hath it now such a great cooler ioyned with it? I hope you know, and will confesse, that two extreames, can∣not consist, and dwell together, in one, and the selfe same substance, in equall degrees, and at one time: no more then darke midnight, and cleare shining noone day, can be at one instant, in one and the selfe same place: or that any one thing can be as hote as fire, and the selfe same to be as cold as yce, at one instant. Here you attribute vnto Tabacco, a cold quality in the highest degree: and heretofore you haue ascribed vnto him, a heate more then ordinarie, nay, almost rather in the like extremitie, if your words be throughly scanned: which is impossible to hang together. But vpon this er∣rour dependeth the greatest force of your former argu∣ments. And this principle being once ouerthrowne▪ which is this: That the heat of Tabacco is so exceeding hote, that it is able to inflame, and destroy naturall heat, &c. (which is nothing so indeed, as I perceiue by your own confession here that it is not, hauing such a cooling card ioyned with him, as you say it hath: and as also partly hath bene well proued before in many other places.) Then I say, all your former reasons brought against the killing, and destroying of our naturall heate, by the great heat of Tabacco, and thereby, the procuring of so many crudities, and ill digestions in our bodies, and all procured by the great inflaming heat▪ of Tabacco, as you say: al these reasōs I say, are quasht, & not worth a buttō.
Well, this is not inough: but yet still you proceed: and make answer to a secret obiection; which is this: Many (say you) in England do take the fume of Tabacco, without hurt or inconuenience: and your selfe giueth the reason, by and by. Because (say you) the custome of taking of it, in that manner, which we do vs, that is to say, by re∣ceiuing of it, at the mouth, or snuffing it vp by the nosthrils, can neither profite nor hurt much, &c. If this be so: why, then haue you so much inueighed against it all this while, as you haue? yea, and against that manner of ta∣king of it too? For euen of that onely action, it seemeth vnto me: that your booke beareth that title that it doth: of Chimny-sweeping, as hath bene alreadie said. But let vs go on: and marke but that reason: which your self hath made, and in the same chapter, afterward imme∣diatly followeth: and you shall see, that it doth wonder∣fully cleare Tabacco; and he is exceeding much behol∣ding to you for it. For thus you say: You are not ignorant that many perillous, and deadly poisons, are sometimes taken into the bodie without offence, and daunger: but then they are euer in very small quantitie, or else so repressed, and corrected with other cordials, as that they cannot offend, &c. Let this speech of yours be well marked, and remembred. For if this be so, (as I for my part, take it to be so) then there cannot in all the world, a better tale, & in fewer words be told for Tabacco, then this is. For if poisons, cannot be taken, without great, and present hurt and daunger, except they be taken in a very small quantitie, and with many correctiues too, to resist, and bridle them: then contrariwise; seeing that Tabacco, is daily taken, and that in great abundant quantities too, yea and that also without any correctiue in all the world, and yet for all
that, God be thanked, it poisoneth no bodie: what grea∣ter testimonie or proofe, can there either be had, or brought, for the clearing, and quitting of this poore gentleman, both from being a poison as also from the very suspition of any poison to be in it, then this is, that your selfe hath said? In good faith, in my fancie, I need say no more, then is confessed, and written by your selfe. But yet, come what come will, you will still plod on: and needes you will haue it to be a poison, euen to the very Indians, had not custome preuailed to the contra∣rie as you say. And here you do labour tooth and naile with a long discourse, to set out, the nature, and force of custome, and to tell what great acts, she can do, and bring to passe: all which we do yeeld vnto. But yet, this is nothing to the chiefe point in question. And for a briefe answer to all, that is, or may be said in that behalfe: I am not of opinion that the Indians long vsing of it, hath made it no poison to them: but contrariwise, because of it selfe, and in his owne nature, it was not a poison, nor any hurtfull thing, therefore with them it grew in∣to custome. For it is most likely, in all common sence, and reason, that; things, must first either be found, or knowne, or at the least thought to be good, and whole∣some; before, they can be drawne into any vse, and cu∣stome. Some litle triall, and experience I confesse, must be had of them: to know, and find out, the true nature of euery thing, whether they be good, or no: but yet that little trial, would neuer bring it to a daily custome, or long vse, but would by and by be checked, and con∣trolled: if the thing it selfe, were not found good, and wholesome; vpon the first proofe, and triall thereof. So
that, as I haue sayd alreadie: i is much more probable, that the goodnesse of a thing, is the cause of the cu∣stome thereof, and not the custome, cause of the good∣nesse. As for those particular instances, of the people that Virgil maketh mention of: and of the woman, and maide, that fed vpon poysons, and killed others with her breath, and yet liued her selfe; let them either be true stories, or but reports from mouth to mouth, let them I say be what they will: yet I account them▪ but as pretty, and rare obseruations, of certaine secret Sym∣pathies, and inward workings of nature: more to be wondered at, for the strangenesse thereof: then to be of any force, to proue any thing against Tabacco: or to be answered, for any great matter of moment in this case. But yet, if it so please you: let all this be granted: That vse, and custome, doth make, a thing good in time: and yet what haue you got by this then? For then all the Tabacconists, haue that, that they would haue. For, if cu∣stome, say they, made it good to the Indians: why may it not do the like to the English, in time? If custome be the matter: and all in all, then let vs alone; for we will bring it into as great vse, and custome, as euer anie¦thing was. In that you graunt it to haue such a prerogatiue, for the Scorbute, commonly called the Scuruy, and for o∣ther the like diseases incident to that kind of people: herein also, you haue sayd verie much, in his commen∣dation. For there is no disease, that is more loathsome then that is: neither is there anie that deserueth greater reward for the cure, then that doth. I am sure it is not vnknowne to you, what a notable treatise is written by that worthie old man Wyerus, about the curing of this
Scuruie, as they call it; and how much he hath written in the praise of one poore herbe, called Coclearia: in re∣spect that it is so wholesome, for the cure of that disease. And if Tabacco, haue this singular gift also for that dis∣ease: then I hold him in great regard, and estimation: and account of him, as of an excellent simple, that deser∣eth rather to be worthily written of, then to be so bit∣terly inueighed against. To conclude, at the last, when you haue ended all your talke of the Scuruie, then yet you labour to proue Tabacco, to be a poyson forsooth this way: Because say you, when it is taken of an infected body, it draweth out the poyson, like to himselfe. Your owne words are these, or to this effect: That Tabacco doth the like to o∣ther poysons: which when they find any of their owne qua∣litie and nature in mans body, &c. they draw forth the same (the lik coueting his like) and yet leaue the sound, and healthy humours cleare, and vnspotted. Blessed God, I neuer heard of such a reason, in al my life. For in my poore opi∣nion, in saying this that you haue said, you haue mighti∣ly freed Tabacco, euen from the very suspition of all poy∣son: or else, I am wonderfully deceiued. In this place, there is some occasion offered, to speake somewhat of the nature, and manner of purga∣tiues in Phisicke. Namely to tell by what meanes, this act of purging is performed: and what be the true cau∣ses, of this attraction, or drawing, or purging of humors in a mans body. He that shall enter into this question, shall find a large field to plough. For there be manie o∣pinions, about it, and all earnestly defended: some say∣ing it is, à manifesta qualitate: others, ab occulta aliqua vi, & coelesti virtute: others some: ab ipsa forma specifica, as
they tearme it. And some againe, à violento quodam mo∣tu, & contrarietate substantiae: but the most famous for learning, say it is, à similitudine naturae, and that is Galens opinion; albeit, he is mightily gainesaid, and sore taxed for the same; by that learned, and famous man Valariola. And therefore knowing that this discourse, would be rather tedious then profitable, in so short a Treatise, as this is: I will leaue that point for this time: and rather seeke to answer, your words, as they lye in order. Two things, you do attribute vnto Tabacco: the one is, that from infected bodies, it draweth out all the ill humours: the other is, that it leaues all the other hu∣mors in the bodie, cleare and vnspotted, as you say. Two notable properties, I assure you: and such as would ra∣ther make a man in loue with Tabacco; then cause him to hate it, as a poyson. What? does Tabacco draw out of an infected bodie corrupt venimous humors, because it is a corrupt venom it selfe? and is like to those veni∣mous humours, that are drawne out by it and expelle? Me thinke in common sence that should not be so. As I told you euen now: so I say againe, I will not stand vp∣pon the examining and sifting out, of the causes, and the meanes, of this sayd attraction, and expulsion of hu∣mours: for there be many opinions of that point, as hath bene alreadie said, and all of them probable, and defensible. But thus much, both you, and I do confesse, and we see it also to be so: that ill humors be purged, or expelled, or tumbled out of the body. Marry, how they do come out: and by what meanes, that cannot I tell: but that they do come ou: that is flat, and plaine, and euerie man sees it, by these said purgatiues. And now Sir, to leaue all schoole questions aside, and plainely, and
bluntly, to come to the point: let me aske you but this familiar question: Doth one friend vse to driue out an∣other friend, out of his house, when he findeth him there, who is like to himselfe: in nature, good will, and conditions? or rather doth he thrust out and expell, a theefe, if he find him there: or an enemie: or such a one, as loues him not: but is contrary to him in all his actions and meanings? Me thinke the case, is too plaine, and needeth no farther dispute. But yet; like, finding his like: it expelleth that like: say you still: and this is the fa∣burden of your song. And is it, euen so indeede? and does like, expell his like with you now: who haue borne vs in hand, all this while, that like, added to like, did de∣light, and ioy in that like: and increase that like in our bodies? For if it doth all this, then belike, it expelleth it not: nor one venome doth not thrust out another as you affirme, now? For if this reason of yours be true: then he that hath taken a strong poison: should be hea∣led, either by taking more, of that poison: or else by ta∣king of a stronger poison, then that is. But try that when ye will: and giue rats-bane, to him, that is poysoned with rats-bane alreadie, and you shall see, what a wise cure, you shall haue of it. So that, to conclude, as farre as I can see, you are as farre off, from prouing Tabacco, to be a poison: as both by reason, and your owne words to: he is rather found to be an enemie vnto poyson, and an expeller, and a conquerour of the same: yea, and more then so to: for by your owne report, it leaueth the other good humours (which is a wonder I can tell you) cleare, and vnspotted, as your owne words do testifie. Now then: this great storme, we see is past, and ouer∣blowne: and this terrible accusation, is much like to a
Sampsons post, thwited to a pudding pricke, as the Pro∣uerbe is. Well now: what more? We must not yet so go away. Then let vs heare your seuenth reason in the name of God. The seuenth reason is: for that The first author, and finder thereof was the diuell: and the first practisers of the same, were the diuels Priests, and therefore not to be vsed, of vs Christians. I must needes thinke, that you were very neare dri∣uen to go to the hedge for a stake, when you pickt out this argument. And must it needs be deuised, and inuen∣ted by the diuell? and must it needes be vsed by the di∣uels Priests, and seruants, and by none other? and must not Chrstian men vse it, in any case, because Infidels, the diuels seruants, haue vsed it? what remedie? But yet my mind giueth me: it should not be so. And yet all this while, why it should come from the diuell, I heare no o∣ther reason made by you, as yet: but onely because Mo∣nardus the Spaniard affirmes it: nay rather for that he imagineth it to be so. And my answer forsooth is this, for that he doth but barely affirme it onely; and for that his assertion is but coniecturall▪ I see no reason but that it may be as safely, and as easily reiected, as beleeued. But yet if the circumstances be well considered, that Monardus himselfe putteth downe, me thinke it were a more charitable motion, to thinke that it came from God, who is the author of all good gifts, then from the diuell. This one thing I am most sure of, that euen this selfe same Monardus: whom you here bring against him, as your greatest proofe; hath written as much good of
Tabacco, as can be: affirming him not onely to be verie good, against infinite diseases in a manner: but also to haue a singular gift, to refresh men of their great, and in∣tollerable wearisomnes in their iourneyings. Yea, & to be such a wonderfull preseruer, & curer of poisons: yea, and of that great, & admirable poison too, called Bague (how soeuer it hath pleased you, to slander him in your last Chapter before this) and in conclusion knitteth vp, the whole Treatise of him with these words: That for his excellent vertues, Tabacco, is had amongst the Indians, in wonderfull estimation, &c. Now Sir, how such, an ex∣cellent thing as this is, by his owne report, should now be sayd by him to come from the diuell; that would be knowne. Touching the taking of it by their Priests, and by and by falling asleepe thereupon, &c. Marke me but that whole discourse well: and ye shall see, it is taken & reported quite amisse: for indeede it maketh all for Ta∣bacco. For take but Monardus his owne tale: and by him it should seeme; that in the taking of Tabacco: they were drawne vp: and separated from all grosse, and earthly cogitations, and as it were caried vp to a more pure and cleare region, of fine conceits & actions of the mind, in so much, as they were able thereby to see visions, as you say: & able likewise to make wise & sharp answers, much like as those men are wont to do, who being cast into trances, and exstasies, as we are wont to call it, haue the power and gift thereby, to see more wonders, and high misticall matters, then all they can do, whose braines, & cogitations, are oppressed with the thicke and foggy vapours, of grosse, and earthy substances. Marry, if in their trances, & sudden fallings, they had become nasty, & beastly felowes▪ or had in most loathsome manner,
fallen a spuing, and vomiting, as drunkards are wont to do: then indeed it might well haue bene counted a di∣uellish matter: and bene worthy reprehension. But be∣ing vsed to cleare the braines, and thereby making the mind more able, to come to her selfe, and the better to exercise her heauenly gifts, and vertues; me thinke, as I haue said, I see more cause why we should thinke it to be a rare gift imparted vnto man, by the goodnes of God, then to be any inuention of the diuell. And if that their Priests, as you call them, do abuse at any time, this good gift, to deceiue thereby the people, with subtill, and doubtfull speeches in their answers: that was the Priests fault, and to be ascrbed vnto them: and no whit to be imputed to the thing. Now sir, by the way: whether those Priests, do serue the diuell, or no, and be his seruants as you say they are, that I do leaue to you, and others to iudge. I am of Cicero the Ethnickes opinion in this: That there is no people, or nation so rude, or barborous in the world: but that they haue some sence, and feeling of God: and that thereby they do ordaine and appoint to themselues, some one kind or other of diuine worship, and seruice of that immortall, and omnipotent deity, and most blessed euerlasting power: albeit, they vnderstand him not a∣right, as we Christians do. And albeit, neither these In∣dians, nor yet those Philosophers, whom all ages haue hitherto so much reuerenced: and by whom we haue receiued so many helpes, of learning, as we haue, neuer knew Christ aright, for that perchance they neuer heard of him: and therefore like inough that they do all erre in their religion, or rather superstition: yet, in my fancy, it were a hard thing to pronounce them all to be the di∣uels
seruants, and his instruments: being otherwise good men of life, and couersation, & blamelesse in the ight of the world. But for that this question, appertai∣neth not vnto this place, neither yet commeth within the compasse of your handling or mine: I leaue it to our reuerend Diuines: to whom it belongeth to decide such matters. Hoping for all that, it shall not seeme to be re∣pugnant to the rules of Christianity, to iudge the best, euen of those Infidels: and to thinke, that as God is om∣nipotent and wonderfull in all his doings: so, by that his omnipotency, ioyned with his infinite mercies, he hath also many wayes, and meanes (though to vs, and our weakenesse vnknowne) how to raise vp, plant, and preserue, some numbers amongst them: of such as shall be accounted, and reckened among the fellowship of those his true seruants, that shall be saued. And if this opinion of mine shall be thought awry, and erronious: yet I hope, it shall be taken, and accounted, as pius error: and so I leaue for this matter: submitting my selfe to the censure and iudgement of them, to whom it doth appertaine. But let vs imagine, the worst: be it, that they be the diuels seruants: and that the vse of this Tabacco, came wholly from them: shall it therefore be thought either impious or inconuenient, or vnlawfull, for Christi∣ans to vse it? For my part I am not of that mind. For I thinke, that religion forbids it not: and I am sure, honest pollicy doth not prohibite it. Touching religion: Omnia munda, mūdis: Take me yet here I pray you, as I meane it, that is: as spoken, and meant of such matters, as are not otherwise precisely ordered, & ouerruled by Scripture, but are counted indifferent, & stand only vpō their right
vse, or abuse, to be either good, or bad: and haue no ex∣presse rule, example, or commandement to the contra∣rie. As for honest pollicie; I referre you ouer, to the daily practise of all good Christian Princes. Imagine those Indians be as ill, as ill may be: yet I know, that the Turks are as ill as they: who are the professed enemies, of Christ, and of his sacred Gospell: and yet, I am sure there are many things both inuented and deuised by them: or else by as ill as they: and also, that are daily v∣sed by them: which are held in great price, and estima∣tion, with all Christians, at this day, and by all Christian Princes put in practise euery where. Wherefore, in condemning Tabacco, and the Tabacconists so eagerly in this point, as you do: in my opinion you do in a ma∣ner condemne all Christendome for some one thing or other vsed by them: which was either inented at the first: or else is now daily vsed by the Infi∣dels. The eighth and last reason is: for that It is a great augmentor of Melancholy in our bodies, which humor, is the cause of many great diseases, and hurtfull im∣pressions in our bodies, &c. In this chapter there be many things, very well, and learnedly put downe: As, the nature, and description of Melancholy: The difference betweene the naturall melancholy, and that melancholy which commeth, by adustion, and accidentally: the straunge effects, and properties, that it breedeth, and bringeth foorth in our bodies: the helpe and vertue that it hath in it to make men wise: and how that proposition, which auoucheth
melancholy men, to be the wisest men, is rightly to be vnderstood, &c. All these things haue very good mat∣ter in them I confesse. And though some of them, by some men, both are, and may be contradicted, by the way of argument, and schollerly disputation: yet for my part, I mind not to gaine-say any one of them: for it were nothing to the purpose, for that matter which we haue now in hand. But when all is said, that you can say, and when all those odde ends are brought together, of those matters, which you haue laid downe, and scatte∣red in your discourse; the vpshot of all your talke in this matter: is, and must be this: that Tabacco increaseth me∣lancholy humor in our bodie, and increaseth it so abun∣dantly, that it manifestly destroyeth the temperature of our bodie, disordering and ouerthrowing, the good actions of the same: and so consequently is a breeder, and an occasion of many diseases in melancholie per∣sons especially. And this is the marke, I am sure that you shoot at. Wel sir, then to leaue your long discourse, and to come to handie gripes, and to make short with you▪ then thus I say: if Tabacco do these things which you affirme it doth: that is: if it increase the humour of melancholie, and breed blacke vapours in our bodie, as you do say, it doth: then suely sir, it must needes do it, either by his fume, and smoke, or else by his purging fa∣cultie. For there be no moe waies, I trow, how he shold do it: for by the way of foode, I think you meane it not: for that is alreadie resolued vpon, and put downe as a principle: That no man feedeth on Tabacco, as to make his meales thereof. Well then, as touching the fume of Tabacco, here in this chapter, you plainely, and precise∣ly affirme, that by the smoke, or fume of Tabacco, all sorts
of melancholy are augmented, and increased, &c. But in a∣nother place, you haue as plainely affirmed likewise, that no impression of any matter, either to do hurt, or good, can be made by the smoke or fume of Tabacco. Of these two contradictions, I know not I promise you, what to make: they appeare vnto me, much like to the Aegipti∣ans fast and loose: so that a man cannot tell where to haue you. For to do no hurt at all: as you say: and to do so great a harme, as to increase all sorts of melancholie, being a matter of so great moment, &c. which also, you do say: it doth so puzzle my wits to reconcile them well: as in truth, I know not what to make of it. If you can re∣concile them, I pray you then do it; for in truth I can∣not. As for the reason that you bring, to proue Tabacco, to leaue in our braine, a black, swarfe, sootish tincture, because it doth all to be-blacke the Pipe wherein it is taken: ó Lord, it is a very weake reason. For betweene your dead, and sencelesse Pipes, made of earth or other∣wise; and the liuely cauities, passages, and pipes of ou breathing and liuing bodies, there is no likelihood or comparison to be made. And for proofe hereof, let vs not stand now vpon making of schoole syllogismes: but let vs fall to a flat de∣monstration: and one demonstration you know verie well, is worth fiue syllogismes. My demonstration then at a word is this: looke me but into the throats, and no∣sthrils, of all the great Tabacco takers: view them well, I say, and prie into their noses, as much as ye please, and I will lay what wager you will, that you shall find them as faire nosed gentlemen, and as cleane mouthed, and throated, as any men aliue, I will warrant you. Againe
to go a litle farther, and to proue that the smoke of a thing, worketh no such operation, or increaseth not melancholie, as you presuppose that it doth, let me giue you another instance, by another plaine demon∣stration. Behold your poore ploughmen, that liue con∣tinually in smokie houses: and your blacke Smiths, that are still moyling in sea-coale fire, all the day long: and Grim the Colier, that is all his life time almost, in con∣tinuall smoke, in somuch, as in a maner he feedes vpon it: and tell me, if you find many melancholie men a∣mong them. All to be smeered perchaunce you shall haue them, with smoke, and soote, on the outside, and with foule blacke, quarrie, scorched hands: but yet you shall see them as merrie, and as madde knaues, with as white teeth, and as good complexions, as any men a∣liue: and as litle touched with sadnesse, or melancholie; as he that is least subiect to that disease. Vnlesse it be sometime now and then, when the poore Colier is set vpon the Pillorie for false measuring his coales: then perchaunce he may be somewhat sad, and melancholie for the time, while his fooles head stands peeping out, at the Pillorie hole. But assoone as he hath giuen them the slip, and gotten his head once from the Pillorie; and is gone but some two or three miles out of London, he is as merrie againe as a Cricket: and all to be-knaues the Marshall for his labour, and biddes him come now, and he dare, to fetch him to the Pillorie againe. What? must poore smoke, being so light a thing, and so soone vapoured away, and so, and so taken: as your selfe hath described, and by and by let out againe; must smoke I say needes haue so great a force, as to increase such a sad soure humor as melancholie? Is no possibly, as Domingo
was woont to say. Marrie, if the smoke, were a matter of solide substance, so that it might be chewed, as other meates are, and swallowed downe, and concocted, and digested, and then distributed, and conueyed by the veines, to the particular parts of the bodie, to feede and cherish them: then perchaunce vpon this long abode, in the truncke of our bodie, and vpon the thorough fer∣menting, and working of it selfe, into the whole masse, or lumpe of our bloud, that giueth vs nourishment: if all this, I say were done, or might be done: then per∣chaunce, you had somewhat to say, and to warne good Students, to take heede, how they did meddle with Ta∣bacco: for feare of increase of melancholie. Otherwise, in my iudgement, this needlesse feare of yours, doth somewhat sauour of melancholie in your selfe. For you know: that melancholie men, be sad, and fearefull, & non timenda, timent: which is one of the chiefest pro∣perties of a melancholie person. And thus much brief∣ly; touching the smoke of Tabacco. But now sir, it may be your opinion is also, that Ta∣bacco increaseth melancholie, and worketh this great daunger and offence, by his purging facultie: and this perchaunce is that, which you seeme to glaunce at by the way, when you say: that, it auoideth that liquid Phleg∣maticke matter, which would be good nourishment, and that which otherwise should be mingled with the rest of our bloud, and giue a moisture to the drinesse of melancholie, and so keepe all things in good tune, and temper, &c. If this be your opinion, that bcause the smoke of Tabacco maketh the takers thereof to spit a litle, and to auoid by the mouth some waterish matter, that there∣fore I say when it is vsed in purging, it will purge the
like matter also, as it seemes you do make your chiefest argument vpon that point: then I say, that euen in this point also, either you are; or you may be deceiued. For there be many things, that will prouoke a man to spit much, and yet they will not purge at all. As for exam∣ple, take but Mastich, and chew it vp and down in your mouth: and you shall spit for life: and yet it is no purga∣tiue. The like may be said, of an vnripe, sharpe, sower apple, or the like: for it will not onely do so to the eater thereof: but also prouoke the stander by sometime to spit, and spattle as much and more too, as I haue seene. And thereof I thinke comes this English Prouerbe: That a mans teeth doth water, at this, or at that, &c. And here is to be noted by the way, (and it is worth the noting too, and hath bene remembred alreadie in ano∣ther place before) that, of that same liquid moist matter, which you so much talke of, and make it so necessarie, and precious a thing, as you do in all your discourse: there is I say such store and plentie of it in our bodies for the most part, and it is at all times, so readie at hand to come at a call, that there neede be no feare at all, of spending of that moisture by the vse of Tabacco, especi∣ally to vs, that are English men, and Ilanders, as hath bene declared alreadie before. But here, you come vpon me, and say: Yea sir, but Tabacco is a Purgatiue, there is no question of that: and because it is a Purgatiue; therefore, it must needs purge the like matter, by the bellie, which it doth auoid by the mouth: and that is Phleame, and other liquide matter, and humiditie: and in purging of that, it maketh me∣lancholie the drier▪ and so consequently, it maketh it the worse, &c. No, not so good sir, and to answer this obie∣ction
fully: I doubt not, but that you do know right wel that as touching purgatiue medicines, there be two o∣pinions of antiquitie. The one affirmeth, that they do purge by election: and are called Elctiuè purgantia: which is as much to say, as that they do purge, with a kind of choice, or iudgement, either this, or that hu∣mor alone, or else some one humor more then any o∣ther. And yet those Electiuè purgantia, do not so make speciall choise, of that onely one humor alone: as a Deere is wont to be singled out, from the rest of the heard, and so had in chace by himselfe alone without a∣ny other: but their meaning is, that those Purgatiues do expell and auoid some one humour more then the rest indeed, which they do most fancie, and haue a li∣king vnto: but yet with that principall humor, some one or other humor too, may in part, be expelled and auoi∣ded, at the same instant: as you, and I do know, many of those electiue Purgatiues, which do purge some one: yea some two: nay, some three humors, all at one time, though not all those humors indifferently at one time, but they shall not be named by me, of purpose, because I thinke it not meete, to acquaint the vulgar sort, with any such secrets. The other opinion is (and those be iolly fellowes too, I can tell you, that be the authors of it:) That there are no purgatiues at all by election or choie, which are cal∣led Electiuè purgantia, as I haue told you: but that all pur∣gatiues do purge promiscuè; or as a man would say, a like: or indifferently: or at a venture, so that nature▪ being once set a worke by a purgation: and hauing as it were her sluces, or conduits, now open: looke what humour she findeth her self most aggrieued withall, or that lieth
aptest and readiest in the way to be auoided, that she tumbleth out, hauing now the helpe of art, to assist her in her action. So that make your choise of these two opinions, which you will; yet I see no reason why Tabacco, should be so much feared, and misliked in the purging of me∣lancholy. For if you say with this latter crue of Phisi∣tions: that all purgatiues do purge promiscuè: then the case is cleare: for then he may aswell purge melancho∣ly, as any other humor; or at the least he may purge me∣lancholy with another humour, when nature is once set a worke to purge and auoide that which offendeth. But if you do say with the other sect of Phisitions: That all purgatiues do worke Electiuè: or by choise, and a kind of iudgement, then thus I say, that neither I, nor you, nor any man else can giue any reason, why Tabacco, should not aswell, as any other purgatiue, purge away melācho∣ly, either alone, or principally, or at the least with some other humors, as well, as we see other purgatiues do: notwithstanding that his smoake doth seeme to keepe such a sturre, with a little spittering, and spattering by the mouth, as is already sayd. But it may be Sir: that you are of another opinion, then all this commeth vnto, and that you do thinke, that in melancholy matters, there should no purgatiues at all be vsed, and would haue no other course to be taken in the cure thereof: but only Alterantia, and Commoderan∣tia, as we terme them, to be vsed: that is, you would haue them vse such things as might alter, temper, and miti∣gate the harshnesse of that melancholy humor, and so in time at the length alter the whole state of the body, without any more a do, &c If this I say be your opinion:
then is all at an end: and I haue no more to say, either to it, or to you, at this time, but onely this: God speed you well: but therewithall yet still this I say: That if you will not seeme to swarue, from the steps of the learned anci∣ent writers, who vsed in the cure of melancholy, as round, and as strong medicines, as Tabacco is, and such to, as were in their manifest qualities, as hoe, and dry as Tabacco is, also: Then it shall be no discredit for you, to suffer Tabacco, to haue his place among those auncient allowed purgatiues, and to alter your opinion of this poore straunger, and hereafter to giue him no worse speeches, then vpon good proofe he shall deserue. And thus hauing made, a wise foolish speech, or a foolish wise speech in the behalfe of this poore Tabacco: now it is not much amisse, to haue a word or two for my selfe. It is like inough, that in this brag-speaking age, there will not want some store of those, that will be rea∣dy to start vp, and make hast to carpe, and reprehend▪ all that euer is, or that can be sayd, either in this matter, or anie other, whatsoeuer. And marke it when ye will, and you shall see, that none will be so readie thereunto, as they: who either for lacke of wit, are least able to iudge and vnderstand what is well said: or else for lacke of learning, are most vnable, to amend that which is amisse. But making small recke∣ning, or account of any such: my chiefe and onely de∣sire is: that this sporting exercise of mine, may no whit displease, any of those learned sweete conceited gentle∣men (in regard of whose fauour only, I haue vndertaen it) in whom there is neither scornefull, nor wayward▪ nor any such sullen sower humor, but that they can be contented to heare, a Philosophicall probleame, some∣what
scholer-like handled: to passe the time these Christmasse holy daies. Moreouer, it may be, that some also, will muse to see any time at all to be spent, in so tri∣fling an argument as this is; in their conceit, and opini∣on: but yet, for their better satisfaction, let this be said: Seeing that as famous men, as euer haue bene, either in our age, or in our forefathers dayes, haue not disdained to write of meaner matters then these: as namely, some of baldnesse, others in the commendation of folly: yea, and other some, of farre baser matters to: as of a gnat, a flye, & a flea: and yet neuerthelesse, they haue thought no part of their credit either touched, or impeached thereby: then I hope, it may be permitted to him, that is no hater of learning, to attempt the like, in a matter not farre vnlike: and so much the more for that I was prouoked, or rather in some sort much vrged therunto, (I protest) for that to my thinking, I did perceiue, the credit of that most excellent knowledge of Phisicke, not a little touched and stained thereby, vnder his pretence of inueighing against Tabacco. And albeit his meaning perchance, was farre otherwise (as like inough it was) yet I thought it not amisse, that such an ouerslip as that was, should in some good sort, either be met withall: or else, at the least, be bet∣ter vnderstood. FINIS.
