673 99852078 17381
A short description of Antichrist vnto the Nobilitie of Eng∣lande, and to all my brethren and contrey∣men borne and dwelling therin, with a warnynge to see to, that they be not deceaued by the hypocrisie and crafty conueyaunce of the Clergie. Ioh. 10. He that is of God, heareth the worde of God.
OH Lorde God / although suche lordes haue dominiō ouer vs / as knowe the not / yet graunt that we may hope only in the / and kepe thy name in remem∣braūce. For beholde the Lorde will go out of his habitation and visite the wickednes of them that dwell vpon the earth.Esa. 26. He wil discouer the blood that she hath deuoured / she shall neuer hyde them that she hath murthered. Muster you and gather you / muster you and gather you? Take your counsaill together. Yet muste your coun∣saill come to nought. Go in hande withal / yet shall it it not prosper / except Ema∣nuel / Esa. 8. that is / God be wyth vs. For ther is no prudence / ther is no wysdome / ther is no counsaill against the LORDE. ☞☜
THere is nothing more peri∣louse (right honourable Lor∣des) ne yet more pernitious and euell to the Christē mans religion, then so to be corrup∣ted, poysoned, and blinded in his vnder∣standing and iudgement, that he este∣meth & iudgeth euel in the stede of good, errour in the stede of veritie, cloked super¦stition in the stede of Christes true reli∣gion, painted hypocrisie in the stede of godly vertue, manifest and open ydola∣try in the stede of true worshipping of God, mens dreames and traditions in the stede of Gods most holy lawes & or∣dinaunces, a cōmen custome (long tyme vsed of our forfathers) in stede of a sure grounde and firme foundation of our christen faith, And finally to accepte and take Antichrist, the Man of synne, and childe of perditiō (as Paul nameth him) in the stede of God and of Christ. Who neuerthelesse is moste contrary to God, and moste hatefull enemye to Christe, in all his doctrines, workes and conditiōs. Such erronious, blinde, and corrupte iudgementes, God (by his Prophete E∣say) pronounces accursed sayeng:Esa. 5. Wo be to you that saye good is euil, and euill is good: light is darkenesse, and darkenesse is light. &c. Also the Apostle S. Paul
fearing like errour and corruptiō in iud∣gement, to come to the Corinthes, tho∣rough the wicked doctrine of subtile and false preachers,2. Cor. 11. exorteth the Corinthes to beware of deceauers, sayeng: I feare that it come to passe, that as the serpente deceaued Eua thorough his subtiltie, e∣uen so your wittes shoulde be corrupted frō the singlenesse that you had towarde Christ. For false Apostles (sayeth he) are deceatfull workers, and fashion them sel∣ues lyke vnto the Apostles of Christ. And no merueil for Sathan him selfe is chaū∣ged into the fashiō of an Angel of light? Therfore it is no great thing, though his ministres fashion them selues lyke as they were the ministers of rightuous∣nes. Whose ende shalbe accordinge to their workes. Euen so (right honorable lordes) I can not but feare lest your vnderstandin∣ges and iudgementes, be now corrup∣ted drawen and caryed awaye from the simplicitie and purenes of sincere vnder¦standinge and godly iudgemente which late you had of Christe, thorow the crafty persuasions, deceatefull and false illusi∣ons of Antichrist, that hath transfigured hym selfe in to the fashion of an Angell of lighte. For I am not ignorante that
now the monstrouse beaste Antichriste, Sathās vicar general in earth and all his adulterous generation of vipers, that be his false Apostles, most subtile and crafty deceauours, and the most ma∣litious enemies of God and Christe, cea∣se not daye nor night with false lyes, colo¦red with cloked hypocrisie, and deceat∣full and flatteringe persuasions, to decea¦ue the Quenes magestie and all you, my lordes, of hyr most honorable counsaill, wherby they might draw hyr highnes & all you, from the godly and most pure knowleage, which you had in litle tyme past, receaued of Christe, in to their fylthy Puddels and vayne inuētions, that they of their owne braynes (without any au∣thoritie of holy scriptures, haue inuen∣ted, to reuiue and to stablish the vsurped power and bloody kyngedome of Anti∣christ in this realme. By whose false doc¦trines, all the people of this realme shall be drawen from God, and from our sa∣uiour Christe to trust in most vayne and deceatefull vanitie. But if, your lordships wolde both waye and ponder, that not only God by his holy prophetes, and Apostles, but al∣so Christ hymself admonisheth and war∣neth you and all men, to beware of false
preachers and of craftye and subtile de∣ceauers: your Lordships wold be moch more circumspecte and well ware, be∣cause that not only the Prophetes and A¦postles, but also Christ him self, (to whō you ought to gyue credence) hath war∣ned you to beware of soch deceauers. And namely because this deceate ys not a manifeste and playne deceate easely to be perceaued, and knowen of al men, but so craftly coloured and subtylie painted with dessebled persuasions, and of soch as shall come euen in the name of Chri∣ste, and of his holy church. And therfore they shal deceaue many, sayeth Christe. Sainte Paul also sayeth:1. Tim. 4. In the later tymes some shall departe from the faith, geuinge eare to the spirites of erroure and doctrines of deuylles.1. Cor. 11. And the same sayeth that heresies must neades be, that the proued and godly maye be knowen. Sainte Peter also sayeth: that there we∣re wicked Prophetes,2. Pet. 2 as there shalbe fal∣se masters amonge you that shall bringe in sectes of perdition, that shal denie the Lorde that hath boughte them. Also S. Iohan sayeth.2. Ioh. 4 Antichriste is come, and that ther be many Antichristes. Conside∣ringe that the Prophetes of God, Chri∣ste, and his Apostles, haue this certenly-and
diligently admonisshed and warned you and all men, of false preachers and of leenge masters that departe from the fayth / and bringe in sectes of perdicion / and of soch that will come in the name of Christe / Math. 24 lyke as they did preach his true doctrine / which neuertheles preach their awne dreames and the doctrines of deuils, denyeng the lorde that brought them / and in all thinges folowe the spirites of errour.1. Tim. 4. It behoueth your Lordships, and it is the parte and most bounden dutie of euery Christen man, di¦ligently to search out these false Prophe¦tes, lyenge masters, and to laboure stu∣diously, to knowe which be the doctri∣nes of deuils, and spirites of errour, ac∣cordinge to the admonition and warnin∣ge of the Prophetes, of Christe / and of the Apostles geuen to them, that they maye circumspectly eschew and auoyde them that they be not deceaued by them and their doctrines. And because in the reigne of Edwar¦de the sixte of famose memory, by the cō∣sent of his honorable counsel, ther was a doctrine preached and religion recea∣ued in this realme of Englande, which now is reiected and banisshed as a doc∣trine of the deuyll, and as heresye, and
false religion: And a nother doctrine and religion receaued, to the former religion and doctrine, directe and manifest con∣trary: some mē therfore wil doubte, whe¦ther the first doctrine and religiō be god∣ly, or the later doctrine and religion rece∣aued be the truer and better to be folo∣wed. I will commende vnto youre god∣ly remembraunces (right honorable lor∣des) not such doctrines as any new wri∣ters call, of their awne heedes, false doc∣trines, and doctrines of deuyls, or the doctrines of lyenge masters. But the sa∣me doctrines that Christ and his Apost∣les expresly call false doctrines, and the doctrines of Deuyls. So that your lordships nor any other shall haue any iust cause to be ignorante what be the doctrines of deuyls, and who be wycked preachers, and lyenge masters, the wic∣ked secte of Antichrist, & who also is the heed Antichrist.The peo∣ple serue Antichrist and yet do not knowe hym. Although doubtles righ¦te honorable lordes) I well perceaue the multitude of the worldly people so pla∣ged of God with blindnes and hardnes of hearte, that all though they with all dyligence studie and obedience, dayly do serue Antichriste, the greatest aduersary of God and of Christe: yet do they not knowe nor vnderstande hym to be Anti∣christe
christ, nor do perceaue his crafty illusiōs, his hypocrisie, and disguysed fashons. So that except a man consider & beholde hym assuredlye by the light of Gods worde, he shal neuer vnderstande, espie, nor perceaue hym, although he had a subtyle and pregnant witte, as clere and wel seyng eyes, and as craftye a brayne as euer had man. He cōmeth in so dis∣guysed vnder the colour of holynes: Yea and that in the name of Christ, & vnder the pretence to condemne al false and er∣ronious doctrines and heresies. Which thing all Christen princes, and all other good men, wilbe most diligent and glad to do. But herin he most subtilie and sha∣mefully begileth al men. For he and his adulterouse generation will chalenge to him and to them autoritie & power only geuen to determe, discerne, and to iudge what is heresie, errour,Anti∣christ in the name of heresie, condēneth the trueth & what is false doctrine. And by that meanes, be the do∣ctrine neuer so true and godly (yf it soūde any thinge against his vsurped power, his pryde, his profite, his vngodlye decrees and lawes made in generall Counseils, and other his false and wic∣ked determinations, and iudgementes) he will condemne it for heresie. And he that preacheth it, hym will he
accurse, callyng him the enemie of God, and of al the holy church, a seditious per¦son, not worthye to dwell in any comen wealth. But yf Emperours, Kynges & other ciuill gouernours & rulers, wolde examin his doctrines, and trye them by the light of Gods heauenly worde, and proue all his other procedinges, how they agree with the same. They should then sone perceaue, vnderstāde, & knowe, that he himselfe (although he calleth him selfe the head of the church and Christes vicar vpon earth, the successour of the A∣postles) yet should they fynde and proue hym, to be the head Antichrist, the Arch∣heretique, the man of Synne, and childe of perdition: And al his sectes, to be the sectes of perdition, that departe from the fayth, that also attende to the spirites of errour, denyeng the Lorde that bought them. But for as moch (right honorable lor∣des) as no man can wel put any diuersi∣tie betwixt two extreme cōtraries, except he perfitly vnderstande and knowe bothe the contraries, I will first describe and set forth vnto your good lordships, Christ (who is contrarye to that wicked Anti∣christ) according as the holy scriptures,Ioh. 5. which (as Christ sayeth) beare true wit∣nesse
of hym. And then I will also paynt in his lyuely colours, that Arch heretike Antichriste, that extreame contrarye to Christe. But no nother wyse, then Christ and his Apostles in the holy scriptures haue reueled and euidētly expressed and declared hym. So that the one contrarye compared and set nere to the other con∣trarie, shall expresse, declare and set forth the other, more euidently, playnlye, and more aparauntly. Fyrst, Christe is as muche to saye,Christ. as annoynted, (as Iesues Christe was of God the father) not with oyle & creame coniured of our Bishoppes, but with the holy Ghoste, who in the holy scriptures,Psal. 44 and. 88. is called the oyle of gladnes: by whome God enlighteneth, enstructeth and tea∣cheth his holy Churche, of the which he hath appointed and authorised, Christe to be the Supreme head, Kinge,Phil. 2. Hygh∣bisshop, and euerlasting Priest. Who be∣yng equall with God his father, dyd vouchsafe of his mere mercy & good wil, to descende from heauen, & toke on hym our vile nature: not forsaking his diuine nature, but ioyning them together, (both natures remayning not diminished, hurt or altered) & became a perfite man, in all
natural miseries like vnto vs excepte on∣ly synne.Ro. 5.8 Col. 2. And euen then when we were his enemies he reuyued vs, and offered hymself to God his father vpon the cros∣se, as a sacrifice to be slayne for the redēp¦tion of oure sinnes.Heb. 10 By which this his only one sacrifice ones performed for vs, (not for a litle season, but for euer) he hath made holy and perfite them that be and shalbe made holy and perfite. And by this meanes he hath reconcyled vs to God his father,Eph. 2. pacifienge his fathers wrath, that then was against vs, thoro∣ugh his bloodshedinge, and paynfull death. And he that was without synne, became a ful,2. Cor. 5. iust, and perfite satisfaction for oure synnes.Eph. 2. Col. 2. And hath taken awaye the curse and condemnation of the lawe, delyueringe vs from the cruell curse and iudgemente therof. And after thorow his awne power, he ouercame death, and ascended to heauen, where he continueth oure aduocate, mediatoure, and only sa∣uioure from oure synnes.Ioan. 10. Oure onely waye and doore by the which we must enter into eternall ioyes. To whom on∣ly, we be boūde to geue the honoure and thankes for our redemption from synne, hell,Ezech. 43 Luk. 2. and death euerlastinge: And therfo∣re to obeye and serue hym all the dayes
of oure life in holines and righteousnes, accordinge to oure callinge. Herin ha∣ue I described and declared to your ho∣norable lordships oure redemer and only sauioure Iesu Christe, and his only offi∣ce and benefites most mercifully exhibe∣ted and done to vs. By the which descrip¦tion, your Lordships maye / with moch more facilitie & ease, haue certayne & sure vnderstanding & knowlege of Antichrist, the other extreme contrary to Christe. This Antichriste must not be vnder∣standed and taken (righte honorable Lor∣des) for one naturall man,what is Anti∣christ. that by nature is as all other be, a miserable synner, or that he shuld be a certen wicked persone, that shuld be begotten betwixt a Freere and a Nonne, or betwixt a Monk and a Nonne, according to olde wiues fables and winter tales. But this name Anti∣christe, is the name of a misterie and offi¦ce perteininge to a misticall bodie, wher∣of the principall minister is called the chief Antichriste, as all the other mem∣bres of the same faction, misterie and of∣fice, be also Antichristes. All which rece∣aue power, autoritie, and office, from their heed Antichriste, that in al his doc∣trines, maners, and lyuinge, is mere con¦trary to Christ. For euen as that congre∣gation
is the misticall body of Christe, wherof he is the supreme heed, that hath receaued the true and sincere preachinge of the law and of the gospel, and lyue ac∣cordinge to the preachinge of the same, and also haue the sacramentes duely ad∣ministred vnto them, accordinge to Chri¦stes institution of the same:The de∣scription of Anti∣christe. Euen so is that malignaunt church and congrega∣tion the misticall bodie of Antichriste, that hath not amongest them the true and sincere preaching of the Law and of the Gospel, ne yet the sacramentes dulie administred vnto them, accordinge to Christes institution of them, ne yet ac∣cordinge to the practise of the Apost∣les, nor of the primatiue church, nor the same can be content to lyue according to the rule and doctrine of Gods heauenly worde: nor suffer any other to lyue accor¦dinge to the same: but will compell thē with tormentes to receaue a new religi∣on, that must consiste other in vayne thin¦ges which be of no commoditie or profit to any man ether spirituall or tempo∣ral: or els it is manifest wicked and re∣pugnaūt to Gods holy worde. And first touchinge their vaine thinges, and deed ceremonies of their religion, that be of no commoditie or profite to any man
excepte onlye to the sluttishe secte of per∣dition. I note all their popishe tradi∣tions of confirmacion of yonge children with oyntinge of oyle and creame, and with a ragge knitte aboute the necke of the yonge babe, the christeninge of bel∣les, the halowinge of oyle and creame, ye halowinge of churches of churchyardes, of chalices, of vestimētes, of aultares, of aultare clothes, of salte, of bread, of fiere, of asshes, of water, of candles, of palme stickes, Iudas bels with candels blowē out at the ende of euery Psalme and les∣son, crepinge to the crosse with egges and apples, dispelinge with a white rod¦de, wasshinge of aultares. Of all which thinges the holy scriptures commaunde not one to be done, although in this chur¦che of Antichrist they be straytly cōmaū∣ded to be vsed. And yet I know no wise man yt wil or can prayse the comoditie or profite that cometh therof to any man, but only to the priest yt hath ye cādles eg∣ges. &c. yt be offred vnto hym. And altho∣ugh ther riseth not any cōmoditie or pro∣fite other spiritual or tēporal to any man: yet as I haue said, they be straytly cōmaū¦ded to be obserued / cōtrary to Gods cō∣maun̄demēt yt sayeth:Deut. 12 That which I com∣maūde you, yt only take hede do to the
Lorde, Putth on nought therto. Not withstandinge which commaun¦demente / because Antichriste wold part∣ly set forth his awne nature and proper∣tie, that is, to be contrary and disobediēt to God and Christ, he hath erected these new holy thinges, neuer of God com∣maunded. And therfore as they be not of God, so be they of no commoditie or profite to any of the people of God. why An∣tichrist commaū∣deth vani∣ties.But yet ther is some consideration wherfore Antichriste hath commaunded these vayne thinges to be done. One is, that he wold haue his filthy generation to be had in estimation of the worldly ba∣bes, because that they haue receaued soch holines from his holy fatherhood, that they maye sanctifie and make holy, that God hath halowed allready, lyke as the thinges of Gods creation were not suffi¦cientlye halowed thorowe his eternall worde wherby he created them. Exalteth not he himself aboue God, honorable lordes, that taketh vpō hym to adde holy∣nes to that which God hath sufficient∣ly halowed? Be not these his halowin∣ges of Gods creatures a necessary point perteininge to the vocation of a spiri∣tuall pastoure / that hath cure and char∣ge of soules? Or be they not necessary
thinges to be done of a Christen man / towchinge his vocation and dutie to be done towardes God and towardes his neighbour And although they be worthy rather to be laghed at and mocked / yet by these his vanities he occupieth the tyme hat shuld be spente in the instruction & teachinge the people in the lawe and the Gospell. Moreouer by these, as also by many other their doinges / they declare their di¦ligente cure and studye that they haue to obeye Gods commaundement geuen to them to instructe and to teach the people Gods worde, that leaue the gospell vn∣preached and occupie the heartes and mindes of the people with soch trifles and vanities. But because these vayne thinges do not sufficiently reuele this wicked Antichriste and his secte. That he may be knowen of all men, I will com∣mende to youre memories (honorable lor¦des) some of his false doctrines: Not soch as I of myne awne brayne, call false doc∣trines and the doctrines of deuels, and of soch as departe from the fayth, and be lyeng masters, and geue eare to the spiri¦tes of erroure: But soch doctrines as Christe and his Apostles note to be the doctrines of deuels, and of soch as by
the same doctrines shal deceaue , and shall cause many to folow the sp∣tes of erroure. So that euery man that heareth soch doctrines preached, maye boldlye saye, that the preachers therof be false preachers and sectes of perdition, that they be the adulterouse generation of Antichrist, that these many yeres haue deceaued and bewitched the world. And although Christ and his Apost∣les haue manifestlie declared, and eui∣dently set forth to the world the sayd doc∣trines to be the doctrines of deuels and of them that departe from the faith, and the very selfe same doctrines wherby An¦tichriste and his filthy secte shulde dece∣aue many Yet soch hath ben the blind∣nes of the worlde, that they can not vn∣derstande nor perceaue those doctrines, to be the same wicked doctrines, wherof, Christ and his Apostles admonished thē & al men to beware: not only because he coloureth his doctrines with false payn∣ted gloses,Ioan. 3. but also because the world lo∣ueth darkenes moare thē the lighte, And also to verifie Christes wordes of prophe¦sie to be truely fulfilled in them saying: I am come in my fathers name and you re¦ceaue me not.Iaon. 5. But yf a nother shal come in his awne name, him wil you receaue.
Now touchinge the false doctrines of Antichriste Sainte Paul sayeth:1. Tim. 4 The spirite manifestly sheweth that in the last tymes, certen men shal departe or go a∣waye from the faith, attending or geuing eare to the spirites of erroure and doctri∣nes of deuels, prohibitinge to mary, and commaunding to absteyne from meates, that God hath created to be receaued of them that beleue and know the trueth, with thankes geuinge. By this doctrine of sainte Paul manifestlye appereth (ho∣norable Lordes) that the forbiddinge of mariage is the doctrine of deuels. For God in paradise first ordeyned mariage, sayenge: It is not good for man to be by hymselfe alone. Let vs make to him a helper to beare hym company, & so forth as it appereth in the texte.Gen. 2. Consideringe that God sayde: It is not good for man to be alone, doutles it is not good general¦ly, for mā to be alone without his helpe.Esa. 45 And the Prophete Esay curseth all them that speake againste their maker. Nomā therfore durst be so bold to forbidde ma∣riage to any people excepte only Anti∣christ and his fluttish and shameles secte, which euer be againste God and Christ. Also because it was not good for man to be alone without his wife in the state of
innocēcie: It is not now good but moch worse to be without a wife, whē man is fallē by synne, beyng ye fleshe more frayle & prone to synne. And therfore that man that hath not the especiall gifte of chasti∣tie and will lyue alone, & not take a wyfe. The same not onlye contemneth God∣des mercyfull ordinaunce made for man in the state of innocencie, but also despi∣seth Gods louinge benefite and reme∣dy prouyded for the infirmitie of man, wherby he might auoyde fornication, & other wicked lustes forbiddē by God: ac∣cordinge to Sainte Pauls doctrine say∣enge:1. Cor. 7. To auoyde fornication, let euery man (exceptinge not priestes) haue his wife, and euery woman (exceptinge not vowasses) haue hir husbande. And becau¦se mariage is Gods ordinaūce and mer∣cifull remedye prouided for all men, hat haue not the gift of chastitie: It is ther∣fore good for euery mā, that haue not re∣ceaued the gifte of chastitie to haue a wi∣fe, namely because it is Gods mercyfull prouision and ordinaunce prouided for the helpe of man, and commaūded in the holy scriptures by Gods holy spirite, where no euil thinge can be cōmaūded. And also the same state of matrimo∣nie
in Christes religion is praysed of the Apostle, sayeng: Maryage is honorable,Heb. 13. & the bed not defiled. Christ also appro∣uinge the same estate in that he was bor∣ne of a virgin in mariage,Luc. 1. and not of a virgin out of mariage.Ioan. 2. And also Christe hym selfe in his godly presence honored matrimonie with a great miracle done in Cana, where he turned water in to wy∣ne. Abraham the father of all beleuers, and other the patriarkes and Prophetes had lawful wiues that were not dispro∣ued of God, nor was no impedimente vnto them, but that they had the spirite of prophesie & ye faruoure of God. Wher∣fore then shuld oure vnlerned priestes re¦fuse to marye wiues specially because all men perceaue by their lyuinge, that they haue not the gifte of chastitie? But for so much as Paul sayeth, honorable lordes,Tit. 3 that all thinge (namely of Gods creati∣on and ordinaunce) is pure and good to them whose consciences be pure and good. All mē that knowe any thinge in the holy scriptures knowe and certenly beleue, that yf oure Antichristian prie∣stes were pure & cleane towardes God, his ordinaunce of matrimonie wold not be forsaken of them. But for as moch as by the residew of their conditions and
qualities, many thinke them to be soch as Peter writeth of,2. Pet. 2. that haue eyes full of adulterie and of the insatiable luste and offence, & so defiled with filthy lus∣tes. To our English priestes, godly ma∣trimonie is nother pure nor cleane, and therfore are they vnworthy of chast ma∣trimonie, because their consciēces be ne∣ther pure nor cleane. And then be they so cast of frō God that they can not iud∣ge chast matrimonie good for thē, altho∣ugh they can not denye, matrimonie to be Gods ordinaunce, which can not be euill to a good man. And also they know that as good men, as any that the holy scriptures prayse, were maried, & had both wiues and childerne. An obiecti¦on.But to this they saye, that matrimo∣nie is godly so that it be by soch as maye laufully mary. But because they haue made vowes to lyue sole and vnmari∣ed, they saye, they maye not take any wi∣ues of their owne. But I desyre them to shewe me whether God requireth of thē any soch vowes to be made by thē?Esa. 1. And also I require of them to shew me with¦out any dissimulatiō, whether they wold haue made any such vowe, yf it were not for to be apte to haue a benefice? And be∣cause ye Pope, which maketh lawes to fil
hell / by his most wicked decrees hath ordened that euery Priest that shuld be apte to receaue ecclesiasticall promotion shuld be with in soch orders, that it shuld not be lawfull for hym to marie a wife, therfore make the priestes their vowes. But for a conlusion (righte honora∣ble lordes) ther is no prohibition nor for biddinge of mariage made to any perso∣nes but only to priestes and vowesses. Doutelesse therfore that prohibition of mariage made to them, ys the selfe same doctrine of deuels that Paul speaketh of. And their vowes be wicked, because the vowes that they make be proude vowes, that they can not rēder to God, and soch as they oughte rather to aske of God, yf he wold geue them. And therfore folish vowes be they, that displease God,Eccl. 5. as ye holy goste sayeth. And if, your Lordships, wold wel consider, waye, and pōder how moch adulterie, fornication, deflowringe of virgins, murder of infantes, and of maryed men, whoredome and the fylthie synne of buggery haue be cōmitted tho∣row these folish & vngodly vowes of sole lyuinge, & prohibitiō of matrimonie ma∣de to priestes & vowesses, I thinke, yt ne∣ther your lordships, nor any christē mā cā otherwise, other iudge or saye, but yt this
forbiddinge of mariage, is the self same doctrine of deuels wherof Paul speaketh As the same doctrine wherby the Deuel hath greatlye, and will maynteyne and fill his kingedome. Beware therfore, my good Lordes, of one of Antichristes wic∣ked doctrines. And note well whether ye haue any in youre Englishe clergye that teache that doctrine, and stobernly de∣fende the same And knowe ye them to be Antichristes disciples. And although all the heauens crye out vpon them, and al the earth wondereth at their abhomi∣nable whoredome, adulterye and forni∣catiō, yet be oure priestes permitted and suffred: nay rather cōpelled, to make soch wicked and folishe vowes, therwith to mocke the people, that they shuld not mi∣strust thē wt their wiues, doughters, nor womē seruantes, because, they saye, they will haue no nother wyfe but our Lady. But Englande can not be ignoraunt of the multitude of their whores and bastardes.1. Cor. 5. How this agreeth wt Pauls doctrine, that cōmaundeth vs not to eate with soche, iudge you, my Lordes, that shuld se it reformed. And for your owne honoures prouyde that adulterie maye be punished with the same punishement that God ordened adulterye to be puni∣shed.
Do you doute whether God did erre in iudgement? Yf you do not thinke iniquitie in God, Wherfore do ye not fo∣low hym in iudgement, that can not erre nor commaūde any vnrightuousnes. Sainte Paul (right honorable lor∣des) setteth forth a nother doctrine of de∣uels, the abstinence from meates in cer∣ten tymes and dayes, and for conscience sake: supposinge the meate to be propha∣ne, and vngodly, and againste Gods wil and pleasure to be eaten. Soch abstinen∣ce from meates Paul calleth the doctri∣ne of deuels, because it is mere contrary to Christes wordes, and the holy scrip∣tures. For meate, sayeth Paul, commen∣deth vs not to God,1. Cor. 8. nether yf we eate be we the better, nether yf we eate not be we the worse.Math. 15. For that which entreth in to the mouth defileth not the man: but that which procedeth out of the hearte, sayeth Christe. Also Sainte Paul exhor∣teth all men that they regarde not soch ordinaunces made by men, lyke as the ordinaunces made by God, sayenge:Collo. 2. Let no man trouble youre conscience aboute meate and drinke. Wherfore, if you be deed with Christe (sayeth he) from the or∣dinaunces of the world, whic as though ye yet lyued in the world, are ye leed with
man traditions? Touche not, tast not, handle not. All which perishe thorow the veraye abuse, after the commaundement & doctrines of men. Which thinges out∣wardlye haue a similitude of wysedome by superstitiō, & humblenes, & by hurting of the body, & in that they do the fleshe no worship to ye nede therof. S. Peter also thought it not meete for hym to eate cer∣ten meates that were forbidden in Mo∣ses law to be eaten, as thinges that were vncleane.Act. 10. To whome in a vision was an∣swer geuen, that he should not saye that thinge to be comen and vncleane that God had purified, thorow his eternall worde.Hebr. 13. It is therfore good, sayeth Paul, to stablish oure heartes in grace and not in meates which profited not them that walked therin. 1. Cor. 10.Doutles, honorable lordes, Sainte Paul wold not haue commaunded gene∣rally yt we shuld eate of all kinde of mea∣tes yt come to be solde in ye shambles, as∣kinge no thinge what they be, for consci∣ence sake, yf it had not ben lawfull by Gods lawes to eate of all kindes of mea¦tes, and that in all tymes and dayes so yt they be eaten temperatly, for the necessi∣tie of the bodie, and not for wanton lust to please the flesh, and also eatē with out
offence of the weake brethrē, & eatē with thākes geuyng for the same to God that feadeth al thinges But who (right hono∣rable lordes) hath forbodē these flesh mea¦tes, and whit meates to be eaten in Lent & other prescript tymes? Euen he yt hath vsurped power to make offences & synne of yt which God nor his Apostles, taught to be synne or offence. Of whōe S. Paul warneth you to beware, & to marke them, & decline frō them. For soch sayeth Paul,Rom. 13. sserue not our Lorde but their belies. And by pleasaūt wordes & blessinges they se∣duce & begyle the heartes of innocentes. But wherfore hath our holy father made restraint of meates to be eaten in certayne tymes for conscience sake, so ma¦nifest contrary to ye doctrine of them that he bosteth to be his predecessours? Vere∣ly that he might set forth his vsurped po∣wer. And also that (as S. Peter sayeth) he might make marchaundise ouer vs in couetousnes.2. Pet. 2. For money he will geue li∣cence to eate what you wil, & to do what you will. And therfore all his lawes made of restrainte, & forbiddyng of those thinges that God lefte free, are but a playne arte and crafte deuyse made to begyle the people of their money. This, moste honorable Lordes, I haue sette
forth two of Antichristes false doctrines not after myne awne fātesie, but as Paul nameth them the doctrine of deuels, that you might not be any furder deceaued by the preachers of them. And also that you maye assuredly, certifie youre consciēces, that al they that preache and defende the same doctrines, ben vnfaynedly Anti∣christes disciples, which be spirites of erroure, that haue departed from the faith: or els the Apostles doctrine is erro¦nious and false: But that cā not be true. Also oure master Christe, admonisheth vs to beware lest any mand deceaue vs. For many shall come, sayeth Christe, in my name sayenge:Mat. 24 I am Christe, & shall deceaue many. Who is he that cometh in Christes name sayeng, I am Christe? None doutles,who be they that saye they be Christ. but he yt vsurpeth to hym Christes office, power, & holynes, which no man doeth but the Romish Antichrist and his sluttish secte. Euen they that vsurpe absolute power geuen to them to remitte and to forgeue synnes to the peo¦ple,Against thē that vsurpe Christes power and place. whiche is the onlye power, grace and office of Christe, and not of any man. Wherfore that man that vsurpeth vpon hym that office of Christe, is the very same that sayeth: I am Christe, that is, so anoynted and authorised of God,
that I haue absolute power geuen me from God, to forgeue synnes, as Christe hath. For euē in soch maner of speaking all his filthy secte, sittinge in their who∣rish confessions, boost them selfes that they sit in Gods stydde and rowme to for¦geue the synnes of soch as confesse their sinnes to them, sayenge in their false ab¦solutions in a tonge that the confessed vnderstandeth not. By the authoritie of Peter and Paul, and by the authoritie to me committed I forgeue the thy synnes to me confessed? But nether Peter, ne yet Paul, did forgeue synnes by their awne authoritie, grace or power, but on∣ly by the preaching of the gospel.Act. 4. As Pe¦ter sayeth: ther is no nother name vnder heauen geuen vnto men, nether is ther a¦ny other by whom we must be saued,Act. 10 but the name of Iesu Christe. For to hym all the prophetes beare witnes (sayeth Peter) remission of synne to be had thorowe his name. Also, sayeth Paul, be it knowen vnto you men and bretherne,Act. 13. that thorow this mā (meaning Christe) remission of synnes is preached, and that by hym all that beleue are iustified from all thinges from the which ye could not be iustified by the law of Mo∣ses. For he is the lambe of God that ta∣keth
awaye the synnes of the people / say∣eth Ioan baptiste.Ioh. 1. And euē so sayeth the Angell to our lady,Math. 1. that he shall saue his people from their synnes. Wherfore ne∣ther by the authoritie of Peter / nor of Paul, ne yet by any absolute autoritie to them committed, excepte by the autoritie of preachinge of the gospel to the people, that trulie repente, beleuinge constantly to haue remission of their synnes by the deeth and bloodshedinge of Iesu Christ, hath other bisshop or priest any autoritie to forgeue synne. Lamente therfore (my Lordes) the mi¦serable state of this realme, consideringe that there can be no remission of synnes geuen, but onlye thorow the preaching of the gospell, which none of oure prie∣stes thorow all the realme do practise in their whorish confessions, nor yet know they what is a gospel, moch lesse cā they preach the gospell. Halas, by what mea∣nes do these beastes of the bely geue re∣mission of synnes to the people, when they speake not one worde of Christe that the confessed doeth vnderstande or perce∣aue. But in their absolutions they geue penaunce to the confessed, fastinge certen dayes, lyplabour in sayenge of thinges they vnderstande not, masses
to be sayed, and almes to be geuen for the satisfaction of their sinnes. Thus bu∣rye they Christes passion, and deeth, and bloodshedinge, which only be oure satis∣faction for oure synnes. And no nother can be. And although God, by his pro∣phete Esai, commaundeth all pastours that haue the spirituall charge of soules,Esai. 43. to shew vnto his people their synnes, say∣enge: Crie and cease not. Lyft vp thy voy∣ce as a trumpet,Esai. 58. & shew my people their synnes. Notwithstandinge this com∣maundemente of God geuen to all them that haue spirituall charge of soules, An∣tichriste myndinge to shew to the world, that he thinketh him selfe wiser thē God, and that he can make more godly and holsome prouision for soule health then God, hath made a law that all people of euery kinde once in the yere at ye leest, shal confesse and shew their synnes to their awne Pastour or curate. God commaun∣deth that the pastoure shall shew to the people theyr synnes. But Anti∣christe commaundeth cleane contrary, that the people shall shew their syn∣nes to their curates. By these mea∣nes, the people for the most parte beleue that they haue remission of their synnes, because they haue nombred their synnes
in to the eares of their confessoure. Or els for what cause shulde we confesse thē to our curates? For euery man knoweth what is synne, & that he shalbe damned yf he forsake not his synne, yf the priestes execute the commaundemente of God geuē by Esai.Esai 58. But the simple people thin¦ke verely that when the curate pronoun∣ceth a certen sownde and voyce of wor∣des ouer their beedes which they thinke is an absolutiō frō their sinnes, although they vnderstande not one worde what he sayeth, yet beleue they that the wor∣des that he speaketh hauinge his han∣de vpon their heedes haue vertue and power, to forgeue to them their synnes: euen because the priest sitting in Gods stede (as they thinke, and as the priestes boaste them selfes to do) pronounceth and speaketh them. Wherin all be dece∣aued lamentablye. Assured meanes wherby e∣uery man maye haue remissi∣on of sin∣nes.But doutles, he that earnestly repen∣teth his sinfull life, fully mynded neuer after to returne to ye same, & thē trusteth cōstantly to Gods promise made of re∣missiō of sinnes to hym, for the passion & deeth of oure sauioure Christe / the same hath remissiō of his synne althouth he neuer nombre them in to the eare of any preist. And then yf he fealinge and per∣ceauinge
true, repentaunce and faith in his hearte, will resorte to any prieste to re¦ceaue absolution and remission of his syn¦nes, wherof he is assured by Gods pro∣mise, ye same declareth hymself to mistrust Gods promise made to hym of remission of his synnes, and then is he an infidele, that by no meanes can haue remission of his synnes. And if he be not fully mynded to forsake his former euill lyfe, and neuer to retorne to the same againe, then can he not haue any trust to haue remission of his synnes, because that is promised to them only that for euer forsake their syn∣nes. And therfore, if he mindeth not to forsake his synnes, he goeth in vayne to his curate to haue remissiō of his synnes. And if he repenteth his synnes and bele∣ueth, as I haue said, then doeth he euyll to fatch remission of his synnes, wherof he is assured already by Gods promise to be forgeuen. And therfore his goinge to his curate to be confessed is veraye vayne and a poynte of infidelitie. Oh that the curates of Englāde, wold theye and obserue Gods commaunde∣mente, geuen to them by the mouth of his prophete Esaia. But that will they neuer . But their master Antichristes cō∣maundementes wyll they deligently o∣beye,
although they bringe no commodi∣tie spirituall or temporall to any man, sa∣uinge to their fylthie paunches. Euery man maye well perceaue, wherfore they be so gready to holde and to maynteyne this whorish confession,Th cau∣ses why the clergie so earnest∣lie mayn∣teyne auri¦culer con∣fession. and authoritie to heare testamentary causes &c. Ouer & besydes that they prouide for them selfes in their confessions, where they maye be sped of a whore or two, all the yere after. Yet by these their cōfessiōs, the chiefe An∣tichrist kepeth his sluttish secte of perdi∣tion in estimation with the comen peo∣ple, in whose cōsciēces they sitte as God, and execute Antichristes office, that is to fill hell with soules. And so in their con∣fessions be euer ready to worke sedition and treason against both Emperoure kin∣ge, and al other gouernours, of that Em∣pire, realme, and dominion, that ether cō∣tendeth or striueth with their holy father Antichriste, or speaketh against his vsur∣ped power, his false and craftie deceated wicked doctrines, wherby he seduceth & begyleth all men for the most parte: lea∣ding them with a false confidence and fayth, to haue remission of their synnes, because they declare them to his filthy generatiō of serpentes. And by these mea∣nes innumerable soules be le
to hell. And moch sedition and treason is wroughte, wherby moch bloodshedinge and murther is broughte to passe to the vtter subuersion and destruction of ma∣ny Realmes. As the last sedicion stirred vp in ye North, in Somerset shire, & De∣uonshire, and in other partes of this Re∣alme, be most miserable monimētes and witnesses. And this is not their only co∣men practise practised with vs in Englā¦de: but also the like practise, was practised with the Princes of Germany, that will neuer suffer their treasōs to be out of mās memory. Wherfore this whorish confession, wherof procedeth so moch euyll and mis∣chefe to all realmes, which also bringeth no profite with it, but seduceth and be∣gyleth many, ought to be banished and a∣bolished, although they saye, that they cā¦not well gyue medicine, or plaister, that shalbe holesome or profitable, excepte they also know the particuler disease and grief Which answere oure holy father hymself desproueth. For he geueth cleane remissi∣on, a prenaet a culpa, that is from peyne and synne, to thē that neuer shewed their offences to hym, and healeth all sickenes∣ses, and sores, with this one plaister, that is, all that be truly sory and penitente for
their synnes, and be confessed to a priest haue cleane remission. As for faith in our sauioure Iesus Christe, it forceth not: so thou be confessed, it maketh no matter whether thou beleue in Christe or no. And yet without Christ are we all for euer: re∣midiles damned. Why do ye, right honorable lordes / ad¦mit this blasphemous doctrine, of remis¦sion of synnes without faith in Christ. All that be truly sorry for their synnes, enten¦dinge thorow Gods helpe / neuer to re∣torne to the same, and put their trust and faith in Christes blood for the remissiō of their synnes, haue a generall pardō graū∣ted vnto them by God hym selfe, by his promise, though they neuer come to prie∣stes eare, which is a sure bull, nor sealed with lead, but with the bloodshedinge of Iesus Christe. And therfore, if oure en∣glish priestes wolde truly preach the law to the people openly, thē shuld they shewe the people their sinnes, accordinge to Gods commaundemēte, and geue them the generall plaister, that is, they must vtterly forsake their sinnes, and trust to Christes satisfaction made for the same, This maye they do without carish confes¦sion. And this is the only true waye to forgeue sinnes, and of it selfe sufficiente.
Awaye therfore with this blasphemous care confession, and compell youre prie∣stes to preach the law and the gospel. And so maye, youre lordships, auoyde many e∣uyls and moch wickednes that ensueth this whorish confession. And, good my Lordes, beware of them that saye, I am Christe, that is, so anoyn∣ted of God with grace that euery man maye haue of me, the same benefite that they may haue of Christ. For they that co∣me so in the name of Christe, sayenge.Math. 24 I am Christe, shal deceaue many sayeth Chri∣ste, who can not speake vntruly. Beware therfore, my lordes, of a no∣ther of Antichristes false doctrines and practise.A nother of Antichri¦stes false doctrines. A nother false doctryne of Anti∣christe is that he hath inuented and erec∣ted the new sacrifice to be made in the y∣dolotrous Masse for ye soules of the quyc∣ke and of the deed.2. Petr. 2 By the which sacrifice they make marchaundise of mens soules for money. But for as moch as Christ hath offred hym self vpon the crosse to God his father, and become for vs a perfite,He. 7. et. 9 whole and sufficiente sacrifice for oure sinnes, ones for euer, wherwith he hath taken a∣waye oure sinnes. By what meanes can oure false sacrificers / with their false sacri¦fice made in their ydolotrose masse (neuer
commaunded of God to be made, for the synnes other of the quycke, or of the deed) take awaye oure sinnes. Cōsideringe that Paul sayeth:Hebr. 10 where is remission of sinnes there neadeth no forther sacrifice to be made for sinnes, but Christe with his on∣ly one sacrifice made to God his father for vs hath taken awaye oure synnes, as all the holy scriptures beare manifeste wit¦nesse. And in the articles of oure crede we confesse the same. Wherfore this sacrifice made in the ydolotrouse masse, is most wicked and sinfull, & can not by any me∣anes take awaye oure sinnes: but is one of Antichristes false craftes and subtile deuises therby to maynteyn his sluttish ge¦neration of infideles, to lyue ydly, proud∣ly and lecherously. And by this their false sacrifice made in their ydolotrouse masse, they robbe Christ not only of his honour of oure redemption, and of the thankes dew for the same: But also they make ma∣ny to haue a false confidence and trust, to haue their synnes to be taken awaye tho∣row their false sacrifice made in their mas¦ses. Wherin they be lamētably deceaued. And also they robbe vs of oure money, & be the selfe same robbers that Christe sayeth do deuoure widowes houses vn∣der the coloure of longe prayers,Mat. 23. Marc. 12. and also
yt make marchādice of oure soules in co∣uetousnes.2. Pet. 2 These be ye same Antichri∣stes, yt cōfesse not Christ to be comē in the flesh, & denye ye Lorde that bought them.1. Ioan. 4 The selfe same sacrificers, righte ho∣norable lordes, take vpon them to be me∣diatours and aduocates with God for the people: not for loue,An other of Anti∣christes fal¦se doctri∣nes. as one man is boūde to praie for an other. But these ho∣ly mediatours and aduocates will not praye but for money. That the comō pro∣uerbe maye be verified in them. Where is no pēny, ther is no Pater noster.Prayer. Pray∣er is of all thinges most spirituall. And no man can praye truly, except God teach hym,Math. 6 As it appeareth by the Apostles yt desired Christ to teach thē to praye. And also, Paul sayeth:Rom. 8. we can not praye as we oughte to praye. Therfore, if our clergies sacrifices and prayers were spirituall, as in dede they be but veraye liplaboure and most deceatful bablinges, they shuld committe Symonie, for takinge for a spi∣ritual office a tēporal rewarde. But mo∣neye & all other thinges be spiritual when̄ they medle with them. They in them sel∣fes be so spiritual. But mediatours, & ad∣uocats, wil they be, although ye holy scrip¦tures saye ye cōtrarie And yt Christ is our only mediatour & aduocat as it appereth Ioan. 14▪ &. 17. &. 1. Tim. 2. and. 1. Iaan. 3
Yet will oure wicked priestes vsurpe vn∣to them the only office of Christe: to be me¦diatours and aduocates. And therby, saye that they be Christe. But beware of them, honorable lordes. For Christ biddeth you beware of them. For they shal deceaue ma¦ny sayeth Christe. Beware therfore of a nother of Anti∣christes false doctrines. All christen men be bounden to beleue that oure sauioure Christe in his naturall body is ascended in to heauen, and ther sitteth on the righ∣te hande of God the father, acccordinge as both Peter and Paul haue taughters.1. Petr. 3. Coloss. 3. And accordinge to oure comē crede. But Antichriste, and his adulterous generati∣on of infideles haue taughte a nother doc¦trine sayenge. Here is Christe and there is Christe. But none saye here is Christe and there is Christe but these Masmon∣gers, which saye that they (thorow their speakinge of foure wordes, scz, this is my body) do make Christes body of bred, ther to be really and bodely presente vpon e∣uery altare, in one instāte, that thei might offer him once againe for a sacrifice, made for money but not for sinne. This doc∣trine is to be moch suspected to be a false doctrine, because that Christ commaun∣deth you not to beleue them, that so teach
or saye. And Peter sayeth that he is in hea¦uen, and that the heauens shall there reteyne hym, vntill all thinges be fulfil∣led. &c.Act. 3. Consideringe that he in his bodely pre¦sence is in heauen, and his bodie is lyke to oure bodies in al naturall thinges, except onlye sinne. And oure bodies can not be in diuerse places at one tyme therfore nor Chrifles body cā be in diuers places at one tyme. Wherfore, good my lordes, be not any more ignoraunte who be false deceauers, wicked prophetes,Christes body is in secrete pla¦ces, that is in euery pixt. and lienge masters the natural broode of Antichriste The same secte sayeth, that Christ is in se¦cret places, which be all they that saye, Christes natural body is in euery pyxe, hā¦ginge ouer euery altare, beware of them. For Christe sayeth that by these wordes they shall deceaue many, Which doctri∣nes our English priestes dayly do preach. Now I will reherse a nother of his false and wicked doctrines,Yet a false doctrine. inuented only therby to maynteyne a nomber of ydle harlottes, and to lead innumerable soules thorow a false fayeth and vayne trust, in to hell. This is his doctrine of purgatorie the pyke purse of all Christendome. And although the holy gooste sayeth / that by mercy and sayth synnes be purged: Yet
Yet hath this Antichrist foūde out a pri∣son,Purgato¦rye. which he calleth Purgatorie, therin to punysh soules, vntill other he, or some of his marke must make a sacrifice for his soule in his ydolotrous masse. But it were no good policie to trust to moch to their sacrifice because ther is no menti∣on therof made in any place of the holy scripture. Nor yet is it wisdome to trust moch to their prayers, because the pro∣phete sayth, that the prayer of the wicked is not wel hearde of God,Psa. 108. but rather to synne. Wherfore it is beste for a christen man to trust vnto Gods mercy, and not to popish sacrifices nor prayers, which be nother mercy nor faith. And we be sure that nother the mercy of God nor faith in Christe, be in the Popes hādes to dis∣tribute where it pleaseth him. Wherfore he can not purge soules, neither of their sinnes nor of the peynes dew for ye same, by Gods iudgemente. It belongeth only to God to purge soules frō their sinnes. As the prophete sayeth.Psal. 48. No mā can dely∣uer his brother, nor make agreamente for him to God, for it costeth more to redeme their soules, so yt ye must let yt alone for euer.Ioan. 3. Ioan. 1. Ro. 8. Christe sayeth, he yt beleueth, hath now eternal lyfe, & is ye sonne of God, co∣heire wt Christe, to whome God hath pro∣mised
remission of synnes frely for Chri∣stes sake. Therfore ye Pope shall do him to moch wronge, to ponish him for his sin∣nes, to whō God hath forgeuē thē. And if he were a true vicar to God & Christe, he wold not so cruelly ponish his masters childern nor louinge seruantes. But yt we maye not trust vnto this po∣pish purgatory, wherof ther is no menti∣on made in the scriptures. Let vs resorte vnto ye holy scriptures wherin we may he¦ue a sure hope of a true purgation of oure sinnes. S. Ioā sayeth.1. Ioh. 1. If we walke in ye lighte euē as he is in ye light, thē haue we felowship wt him: And the blood of Iesu Christe his sonne clenseth vs frō al sinne. Here maye all Christē mē haue sure cōfi∣dēce, yt if they walke in ye lighte of Gods worde, yt thē Christes blood purgeth thē frō al their sinnes. But many persons (ye more it is to be lamented) so walck in the darkenesse of sinne, & trust to haue helpe thorow sacrifices made, & masses, yt they can neuer come to Purgatory, but go as∣suredly to hel, wher no purgatiō of sinne can be: because Christes sentēce & iudge∣ment is geuē, yt he yt beleueth not, is alre¦dy cōdēned. And ye holy scriptures saye: where ye tree falleth there he shal lye, whe¦ther it be at East, west, North, or South.Eccle. 11.
Be not therfore deceaued, honorable lordes, nor trust to this false doctrine of purgatorie, that sinnes shuld be purged with fyre. A Christen man wold not put fyre in the stede of Christes blood, where with oure sinnes be purged only, As Paul sayeth,Hebr. 1. Christe is the brightnes of the glorie of his father, and veray yma∣ge of his substaunce, bearinge vp all thin¦ges, with the worde of his power, that hath in his awne person purged oure sin¦nes. Excepte, therfore, oure holy father will proue himselfe to be the natural son∣ne of God, euen Christe hymselfe, he pur¦geth not oure sinnes.Apo. 1. It is Christe that so loued vs, yt he washed vs in his hearte blood sayeth Sainte Iohn. Considering, right honorable lordes, that I haue called to youre memories cer¦ten of Antichristes false doctrines, which I of myne awne herd do not name to be doctrines of deuels, doctrines of lyenge masters, and of subtile deceauers, and of them that departe from the faith, but out master Christ and his apostles (to whom all christen men  geue credit) cal∣leth them so, & the preachers of the same false Apostles, and soch as with their fal∣se doctrines shall deceaue many. Of whō Christe admonisheth you to beware,Mat. 24.
and the Apostle desireth you to marke & well to take hede of them and to decline or departe from them For they serue not Christ the Lorde, but their belly.Ro. 16. And yet (notwithstandinge these louinge admo∣nitions and warninges geuen vnto you (not by lighte preachers) but by Christe hymselfe, and by his Apostles) thesame doctrines be dayly taughte, preached / a∣lowed, and malitiouslye defended with you. Therfore haue I accordinge to my boundē dutie, set thē forth, that you might beware of them, and of the preachers of them. So that ye maye auoyde the plage of God that hangeth ouer vs, for oure de∣partinge from Christe, and from his true doctrines vnto the seruice and obedience of Antichriste and of his false doctrines / which be mere and plaine contrary to Christe and his doctrines. By the which condition and sure marke, youre lordships maye well knowe them euer. And bycause I haue rehersed so ma∣ny of Antichristes false doctrines, that al men maye wel discerne and iudge the re∣sidue of his false doctrines by them that I haue here written. I will now directe my penne to expresse and declare, a certen assured signe and token geuen by Daniel
and also by Christe, of the tyme wherin Antichrist shuld come and rage againste Christe,Mat. 24. Christe warneth vs to loke for him when we shall se abhomination of desola∣tion stande in the holy place. For the true declaration of the which texte, it is to be noted, honorable lordes, that the Apostle calleth vs the temple of God sayenge:1. Cor. 3. The temple of God is holy, which be you Consideringe that we be the temple of God, and the holy place. What more abhomination of desolation can ther be in the holy place, then to exile God out of his temple and holy place, not only by ye workinge of manifolde sinnes, fylthy∣nes, and detestable wickednes, wherof was neuer moare plentie vsed: but also in the stede of God to receaue Antichriste the men of synne, and childe of perdi∣tion, as Paul nameth hym? Is not this to put man in Gods stede, whē we trust to receaue remission of sinnes and eter∣nall lyfe of the Romish Antichriste, and that in perchmeyne snes, cōsideringe that we heare not him preach any gospell to vs, wherby oure sinnes shuld be forgeuen vs, nor yet knoweth he a∣ny of our sinnes? If he can forgeue vs oure sinnes, without hearinge oure sinnes nombred vnto him; and without
speakinge with vs, wherfore wyl not our priestes forgeue vs oure sinnes excepte they must heare them tolde in to their ea∣res? Is not this abomination of desola∣tion standinge in the holy place? To geue ouer oure trust and confidence that we oughe to haue of remissiō of oure sinnes, at Gods handes for Christes sake only, and now to haue confidence to haue it at Antichristes handes (for a litle money) that is most contrary to God & to Christe in all thinges? Oh most abomination of desolation, stādinge in mans cōsciēce, that shulde be the tēple of God, and the dwellinge place of the holy goost. Is it not a foule abomination of desolation stā¦dinge in the holy place? In the stede of Christes only one sacrifice which he made of himselfe to God his father for vs vpon the crosse, now to set vp a new sacrifice to be made to God for vs of a pe∣ce of bread and a cuppe of wyne, and to lyfte vp them to be shewed to the people, to be gased vpon and to be worshipped, and not to be receaued, and to be eaten & drōken, accordinge to Christes instituti∣on and commaundemente? Is it not ab∣homination of dēsolation stādinge in the holy church of God in the stede of the gospell to be preached and declared
vnto the people in soch maner that they mighte receaue comforte and hope ther∣by, to haue the gospell and other partes of the holy scriptures / to be read & songe in a speache nether vnderstanded not knowen of the hearers of them? Rom. 15.Sainte Paul sayeth / what so euer was written, was written for our doctrine and learninge, that thorow patience and consolatiō of the holy scriptures we mighte receaue hope. But Antichrist hath ordeyned a payne sownde, to occupie the eares of the people callinge it ye gospell, although therbe no interpretation or de¦claration therof made to the people.Ephe. 5. For he & his filthie secte well knowe that the Apostle sayeth, that all thinges that be declared & opened bringe lighte. Which Antichriste & his filthy generation maye not suffer nor abydes because their wor∣kes,Ioan. 3. which be al wycked and done in dar¦kenes shuld by the lighte he made mani∣fest and openly knowē to the world. For euen as Christe came an to the world to geue light to the world: Euen so is An∣tichriste came in to the world, to take a∣waye from the people ye light that Christ broughte in to the world. 1. Cor. 14.The Apostle commaundeth that what so euer be done in the church, that it should
be done to the instruction and edificatiō of the congregation. For sayeth he, yf any man speake with tonges, let it be by two or thre at the moste, and that by order, & let one interpretate or declare. And yf ther be no man there to let him kepe silēce and speake not to the congregacion. Do not your lordships perceaue plainly how Antichriste & his filthy generation study and laboure with policy to subuerte all godly and profitable ordinaunces made by Christ and by his Apostles? Wherfore cōtrary to Paules doctrine and the god∣ly ordinaunces receaued, do ye suffer our priestes to reade a synge the holy scrip∣tures dayly in the churches to ye people, in a tonge that they vnderstande not, nor perceaue that is spoken calling it Gods seruice, & cōpelling the people to come to heare it? Who vnderstādeth or is taught any thinge therby? They mocke the peo∣ple with a vayne soūde, wherby they ha∣ue no lust, nor commoditie, nor profite. Is not this Antichristes ordinaunce of the holy scriptures to be reade in a tonge or speche nor vnderstande nor per∣ceaued of the people,Collos. . cōtrary to the scrip∣ture that commaundeth that the worde of God shuld dwel in vs abundauntly, that
we mighte teach the one the other: A wō∣derfull crafty abomination of desolation standing in the holy place, depriuinge the people of the vnderstandinge of holy scrip¦tures? And where Christe hath ordened certen Apostles, certen prophetes, some Euangelistes and doctours to fynish a nomber of the electe, and to buylde the misticall body of Christe. In the stede of which ministers of Christe by Antichriste are entred in theues that receaue and ta∣ke greate reuenuwes and profites of the benefices: but they do no thinge the office that Christe appointed and assig∣ned vnto the office to be done. Euen ra∣ueninge wolfes that nether spare nor fa∣uoure the flocke of Christe. And no mer∣uayl it is, for in that they take the profites of their benefices, and do not the office ther vnto belonginge, by Christes sentēce they be theues by daye and by nighte.Ioan. 10. Whose office and cominge, is not to fee∣de and to fauoure the flocke (sayeth Christ) but to steale, to kyll, and destroye, as your lordships haue therof to moch experience, and most certen profe. Is it not therfore abomination of de∣solation standinge in the holy place, to see a thefe and a murtherer stande in the church of God in the steade of a true and
diligente pastoure and godly feader or bisshop? Is it not abomination of desla¦tion standinge in the chief cytie of En∣glande, to sea franked fat Boore sittinge at euery sermō preached at Pauls crosse, and thesame not be founde ones in the yere in the same pulpet, feadinge the floc∣ke committed to his spirituall charge? Is it not abominatiō of desolation stādinge in the holy place, to se the holy scriptu∣res in oure natiue English tonge writtē vpon euery wall in the churches, now to be by commaundemente blotted out and in the stede therof erected kerued ymages of wood and of stone, by Gods owne sen∣tence accursed, and all they that make the same? And how they that cause thē to be set vp shall escape the same curse. I know not. They also vpon palmes sondaye lifte vp a cloth and saye, hayle oure kynge, to a Roode made of a wooden blocke. Doutles, a worthy kinge for soch a peo∣ple. Now (right honorable Lordes) I trust ye be not ignorante of the tyme wherin Antichriste shall come, regne and rage againste God and Christe. Euen verely now, when there was neuer moare abo∣mination of desolation standing in mās conscience, and erected and set vp in the
temple and church of God. Where as, in the stede of a constante fayth in Christ, is planted a most wicked faith & trust in the man of sinne. And in ye place of Chri¦stes only one sacrifice made vnto for vs for euer sufficiently, is erected and set vp a sacrifice made of bread and wyne, day∣lye to be made a sacrifice for vs. And in the stede of the holy scriptures to be de∣clared, that the people might vnderstāde the sence and meaninge therof, is erec∣ted and ordeyned the gospels and holy scriptures to be read and spoken in a tonge and speache that the people which heare the voyce ae no profite or com∣forte therby. By this pointe of ab∣homination of Desolation, all the clergie for forth them selfes that they abhorre no thinge moare then the lighte of Gods worde.Ioan. 3. Which no man doeth, but he that doeth euill, sayeth Christe that lyeth not. In the stede of pastours and spiritu∣al teachers, be entred in theues and most cruel murtherers. And in the stede of the holy scriptures written vpon the church walles in a speach that the people do vn∣derstande and perceaue, be erected and set vp erued ymages, accursed of God with the makers of them. So that in the
stede of lighte and knowlege, is brought in and traded darknes and ignorancie which he the greatest policies and subti∣le craftes practised by Antichrifle and by all his filthy secte, wherby, he and they maye bringe soules to hell. Now it resteth to be noted (right hono∣rable lordes (wherfore ye Apostle nameth Antichrist the man of sinne, rather then a sinner, as al men be conceiued, and borne in sinne. Paul nameth him the man of sinne, because from him, as from a foun∣teyne and heed well springe, floweth and springeth all notable and greate sin∣nes and wickednes: as false doctrines, wicked lawes and decrees, dispēsations for buggery, fornication, and all kinde of lust and lechery, for Symony and vsu∣ry. Wherby all men be drawen and leade from their faith in God and in Christe, in to a false faith and trust in most vayne tryfles and vanities, wherby he practi∣seth to bringe innumarable soules to hell. Also right honorable lordes, where as God hath commaunded all men to be o∣bediente to the higher powers,Rom. 12. 1. Petr. 2 as to kin∣ges most excellente, or to soch as be set in authoritie. Notwithstanding soch cō∣maundement geuen from God, yet Anti∣christe
myndinge to declare himselfe and his secte to be aduersaries to God and Christe, hath resisted and circumuented many Emperours & also kinges, whome thorow most detestable treason, sedition and intestine warre in their Empires, Realmes and dominions, he hath depo∣sed and depriued of their Empires and kingedomes, to the great dishonour and disolediēce of God, & to ye effusiō of moch christen blood, & the lamētable desolation of many wydowes, and miserable orba∣tinge of many Orphanes and fatherles childerne. As the deposition of Chelperi∣cus beinge French kynge from his king∣dome, who was naturally borne, and de∣scended from the noble lynage and house of the kinges of Fraunce, and in his stede the erectinge and makinge kinge Pipinus, which was not borne of any noble house, nor of the lynage of kinges of Fraunce. The deposition and putting downe the Emperours Frederike from his Empire. The deposition also of O∣tho kinge of the Longebardes, and of many other do manifestly beare wytnes Amongest the which, I will cōmēde vnto your lordships memories, one lamē∣table historie that is this. When Hen∣rich the fourth Emperour of that name,
attempted to haue the electiō of the Ro∣mish bishop, as his noble progenitours before him had. One Hyldibrāde a mōke beinge then the Romish bishop, and na∣med him selfe Gregory the seuenth bis∣shop ther of that name, did fearsly withstande the said Henrich & stered vp soch intestine sedition and warres in his do∣minion, that his people did seke mea∣nes to chose a new Emperoure / which treasō, beinge forsene of the said Empe∣roure and of his counsaill, his enimies could not bring their wicked enterprise and purpose to effecte. Then the said Mōkish pope Gregorie (whose couetou∣snes, ambition, and pride, all the Italian writers can worthelie testifie, Amongest whom Beno the cardinal, most earnest∣lie & plainly paynteth and setteth forth the same) excomunicated the said Hen∣rich and as many as did either ayde him with power riches or vitailes, And did forther absolue and discharge al the sub∣iectes of the said Henrich of their obe∣dience towardes him, which they by Gods lawes did owe vnto the said Em∣peroure. And then, in open proclamati∣ons made in all the dominions of the said Henrich, he burdened and sclaūde∣red the said Henrich with ye most odious
and greuous title and name, Heretike▪ and schismatike, enemie to God and to all holy church, wherby many of his fren¦des and subiectes (euen al they in whose consciences did sitte Antichriste, occu∣pienge Gods holy place) did flie and de∣parte from the said Emperoure. Wher∣by the power of the said Emperoure was greatlye decayed and minished. And thē Hildibrande the monkish Pope bestered him busylie, and caused one Rodulph duke of Sweuclande to be elected Em∣perour: Who after great bloodshedinge lost his lyfe and Empire. After him, by Gregories commaundemente one Her∣man Earle of Lucenburge was chosen Emperour, who after great māslaghter was sleyne in the warres and lost his life and Empire. And thridly thorow treason wrought by Gregorie, was one Mar∣chio Echerte chosen to be Emperour, who after greate slaghter of christen mē lost not only his Empire but also his lyfe, which cruell warres finished, with no litle bloodsheding gaue occasion to other princes, to feare to fyght againste the said Henrich, because of the great murther and deeth of these thre noble princes. But yet the malice and cruell am¦bition of the hearte of that monkish pope
Gregory, coulde not be pacified, but that for his priuate lucre & honour he wolde maynteyne so blody warres, neuer be∣inge moued to mercye nor pitie with the destruction of so many cities and tow¦nes set a fyre and myserably wasted, nor with the destruction, treadinge downe and vtter waste made of so many feldes of corne and grasse, nor yet with the she∣dinge of so moch christen blood, nor wt the lamentacion and mourninge of so many widowes for their husbandes sley∣ne, nor with the greuous outerye of Or∣phanes that dyed for lacke of bodylye foo∣de, nor for anye euill that ensueth the fu∣rious warres, wold this holy father leaue of his workinge of sedition and treason. Oh horrible monster? Againste na∣ture he stered vp Henrich the only sonne of Henrich the fourth to gather a great army against his owne naturall father, who nether for publike nor priuate wrōge done by his father to him, noe any other euil was prouoked therto. Neuerthelesse he did not only vnnaturally forsake his father, & wtdraw his ayde frō his father in ye time of neade, but thorowe ye treason wroughte by Gregorie & by his helpe he circūuented his father and oppressed him
with power, did take him prisoner in the warres, and leed him captiue to pri∣son, where he put his awne father myse∣rablye to death. Behold, right honorable Lordes, a tra∣gedie moare then cruell and bloody. Be∣hold the charitie of oure holy fathers of Rome: By this facte they haue setforth soch exemple of wickednes, as neuer was before seene or hearde of. If their sedition, treason, oppression, craftes and subtelties be well wayed and pondered of all wicked men they maye most iust∣lie be called, not only a wicked synner, but also the man of sinne. From whome all the detestable and great sinnes of the world procede although there shuld not be had in remembrance all their dispen∣sations for the stewes of whorish womē and of fylthy and abhominable Sodo∣mitical lustes, for Symonye, vsurye, and all other vices to regne in the worlde. Now, righte honorable lordes, I trust yt I haue sufficiently set forth this mon∣strus & furious beast Antichrist, as well by his false doctrines, yt I haue not fay∣ned to be false of myne owne brayne and phantesye: but of the manifest sayēge of Christe & his Apostles, so plainly spokē yt they be nether obscure, darke, nor hard to
be vnderstāde. Who also haue cōmaun∣ded all mē to beware of them, & of ye tea∣chers of thē,Rom. 16. & so to departe & decline frō them. I haue also set forth his tyrāny, his sedition, his treason, his crafty and false deceates, wherwith he hath cir∣cumuented, oppressed and deceaued, ma∣ny Emperours, kinges and other noble rulers to whome Christ commaunded hym to obeye,Mat. 17. and gaue him also a ma∣nifeste and playne example when he pay∣ed tribute for himselfe and Peter. And by his owne obedience vsed and practi∣sed vnto the higher powers & vnto their lawes. He neuer gaue him exēple, autho¦ritie or power to depose other Empe∣roure, kinge or any other cyuil rules. And therfore for this his disobedience towar¦des God, and for all his other iniqui∣ties, he is iustly called the man of sinne, a child of eternal perditiō. So that he is worse thē a beast, or ye most frātike madde man yt euer was madde, yt ether wil saye or thinke, yt he is other. Christes vicare, or successoure to the Apostle. But ra∣ther the deuels vicar and successoure, or clothe deuel himselfe. For as by the frute the tree is most certenly knowen, euen so , your lordships, by these his false doctrines & al other his wickednes,
assuredly knowē him to  man of synne veraye Antichriste himselfe: And all his wicked generation to be the sectes of per∣dition, the wicked brood of Antichriste, most contrary to God and Christe. Wherfore he most falsly vsurpeth to him the title and name of holy father, or of Christes vicar in earth, or successoure of the Apostles. But moch more worthe∣ly and truly is called Antichrist the most malitious enemie and hatefull aduersa∣rie of Christ, as both his doctrines, his de¦crees & wicked lawes, his pride exaltinge him selfe aboue al Emperours & kinges, his dispensational for sinne to be vsed in the church of God, his vanities where with he deludeth and bewytcheth the people▪ all his forged and fayned ho∣lynes, his hypocrisis, dissimulation, sedi∣tion, treason, most seuere crueltie, and all other his wickednes and most detestable lyst of both hym and all his fluttish gene∣ration of serpentes, and filthy secte of in∣fideles do manifestly proue and testifie be∣fore all men. So that doubtles, the can not be any thinge more contrary to God and Christe, then he himself and his wic∣ked broede do in all thinges. Consideringe that youre lordshipe be not now ignoraunce (as my trust is what
thinge Antichrist is, but that you wel vn∣derstande and knowe that all they that be come in to the church to occupie an mi∣sterie, office or vocation contrary to Gods worde and Christes ordinaunce and ap∣pointementes, or abuse his sacramentes contrarye to his ordinaunces, or that teach any false doctrine, or that take vpon them any of Christes honoure or power, be ve∣raye Antichristes, which is as moch to saye as againste Christe. Wherfore, right honorable lordes, I hope that God will open the eyes of your heartes that you maye nowe at the last see and well perceaue, by what crafte, fal∣seed and subtile deuyses, you haue ben deceaued, & entised to serue Antichrist in the stede of Christe: the deuel in the stede of God: to folowe false superstition, in the stede of Christes true religion: hypo∣crisie and vanitie, in the stede of the chri∣sten veritie. And in conclusion, that you maye well vnderstande, that you of al mē, haue ben most blinded in your iudgemē∣tes, most fylthilie corrupted, and your vn∣derstandinge and senses most shamfully deluded, begyled and bewitched. Therfore, my good Lordes, nowe re∣newe youre wits and vnderstandinges. And knowe you certenly that all your
lordly lorde bisshops be of the naturall broede of Antichriste. Who with all sub∣tiltie policie and falsheed studie and la∣bour to obscure the light of Gods worde,why they make the nobles par¦takers. and to subuerte the ordenaunces of Christ and of his Apostles and obstinatly defēde their errours and euill doinges and make you their ministers to murther your bre∣thern for their faith, against your consci∣ence to wrappe you and your posteritie in Gods displeasure with them. And because your lordships shall not be deceaued in them. I haue geuen you the comon token signe and marke, wher∣by you & al men can not but know them to be against Christ and his worde. Where Christe sayde to Peter, feede, feede, feede, Which is to saye: teach, teach, teach. They take teachinge for no parte of their office, but only to multiplie a sorte of blinde cere∣monies, to bringe the people from know∣leage of Christe, and to kepe them vnder in ignorance with crueltie, And that they maye bringe that to passe, they laboure to be lordes and to haue temporal offices contrary to Gods worde sayenge. The kinges of the nations reigne ouer them,Luc. 22 and they that beare rule ouer them be called gratious lordes. But you shall not be so. That is you shall not take upon
you to haue ciuill gouernaunce and rule ouer the people, ne yet to be called gratious lordes. S. Peter commaundeth all bishops and soch as haue spirituall charge of soules committed to them, to feede the flocke of Christe willingly (as Christe commaunded him) and not to be lordes ouer the parishes, but euen as they were one of the flocke. Yet your lordships well perceaue that oure bishops, not only take to them selfes the name of lorde and gratious lorde: but also procure to haue both cyuell gouer∣naunce and rule ouer the people, as to be Lorde chaunceloure, Lorde presidente, and to haue ye hearinge of testamentary cau∣ses, of whoredōe, of dyuorses, of slaūders, which be no spirituall matters Except a man will so call them, bycause that they that boast to be spirituall only, do most vse them. And as for preachinge (where with Christe chiefly chargeth his ministers) is the least poynte of their charge. But they must attēde vpō bysshoppinge of childern, christeninge of belles, of churches & chur∣chyardes, altares, and soch other baggage and abominations as were neuer com∣maunded of Christe, nor yet practised not knowen of his Apostles. Wherby they maye easlye be knowen not to be of Christ
but against Christ and very Antichristes. In lyke maner the persones, vicars, and curates, that are admitted by them to haue, enioye and occupie, the commo∣ditie and profite of any spiritual benefice wherunto perteyneth cure and charge of soules, do not diligently reache the Lawe & the Gospell, but nosell the people with longe Matenses, Masses and Euen son∣ges in a straūge tonge. And where ryche parisshes be they rocke them with mirrye singinge and pipinge with soch guega∣wes to please them withall, cleane con∣trarie to Gods worde and Christes com∣maundement, which sayeth. As my Fa∣ther sent me,. 20. euen so do I sende you. But his Father dyd sende him to preache as it is playne Esaye. 61. Mark. 1. Luke. 4. with the whiche comaūdemēt of Christ, geuen to all that haue charge of soules, nother Emperoure, Kinge, nor Quene maye lawfully dispence, or discharge. Wherfore as they be minisers contrary and not according to Christes commaū∣dement. Euen so be they Antichristes, that be euer against Christ, in all his doc∣trine and forme of lyuing. As Christ say∣eth▪ he that is not wt me, is against me.Matt. 12. And how many so euer be come against me be ss by daye and nighte.Ioan. 10. And
consequently. Christ myndinge to shew vnto you, the cōdicions wherby ye maye euer know, who be spirituall theues say∣eth: the thefe commeth not but to steale, to kill, and to destroye. Of their stealin∣ges, youre Lordships be not ignoraūte. How many beneficed men be within this Realme as well bishops, as deanes, Archedeacons, persons, uicars, and prebendaries which take the profites from their benefices / and do not feede their flock with the word of God?Mat. 4. with out the which the soules of the flocke cā not lyue. Wherfore they steale the profi∣tes that do not the office. And of their cruell mortheringe (you haue to moch experience) & that nother of thefe, mortherere, robber, or traytour: but of the best lerned mē of this realme or that euer were in this realme: Euen of soch as were hable to reproue and cō¦trolle them in all thinges by Gods worde. Wherin they deceaue and mocke you, and all the people. And to proue thē veraye theues, And as, youre lordships haue to moch experience of their stealin∣ge and of their mortheringe: Euen so shal your lordships not sayle to haue more certen and sure experience, that they shal be most miserable destroyers of this re∣alme
of Englande, and that at soch tyme, when your lordships nor any of youre posteritie, shalbe hable to prouyde any helpe or remedie to redresse their de¦struction. For euen as Christes wordes be vnfaynedly true that ye thefe cometh not for any purpose but to steale and to kyll, so must the residew of his wordes, euer be founde to be true, most certen and sure, that is, that he shall also destroye. And although you now do not regard nor beleue Christes wordes to be true, yet, when you thinke least theron, your infidelitie shalbe requyred with the fea∣linge and peynful sufferinge the destruc¦tion of you, and of youre posterytie, and the most miserable chaunge and alteration of the state of this re∣alme. This miserable mischiefe ensueth and cometh of this misorder that the go∣uernaunce of this realme, by your lord∣ships consentes, hath be committed and done agaynst God, in makinge a bishop (that by Gods worde and appointemēte was assigned to feed the flocke commit∣ted to his spirituall charge) to leaue his office, committed to hym by God to be executed and done, to be a chauncelour
wher by he was so occupied and busied in the hearinge of the matters & affai∣res of this realme, that he could not at∣tende his flocke to feade them accord∣dinge to Christes commaundemente. Wherby he was put out of that order and rule that God had appointed to him. Beinge out of the which order & appointemente of God, he could neuer be cōmodietie or profite to this realme. For he was entred into ye office not by ye dore Christ, but ascended by a nother waye, & therfore was a thefe, from̄ whōe no good counsaill or any other godli∣nes can procede, nor more then of thor∣nes maye grapes be gadered. And yt his doinges will proue to well. For in that office he hath brought to passe by his counsaill and persuasion, and by your lordships sufferaūces, soch incu∣rable euill, that all Englande shall la∣mente and bewayle the same. Not only in kyllinge the preachers and lerned mē of this realem, but also in the vttr destruction of this Realme, & the altera¦tiō of the state and honour of the same. And although God hath delyuered you of that spirituall thefe. Yet be your lordships and all the Realme burde∣ned with a nother in the same office,
that shall do no lesse euil then the other hath done. Yf so moch euill maye be done. For as a ioynte ordeyned by God in the bodye, is appointed and set in a dew order to helpe the bodie, which ioynte beinge out of that order that God hath set it in, can not be any com∣moditie and helpe to the bodie, but great peyne and trouble to the bodye. Euen in lyke maner, if a bishop, that is appointed and ordeyned by God to teach his flocke, be taken from that of∣fice wher in God had assigned and or∣dered him: he can neuer be profitable but great hurte and peyne to the bodie. For I thinke that there is no man that hath any knowlege in the holy scrip∣tures or any good conscience towarde God, but he well knoweth that a bis∣shop that feedeth not his flocke is a thefe. Otherwise he beleueth not Christe to be true in his wordes, And if he be a thefe (as the trueth sayeth he is) then is his cominge for no nother purpose, then to steale, to kyll and to de∣stroye. And who so euer doubteth ther of, doubteth whether Christe be true. And I feare me yt because the gouer∣nours haue not beleued Christe to be
true, that they shall proue it true by expe∣rience, to their great peyne. Soch shalbe the frutes of a bishop set in autoritie to be a counselour for the temporall affai∣res of the Realme, that he is one of them that is come to steal, to kill and to de∣stroye. Of whome God by his prophete Esai, complayneth sayenge:Esay. 1. Heare oh heauens, and herken oh earth, for the Lorde speaketh. I haue noreshed and brought vp childerne, and they are fallē awaye from me. How happeneth it that ye righteous citie which was ful of equi∣tie, is become vnfaithful as an whore? Rightuousnes dwelled in her, but now mortherers. In tymes past, it was the office of Nero and of other tyrantes to tormentt men to death for their faith: but now oure english bishops haue takē vpō them to put the tyrātes out of that office. For they them selfes condemne both lerned and vnlerned for their faith, and make you, right honorable lordes, to exe∣cute the office. That they might set forth to all mē, that they be the veraye theues, of whom Christ (that can not lie) spea∣keth. Whose cominge is for no nother purpose then to steale, to kill, and to de∣stroye. And yet to deceaue the people, they
be crepte in vnder the cloke of my lorde bishop, a reuerende father. But to this my lorde bisshops and their accomplis∣shes saye: that they kil none for their fayth but for their heresie, which ought of all Christen men to be abhorred and auoy∣ded, accordinge to the true sayēge of the Apostle, that commaundeth sayenge an heretike, after he is twise reproued auoyd him.2. Tit. 3. But yet sayeth he not kil min, but a∣uoyd him. As al ye fathers of ye primatiue church haue shewed manifest example in the exile of many that in veraye dede were heretikes approued by gods worde to be heretikes, and yet were not persecu¦ted to deeth for their heresyes Vntil An∣tichrist of Rome the heed of al heretikes by crafte, gyle and falsheed seduced and begyled the Emperours and kinges, and robbed them of their dominions and po∣wers, wherby the hath exalted him selfe not only aboue them, but also aboue God. And then became he a most cruell ty∣rant, and made lawes of death, for all soch as he and his fylthy secte did ad∣iuge heretikes, Therby colourably to morther and destroye, all soch as did ones speake or preach against his vsur∣ped power, or by any meanes reueyle his
iniquitie for that calleth he and all his fil¦thye generation of infideles heresie. Which exemple of makinge of lyke lawes oure english bishops did compasse and bringe to passe about the yere of oure Lorde 1420. then beinge a bishop Lorde Chaunceloure and a nother lorde priuey Seale, wherby being in great authoritie & high estimation amongest the nobles and counselours thorow flattery circū∣uented the kinge, and his counsaill, and other of the nobles to make a law in Englande to suppresse heresie spronge vp in this realme. But what that heresie was that must only be adiudged, by the Antichristes lawes and by his sworen secte the generation of infideles, the ene∣myes of God & aduersaries of Christe. For as it is reported by cronicles, it was the reuelation of Antichristes iniquitie, that he calleth heresye. Forther to colour their cruel tirānie, they sayed with their forfathers the Bishops, Priestes, Scribes, and Phariseys, and ye rest of the Iewish clergie: It is not law∣full to vs for to sley any man. And as for vs, ye may trust well inough, we be to holy to deceaue you. You maye frely wtout scrupulositie of consciēce, crucifie whome so euer we committe in to voure handes.
For if he be not an euill doer, we wil ne∣uer deliuer him vnto you. Youre ho∣nours neade neuer to examine the cause, but boldly burne him. Oure soules for youres. His blood vpon oure heades. And by soch subtile meanes made all Kinges, and Officers of Englāde, that haue bin synce, their tourmentours, and hange mē. A goodly office that they haue sett all kinges and you, right honorable lordes, in. They haue made the kinge and you their hange men, & not a whit better. And yet for al their warrantyse & puttīge their soules for youres, & though ye wash neuer so cleane your hāde wt Pylate. whē ye thus morther the innocentes for their saith in Iesu Christe, be assured yt Gods curse will not departe from you & youre howses excepce ye spedelye repente. But how that law agreeth wt Gods worde it shal appere. Euen as God & the deuel, Christ, and Antichrist, light, and darkenes. First God by his Prophet E∣sai sayeth:Esai. 11. they shal not hurte, nor shall they kil in all my holy hyll. By this holy hil, meanīg this his church. Wherfore yf youre lordly Lorde bishops were true mi∣nistres in this church, they wold not mor¦ther any man for his faith / or for want of a good faith, which he can not haue of
his awne power and studie. The Pro∣phet Hieremie sayeth also:Iere. 7. Behold these men saye vnto me, where is the worde of the Lorde. Let it come. Where as I neuer the lesse leading the flocke in thy wayes, haue compelled no man by violence, for I neuer desired mans deeth. This kno∣west thou well. Here Hieremie sayeth yt he leading the flocke in ye Lordes way∣es, compelled none by violence to walke therin. This doctrine and exemple geuen by Hieremie agreeth but sclenderlye wt Antichristes canons, decrees, & lawes, nor with ye law newly reuyued by your lordships consentes, and laste of all with youre bishops mortheringe and tormen∣tinge of your lerned men. Also when Christe going vnto Hieru¦salem, Ioan and Iames entered in to a citie of the Samaritanes to make pro∣uision for Christe. But the citesins wold not receaue Christ. Wherfore Ioan and Iames retourned to Christ, and shewed to him the vnkindnes of the citesins say∣eng vnto him: Master will thou that we commaundye fyre to come from heauen, and consume them? Iesus turned to thē / and rebuked them sayenge: You know not of what spirit ye be. The sonne of man is not come to destroye mēs lyues,
but to saue them. If your lordly lorde bisshops were Chri¦stes true seruātes, then wold they folow his doctrine and example. As Christ say¦eth. He that serueth me, let him folow me.Ioh. 18. Ioan. 12. And he that foloweth me walketh not in darknes. But all men maye per∣ceaue that this their mortherīge, is mere contrary to both Christes doctrine and example, and vtterly bewrayeth them to be the seruantes of Antichriste. As Paul sayeth:1. Tim. 5. Good deades be manifeste, and they that be euyll can not be hid. The parable of Christe of the tares sowed by the enemie vpon the good seed which the master wold not haue drawē vp vntill harueste (leste drawinge vp the tares,Math. 3. the good wheate shuld also haue ben drawen vp) declareth manifestlie, that Christe wold not any man of an euil faith, to be killed for his euill faith. For if Paul had byn tormented to deeth, for wāte of a good faith, whē he was a per∣sequuter of Christes church. He thē had neuer bin the Apostle of the gentiles, ne yet the most laborious worke man that euer wrought in Christes vinyard. And if Sainte Augustine had foūde so cruell tyrātes to haue persequuted him to deeth before he was cōuerted by God at ye prea¦chinge
of S. Ambrose: thē ye church had wāed at this daye, as godly a doctor & wryter as euer wrote in Christes church sence the Apostles. But ouer & besides Christes doctrine and exmple, which be not any errours or vperfite doctrines, the Apostles doc¦trine is: that the seruante of God shulde not stryue,2. Tim. 2 but to be gētle to al men apte to teach, and one that can suffer, the euill with mekenes, and can enforme them that resiste the trueth. He sayeth not, can kill them that resiste the trueth, but can enforme them. For neither he nor nay mā can know when it shall please God to o∣pen the eyes of his heart, and to geue vnto him a perfite faith, which now ys holdē captiue in vnbelefe, at the wil of the Lorde. This doctine of ye Apostle, al∣though you wil not geue credite therto, yet proueth it manifestly before all men that your lordly lorde bishops be not the seruauntes of God, that shuld suffer the euill accordinge to Christes doctrine and example. And also this doctrine of the Apostle proueth, that youre law reuyued, is against the doc∣trine of Christe and of his Apostle, And therfore is a wicked law inuented by Antichriste, and his filthy genratiō,
and sluttish secte of infideles, to subuert & extinguish al godly knowleage & faith. Also the Apostle sayethrif ther be any that obeyeth not oure teachinges,2. Thes. 3 sende vs worde of him by a letter and haue no company with him that he may be asha∣med. And counte him not as an enemie: but warne him as a brother. Perceaue ye not, honorable lordes, how contrary your bishops be to Christe, and how con¦trarie they be to his doctrine, and to the doctrine of his Apostles, and also how wicked your law lately by your consētes reuyued is, contrary to Gods worde? But good my lordes, thinke not yt you can gather grapes vpon thornes. This their mortheringe of their brethern for their faith, declareth vnto all men (who∣se vnderstandinge is not takē awaye by God) that they be the theues of which Christe speaketh,Ioh. 8. of whome cā not come any good frute. For morther is a worke that proueth them to be the deuels ser∣uātes, who was a mortherer from ye be∣ginninge, sayeth Christ that lyeth not. But as Abraham had two children, one borne after the fleshe called Ismael,Gal. 4. and an other after the spirite called Isaac. As then he that was borne carnally persecu∣ted him that was borne spirituallye, euē
so is it now sayeth Sainte Paul Did Christ, my good lordes, compel any mā to come to his religion, with im∣prisonemente, or with fyre? Did Christe kill the Iewes, scribes, & pharisees that hearinge his doctrine, and seinge also his wonderous miracles, not withstan∣dinge both wold not beleue in him? Ys not faith, honorable lordes, ye only gifte of God, liberally geuen to whome it plea¦seth him? Can any man by his awne in∣dustry, studie, and laboure obteyne faith? If you will suffer youre byteshepes so cruelly to morther men for wante of soch faith as it hath pleased them to deuyse, by lyke equitie and Reason maye you suffer them to morther all them that ha∣ue not the lyberall gifte of God to make whole the sicke. And also with moare equitie you your selfes maye hange vp the bishop of London and all youre other bisshops & preistes as theues and mor∣therers, that take charge of soules & re∣ceaue the profites of their benefices, which haue not ye gifte of God to preach the gospell to the flocke, accordinge to Christes commaundemente. And by no lesse equitie, all they must suffer deeth that haue not the gift of chastitie, all∣though to deceaue the people, they saye,
they haue auowed it. And although, your lordships, as ye thinke, do not any violence against soch as now suffer by force of that wicked law, that by youre consentes is reuiued, be∣cause your lordships haue referred al the determinatiō & iudgemēte of heresie vn¦to your byteshepes. Yet, be your lordships and all they that haue consented to the reuiuinge and makinge in force & strēgth of the sayd law, gyltie of the blood and deeth of all thē that haue suffered deeth, shall suffer or do suffer, by force & s;trēgth of the said law. For not only all they that committe & do euill be worthy deeth (say∣eth Paul) but also all they that consente therto.Rom. 1. Not only because the law by force wherof many suffer deeth was reuyued by your consētes. But also bycause ye same law is manifest wicked & vnrightuous because it is contrary to the worde of God. Wherfore it cā not be but wicked. And therfore the same law wherby all they suffer vniustlie, and the blood of thē that suffer deeth, shalbe a witnes before God against you of their tormentes and deeth. And then good, my lordes, re¦member the sētence of God pronounced against al them that shede innocēte blood vnrightuously, not only that they be mor¦therers,
who shal neuer inheret ye kinge¦dome of heauen.1. Cor. 5. Gene. 9 But also the holy goost sayeth: he that shedeth innocente blood of men, his blood shalbe shed againe by men. If your lordships do not thinke God false in his promises, loke most certēly for your blood (if ye do not vnfaynedly & spe¦dely repente) to be shed of men againe. And although you wold, not beleue the promises of God to be true. Yet way you the late experience of that trueth ve∣refied in the late dukes of Somerset and Northumberlande, whose doinges to al them that did know them, do manifestlie prooue the sayed promises of God to be most certenly and truely verefied in them. As they can not be otherwise in all men. And now, I trust your lordships do well vnderstande and perceaue, that this law by your consentes lately reui∣ued, & made a law in force and stength, is contrary both to the doctrine and ex∣ample of Christe and of his Apostles and Prophetes. Wherfore it can not be but a wicked law.Esai. 10. Woo therfore be vnto you that make wicked lawes, sayeth God by his prophe Esaias, And if a nother magistrate shuld (by
the prouision of God) be called to reigne oue vs, who iudgeth the forme of reli∣gion last receaued of vs, to be contrary to Gods worde, and therfore to be wor∣thely abolished, then maye he persecute all youre bishops and thē that now haue consented to morther christen men for their fayth, but nor because he perceaueth that they haue no perfite faith, or els a wicked faith (for then should he commit lyke iniquitie) but because the worde of God sayeth: The same measure that you haue measured to other, the same shalbe measured to you againe. By this senten∣ce, that is no wicked law, al youre mor∣theringe bishops maye iustly be handles as they haue handled them. This law of late, by youre consentes, reuyued and made in force and strength as a perfite law, doeth not only reproue youre lordships of youre inconstauncie, who not longe tyme before vpon reaso∣nable and godly causes, wel wayed, fre∣ly disputed and reasoned, did dysanull, make frustrate & voyed the same as a wic¦ked law: but also this youre sodeine rein∣uinge of the same, declareth, that you care not what you do, be it neuer so wicked & contrary to God, so that you maye auoy∣de the displeasure of the magistrate and
supreme eyuill gouernour. Wherby it ap¦pereth manifestlie that you regarde mo∣re the displeasure of man then the disple¦asure of God. Doeth nor your lordships consider that God saith by the prophere:Psal. 5. The lorde shall breake the bones of them that do studie to please men? Halas, right honorable lordes, who har so be witched you now, yt you so so∣denly aye fled from Gods trueth?Gal. 3. (Your awne cōnsciēces so longe tyme) approuīg ye same. Before whose eyes Iesus Christ was so lyuely preached, and so faithfully set forth. And neuertheles now, not only his doctrine, and the true and profitable vse of the sacramentes, be by your consē∣tes repelled for heresie, but also Christ him self in his holy membres and misti∣call body most truelly tormented and slayn. Halas that foreyne nations shal ob∣secre this inconstantie to your disho∣nours: namely to be so in constante and inge in the principall pointes con¦cerninge a Christen mans religion and faith, consideringe that by your owne consentes the same religion now by you repelled as heresye, was by your com∣mandemes set forth and commaunded thorough all the Realme and domini∣ons
of Englāde to be taught, and also to be receaued of the people. To what trueth and to what religi∣on maye the subiectes of this realme here after cleaue, & assuredly without waue∣ringe folow, which do perceaue yt your lordships (contrary to youre owne com∣maundementes before made and direc∣ted to them) do flie and retiere from the doctrine and true vse of the Sacramētes that you in so litle tyme past did most worthely approue to be most Godly and necessarie to be taughte and folowed. God graunte that the comēs of this Re∣alme that now murmur and grudge at this inconstancie and other your euil do∣inges, do not hereafter burden you with the same. And especiallye for your flieng from the true religiō, which you did be∣fore all men approue to be most godly▪ From the which ye be now fled to the great dishonoure of God. Wherfore God by his Prophete threatneth you to bring you to dishonoure sayenge. I will geue them honour that honoure me. And they that dishonoure me,1. Reg. 2. them will I bringe to dishonoure. This promise will God kepe with you. God therfore graūt you grace truly to repente in season. Amen.
Hieremi. 5. Horrible and greuouse thinges be done in the lande. The preachers teache falsly, and ye priestes folow them, and my people haue pleasure therin. What will come therof at the last? Hieremi. 7. From the least to the most, they hange all vpon couetousnes. And from the pro∣phete vnto the priest they go all about wc falsheed and lye, and besydes that they heale the hurte of my people with swete wordes sayenge: peace, peace, when ther is no peace at al. Therfore they must be ashamed, for they haue committed ab∣omination. Hieremie. 23. Heare not the wordes of the prophe∣tes that preache vnto you, and deceaue you. For they speake the meaninge of their awne heartes, and not out of the mouth of the Lorde. Hieremie. 23. Yea the waye that men take is wicked and theyr gouernaunce is nothinge lyke the worde of the Lorde. For the preachers and the pristes them selfes are polluted ypocrytes, and their wickednesse haue I founde in my howse, sayeth the Lorde. Hiere. 51.
Babilō hath benin the Lordes hādes a golden cuppe that maketh all landes dronkē, of hyr wyne haue al people dron∣ken, therfore are they out of their wittes. Hier. 51. Oh my people come out of Babilon, that euery man may saue his lyfe frō the fear ful wrath of the Lorde Esaias. ca. 10. Woo be to Assur that is a staffe of my wrath, in whose hande is the rod of my punishmente, for I shal sēde him amōge these ypocrites, amōge the people that ha¦ue deserued my displeasure shall I sēde him, That he maye vtterly robbe them, spoyle them, and treade thē downe lyke the myre in the strete. How be it his pre¦tēce is not so, nother thinketh his hearte in his fashion. But he ymagi∣neth only how to ouerthrow and to destroye moch peo∣ple. For he sayth be not my princes all kinges.
The contentes of this treatise. 1 Ther is no thinge moare perilous & harte to christen faith, then a corrupte iudgemente. 2 The multitude of people serue Anti∣christe nor vnderstādinge nor knowinge him to be Antichriste. 3 Antichrist cometh in vnder the pre∣tence to condemne errours and hersye, wherof he & his sworen secte wilbe iud∣ges, and therfore condemeneth veritiein the siede of heresie. 4 A description of Christ and of his office. 5 The reuelation of Antichrist and of his condicion. 6 The vayne thinges that Antichrist hath ordened. 7 Antichriste erecteth a new religion wherin he breaketh Gods commaunde∣ment. 8 The world receaueth Antichrist rather then Christe, and what is the cause. 9 Christe and his Apostles call certen doctrines the doctrines of deuels. 10 Nether bishop nor priest hath any authoritie to forgyue synnes, but by prea∣ching the gospell.
11. Anriculer confession is contrary to the doctrine of Esai. 12. The priestes absolution spoken in a spech not knowen of the confessed, can̄ not profite them. 13. Certen causes wherfore bishops & priestes do mayntayne whorish confessiō 14. A token geuen by Christ of the ty∣me when Antichrist shal come. 15. Diuers abominations stande now in the temple of God, And what is the temple of God. 16. The causes wherfore Paul nameth Antichrist rather the man of sinne then a synner. 17. How the Quenes maiestie is cir∣cumuented to make a law to stablish the Popes vsurped power. 18. What bishops be theues, morthe∣rers and destroyers. 19. No man shuld dye for his faith. 20. Who be gyltie of the deeth of all them that haue suffred deeth by the wic∣ked lawe lately reuyued & made in force.
