709 99847950 13020
The Patterne of painefull Ad∣uentures: Containing the most excel∣lent, pleasant and variable Hi∣storie of the strange accidents that be∣fell vnto Prince Apollonius, the Lady Lucina his wife, and Tharsia his daughter. Wherein the vncertaintie of this world, and the fickle state of mans life are liue∣ly described. Gathered into English by LAVRENCE TVVINE Gentleman. Imprinted at London by Va∣lentine Simmes for the Widow Newman.
To the worshipfull Master Iohn Donning, Custo∣mer and Iurate of the towne of Rie in Sussex. BEing diuersly moo∣ued in mind, to signifie my good will and har∣tie loue towardes you, gentle M. Donning, I could not deuise any meanes more effectual, then by presenting the same to you, which had cost me some small labor and trauel. Not seeming ther∣by to acquite your manifold curtesies, towards me diuersly extended, but ra∣ther to discharge me of the note of In∣gratitude, which otherwise I might
seeme to incurre. Wherefore in steede of a greater present to counteruaile your friendlines, I am bold in the set∣ting foorth of this simple Pamflet vn∣der your name, to make a proffer of my thankeful heart to you againe. Wher∣in though want of farther abilitie ap∣peare, yet is there is no let, but that a wel-willing heart may be exprest, yea in the smallest gift. Now if haply the argument hereof appeare vnto you other than you could much wish, or I well afford, yet haue I no feare of any great misliking, considering your na∣tural disposition, which is to be deligh∣ted with honest pleasure, and com∣mendable recreation, and not to lie e∣uermore weltering, as it were, in dole∣full dumpishnesse. Which thing did put me in the greater hope, that this
worke would be the welcommer vnto you, especially considering the dele∣ctable varietie, and the often changes and chances contained in this present historie, which cannot but much stirre vp the mind and sences vnto sundry affections. What euer it be take it I beseech you, in good part, in stead of some better thing which I might well affoord, promising the same when oc∣casion shall serue, not being at this present so well furnished as I could wish of God: to whose good grace I re∣commend you and yours, both nowe and euermore. Your worships to vse. Laurence Twine.
The Table. HOw Antiochus committed incest with his owne daughter, and beheaded such as su∣ed vnto her for Marriage, if they coulde not resolue his questions. Chap. 1 How Apollonius arriuing at Antiochia, resolued the Kings question, and howe Taliarchus was sent to slay him. Chap. 2 How Taliarchus not finding Apollonius at Tyrus, departeth ioyfully, and Apollonius arriuing at Tharsus, relieueth the citie with victuall. Chap. 3 How Apollonius departing frō Tharsus by the per∣swasion of Stranguilio and Dionisiades his wife, com∣mitted shipwracke, and was relieued by Altistrates king of Pentapolis. Chap. 4 How Lucina king Altistrates daughter desirous to heare Apollonius aduentures, fell in loue with him. Chap. 5 How Apollonius is made Schoolemaster to Lucina, and how shee preferreth the loue of him aboue all the Nobilitie of Pentapolis. Chap. 6 How Apollonius was married to the Lady Lucina, and hearing of king Antiochus death, departeth with his wife towards his own country of Tyrus. Chap. 7 How faire Lucina died in trauell of childe vpon the sea, and being throwen into the water was cast on land at Ephesus, and taken home by Cerimon a Physicion. Chap. 8 How Lucina was restored to life by one of Cerimon the Physicions schollers, and how Cerimon adopted hir
to his daughter, and placed her in the Temple of Dia∣na. Chap. 9 How Apollonius arriuing at Tharsus, deliuereth his yong daughter Tharsia vnto Stranguilio and Dionisi∣ades to be brought vp, and how the Nurce lying in her death bed declareth vnto Tharsia who were hir parents. Chap. 10 How after the death of Ligozides the Nurce, Dioni∣siades enuying at the beautie of Tharsia, conspired her death, which should haue been accomplished by a vil∣laine of the countrey. Chap. 11 How certain Pirats rescued Tharsia when she shuld haue been slaine, and carried her vnto the citie Machi∣lenta to be sold among other bondslaues. Chap. 12 How the Pirats which stole away Tharsia, brought her to the citie Machilenta, and sold her to a common bawd, and how she preserued her virginitie. Cha. 13 How Tharsia withstood a second assault of her vir∣ginitie, and by what meanes shee was preserued. Chap. 14 How Apollonius comming to Tharsus, and not fin∣ding his daughter, lamented her supposed death, and taking ship againe, was driuen by a tempest to Micha∣lenta where Tharsia was. Chap. 15 How Athanagoras prince of Machilenta seeing the beautie of Apollonius ship, went aboord of it, and did the best he could to comfort him. Chap. 16 How Anathagoras sent for Tharsia, to make her fa∣ther Apollonius merrie, and how after long circum∣stance they came into knowledge one of another. Chap. 17 How Apollonius leauing off mourning, came into the citie Machilenta, where he commanded the bawd to be burned, and how Tharsia was married vnto Prince Athanagoras. Chap. 18
How Apollonius meaning to saile into his owne Countrey by Tharsus, was commaunded by an Angell in the night to goe to Ephesus, and there to declare all his aduentures in the Church, with a loud voice. Chap. 19 How Apollonius came to the knowledge of his wife the Ladie Lucina, and how they reioyced at the meet∣ing of ech other. Chap. 20 How Apollonius departed from Ephesus and sailed himselfe, his wife, his sonne and daughter vnto Antio∣chia, and then to Tyrus, and from thence to Tharsus, where he reuenged himselfe vpon Stranguilio, and Dio∣nisiades. Chap. 21 How Apollonius sayled from Tharsus to visite his father in law Altistrates king of Pentapolis, who died not long after Apollonius comming thither. Chap. 22 How Apollonius rewarded the fisherman that re∣lieued him after he had suffered shipwracke: how he dealt also with old Calamitus, and likewise with the Pi∣rates that stole away Tharsia. Chap. 23 How Apollonius had a yong sonne and heire by his wife Lucina, likewise of Apollonius age, and how hee died: with some other accidents thereunto incident. Chap. 24 FINIS.
The first Chapter. Howe Antiochus committed incest with his owne daughter, and beheaded such as su∣ed vnto her for marriage, if they coulde not resolue his questions. THE most famous and mightie king Antiochus, which builded the goodly citie of Antiochia in Syria, and called it after his own name, as the chiefest seat of all his dominions, and most principal place of his abode, be∣gat vpon his wife one daugh∣ter, a most excellent and beautifull yoong Ladie. Who in processe of yéeres growing vp as wel in ripe∣nesse of age, as perfection of beautie: many Princes and noble men resorted vnto her for intreaty of mar∣riage, offering inestimable riches in iointure. How∣beit the king her father, euermore requiring delibe∣ration, vpon whom rather than other to bestow his daughter, perceiued eftsoones an vnlawfull concupis∣cence to boyle within his breast, which he augmen∣ted with an outragious flame of crueltie sparkling in his heart, so that he began to burne with the loue of his owne childe, more then it was beséeming for a father. Thus being wrapped in the toyle of blind de∣sire, hee sustained within himselfe a fierce conflict, wherein Madnesse put Modestie to flight, & he wholly
yéelded himselfe vnto loue. Wherefore, not long after, on a certaine day hee came into his daughters cham∣ber, and bidding all that were there for to depart, as though he had had some secret matter to conferre with her: the furious rage of lust pricking him forward thereunto, he violently forced her, though séely mai∣den she withstood him long to her power, and threwe away all regard of his owne honestie, and vnlosed the knot of her virginitie. Now when he was depar∣ted, and she being alone deuised within her selfe what it were best for her to doe, sodainelie her nurse entred in, and perceiuing her face al be blubbred with teares, What is the matter, deare childe and Madam, (quoth she) that you sit thus sorrowfully? O my beloued nurse, answered the Ladie, euen nowe two noble names were lost within this chamber. Howe so, saide the nurse? Because (quoth shée) before marri∣age, through wicked villanie I am most shamefully defiled. And when the nurse had heard these wordes, and looking about more diligently, perceiued indéede what was done, being inraged with sorrowe and an∣ger, and almost distract of her wittes. Alas, what wretch or rather infernal féend (quoth she) durst thus presumptuously defile the bed of a Princesse? Ungod∣linesse hath done this déede (quoth the Ladie.) Whie then doe you not tell it the King your father, saide the nurse? Ah nurse, answered the Ladie, Where is my father? For if you well vnderstoode the matter, the name of Father is lost in me, so that I can haue no re∣medie now but death onely. But the nurf e nowe by a few wordes perceiuing the whole tale, and weying that the yong Lady gaue inkling of remedie by death, which she much feared, beganne to assuage her griefe with comfortable wordes, and to withdrawe her minde from that mischieuous purpose. Wherein she preuailed so effectually in short time, that she appea∣sed
the fresh bléeding of the gréene wound, howbeit the scarre continued long time, as déepely stroken within her tender heart, before it could be throughlie cured. In the meane season, while this wicked father she∣weth the countenaunce of a louing sire abroad in the eies of al his people: notwithstanding within doores, and in his minde, he reioyceth that he hath played the part of an husband with his daughter: which false re∣semblance of hateful marriage, to the intent he might alwaies enioy, he inuented a strange deuise of wic∣kednesse to driue away all suters that should resort vnto her, by propounding certaine questions, the ef∣fect and law whereof was thus published in writing: Who so findeth out the solution of my question, shall haue my daughter to wife, but who so faileth, shal lose his head. Now when Fame had blowen abroade the possibi∣litie to obtaine this Ladie, such was the singular re∣port or her surpassing beautie, that many kings and men of great nobility repaired thither. And if haply any through skill, or learning had found out the solu∣tion of the kings question, notwithstanding hée was beheaded as though hée had answered nothing to the purpose: and his head was set vp at the gate to terri∣fie others that should come, who beholding there the present image of death, might aduise them from as∣saying anie such danger. These outrages practised Antiochus, to the ende he might continue in filthie incest with his daughter.
The second Chapter. ¶ How Apollonius arriuing at Antiochia, resolued the kings question, and how Taliarchus was sent to slay him. WHilest Antiochus thus continued in exercising tyrannie at Antiochia, a certaine yong Gentle∣man of Tyrus, Prince of the country, abounding in wealth, and very well learned, called Apollonius, ar∣riued in the coast, and comming vnto the citie of An∣tiochia, was brought into the kings presence. And when he had saluted him, the king demanded of him the cause of his comming thither. Then saide the yoong prince, Sir, I require to haue your daughter in marriage. The king hearing that which he was vn∣willing to heare, looking fiercely vpon him, saide vnto him: Doest thou knowe the conditions of the marri∣age? Yea sir king, said Apollonius, and I sée it stand∣ing vpon the gate. Then the king being sharply mo∣ued, and disdaining at him, said, Heare then the que∣stion which thou must resolue, or else die: I am carri∣ed with mischiefe, I eate my mothers fleshe: I seeke my brother my mothers husband and I can not finde him. Apollonius hauing receiued the question, withdrew himselfe a while out of the Kinges pre∣sence, and being desirous to vnderstand what it meant, he found out the solution thereof in short space through the help of God, and returned againe to the king, saying: Your grace proposed a question vnto me, I pray you heare the solution thereof. And wher∣as you said in your probleme, I am carried with mis∣chiefe: you haue not lied, for looke vnto your owne selfe. But whereas you say further, I eate my mothers flesh, looke vpon your daughter. Now the king as soone as he perceiued that Apol∣lonius had resolued his problems, fearing lest his
wickednesse should be discouered, he looked vpon him with a wrathfull countenance, saying: Thou art farre wide from the solution of my demand, and hast hit no part of the meaning thereof: wherefore thou hast de∣serued to be beheaded. Howbeit I will shew thee this courtesie, as to giue thee thirtie daies respite to be∣thinke thy selfe of this matter. Wherefore returne home into thine owne countrey, and if thou canst find out the solution of my probleme, thou shalt haue my daughter to wife: If not, thou shalt be beheaded. Then Apollonius being much troubled and molested in mind, accompanying himself with a sufficient train, tooke shipping, and returned into his owne countrey. But so soone as he was departed, Antiochus called vnto him his steward named Thaliarchus, to whom he spake in maner following. Thaliarchus, the only faithfull and trustie minister of my secrets: vnderstand that Apollonius prince of Tirus, hath found out the solution of my question. Wherefore, take shipping and followe him immedi∣atly, and if thou canst not ouertake him vpon the sea, seeke him out when thou commest to Tirus, and slay him either with sword or poyson, and when thou re∣turnest I will bountifully reward thee. Taliarchus promised to accomplish his commandement with all diligence, and taking to him his shield with monie sufficient for the iourney, departed on his way, and shortly after ariued at the coast of Tirus. But Apol∣lonius was come home vnto his owne Pallace long time before, and withdrawing himselfe into his stu∣die, perused all his bookes concerning the kings pro∣bleame, finding none other solution, than that which he had alreadie told the king. And thus he said with∣in himselfe: Surely, vnlesse I be much deceiued, An∣tiochus burneth with disordinate loue of his daugh∣ter: and discoursing farther with himselfe vpon that
point: What sayest thou now, or what intendest thou to doe Apollonius, said he to himselfe? Thou hast re∣solued his probleme, and yet not receiued his daugh∣ter, and God hath therefore brought thee away that thou shouldest not die. Then brake hee off in the midst of these cogitations, and immediatly comman∣ded his ships to be prepared, and to be laden with an hundred thousand bushels of wheate, and with great plentie of gold, siluer and rich apparrell: and taking vnto him a few of his most trustiest seruants, about midnight imbarked himself, and hoysing vp his sails, committed himselfe to the wide sea. The day follow∣ing his subiects the citizens came vnto the pallace to haue seene their Prince, but when they found him not there, the whole citie was forthwith surprised with wonderfull sorrowe, euerie man lamenting that so worthy a Prince so sodainly gone out of sight and knowledge, no man knew whether. Great was the griefe, and wofull was the wayling which they made, euery man lamenting his owne priuate estate and the common-wealths in generall, as it alwaies hapneth at the death or losse of a good Prince, which the inhabitants of Tirus tooke then so heauily in re∣spect of their great affection, that a long time after no barbers shops were opened, the common shews and plaies surceased, baines and hoat houses were shut vp, tauerns were not frequented, and no man repai∣red vnto the Churches, al thing was full of sorrw and heauinesse, what shall I say? there was nothing but heauinesse.
CHAP. III. How Taliarchús not finding Apollonius at Tirus de∣parteth ioyfully, and Apollonius arriuing at Thar∣sus, relieueth the citie with vittell. IN the middes of this sorrowfull season, Taliarchus commeth to Tirus to execute the cruell commande∣ment of Antiochus, where finding al-thing shut vp, and a generall shew of mourning, meeting with a boy in the stréete tell me, said he, or I will slay thee, for what cause is al this citie thus drowned in heauines? To whom the child answered: My friend, doest thou not know the cause, that thou askest it of me? This ci∣tie mourneth because the Prince therof Apollonius, returning back from king Antiochus, can no where be found, or heard of. Now so soone as Taliarchus heard these tidings, he returned ioyfully vnto his ships, and tooke his iourny backe to Antiochia, and being lan∣ded, he hastened vnto the king, and fell downe on his knees before him, saying: All haile most mightie Prince, reioyce and be glad, for Apollonius being in feare of your grace is departed no man knoweth whe∣ther. Then answered the king: He may well flie a∣way from mee, but he shall neuer escape my handes. And immediatly he made proclamation, that whosoe∣uer could take that contemner of the king Apollonius prince of Tirus, and bring him aliue into the kinges presence, shoulde haue an hundred talents of golde for his labour: and whosoeuer coulde bring his head, shoulde haue fiftie talentes. Which procla∣mation beeing published, not onely Apollonius en∣nemies but also his friendes made all haste possible to seeke him out, allured thereto with couetous∣nesse of the money. Thus was that poore Prince
for about by sea and by land, through woodes  wilde deserts, but could not be found. Then the king commanded a great Nauie of ships to be prepa∣red to scoure the seas abroad, if haply they might méet with him, but for that euery thing requireth a time ere it can be done, in the meane season Apollonius ar∣riueth at Tharsus, where walking along by the sea side, he was espied by one of his owne seruauntes, na∣med Elinatus, who landed there not long before, and ouertooke him as he was going, and comming neere vnto him with dutifull obeisance, said vnto him: God saue you prince Apollonius. But he being saluted, did euen so as noble men and princes vse to doe, set light by him. But Elinatus taking that behauiour vnkind∣ly, saluted him againe saying: God saue you prince Apollonius salute me againe, and despise not pouer∣tie beautified with honestie. And if you knewe that which I know, you would take good heed to your self. Then answered Apollonius: If you thinke good, I I pray you tell me. Elinatus answered, you are by proclamation commanded to be slaine. And who, said Apollonius, dares commaund by proclamation, the prince of a countrey to be slaine? Antiochus said Eli∣natus. Antiochus? For what cause, demanded Apol∣lonius. For that, said Elinatus, thou wouldst be vnto his daughter which he himselfe is. Then demanded Apollonius, for what summe of mony is my life sold by that proclamation? Elinatus answered, whosoeuer can bring you aliue vnto the king shall haue an hun∣dred talents of gold in recompence: but who so brin∣geth your head shall haue fiftie talents of gold for his labour, and therefore I aduise you my lord, to flie vn∣to some place for your defence: and when he had so said he tooke his leaue and departed. But Apollonius cal∣led him againe, and said that hee would giue him an hundred talents of gold: for said he, receiue thus much
now of my pouertie, where nothing is now left vnto me but flight, and pining misery. Thou hast deserued the reward, wherefore draw out thy sword, and cut off my head, & present it to the king, as the most ioy∣ful sight in the world. Thus mayst thou win an hun∣dred talents of gold, and remaine without all blame or note of ingratitude, since I my selfe haue hyred thée in the kinges behalfe to gratefie him with so ac∣ceptable a present. Then answered Elinatus: God for∣bid my lord that by anie such sinister means I should deserue a reward. In all my life I neuer consented to any such matter in my heart. And, my lord, if the déed were good, the loue of vertue were sufficient force to allure any man thereunto. But since it respecteth your life, to whome in consideration of the cause no man may doe violence without villanie: I commit both you and your matter vnto God, who no doubt will be your defender: And when he had thus said, he departed. But Apollonius walked forth along vpon the shoare, where he had not gone farre, but he descri∣ed a man a farre off comming towardes him with heauie chéere and a sorrowfull countenance, and his name was Stranguilio: a Tharsian borne, and of good reputation in the citie: To whom saide Apollonius, God saue you Stranguilio: and he likewise resaluted him saying, and you likewise my good lord Apolloni∣us: I pray you tel me, what is the cause that you walk in this place thus troubled within your minde? Apol∣lonius answered: because, being promised to haue king Antiochus daughter to my wife, if I told him the true meaning of his question, nowe that I haue so done, I am notwithstanding restrained from her. Where∣fore I request you it may so be, that I may liue secret∣ly in your citie: for why, I stand moreouer in some doubt of the kinges farther displeasure. Stranguilio answered: My lord Apollonius, our citie at this pre∣sent
is verie poore, and not able to sustaine the great∣nesse of your dignitie: and euen now we suffer great penurie and want of vittell, insomuch that there re∣maineth small hope of comfort vnto our citizens, but that we shall all perish by extreme famine: and now certes there resteth nothing but the fearefull image of gastly death before our eies. When Apollonius heard these wordes, he said vnto him: Then giue thankes vnto God, who in my flight hath brought me a land into your costes. For I haue brought great store of prouision with me, and I will presently giue vnto your citie an hundreth thousand bushels of wheate, if you will onely conceale my comming hither. At these wordes Stranguilio being strooken as it were into a sodaine amazednesse, as it happeneth when a man is ouerioyed with some glad tidinges, fell downe pro∣strate before prince Apollonius feete, and saide: My lord Apollonius, if you coulde, and also if it might please of your great goodnesse, in such sort as you say, to succour this afflicted and famished citie we wil not onely receiue you gladly and conceale your abode: but also if néede so require, willingly spend our liues in your quarrell. Which promise of mine, to the intent you may heare to be confirmed by the full consent of all the citizens, might it please your Grace to enter into the citie, and I most willingly will attend vp∣on you. Apollonius agréed thereto, and when they came into the citie, he mounted vp into the place of iudgment, to the intent he might the better be heard, and gathering al the people togither: thus hee spake vnto the whole multitude. Ye citizens of Tharsus, whom penurie of vittell pincheth at this present: vn∣derstand ye, that I Apollonius prince of Tirus, am determined presently to relieue you: In respect of which benefite I trust ye will be so thankfull, as to conceale mine arriuing hither. And know ye more∣ouer,
that not as being driuen away through the ma∣lice of king Antiochus, but sayling along by the Seas I am happily fallen into your hauen. Wherefore, I meane to vtter vnto you an hundred thousand bus∣shels of wheate, paying no more than I bought it for in mine owne countrey, that is to say, eight péeces of brasse for euerie bushell. When the citizens heard this, they gaue a shout for ioy, crying, God saue my Lord Apollonius, promising to liue and die in his quarrell, and they gaue him wonderfull thankes, and the whole citie was replenished with ioy, and they went forthwith vnto the ships, and bought the corne. But Apollonius doubting lest by this déede, he should séeme to put off the dignitie of a prince, and put on the countenance of a merchant rather than a gi∣uer, when he had receiued the price of the wheate, he restored it backe againe to the vse and commoditie of the same citie. And when the citizens perceiued the great benefites which he had bestowed vpon their ci∣tie, they erected in the marked place a monument in the memoriall of him, his stature made of brasse stan∣ding in a charret, holding corne in his right hand, and spurning it with his left foot: and on the baser foot of of the pillar whereon it stoode, was ingrauen in great letters this superscription: Apollonius prince of Ti∣rus gaue a gift vnto the citie of Tharsus whereby hée deliuered it from a cruell death. CHAP. IIII. How Apollonius departing from Tharsus by the per∣swasion of Stranguilio and Dionisiades his wife, com∣mitted shipwracke, and was relieued by Altistrates king of Pentapolis. THus had not Apollonius aboden many daies in the citie of Tharsus but Stranguilio & Dionisiades his
wife, earnestly exhorted him, as séeming very carefull and tender of his welfare, rather to addresse himselfe vnto Pentapolis or among the Tirenians, as a place most fit for his securitie, where he might lie and hide himselfe in greatest assurance & tranquilitie. Where∣fore hereunto, he resolued himselfe, and with conue∣nient expedition prepared al things necessarie for the iourney. And when the day of his departure was come, he was brought with great honour by the citi∣zens vnto his ships, where with a courteous farewell on ech side giuen, the marriners weighed anker, hoysed sailes, and away they goe, committing them∣selues to the wind and water. Thus sailed they forth along in their course, thrée days and thrée nights with prosperous winde and weather, vntill sodainly the whole face of heauen and sea began to change: for the skie looked blacke and the Northerne wind arose, and the tempest increased more and more, insomuch that prince Apollonius and the Tyrians that were with him were much apalled, and began to doubt of their liues. But loe, immediatly, the winde blew fiercely from the South-west, and the North came singing on the otherside, the rain powred down ouer their heads, and the sea yéelded forth waues as it had béene moun∣tanes of water, that the ships could no longer wre∣stle with the tempest, and especially the admirall, wherein the good prince himselfe fared, but néeds must they yéeld vnto the present calamitie. There might you haue heard the winds whistling, the raine dash∣ing, the sea roaring, the cables cracking, ye tacklings breaking, the shippe tearing, the men miserable shou∣ting out for their liues. There might you haue séene the sea searching the shippe, the bordes fléeting, the goods swimming, the treasure sincking, the men shif∣ting to saue themselues, where partly through vio∣lence of the tempest, and partly through darcknes of
the night which then was come vpon them, they were all drowned, onely Apollonius excepted, who by the grace of God, and the helpe of a simple boord, was dri∣uen vpon the shoare of the Pentapolitanes. And when he had recouered to land, wearie as he was, he stoode vpon the shoare, and looked vpon the calme sea, saying: O most false and vntrustie sea. I will choose rather to fall into the handes of the most cruell King Antiochus, than venture to returne againe by thée in∣to mine owne Countrey: thou hast shewed thy spite vpon me, and deuoured my trustie friendes and com∣panions, by meanes whereof I am nowe left alone, and it is the prouidence of almightie God, that I haue escaped thy gréedie iawes. Where shall I now finde comfort? or who will succour him in a strange place that is not knowen? And whilest he spake these wordes, hée sawe a man comming towardes him, and he was a rough fisherman, with an hoode vpon his head, and a filthie leatherne pelt vpon his backe, vnséemely clad, and homely to beholde. When hée drewe neare Apollonius, the present necessitie con∣straining him thereto, fell down prostrate at his féet, and powring forth a floud of teares, he said vnto him: whosoeuer thou art, take pitie vpon a poore sea-wrac∣ked man, cast vp nowe naked, and in simple state, yet borne of no base degrée, but sprung foorth of noble pa∣rentage. And that thou maiest in helping me knowe whome thou succourest: I am that Apollonius prince of Tyrus, whome most part of the worlde knoweth, and I beséech thée to preserue my life by shewing mée thy friendly reliefe. When the fisherman beheld the comlinesse and beautie of the yoong Gentleman, hée was mooned with compassion towardes him, and lif∣ted him vp from the ground, and lead him into his house and feasted him with such fare as he presently had, and the more amplie to expresse his great affec∣tion
towardes him, he disrobed himselfe of his poore and simple cloke, and diuiding it into two parts, gaue the one halfe thereof vnto Apollonius, saying: Take here at my handes, such poore entertainment and fur∣niture as I haue, and goe into the citie, where per∣happes thou shalt finde some of better abilitie, that will rue thine estate: and if thou doe not, returne then againe hither vnto mée, and thou shalt not want what may be perfourmed by the pouertie of a poore fi∣sherman. And in the meane time of this one thing onelie I put thee in mind, that when thou shalt be re∣stored to thy former dignitie, thou doe not despise to thinke on the basenesse of the poore péece of garment. To which Apollonius answered: If I remember not thée and it, I wish nothing else but that I may su∣staine the like shipwracke. And when hée had saide so, he departed on the way which was taught him, and came vnto the citie gates, whereinto he entred. And while he was thinking with himselfe which waie to séeke succor to sustaine his life, he saw a boy running naked through the stréete, girded only with a tuell a∣bout his middle, and his head annointed with oyle, crying aloude, and saying: Hearken all, as well citi∣zens as strangers and seruants, hearken: Whosoeuer will be washed, let him come to the place of exercise. When Apollonius heard this, he followed the boy, and comming vnto the place cast off his cloake, and stripped himselfe, and entred into the Baine, and bathed himselfe with the liquour. And looking about for some companion with whome he might exercise himselfe according vnto the manner of the place and countrey, and finding none: sodainelie vnlooked for entred in Altistrates King of the whole land, accompa∣nied with a great troupe of seruitours. Anone he be∣ganne to exercise himselfe at tennis with his men, which when Apollonius espied, he intruded himselfe
amongst them into the kings presence, and stroke back the ball to the king, and serued him in play with great swiftnes. But whē the king perceiued the great nim∣blenesse and cunning which was in him, surpassing the residue: stand aside, (quoth he) vnto his men, for me thinkes this yong man is more cunning than I. When Apollonius heard himselfe commended, hée stept foorth boldly into the middes of the tennis court, and taking vp a racket in his hand, he tossed the ball skilfully, and with wonderful agilitie. After play, he also washed the king very reuerently in the Baine: and when all was done, hée tooke his leaue duetifully, & so departed. When Apollonius was gone, the king said vnto them that were about him: I sweare vnto you of truth as I am a Prince, I was neuer exercised nor washed better then this day, and that by the dili∣gence of a yongman I know not what he is. And tur∣ning back, go, said he vnto one of his seruants, & know what that yong man is that hath with such duty & di∣ligence taken pains with me. The seruant going af∣ter Apollonius, and séeing him clad in a filthy fishers cloke, returned againe to the king, saying: If it like your grace, the yongman is a sea-wracked man. How knowest thou that said the king? the seruāt answered: Though he told me not so himselfe, yet his apparel be∣wraieth his state. Then said the king to his seruant: Go apace after him, & say vnto him, that the king desi∣reth him to sup with him this night. Then the seruāt made haste after Apollonius, & did the kings message to him, which so soone as he heard, he granted thereto, much thanking the kings maiestie, & came back with the seruant. When they were come to the gate, the seruant went in first vnto the king, saying: The sea-wracked man, for whom your grace sent me, is come, but is ashamed to come into your presence, by reason of his base aray: whome the King commaunded im∣mediatly
to be clothed in séemely apparell, and to be brought in to supper, and placed him at the table with him, right ouer against himselfe. Immediately the boorde was furnished with all kinde of princelie fare, the guests fed apace, euery man on that which he li∣ked, onelie Apollonius sate still and eate nothing, but earnestly beholding the golde, siluer, and other king∣ly furniture, whereof there was great plentie, hée could not refraine from sheading teares. Then saide one of the guests that sate at the table, vnto the king: This yoong man, I suppose, enuieth at your graces prosperitie. No not so, answered the King, you sup∣pose amisse: but he is sorie to remember that he hath lost more wealth then this is: and looking vpon A∣pollonius with a smiling countenance, be mery yong man, quoth he, and eate thy meate with vs, and trust in GOD, who doubtlesse will send thée better for∣tune. CHAP. V. ¶How Lucina King Altistrates daughter desirous to heare Apollonius aduentures, fel in loue with him. NOW while they sate at meate, discoursing of this, and such like matters at the boord, sudden∣lie came in the kings daughter and onlie child named Lucina, a singular beautifull ladie, and a maiden now of ripe yéeres for mariage: and she ap∣proched nigh and kissed the king her father, and al the guests that sate with him at the table. And when she had so done, she returned vnto her father, and saide: Good father, I pray you what yongman is this which sitteth in so honourable a place ouer against you, so sorrowfull and heauie? O swéete daughter, answered
the king, this yong man is a sea-wracked man, and hath done me great honour to day at the baines and place of exercise, for which cause I sent for him to sup with me, but I knowe not neither what, neither whence he is. If you be desirous to know these things, demaund of him, for you may vnderstand all things, and peraduenture when you shall knowe, you will be mooued with compassion towardes him. Nowe when the lady perceiued hir fathers mind, she turned about vnto Apollonius, and saide, Gentleman, whose grace and comlinesse sufficiently bewraieth the nobi∣litie of your birth, if it be not grieuous vnto you, shew me your name I beséech you, and your aduentures. Then answered Apollonius: Madam, if you aske my name, I haue lost it in the sea: if you enquire of my nobilitie, I haue left that at Tyrus. Sir, I beséech you then said the Lady Lucina, tel me this more plain∣ly, that I may vnderstand. Then Apollonius crauing licence to speake, declared his name, his birth and no∣bilitie, and vnripped the whole tragedie of his aduen∣tures in order as is before rehearsed, and when he had made an end of speaking, he burst foorth into most plē∣tifull teares. Which when the king beheld, he saide vnto Lucina: déere daughter, you haue done euill in requiring to know the yong mans name, and his ad∣uentures, wherein you haue renued his forepassed griefes. But since nowe you haue vnderstoode all the trueth of him, it is méete as it becommeth the daugh∣ter of a king, you likewise extend your liberalitie to∣wards him, and whatsoeuer you giue him I will sée it be perfourmed: Then Lucina hauing already in hir heart professed to doe him good, and nowe perceiuing very luckily her fathers mind to be inclined to the de∣sired purpose, she cast a friendly looke vpon him, say∣ing: Apollonius, nowe lay sorrowe aside, for my fa∣ther is determined to inrich you: and Apollonius ac∣cording
to the curtesie that was in him, with sighes and sobbes at remembrance of that whereof he had so lately spoken, yéelded great thankes vnto the faire la∣die Lucina. Then saide the king vnto his daughter: Ma∣dame I pray you take your harpe into your handes, and play vs some musike to refresh our guests with∣all, for we haue all too long hearkened vnto sorrowful matters: and when she had called for her harpe, shée beganne to play so swéetely, that all that were in com∣panie highly commended her, saying that in all their liues they neuer heard pleasanter harmonie. Thus whilest the guests, euery man for his part much com∣mended the ladies cunning, onely Apollonius spake nothing. Then saide the king vnto him: you are too blame Apollonius, since all praise my daughter for her excellencie in musike, and you commend not her, or rather dispraise her by holding your peace. Apol∣lonius answered: My soueraigne and good lord, might it please you to pardon me, & I will say what I think: The lady Lucina your daughter is pretily entred, but she is not yet come to perfection in musike. For proofe whereof, if it please your Grace to command the harp to be deliuered vnto me, she shall well perceiue, that she shal heare that which she doth not yet know. The king answered: I sée well Apollonius you haue skill in all things, and is nothing to be wished in a gentle∣man, but you haue perfectly learned it, wherfore, hold, I pray you take the harpe, and let vs heare some part of your cunning. When Apollonius had receiued the harp, he went forth, and put a garland of flowers vp∣on his head, and fastned his raiment in comly maner about him, and entred into the parlour againe, play∣ing before the kng and the residue with such cunning and swéetnes, that he séemed rather to be Apollo then Apollonius, and the kings guests confessed, that in al
their liues they neuer heard the like before. But whē Lucina had heard and séene what was done, she felt hir selfe sodainely mooued within, and was sharpelie surprised with the loue of Apollonius, and turning to her father: Nowe suffer me good father, saide she, to giue vnto this yoong gentleman some reward, accord∣ing as I shall thinke conuenient. I giue you leaue to do so faire daughter, saide the king. Then she look∣ing towards Apollonius, My lord Apollonius, saide she, receiue héere of my fathers liberalitie two hun∣dred talents of gold, foure hundred poundes of siluer, store of raiment, twentie men seruants, and tenne handmaidens. Nowe therefore, said she vnto the of∣ficers that stood by, bring hither all these things which I haue here promised, and lay them downe in the par∣lour, in the presence of our friends. And immediatly they were all brought into their sight as she had com∣maunded. When this was done, the guests arose from the table, and giuing thankes vnto the king and ladie Lucina, tooke their leaue and departed. And Apollo∣nius, thinking it likewise time for him to be gone: Most gratious king Altistrates (quoth he) thou which art a comforter of such as are in miserie: and thou al∣so renowmed princesse, a fauourer of philosophie, and louer of all good studies, I bid you now most heartily farewell, as for your great deserts toward me, I leaue them to GOD to requite you with deserued recom∣pence: and looking vnto his seruants which the ladie Lucina had giuen him, Sirs, take vp this géere, quoth hée, which is giuen me, and bring it away, and let vs go séeke some lodging. When Lucina heard those words she was sodain∣lie stroken into a dump, fearing that she shoulde haue lost her newe louer, before she had euer reaped anie fruit of his companie, and therefore turning to her fa∣ther, said: I beséech you good father and gratious king,
forasmuch as it hath pleased you this day to inrich A∣polonius with many great gifts, you would not suffer him now to depart so late, lest he be by some naughtie persons spoiled of the things which you haue giuen him. The king willingly granted the ladies request, and commanded forthwith that there should be a faire lodging prepared for him and his, where he might lie honourably, and when he sawe conuenient time he went to bed, and tooke his rest. CHAP. VI. ¶ How Apollonius is made Schoolemaster to Lucina, and how she preferreth the loue of him, aboue all the nobilitie of Pentapolis. WHen night was come, and euery one was at rest, Lucina laie vnquietly tumbling in her bed al∣waies thinking vpon Apollonius, and could not sléep. Wherfore, in the morning she rose very early, & came in to the king her fathers chamber. Whom when her father saw, what is ye matter daughter Lucina, (quoth he) that contrary to custome you be stirring so earelie this morning? déere father, quoth Lucina, I could take no rest al this night, for the desire I haue to learn mu∣sicke of Apollonius, and therefore I heartily pray you good father, to put me vnto him to be instructed in the Art of Musicke, and other good qualities, wherein hée is skilfull. When Altistrates heard his daughters talke, he smiled within himselfe, when hée perceiued the warmed affection kindled within her breast, which with so séemely a pretence she had couered, as the desire to learne, and determined in part presently to satisfie her request: and when time serued, he sent a messenger for Apollonius. And when he was come, he said vnto him: Apollonius my daughter much de∣sireth
to be your scholler, and therefore I pray you take her to your gouernement, and instruct her the best you can, and I will reward you to your conten∣tation: Apollonius answered, gracious prince I am moste willing to obey your commaundement. So hée tooke the ladie, and instructed her in the best maner he coulde, euen as himselfe had learned: wherein she profited so well, that in short time she matched, or ra∣ther surpassed her maister. Thus increased shee not onely in learning, but grew also daily in more fer∣uent loue of Apollonius, as, whether stāding in doubt of her fathers resolute good wil if he were moued con∣cerning marriage, or fearing the time woulde be de∣ferred in respect whereof she was presently ready, in so much that she fell sicke and became weaker euerie day than other. When the king perceiued his daugh∣ters infirmitie to increase, hée sent immediatlie throughout all the dominions for the learnedst phisi∣tions to search out her griefe and to cure it, who exa∣mining her vrine, and feeling her pulse, coulde finde out no manifest cause or substance of her disease. Af∣ter a few dayes that this happened, three noble yong men of the same countrey which had béen suters a long time vnto Lucina for marriage, came vnto the Court, and being brought into the kinges presence, saluted him dutifully. To whom the king said, Gentlemen, what is the cause of your comming? They answe∣red, your Grace hath oftentimes promised to bestow your daughter in marriage vpon one of vs, and this is the cause of our comming at this time. Wee are your subiectes, wealthie, and descended of noble fa∣milies, might it therefore please your Grace to choose one among vs three, to be your sonne in law. Then answered the king you are come vnto me at an vnsea∣sonable time, for my daughter now applieth her stu∣die, and lieth sicke for the desire of learning, and the
time is much vnméet for marriage. But to the intent you shall not altogither loose your labour, nor that I will not seeme to deferre you too long: write your names euery one seuerally in a péece of paper, and what ioynter you will make, and I will send the writinges to my daughter, that she may choose him whom she best liketh of. They did forthwith as the king had counselled them, and deliuered the writings vnto the king, which hee read, and signed them, and deliuered them vnto Apollonius, saying: Take here these billes, and deliuer them to your scholler, which Apollonius receiued, and tooke them immediatly vn∣to the ladie Lucina. Now when she sawe her schoole∣maister whom she loued so entirely: she saide vnto him: Maister, what is the cause that you come alone into my chamber? Apollonius answered: Madame, I haue brought writings from the king your father, which he willeth you to reade. Lucina then receiued the writinges, and brake them vp, and when she had read the names of the three noblemen her suters, shée threw away the billes, and looking vpon Apollonius, said vnto him: My welbeloued Schoolemaister Apol∣lonius, doth it not gréeue you that I shall be married vnto another? Apollonius answered, No madame it gréeueth not me, for whatsoeuer shall be for your ho∣nour, shall be vnto me profitable. Then said Lucina, Maister, if you loued me you woulde be sorie, and therewithall she called for inke and paper, and wrote an answere vnto her father in forme following: Gra∣cious king and deare father, forasmuch as of your goodnesse you haue giuen me free choice, and libertie to write my minde: these are to let you vnderstand, that I would marry with the Sea-wrecked man, and with none other: your humble daughter, Lucina, and when she had sealed it, she deliuered it vnto Apol∣lonius to be carried vnto the king. When the king
had receiued the letters, he perused them, wherein he perceiued his daughters minde, not knowing whom she meant by the sea-wrecked man: and therfore tur∣ning himselfe towardes the thrée Noblemen, hée de∣maunded of them which of them had suffered ship∣wracke? Then one of them named Ardonius, answe∣red. If it like your Grace, I haue suffred shipwrack? The other twaine named Munditius, and Carnillus, when they heard him say so, waxed wroth, and fel in∣to termes of outrage against him, saying: sicknesse, and the fiends of hell consume thee, for thy foule & im∣pudent lie: doe not we, who are thy equals both of birth and age, know right well that thou neuer wen∣test almost out of this citie gates? And how couldest thou then suffer shipwracke? Nowe when the king Altistrates could not finde out which of them had suffe∣red shipwrack, he looked towards Apollonius, saying: Take these letters and read them, for it may be that I doe not knowe him whom thou knowest, who was present. Apollonius receiuing the letters, perused them quickly, and perceiuing himselfe to be loued, blushed wonderfully. Then said the king to Apollo∣nius, hast thou found the sea-wrecked man? But Apollonius answered litle or nothing, wherein his wisedome the rather appeared according to the saying of the wise man? In many words there wanteth discre∣tion: where as cōtrariwise, many an vndiscréet person might be accounted wise if hee had but this one point of wisdom, to hold his tongue, wherin indéed consisteth the whole triall or rather insight of a man, as signi∣fied the most wise Philosopher Socrates.
CHAP. VII. How Apollonius was married to the ladie Lucina, and hearing of king Antiochus death, departeth with his wife towards his owne countrey of Tyrus. BUt to returne againe to my storie from which I haue digressed: when king Altistrates percei∣ued that Apollonius was the man whom his daughter Lucina disposed in her heart to preferre in loue before anie of the other three noble men, hée found meanes to put them off for that present, saying that hee would talke with them farther concerning that matter another time: who taking their leaue, immediatly departed, but the king withdrew himself into the chamber where his daughter lay sicke, and sayd vnto her? whom haue you chosen to be your hus∣band? To whom Lucina humbling her selfe, and with trickling teares, answered, Gratious Prince and deare father, I haue chosen in my heart the Sea-wrecked man, my schoolemaister Apollonius, for whom I most duetifully desire your fatherly goodwil: when the king saw her teares, his heart bled inward∣ly with compassion toward his childe whom hee lo∣ued tenderly, and he kissed her, and saide vnto her: My swéete Lucina be of good cheere, and take not thought for anie thing, and assure thy selfe thou hast chosen the man that I liked of assoone as I first sawe him: whom I loue no lesse than thee: that is to say, than if hee were my naturall childe. And therefore since the matter is nowe thus fallen out, I meane forthwith to appoint a day for your marriage, after that I haue broken the matter vnto Apollonius. And when he had said that, Lucina with blushing cheekes thanked her Father much, and he departed. Nowe
would I demand of louers, whether Lucina reioyced or not? or whether there were anie better tidings in the worlde coulde chance to a man or woman? I am sure they would answer no. For such is the nature of this affection, that it preferreth the beloued person aboue all earthly thinges, yea and heauenly too, vn∣lesse it be brideled with reason: as the same likewise though moderately, and within the boundes of mo∣dest womanhoode, working the woonted effect in the ladie Lucina, reuiued her so presently, that shee for∣sooke her bed, and cast away her mourning apparrell, and appeared as it had been a newe woman restored from death to life, and that almost in a moment. The king being alone in the parlour called for Apolloni∣us, and when he was come, he said thus vnto him: A∣pollonius, the vertue which I haue seene in thee, I haue testified by my liberalitie towards thee, and thy trustinesse is prooued by committing mine onelie childe and daughter to thine instruction. As these haue caused mée to preferre thée, so haue they made my daughter to loue thee, so that I am as well con∣tented with the one as I am well pleased with the o∣ther. And for thy part, likewise I hope Apollonius, that as thou hast been glad to be my client, thou wilt reioyce as much to be my sonne in law. Tell me thy minde out of hand, for I attend thine answere. Then Apollonius much abashed at the kinges talke, falling downe vpon his knees, answered: Most gratious so∣ueraigne, your wordes sound so strangely in mine eares, that I scarsly know how to giue answer, & your goodnesse hath been so great towardes me, that I can wish for no more. But since it is your Graces plea∣sure, that I should not be indebted to many, but owe all thing vnto you, as life, and wife, honour, and goods, and all: you shall not find me vnthankful, howsoeuer God or fickle fortune deale with me, to remaine both
loyall and constant to you, and your daughter, whom aboue all creatures, both for birth and beauty and good qualities, I loue and honour most intirely. Alti∣strates reioiced much to heare so wise, and confor∣mable an answere, and embracing Apollonius, called him by the name of deare beloued sonne. The next day morning the king addressed his messengers & purse∣uants, to assemble the nobliest of his subiects & frends out of the confederat cities, and countries, and to shew them that he had certaine affaires to communicat vn∣to them: and when they were come altogither vnto Pentapolis, after due gréeting, and accustomable in∣tertainment shewed as in the maner of great estates, he said thus vnto them. My louing friends, and faith∣full subiects, my meaning was to let you vnderstand, that my daughter is desirous to marrie with her schoolemaster Apollonius, and I am wel pleased ther∣with. Wherfore, I beséech you all to reioyce thereat, and be glad for my daughter shalbe matched to a wise man. And know you moreouer, that I appoint this day sir wéekes for the solemnization day of the marri∣age, at what time I desire you all to be here present, that like friends we may reioyce, and make merry to∣gither: and when he had all said, he dismissed the as∣sembly. Now as the time wore away, so the wedding day drue néere, and there was great preparation made aswell for the feast, as for iewels, and rich clothes to furnish the bridegrome, and bride withall, as althing els that appertaine to the beautifiyng of so great a wedding. And when the day was come, the king ap∣parrelled in his princely robes with a diadem of great price vpon his head, accompanied his daughter Lu∣cina and Apollonius vnto the Church, whom thou∣sands of lordes and ladies followed after, all cloathed in rich attire, and marshalled in comely order. The bride woare on a gowne of cloth of gold cut, & drawen
out with cloth of siluer, and a kirtle of crimsin veluet imbrodered with pure golde, and thickly beset with orientall pearles. Her haire hung downe in tresses fairely broided with a lace of gold, and a Coronet vp∣on her head, set with pretious stones of inestimable value. Her necke was bare, whereby her naked skinne appeared whiter than the driuen snowe, cu∣riously bedecked with chaines of golde, and euery o∣ther lincke enameled with blacke amell. Great bau∣drickes of perfect goldsmithes worke vppon eche arme to fasten the sléeues of her garment from sli∣ding vp at the wreast. Lastly, a massie collar of fine golde, made esse wise vppon her shoulders, hanging down behinde and before, with a Diamond reaching downe vnto her middle, estéemed in value at thréescore thousand pound, which the king her father had sent vnto her for a present, that morning while she was apparrelling. The bridegrome wore on a dublet and hosen of costly cloth of siluer garded with Gold∣smithes worke of the same colour, and a gowne of purple Satten embroidred with golde and beset with rich stones. His cap was of fine blacke Ueluet, all ouer bespangled with Rubies, set in gold and fastned on by loopes: the band of massie golde, beset with courses of stones in order, first a Rubie, then a Tur∣keis, then a Diamond, and so beginning againe with a Rubie. This was their raiment, and thus went they forth togither hand in hand, after whom, as is already declared, the lordes and ladies followed by thrée and thrée in a ranke. When the solemnities were done at the Church, and the wordes spoken, and the Princes ioyned in marriage, they returned home and went to dinner. What shall I nowe speake of the noble cheare and Princely prouision for this feast? And after dinner of the exquisite Musicke, fine dauncing, heauenly singing, sweete
deuising, and pleasant communication among the e∣states? I may not discourse at large of the liberall challenges made and proclaimed at the tilt, barriers, running at the ring, ioco di can, managing fierce hor∣ses, running a foote and daunsing in armour? And at night of the gorgeous plaies, shewes, disguised spée∣ches, masks and mummeries, with continuall har∣mony of all kindes of musicke, and banquetting in all delicacie? All these thinges I leaue to the considera∣tion of them which haue seene the like in the Courts, and at the weddinges of Princes, where they haue seene more than my simple pen is able to describe, or may be comprehended within the recital of so short an historie. When night was come, and reuels were en∣ded, the bride was brought to bed, and Apollonius tarried not long from her, where hee accomplished the duties of marriage, and faire Lucina conceiued childe the same night. The next daie, euery man arose to feasting and iollitie, for the wedding triumphes con∣tinued an whole moneth. This while Lucinas bellie began to grow, and as it fortuned that the lord Apol∣lonius and his ladie on a day walked along the sea side for their disporte, hée sawe a faire shippe fléeting vn∣der saile, which hée knew well to be of his countrey, and he hallowed vnto the maister whose name was Calamitus and asked of him of whence his ship was? The maister answered of Tyrus. Thou hast named my coūtry said Apollonius: Art thou then of Tyrus, said the maister? yea, answered Apollonius. Then said the maister, knowest thou one Apollonius prince of that countrey? If thou doe, or shalt heare of him heereafter, bid him now be glad and reioyce, for king Antiochus and his daughter are strooken dead with lightning from heauen. And the Citie of Antiochia with all the riches, and the whole kingdome are re∣serued for Apollonius.
With these words the ship being vnder saile, depar∣ted, & Apollonius being filled with gladnes, immedi∣atly began to breake with his ladie to giue him leaue to go and receiue his kingdom. But when faire Lu∣cina heard him beginne to mooue words of departing, she burst out into teares, saying: My Lorde, if you were nowe in some farre countrie, and heard say that I were néere my time to be deliuered, you ought to make haste home vnto me: But since you be nowe with me, and know in what case I am me thinks you should not now desire to depart from me. Howbeit, if your pleasure be so, and tarriance bréede danger, and kingdomes want not heirs long, as I would not per∣swade you to tarry, so doe I request you to take me with you. This discréete answere pleased Apollonius well, wherefore he kissed his lady, and they agréed it should be so. And when they were returned from wal∣king Lucina reioycing, came vnto the king her father, saying: deare father, reioice I beséech you, and be glad with my lord Apollonius and me, for the most cruell tyrant Antiochus and his daughter are by the iust iudgement of God destroied with lightning from hea∣uen: and the kingdome and riches are reserued for vs to inherite: Moreouer, I pray you good father, let me haue your goodwil to trauel thither with my husband. The king reioyced much at this tidings, and graun∣ted her reasonable request, and also commaunded all things to be prouided immediatly that were necessary for the iourney. The shippes were strongly appoin∣ted and brought vnto the shoare, and fraught with al things conuenient, as golde, siluer, apparell, bedding, vittels and armour. Moreouer, whatsoeuer fortune might befal, the king prepared to saile with them Li∣gozides the nurse, and a midwife, and all things méet for the childe whensoeuer Lucina should néede them: and with great honour himselfe accompanieth them
vnto the sea side, when the time appointed for their departure was come, where with many teares, and great fatherly affection hee kissed his daughter, and embraced his sonne in law, and recommended them vnto GOD in whome hée did wish vnto them a most prosperous iourney, and so returned vnto his pallace. CHAP. VIII. How faire Lucina died in trauell of child vpon the sea, and being throwen into the water was cast on land at Ephesus, and taken home by Cerimon a Phisi∣tion. THe marriners immediatly merrily hoissed saile and departed, & when they had sailed two dayes, the master of the shippe warned Apollonius of a tempest approching, which nowe came on and increased so fast, that all the companie was amazed, and Lucina, what with sea-sicknes & feare of dāger, fel in labor of child, wherewith she was weakened, that there was no hope of recouerie, but she must now die: yet being first deliuered of a faire daughter, insomuch that now all tokens of life were gone, and she appea∣red none other but to be dead. When Apollonius be∣held this heauie spectacle, no heart was able to con∣ceiue his bitter grief, for like a mad man distracted he tare his cloths, and rent his haire, and laying himself vpon the carkas, he vttered these wordes with great affection: O my deare lady and wife, the daughter of king Altistrates, what shall I now answer to thy fa∣ther for thée? would God thou haddest remained with him at home, & if it had pleased God to haue wrought this his pleasure in thée, it had rather chanced with
thy louing father in his quiet land, than with me thy woful husband vpon the wild seas. The whole com∣pany also made great lamentation for her, bewailing the death of so noble and beautifull a ladie, and so cur∣teous a gentlewoman. Howbeit in the hotest of the sorrowe the gouernour of the ship came vnto Apollo∣nius, saying: My lord, plucke vp your heart, and be of good chéere, and consider I pray you that the ship may not abide to carrie the dead carkas, and therefore com∣mand it to be cast into the sea, that we may the better escape. Then answered Apollonius: What saiest thou varlet? wouldest thou haue me cast this bodie into the sea, which receiued me into house and fauour, when I was in miserie and drenched in the water, wherein I lost ship, goods & all? But taking further consultation, and aduising himselfe what were best to do, he called certaine of his men vnto him, & thus he deuised with them. My trusty seruants, whome this common mis∣chance grieueth as wel as me, since sorowing wil not help that which is chanced, assist me, good sirs, to pro∣uide for the present necessity. Let vs make forthwith a large chest, and bore the lid full of small holes, and we will seare it all ouer within with pitch and rosen molten together, whereinto we will put cunningly a shéete of lead, and in the same we will inclose the ten∣der corps of the wife of me, of all other a most vnfortu∣tunate husband. This was no sooner said, but it was almost likewise done with semblable celertie. Then tooke they the body of the faire lady Lucina, and arrai∣ed her in princely apparel, and layd her into the chest, and Apollonius placed a great summe of golde at her head, & a great treasure of siluer at her féet, & he kissed her, letting fall a flood of salt teares on hir face, and he wrote a bill, and put it in also, the tenor whereof was in forme as foloweth: Whosoeuer shal find this chest▪ I pray him to take ten pieces of gold for his paines, and
to bestowe tenne peeces more vpon the buriall of the corpes: for it hath lest many teares to the parents and friends, with dolefull heaps of sorow and heauines. But whosoeuer shall doe otherwise than the present griefe requireth, let him die a shamefull death, and let there be none to bury his body. And then closing all vp ve∣rie safe, commaunded the chest to be lifted ouerboorde into the sea: and willed the childe to be nursed with all diligence, that if euer fortune should so fall, he might present vnto good king Altistrates a néece in stéede of a daughter. Now fléeted away the ship fast with the wind, and the coffin tumbled backeward with the tide, and A∣pollonius could not kéep his eie from the bodie where∣on his heart rested, vntill kenning failed, and the sea rose vp with a banke betwéen. There were two days passed, and the night was now at hand, when the next day morning the waues rolled foorth this chest to the land, and cast it ashore on the coast of Ephesus. Not farre from that place there dwelt a physition whose name was Cerimon, who by chaunce walking abroad vpon the shore that day with his schollers, found the chest which the sea had cast vp, & willed his seruants to take it vp, & diligently to cary it to the next towne, where hee dwelt, and they did so. When Cerimon came home he opened the chest, marueling what shuld be therein, and found a lady arayed in princely appa∣rell and ornaments, very faire and beautifull to be∣holde. Whose excellencie in that respect as many as beheld, were strangely affectioned thereat, perceiuing such an incomparable gleame of beautie to be resident in her face, wherein nature had not committed the least errour that might be deuised, sauing that shee made her not immortall. The haire of her head was naturally as white as snowe, vnder which appeared her goodly forehead, faire and large, wherein was nei∣ther
blemish nor wrinkle. Her eies were like two starres turning about in their naturall course, not wantonly rouing here and there, but modestly moo∣uing as gouerned by reason, representing the stabili∣tie of a setled mind. Her eie brows decently commen∣ding the residue of her countenance. Her nose straight, as it were drawen with a line, comely diuiding her cherry chéeks asunder, not reaching foorth too long, nor cut off too short, but of a commendable proportion. Hir necke was like the white alablaster shining like the bright sunne beames, woonderfully delighting the mindes of the beholders. Her bodie of comely stature, neither too high nor too lowe, not scregged with leane∣nesse, nor vndecently corpulent, but in such equality consisting, that no man woulde wish it otherwise. From her shoulders sprang foorth her armes, repre∣senting two branches growing out of a trée, beautified with a white hand, and fingers long and slender, sur∣passing to behold. To be short, such was the excellen∣cie of her beutie in each respect, that it could suffer no deformitie to accompany it, whereby also may be dis∣cerned a singular perfection of her minde, created by God and infused into her bodie, whereby it was moo∣ued, and those good qualities of hers expressed in ope∣ration: so that all outward beautie of the bodie procée∣deth from the inward beuty of the mind, from whence sprang vp the olde and true saying of the wisest Phi∣losophers, that the sundry nature of the forme or soule, diuersly disposeth the matter according vnto it owne qualitie: as it expresly appeared in the beutiful coun∣tenaunce and stature of this Ladies bodie, whereof Cerimon stoode amazedly taking the view.
CHAP. IX. ¶ How Lucina was restored to life by one of Cerimon the Phisitions schollers, and howe Cerimon adop∣ted her to his daughter, and placed her in the temple of Diana. THe surpassing beauty of faire Lucina, being such as is before recited, no woonder it was though Cerimon were maruellously rauished at ye sight, whereby his affection inforced him to breake out into these words: Alas good beautiful gentlewoman, what vnhappy and cruell chance hath thus made thée a way and caused thée to be so wofully forsaken? And as he spake those wordes, hee perceiued the golde that lay at her head, and the siluer that lay at her féet, with a scroll of paper written, the which hee tooke vp and read, the tenor whereof was this: Whosoeuer shal finde this chest, I pray him for to take tenne peeces of gold for his paines, and to bestowe tenne peeces more on the buriall of the corps: for it hath left many teares to the parents and friends, with dolefull heapes of sor∣rowe and heauinesse. But whosoeuer shall doe other∣wise than the present griefe requireth, let him die a shamefull death, and let there bee none to burie his bodie. And as soone as he had read ouer the writing, he said vnto his seruants: now let vs perfourme vnto the bodie, that which the sorrowe requireth. And I sweare to you by the hope which I haue to liue, that I wil bestow more money vpon the accomplishing of the same than the sorrowful scedul requireth. Wher∣fore according to the maner of the buriall, which was at that time to burn the bodies of the dead, and to bu∣rie the ashes gathered vp and put into pottes, he com∣maunded a pile of wood to be erected, and vpon the top
thereof he caused the body to be layed. Nowe Cerimon had a scholler in Physicke, whose name was Machaon very towardly in his profession, of yeres but yong, but antient in wit and experience, who comming in while these things were doing, and beholding so beautifull a corps layd vpon the pile, hée stoode still and wondered at it. Which thing Cerimon perceiuing: thou art come in good time saide hée to Machaon, and I looked for thée about this time. Take this flagon of pretious ointment, and powre it vppon the corps, being the last ceremonie of the sepulture. Then came Machaon vnto the corps, and pulled the clothes from the ladies bosome, and powred foorth the ointment, and bestowing it abroad with his hād, per∣ceiued some warmth in her breast, and that there was life in the body. Machaon stoode astonished, and hée felt her pulses, and layde his chéeke to her mouth, and examined all other tokens that he could deuise, and he perceiued how death striued with life within her, and that the conflict was daungerous and doubtfull, who should preuaile. Then saide he vnto the seruants: set fire vnto the wood at the foure corners of the pile, and cause it to burne moderatly, and bring me hither a bed that I may take the body out of the chest, and lay it thereon. This being done, he chafed the body against the fire, vntill the blood which was congealed with colde, was wholly resolued. Then went Machaon vnto his master Cerimon and saide: The woman whome thou thinkest to be dead, is aliue, and that you may the better beléeue my saying, I will plainely prooue it to be so. And when he had so saide, he tooke the body reuerently in his armes, and bare it into his owne chamber, and layed it vpon his bed groueling vpon the breast. Then tooke he certaine hote and com∣fortable oyles, and warming them vppon the coales, he
dipped faire wooll therein, and fomented all the bodie ouer therewith, vntil such time as the congealed blood and humours were throughly resolued, and the spirits eftsoones recouered their wonted course, the veines waxed warme, the arteries beganne to beate, and the lungs drew in the fresh ayre againe, and she opened her eies, and looked about, and being perfectly come to herselfe, what art thou, said shee vnto Machaon? sée thou touch me not otherwise than thou oughtest to do, for I am a Kings daughter, and the wife of a King. When Machaon heard her speak these words, he was excéeding glad, and he ran vnto his master and saide: Sir, the woman liueth, and speaketh perfectly. Then answered Cerimon: My welbeloued scholler Macha∣on, I am glad of this fortunate chaunce, and I much commend thy wisedome, and praise thy learning, and cannot but extoll thy diligence. Wherefore be not vn∣thankfull to thy knowledge, but receiue heere the re∣ward which is due vnto thée, namely, that which by the writing was appointed to be bestowed vppon her buriall: for thou hast restored her vnto life, and shée hath brought with her great summes of mony. When he had so saide, they came vnto her and saluted her, and caused her to be apparelled with wholsome and comfortable clothes, & to be refreshed with good meats. A few daies after, whē she had fully recouered strēgth, and Cerimon by communication knew that she came of the stocke of a king, he sent for many of his friends to come vnto him, and he adopted her for his owne daughter: and she with many teares requiring that she might not be touched by any man, for that intent he placed her in the temple of Diana which was there at Ephesus, to be preserued there inuiolably among the religious women.
CHAP. X. How Apollonius arriuing at Tharsus, deliuereth his yong daughter Tharsia vnto Stranguilio and Dioni∣siades to be brought vp, and how the nurce lying in her death-bed declareth vnto Tharsia who were her parents. LEt vs leaue now a while the lady Lucina among the holy Nunnes in the temple of Diana at Ephe∣sus, and let vs looke backe vnto sorrowful Apol∣lonius, whose ship with fortunate winde, and the good prouidence of God directing the same, arriued at the shoare of Tharsus, where hee immediatly came forth of the ship, and entred into the house of Stran∣guilio and Dionisiades, whom he saluted, and told thē the heauy chances that had befallen him, both of the great stormes and tempests on the sea, which hee had indured, as also of the death of the good lady Lucina his wife: howbeit said he, God be thanked, my daughter remaineth aliue, for the which I am very glad: wher∣fore, deare friends Stranguilio and Dionisiades, accor∣ding to the trust which I haue in you, I mean in some things to vse your friendship, while I go about to re∣couer the kingdome which is reserued for me. For I will not returne backe againe vnto king Altistrates my father in law, whose daughter alas, I haue lost in the sea, but meaning rather to exercise the trade of merchandize, I commit my daughter vnto you to bée nourished, and brought vp with your yoong daughter Philomacia, and I will that my daughter be called Tharsia. Moreouer I wil leaue my deare wife Lucinas nurce here also, called Ligozides, to tend the child, that she may be lesse troublesome vnto you. And when hée had made an end of talking, he deliuered the infant
and the nurce vnto Stranguilio, and therewithal great store of gold, siluer, and raiment: and hee sware a so∣lemne othe, that he would not poule his head, clip his beard, nor pare his nailes vntill hee had married his daughter at ripe yeares. They wondred much at so strange an othe, promising faithfully to bring vp his daughter with all diligence. When these things were ended according to his minde, Apollonius tooke his leaue, departed vnto his ship, and sailed into far coun∣tries, and vnto the vppermost parts of Egypt. There∣while the yoong maiden Tharsia sprang vp in yéeres, and when she was about fiue yeares olde, being free borne she was set to schoole with other free children, alwaies iointly accompanied with Philomacia, being of ye same age that she was of. The time passed forth a pace, & Tharsia grew vp so wel in learning as in yéers vntill comming to the age of fourtéene yéeres, one day when she returned from schoole, she found Ligo∣zides her nurce sodainly falne sicke, and sitting beside her vpon the bed, demanded of her the cause, and ma∣ner of her sickenesse. Then saide the nurce vnto her, hearken vnto my wordes deare daughter Tharsia, and lay them vp in thine heart. Whom thinkest thou to be thy father, and thy mother, and in what countrey supposest thou wast thou borne? Tharsia answered, why nurce, why aske you me this question? Strangui∣lio is my father, Dionisiades my mother, and I was borne in Tharsus. Then sighed the nurce, and saide: No swéete Tharsia, no, thou art deceiued. But hear∣ken vnto me, and I will declare vnto thee the begin∣ning of thy birth, to the intent thou mayst know how to guide thy selfe after my death. Apollonius ye prince of Tyrus is thy father, and Lucina king Altistrates daughter was thy mother, who being in trauell with thée, died after thou wast borne, and thy father Apol∣lonius, inclosed her bodie in a chest with princely or∣naments,
laying twenty talents of gold at her head, and as much at her féete in siluer, with a scedule writ∣ten, and threw the chest ouerboord into the sea, that whether soeuer it were driuen, it might suffice to bu∣rie her, according to her estate. Thus wast thou born vpon the Sea, and thy fathers ship with much wrest∣ling of contrarie windes, and with his vnspeakeable griefe of minde arriued at this shoare, and brought thée in thy swading clothes vnto this citie, where hée with great care deliuered thée vnto this thine hoste Stranguilio and Dionisiades his wife to be fostered vp diligently, and left me héere also to attend vpon thée. Moreouer he sware an othe, that he woulde not poule his head, clip his beard, nor pare his nayles, vntill he had married thée vnto some man at ripe yeares. Wherefore now I admonishe thee, that if after my death thine hoste or thine hostesse, whom thou callest thy parents, shall haply offer thée any iniurie, then runne thou into the market place, where thou shalt finde the stature of thy father standing, and take hold of it, and cry aloud saying: O Citizens of Tharsus, I am his daughter, whose image this is: and the ci∣tizens being mindfull of thy fathers benefites, will doubtlesse reuenge thine iniurie. Then answered Tharsia: Deare nurce Ligozides, I take God to wit∣nesse, if you had not told me thus much, I should vt∣terly haue been ignorant from whence I had come. And therefore now, good nurce, I thanke thee with all my heart, and if euer need so require, thy counsel shal be followed: and while they were debating these mat∣ters betwéene them, Ligozides being verie sicke and weake, gaue vp the ghost, and by the death of this pre∣sent bodie, passed into the state of life euerlasting.
CHAP. XI. How after the death of Ligozides the nurce Dionisiades enuying at the beautie of Tharsia, conspired her death, which should haue been accomplished by a villaine of the countrey. THarsia much lamented the death of Ligozides her nurce, and caused her bodie to be solemnly bu∣ried not farre of, in a field without the walles of the citie, and mourned for her an whole yéere fol∣lowing. But when the yeare was expired, she put off her mourning atire, and put on her other apparel, and frequented the schooles, and the studie of liberall Sci∣ences as before. And whensoeuer she returned from schoole, she would receiue no meate before she had vi∣sited her nurces sepulchre, which she did daily, entring thereinto, and carrying a flagon of wine with her, where she vsed to abide a space, and to call vppon her father and mother. Now on a day it fortuned, that as she passed through the stréet with Dionisiades, and her companion Philomacia, the people beholding the beautie and comlinesse of Tharsia, said: Happy is that father that hath Tharsia to his daughter, but her com∣panion that goeth with her, is foule and euill fauou∣red. When Dionisiades heard Tharsia commended, and her owne daughter Philomacia so dispraised, shée returned home wonderfull wroth, and withdrawing her self into a solitary place, began thus secretly to dis∣course of ye matter. It is now fourtéen yeares since A∣pollonius this foolish girles father departed frō hence▪ and he neuer sendeth letters for her, nor any remem∣brance vnto her, whereby I coniecture that he is dead. Ligozides her nurce is departed, and there is no bodie now of whom I should stand in feare, and therefore I
will now slay her, and dresse vp mine owne daughter in her apparell and iewels. When shée had thus re∣solued her selfe vppon this wicked purpose, in the meane while there came home one of their countrey villaines called Theophilus, whom shee called, and said thus vnto him. Theophilus, my trustie friend, if euer thou looke for libertie, or that I shoulde doe thée pleasure, doe so much for me as to slay Tharsia. Then said Theophilus: Alas mistresse, wherein hath that innocent maiden offended, that she should be slaine? Dionisiades aunswered, shée innocent? nay she is a wicked wretch, and therefore thou shalt not denie to fulfill my request, but doe as I commaund thée, or els I sweare by God, thou shalt dearely repent it. But how shall I best doe it, Mistres said the villaine? Shée aunswered, shée hath a custome as soone as shee returneth home from Schoole, not to eate meat before that she haue gone into her Nurces sepulchre, where I would haue thée stand readie, with a dagger drawn in thine hand, and when she is come in, gripe her by the haire of the head, and so slay her: then take her bodie and cast it into the Sea, and when thou hast so done, I will make thée frée, and besides reward thée liberally. Then tooke the villaine a dagger, and gir∣ded himselfe therewith, and with an heauy heart and wéeping eies went forth toward the graue, saying within himselfe, Alas poore wretch that I am, alas poore Theophilus that canst not deserue thy libertie but by shedding of innocent bloud: and with that hee went into the graue, and drue his dagger, and made him readie for the déede. Tharsia was nowe come from schoole, and made haste vnto the graue with a fla∣gon of wine as shée was woont to doe, and entred within the vaut. Then the villaine rushed violently vpon her, and caught her by the haire of the head, and threw her to the ground. And while he was now rea∣die
to stab her with the dagger, poore silly Tharsia all amazed casting vp her eies vpon him, knew the vil∣lain, and holding vp her handes, said thus vnto him: O Theophilus, against whom haue I so gréeuously of∣fended, that I must die therefore? The villaine an∣swered, Thou hast not offended, but thy father hath, which left thée behind him in Stranguilios house with so great a treasure in mony, and princely ornaments. O, said the mayden, would to God he had not done so: but I pray thée Theophilus, since there is no hope for me to escape with life, giue mee licence to say my praiers before I die. I giue thee licence saide the vil∣laine, and I take God to record, that I am constrai∣ned to murther thée against my will. CHAP. XII. How certaine Pyrats rescued Tharsia, when she should haue been slaine, and carried her vnto the citie Machilenta to be sold among other bondslaues. AS fortune, or rather the prouidence of God serued, while Tharsia was deuoutly making her praiers, certaine pyrats which were come aland, and stood vn∣der the side of an hill watching for some prey, behol∣ding an armed man offering violence vnto a mayden, cried vnto him and said: Thou cruel tyrant, that mai∣den is our prey and not thy victorie, and therfore hold thine hands from her, as thou louest thy life. When the villain heard that, he ran away as fast as he could, and hid himselfe behind the sepulchre. Then came the Pyrats and rescued Tharsia, and caried her away to their ships, and hoysed saile, and departed. And the villaine returned home to his mistres, and saide vn∣to her: that which you commaunded me to doe is
dispatched, and therefore now I thinke it good, that you put on a mourning garment, and I also, and let vs counterfeit great sorrowe and heauinesse in the sight of all the people, and say that shée died of some gréeuous disease. But Stranguilio himselfe consented not to this treason, but so soone as hee heard of the foule mischaunce, beeing as it were a mopte, and mated with heauinesse and griefe, he clad himselfe in mourning aray, and lamented that wofull case, say∣ing: Alas in what a mischiefe am I wrapped? what might I doe, or say herein? The father of this may∣den deliuered this citie from the peril of death, for this cities sake he suffered shipwracke, lost his goodes and endured penury, and now he is requited with euil for goood. His daughter which he committed vnto me to be brought vp, is now deuoured by a most cruell Lio∣nesse: thus I am depriued as it were of mine owne eies, & forced to bewaile the death of an innocent, and am vtterly spoiled through the fierce biting of a moste venemous serpent. Then casting his eies vp towards heauen: O God said hée, thou knowest that I am in∣nocent from the bloud of silly Tharsia, which thou hast to require at Dionisiades handes, and therewithall he looked towards his wife, saying: Thou wicked wo∣man, tell me, how hast thou made away prince Apol∣lonius daughter? thou that liuest both to the slaunder of God, and man? Dionisiades answered in manie wordes euermore excusing herselfe, and moderating the wrath of Stranguilio, shee counterfeited a fained sorrowe by attiring her selfe and her daughter in mourning apparell, and in dissembling teares be∣fore the people of the citie, to whom shee saide: Dearely beloued friendes and Citizens of Tharsus, for this cause we doe wéepe and mourne in your sight, because the ioy of our eyes, and staffe of our olde age, the Mayden Tharsia is dead, leauing vnto
vs bitter teares, and sorrowfull heartes. Yet haue we alreadie taken order for her funerals, and buried her according to her degrée. These wordes were right gréeuous vnto the people, and there was almost none that let not fall some teares for sorrowe. And they went with one accord vnto the market place, whereas her fathers image stood, made of brasse, and erected also another vnto her there with this inscrip∣tion: Vnto the virgin Tharsia in liew of her fathers be∣nefites, the Citizens of Tharsus haue erected this mo∣nument. CHAP. XIII. How the Pirats which stole away Tharsia, brought her to the citie Machilenta, and solde her to a common bawd, and how she preserued her virginitie. THe meane time while these troubles were at Tharsus, the Pirats being in their course vpon the Sea, by benefite of happie winde arriued at Machilenta, and came into the citie. Nowe had they taken manie mo men and women besides Tharsia, whom all they brought a shoare, and set them to sell as slaues for money. Then came there sundrie to buy such as they lacked for their purposes, amongst whom a moste vile man-bawd, beholding the beautie and tender yeeres of Tharsia, offered money largely for her. Howbeit Athanagoras, who was Prince of the same Citie, beholding likewise the noble counte∣nance, and regarding the great discretion of the may∣den in communication, out-bid the bawd, and offered for her ten sestercies of gold. But ye bawd being loth to loose so commodious a prey, offered twenty. And I wil giue thirty said Athanagoras. Nay I wil giue forty said
the bawd: and I fiftie quoth Athanagoras, and so they continued in outbidding one an other vntill the bawd offered an hundred sestercies of gold to be payed ready downe, and whosoeuer wil giue more, saide he, I will yet giue ten sestercies more than he. Then prince A∣thanagoras thus bethought him secretly in his minde: if I should contend with the bawd to buy her at so hie a price, I must néedes sell other slaues to pay for her, which were both losse and shame vnto me. Where∣fore I will suffer him to buy her, and when he setteth her to hire, I will be the first man that shall come vn∣to her, and I will gather the floure of her virginitie, which shall stand mee in as great steade as if I had bought her. Then the bawd payed the money, and tooke the maiden and departed home, and when hée came into his house, hee brought her into a certaine chappel where stoode the idoll of Priapus made of gold, and garnished with pearls and pretious stones. This idoll was made after the shape of a man, with a migh∣ty member vnproportionable to the body, alwayes e∣rected, whome bawds and leachers doe adore, making him their god, and worshipping him. Before this fil∣thy idoll he commaunded Tharsia with reuerence to fall downe. But she answered, God forbid master, that I should worship such an idoll. But (sir) said she, are you a Lapsatenian? Why askeest thou, said the bawd? I aske, quoth she, because the Lapsatenians doe wor∣ship Priapus: this spake she of simplicitie, not know∣ing what he was. Ah wretch, answered he, knowest thou not that thou arte come into the house of a coue∣tous bawd? When Tharsia heard that, she fell downe at his féet and wept, saying: O master, take compassi∣on vpon my virginity, and do not hire out my body for so vile a gaine. The bawd answered, knowest thou not, that neither bawd nor hangman do regard teares or prayers? Then called he vnto him a certaine vil∣laine
which was gouernour ouer his maids, and said vnto him: Let this maiden be decked in virgins ap∣parell, pretious and costly, and write this title vpon her: whosoeuer defloureth Tharsia shal pay ten peeces of golde, and afterward she shall be common vnto the people for one péece at a time. The villaine fulfilled his masters commaundement, and the third day after that she was bought, shee was with great solemnitie conducted through the stréete with musicke, the bawd himselfe with a great multitude going before, and so conueyed vnto the brothell house. When shee was come thither, Athanagoras the Prince disguising his head and face, because hee woulde not be knowen, came first in vnto her, whome when Tharsia sawe, she threw her selfe downe at his féete, and saide vnto him: for the loue of God, Gentleman, take pitty on me, and by the name of God I adiure and charge you, that you do no violence vnto me, but bridle your lust, and hearken vnto my vnhappy estate, and consider di∣ligently from whence I am sprung. My father was poore Apollonius prince of Tyrus, whome force con∣strained to forsake his owne countrey. My mother was daughter to Altistrates king of Pentapolis, who died in the birth of me, poore wretch, vpon the sea. My father also is dead as was supposed, which caused Dionisiades wife to Stranguilio of Tharsus, to whom my father committed me of special trust to be brought vp being but an infant, enuying mine estate, and thirsting after my wealth, to séeke my death by the handes of a villaine, which had béene accomplished, and I would to God it had before I had séen this day, but that I was suddenly taken away by the pyrates which solde me vnto this filthie bawd. With these or such like wordes declared shée her heauie fortune, eftsoones sobbing and bursting out into streames of tears, that for extreme griefe she could scarsly speake.
When she had in this manner vttered her sorow, the good prince being astonied and mooued with compas∣sion, said vnto her. Be of good chéere Tharsia, for sure∣ly I rue thy case, and I my selfe haue also a daughter at home, to whome I doubt that the like chances may befall. And when he had so said, he gaue her twenty pée∣ces of gold, saying: Holde heere a greater price or re∣ward for thy virginitie, than thy master appointed: and say as much vnto others that come vnto thée as thou hast done to me, and thou shalt withstand them. Then Tharsia fell on her knées, and wéeping saide vn∣to him: Sir, I giue you most hartie thankes for your great compassion and curtesie, and most hartily I be∣séech you vpon my knées, not to descry vnto any that which I haue saide vnto you. No surely, answered Athanagoras, vnlesse I tell it vnto my daughter, that she may take heede when shee commeth vnto the like yeares, that she fall not into the like mishappe: and when he had so saide, he let fall a fewe teares, and de∣parted. Now as he was going, he met with an other pilgrime that with like deuotion came for to séeke the same saint, who demaunded of him howe hee liked of the maidens company. Truly, answered Athanagoras neuer of any better. Then the yong man whose name was Aportatus entred into the chamber, and the mai∣den, after the manner, shut the doore to, and Athana∣goras listned at the windowe. Then saide Aportatus vnto Tharsia, how much did the prince giue vnto thee? She answered fortie péeces of gold. Then said he, re∣ceiue heere of me an whole pound weight of golde. The Prince which heard this talke thought then in his minde, the more that you do giue her, the more she will wéepe, as thinking that you woulde looke for recompence, the which shée meaneth not to per∣fourme.
The maiden receiued the money, and fell down on her knées at his féete, and declared vnto him all her e∣state with teares, as is before shewed. When Apor∣tatus heard that, he was mooued with compassion, and he tooke her vp from the ground, saying: Arise Ladie Tharsia, we are al men, and subiect to the like chances, & therewithall he departed. And when he came foorth he found prince Athanagoras before the doore laughing at him, to whom he said: Is it wel done, my liege, thus to delude a poore gentleman? was there none to whom you might beginne in teares but vnto me only? Then communed they further of the matter, and sware an othe betwéene themselues, that they woulde not be∣wray those words vnto any, & they withdrew them∣selues aside into a secret place, to sée the going in and comming foorth of other, and they sawe many which went in and gaue their mony, and came foorth againe wéeping. Thus Tharsia through the grace of God, and faire perswasion, preserued her body vndefiled. CHAP. XIIII. ¶ How Tharsia withstoode a second assault of her vir∣ginitie, and by what meanes she was preserued. WHen night was come, the master bawd vsed al∣wayes to receiue the money, which his women had gotten by the vse of their bodies the day before. And when it was demaunded of Tharsia, she brought him the mony, as the price and hire of her virginitie. Then said the bawd vnto hir: it is wel doone Tharsia, vse diligence hencefoorth, and sée that you bring mee thus much mony euery day. When the next day was past also, and the bawd vnderstoode that she remained a virgin stil, he was offended, and called vnto him the villaine that had charge ouer the maides, and said vn∣to
him: Sirra, how chanceth it that Tharsia remai∣neth a virgin still? take her vnto thée, and spoile her of her maidenhead, or be sure thou shalt be whipped. Then said the villaine vnto Tharsia, tel me, art thou yet a virgin? She answered, I am, and shalbe as long as God will suffer me. How then, saide he, hast thou gotten all this mony? She answered, with teares fal∣ling downe vpon her knées, I haue declared mine e∣state, humbly requesting all men to take compassion on my virginitie. And nowe likewise, falling then downe at his féete also, take pitty on mee, good friend, which am a poore captiue, and the daughter of a king, and doe not defile me. The villaine answered: Our master the bawd is very couetous and gréedie of mo∣ney, and therefore I sée no meanes for thée to continue a virgin. Whereunto Tharsia replied: I am skilful in the liberall sciences, and well exercised in all stu∣dies, and no man singeth or playeth on instruments better than I, wherefore bring mee into the market place of the citie, that men may heare my cunning. Or let the people propound any maner of questions, and I will resolue them: and I doubt not but by this practise I shall get store of money daily. When the villaine heard this deuise, and bewailed the maidens mishappe, he willingly gaue consent thereto, and brake with the bawd his master touching that matter, who hearing of her skill, and hoping for the gaine, was easily perswaded. Now when she was brought into the market place, all the people came thronging to sée and heare so lear∣ned a virgin, before whom shée vttered her cunning in musicke, and her eloquence in speaking, and aun∣swered manifestly vnto all such questions as were propounded vnto her with such perspicuitie, that all confessed themselues fully satisfied, and shée wonne great fame thereby, and gained great summes of
money. But as for Prince Athanagoras, he had euer∣more a speciall regard in the preseruation of her vir∣ginitie, none otherwise than if she had béen his owne daughter, and rewarded the villaine very liberally for his diligent care ouer her. CHAP. XV. How Apollonius comming to Tharsus, and not finding his daughter, lamented her supposed death, and taking shippe againe, was driuen by a tempest to Machilenta where Tharsia was. REturne we now againe vnto Prince Apollonius, who whiles these things were doing at Machilen∣ta when the fouretéenth yéere was expired, arriued at Tharsus, and came into the citie vnto the house of Stranguilio and Dionisiades, with whome he had left his yong daughter Tharsia. Whome when Strangui∣lio beheld and knew, hée ranne hastily vnto his wife Dionisiades and saide: Thou reportedst that Prince Apollonius was dead, and loe now where he is come to require his daughter. What shall wée now doe, or say vnto him? Then cried she out, alas wretched hus∣band and wife that we are, let vs quickely put on our mourning attire, and shead foorth teares, and hée wil beléeue vs that his daughter died a naturall death. And when they had apparelled themselues, they came foorth vnto Apollonius, who séeing them in mourning attire, said vnto them: My trusty friends, Stranguilio and Dionisiades, why wéep ye thus at my comming? & tell me, I pray you (which I rather beléeue) whether these teares be not rather mine than yours. Not so (my lord Apollollnius) answered the wicked woman. And I woulde to God some other body, and not mine
husband or I, were inforced to tel you these heauie ti∣dings, that your deare daughter Tharsia is dead. Whē Apollonius heard that word, hée was suddenly cut to the heart, and his flesh trembled that he coulde scarce stand on his legges, and long time hée stoode amazed with his eies intentiuely fixed on the ground, but at length recouering himselfe, and taking fresh breath, he cast vp his eyes vpon her and saide: O woman, if my daughter be dead, as thou sayest she is, is the mo∣ney also and apparell perished with her? She answe∣red, some is, and some yet remaineth. And as for your daughter, my Lorde, we were alwaies in good hope, that when you came, you should haue found her aliue and merry. But to the intent that you may the bet∣ter beléeue vs concerning her death, we haue a suffici∣ent witnes. For our citizens being mindfull of your benefites bestowed vpon them, haue erected vnto her a monument of brasse by yours, which you may go sée if you please. And when she had so saide, she brought foorth such money, iewels and apparell which it plea∣sed her to say were remaining of Tharsias store. And Apollonius beléeuing indéede that she was dead, saide vnto his seruants: take vp this stuffe and beare it a∣way vnto the ships, and I will goe walke vnto my daughters monument: and when he came there, hée read the superscription in manner as is aboue writ∣ten, and he fell suddenly as it were into an outragi∣ous affection and cursed his owne eies, saying: O most cruell eies, why can you not yéelde foorth suffici∣ent teares, and woorthily bewaile the death of my deare daughter? and with that word, with griefe and extreme sorrowe he fell into a sowne, from which so soone as euer he was once reuiued, immediatelie hée went vnto the shippes vnto his seruauntes, vnto whome hée saide, cast mée, I beséech you, into the very
bottome of the sea, for I haue no ioy of my life, and my desire is to yéelde vp my Ghost in the water. But his seruants vsed great perswasions with him to assuage his sorrowe, wherein presently they some deale pre∣uailed, as they might in so wofull a case, and partly the time, which is a curer of all cares, continually mittigated some part of the griefe, and hee espying the winde to serue well for their departure, hoised vp saile, and bid the land adue. They had not thus sai∣led long in their course, but the winde came about to a contrary quarter, and blew so stifly that it troubled both sea and shippes. The raine fell fiercely ouer head, the sea wrought wonderously vnder the ships: and to be short, the tempest was terrible for the time. It was then thought best in that extremitie to strike saile, and let the helme go, and to suffer the shippe to driue with the tide, whither it shoulde please God to direct it. But as ioy euermore followeth heauinesse, so was this sharpe storme occasion of a swéet méeting of the father with the daughter, as in processe heere∣after it shall appeare. For while Apollonius shippe runneth thus at randon, it striketh vpon the shoare of the Citie Machilenta, where at that present his daughter Tharsia remained. Nowe it fortuned that this verie day of their arri∣uall was the birth day of Prince Apollonius, and when as the Marriners sawe themselues so happily come to the land, both for the gladnesse of the one, and ioy of the other, the master of the shippe, and all the whole company gaue a great shout. When Apollonius, who lay solitarily vnder the hatches, heard such a sodaine voice of mirth, hee cal∣led vnto the master, and demaunded what it meant. The master aunswered, we reioyce, and be you glad also with vs my lorde, for this day we doe solemnize the feast of your birth. Then Apollonius sighed,
and said himselfe: all kéepe hollyday saue I onely, and let it suffice vnto my seruants that I only remaine in sorrow and heauinesse: Howbeit I giue vnto them ten péeces of gold, to buy what they will to keepe holyday withall. But whosoeuer shall call me vnto the feast, or goe about to prouoke me vnto mirth, I commaund that his thighes shall be broken. So the cater tooke the money, and went aland, and prouided necessaries, and returned againe vnto the ship. CHAP. XVI. How Athanagoras prince of Machilenta seeing the beautie of Apollonius ship, went aboord of it, and did the best he could to comfort him. AS fortune thereto serued, and delight to take the fresh aire moued Athanagoras prince of ye Citie, to walk toward the sea side, he sawe Apollonius ships ri∣ding at anker: at the view wherof he tooke great plea∣sure, especially at ye Admirall which was a great ship and a beautiful, wherin Apollonius himself was car∣ried, the like whereof haply he had not séene often be∣fore. This was that Athanagoras that loued Tharsia so tenderly, and he haled vnto the Marriners, and as∣ked of whence that faire ship was? The marriners answered, that she came now from Tharsus. Truly, said Athanagoras, it is a faire shippe, and well ap∣pointed, and of all that I haue seene, I like best of her. Now when the Marriners heard their shippe so highly commended, they desired him to come aboord, whereunto he willingly graunted. And when he was come abord, he sate downe with them at meat, and he drue his purse and laid downe ten péeces of gold vpon the table, saying you shall not say that you haue bid∣den an vnthankfull person, take this small summe of
money at my handes for a reward, and they thanked him. But when he was set downe, and beheld al that sate at the boord, hee demaunded who was owner of the ship, and where he was? The maister answered, our owner is sicke, and weake with sorrowe and ta∣king thought, and néedes will die. He lost his wife vppon the Sea, and his daughter in a strange land. Athanagoras said vnto one of the seruants called Ar∣dalius: I will giue thée two péeces of gold, to go down and tell thy master that the prince of this Citie desi∣reth him to come vp out of darkenesse into light. The seruaunt answered, I cannot buy new thighes for thy golde, and therefore get some man els to go on the er∣rand, for he hath said that whosoeuer troubleth him, his thighes shall be broken. That law hath he made ouer you, saide Athanagoras, and not ouer mee, and therefore I will go downe vnto him: but first tell me, I pray you, what you call his name? They answered, Apollonius: And when he heard that name, hee re∣membred in his minde that hee heard Tharsia call her father so, and he went downe vnto him where he lay, whom when hee beheld, hauing a long beard, and rough fligged haire, and long nailes on his fingers: he was somewhat astonied, and called vnto him with a soft voice, saying: Apollonius? When Apol∣lonius heard himselfe named, thinking it had been some of his men that had called him, arose vp sodain∣ly with a fierce countenance, and seeing a stranger looking verie comely and honourably attired, he held his peace. Then spake Athanagoras: Sir, I thinke you doe maruell, that I being a stranger, am so bold as to come to trouble you. You shall vnderstand, that I am prince of this citie, and my name is Athanago∣ras, I walked by chance vnto the Sea side, where be∣holding thy ships, especially commending this wher∣in thou art, for beautie and strength: I was by thy
men desired to come aboord which I did, and haue ea∣ten with them. Then inquired I for the owner, and they told me thy name, and that thou remainest in great sorrow, and for that cause I am come downe vnto thée to bring thée, if I may, out of darkenesse into light, hoping that after this heauinesse God shal restore thée vnto gladnesse. Apollonius lifted vp his eies, saying: I thanke thee my Lord, whosoeuer thou art, and I beseech thee not to trouble me longer, for I am not worthy to eate meat or make good cheare, & I will liue no longer. Athanagoras much mused at this answere, and wondred at the wilfulnesse of the man, and came vp vppon the becke, and saide vnto the ser∣uauntes: I cannot perswade your lord to come vp out of that darke place into the light: what way there∣fore were I best to deuise to bring him from his pur∣pose, and to preserue him from an obstinate death? For it were great pitie that a notable gentleman should so consume away in hucker mucker, and die by a dishonourable death. CHAP. XVII. How Athanagoras sent for Tharsia to make her father Apollonius merry, and how after long circumstance they came into knowledge one of another. ANd as he was deuising with himselfe, it came in∣to his mind to send for the maidē Tharsia, for which purpose hee called vnto him one of his men and saide vnto him. Go vnto the baud, desire him to send Tharsia hither vnto me, for she hath wisdom, & can moue plea∣sant talke, and perhaps she may perswade him not to die thus wilfully. The messenger went speedily, & re∣turned immediatly, bringing the maiden Tharsia with
him vnto the ship. Whom when Athanagoras beheld, come hither vnto me Tharsia, quoth he, and shew now the vttermost of thy cunning and knowledge, in com∣forting the owner of the ship, which lieth in darknes and will receiue no comfort, nor come abroad into the light, for the great sorrow that he taketh for his wife and his daughter. Goe vnto him, good Tharsia, and proue if thou canst perswade him to come into the light: for it may be that God hath appointed by thy meanes, to bring him from sorrowe into gladnesse. Which thing if thou canst bring to passe, as I am a gentleman, I will giue thée thirtie sestercies of gold, and as many of siluer, and I will redéeme thee from the bawd for thirtie dayes. When Tharsia heard this, she went boldly downe into the caben vnto him, and with a milde voice saluted him, saying: God saue you sir whosoeuer you be, and be of good comfort, for an innocent virgin, whose life hath béen distressed by shipwracke, and her chastitie by dishonestie, and yet hath both preserued, saluteth thee. Then began she to record in verses, and therewithall to sing so sweetly, that Apollonius, notwithstanding his great sorrow, wondred at her. And these were the verses which she soong so pleasantly vnto the instrument: Amongst the harlots foule I walke, yet harlot none am I: The Rose amongst the Thorns grows, and is not hurt thereby. The thiefe that stole me, sure I thinke, is slaine before this time, A bawd me bought, yet am I not defilde by fleshly crime, Were nothing pleasanter to me, than parents mine to know. I am the issue of a king,
my bloud from kings doth flow. I hope that God will mend my state, and send a better day, Leaue off your teares, plucke vp your heart, and banish care away. Shew gladnesse in your countenance, cast vp your cheerfull eyes. That God remaines that once of nought, created earth and skies. He will not let in care and thought you still to liue and all for nought. When Apollonius heard her sing these verses, lifting vp his eyes, and fighing he said: Alas poore wretch as I am, how long shall I striue with life, and abide this gréeuous conflict? Good maiden, I giue hearty thanks both to your wisedome and nobilitie: requi∣ting you with this one thing, that whensoeuer, if e∣uer such occasion doe chance, I shall haue desire to be merrie, I will then thinke on you, or if euer I be re∣stored vnto my kingdome. And perhaps, as you say, you are descended of the race of kings, and indeed you doe well represent the nobilitie of your parentage. But nowe I pray you receiue this reward at my handes, an hundred péeces of golde, and depart from me and trouble me no longer, for my present griefe is renued by your lamentable recitall, and I consume with continuall sorrowe. When the maid had receiued the reward, shee was about to depart. Then spake Athanagoras, whither goest thou Thar∣sia, quoth hee? hast thou taken paine without pro∣fite, and canst thou not worke a deed of charitie, and relieue the man that wil consume his life with mour∣ning? Tharsia answered: I haue done all that I may, and he hath giuen me an hundred péeces of gold, and desired me to depart. I wil giue thée two hundred, said
Athanagoras, and goe downe vnto him againe, and giue him his money, and say vnto him, I seeke thy health and not thy money. Then went Tharsia downe againe, and set her selfe downe by him, and saide vnto him: Sir, if you bee determined to continue al∣waies in this heauinesse, giue mée leaue, I pray you, to reason a little with you. And I meane to pro∣pose certaine parables vnto you, which if you can re∣solue, I will then depart, and restore your money. But Apollonius not willing to receiue the money a∣gaine, but thankefully to accept whatsoeuer shee should vtter, without discouraging of her: albeit in my troubles quoth he, I haue none other felicitie but to weepe and lament, yet because I will not want the ornamentes of your wisedome, demaund of me whatsoeuer shall be your pleasure, and while I am aunswering you, pardon me I pray you, if some∣time I giue libertie vnto my teares, and shall not be able to speake for sobbing. Sir, I wil beare with you somewhat in that respect said Tharsia, and nowe if it please you I will begin: A certaine house on earth there is, that roomths hath large and wide: The house makes noise, the guests makes none. that therein doth abide: But house and guest continually, togither forth doe slide. Now if indeed you be a Prince, as your men say you are, it behooueth you to be wiser than a simple maiden, and to resolue my probleme. Apollonius an∣swered: Maiden, to the intent you may not thinke that you were tolde a lie, hearken now to the resolu∣tion.
The house on the earth is the Sea or euery great water, the fish is the dumbe guest, which followeth the water whither soeuer it runne. Sir, you haue an∣swered truely said Tharsia, and now I assaile you the second time: In length forth long I runne, faire daughter of the wood, Accompanied with many a one, of foote and force as good, Through many waies I walke, but steps appeare none where I stood. Apollonius answered: If I might be so bold, and op∣portunitie serued thereto, I could declare vnto you many things that you doe not knowe, faire maiden, but not interrupting your questions whereunto I haue to answere, wherein I much wonder at your yoong yeares, so plentifully fraught with excellent knowledge. But to come to the purpose: The daugh∣ter of the wood, is the tree whereof is made the long ship, which is accompanied with many companions, and walketh vppon the seas many wayes leauing no print, or footsteppes behinde. You haue gessed right said Tharsia, and therefore nowe I propose my third parable: There is an house through which the fire doth passe, and doth no harme: Therein is heat, which none may mooue, from thence it is so warme. A naked house, and in that house guests naked doe desire To dwell, from whence if boords you draw, then fall you in the fire. Apollonius answered: Maiden, this that you
meane, were a méet place for men that liue in delight and pleasure. And the time hath been, when I haue also delighted in the bath and hoat-house, where the heate entreth through the creuises of the boordes and chinkes of the stones, and where by reason of swea∣ting, it behooueth a man to be naked. When hee had done speaking, Tharsia wondering at his wisedome, and the rather lamenting his discomfortablenesse, threw her selfe vppon him, and with clasped armes embraced him, saying: O good gentleman, hearken vnto the voice of her that beséecheth thee, and haue re∣spect to the suite of a virgin, that thinking it a far vn∣worthy thing that so wise a man should languish in griefe, and die with sorrow. But if God of his good∣nes would restore vnto thée thy wife safe, whom thou so much lamentest: Or if thou shouldst find thy daugh∣ter in good case, whom thou supposest to be dead: then wouldest thou desire to liue for ioy. Then Apollo∣nius fell in a rage, and forgetting all courtesie, his vnbridled affection stirring him thereunto, rose vp sodainly, and stroke the maiden on the face with his foote, so that shee fell to the ground, and the bloud gushed plentifully out of her cheekes. And like it is that shee was in a swoone, for so soone as shée came to her selfe, shée beganne to wéepe, saying: O im∣mortall God which madest heauen and earth, looke vppon my afflictions, and take compassion vppon mée. I was borne among the waues and trouble∣some tempests of the sea. My mother died in pangues and paines of childbed, and buriall was denied her vpon the earth, whom my father adorned with iew∣els, and laid twentie sestercies of gold at her head, and as much in siluer at her feete, and inclosed her in a chest, and committed her to the Sea. As for mée vnfortunate wretch, I was at Tharsus committed to Stranguilio and wicked Dionisiades his wife, whom
my father put in trust with me, with mony & princely furniture, and their seruants were commāded to slay me. And when I desired time to pray, which was grā∣ted me, there came pyrates in the meane while, and carried me away, and brought me vnto this wofull city, where I was solde to a most cruell bawd, and with much adoe haue preserued my virginitie, and I sée nothing ensuing but continuall sorrowe, whereof I féele both nowe and euery day some part, and shall doe euer more and more, vntil it please God to restore me vnto my father Apollonius. Apollonius gaue good eare vnto her words, and was strangely moued with∣in himselfe, knowing that all these signes and tokens were most certaine that she was his daughter, and hée cried out with a mighty voice and saide: O mercifull God, which beholdest, heauen, earth and hell, and dis∣couerest all the secretes therein, blessed bee thy most holy name for euer: and when he had said those words, he fell vpon his daughter Tharsias necke, and kissed her, and for extreame ioy wept bitterly, saying: O my most swéete and onely daughter, the halfe part of my life, for the loue of thée I lust not nowe to die, for I haue found thée for whome I had desire to die onely. And therewithall he cryed out aloude, saying: Come hither my seruants and frends, come ye al hither, and sée now the end of all my sorrow, for I haue found my deare daughter and onelie childe which I had lost. When the seruants heard the noise, they came hastily togither, and with them prince Athanagoras, & when they came downe vnder the hatches, they found Apol∣lonius wéeping for ioy, and leaning vpon his daugh∣ters shoulders, and he said vnto them: behold here my daughter, for whom I haue mourned, beholde the one halfe of my life for whose sake I nowe desire to liue: and they al reioyced and wept with him for company, and thanked God for that happy day.
CHAP. XVIII. Howe Apollonius leauing off mourning came into the citie Machilenta, where he commaunded the bawd to be burned, and how Tharsia was married vnto prince Athanagoras. THarsia hearing her fathers words, fell down at his féet and kissed him, saying: O father, blessed be God that hath giuen me the grace to sée you, & that I may die with you. But Apollonius lifted vp his heart, and cast away his mourning apparell, and put on other swéet and cleane raiment. And when Athanagoras and the seruants looked earnestly vpon him, and vpon his daughter, they wondred, saying: O my lord Apollo∣nius, how like in countenance is your daughter Thar∣sia vnto you? that if you had no other argument, this were sufficient proofe to shewe that she is your childe. Apollonius thanked them, saying, that now he stoode not in any doubt thereof. Then Tharsia beganne to discourse vnto her father howe she was sold vnto the bawd, and howe hée thrust her into the common bro∣thell, and by what meanes she alwayes preserued her chastitie, and howe much she was bounden vnto good prince Athanagoras there present. Now Athanagoras was a widower, and a lusty yoong gentleman and prince of the citie, as it is declared, who fearing lest Tharsia should be bestowed in marriage vpon some o∣ther man, and vsing the benefite of the time, cast him selfe downe at Apollonius féete, and besought him for her, saying: Most noble Prince, I beséech you for the liuing Gods sake which hath thus myraculously re∣stored the father vnto his daughter, bestowe not your daughter vpon any other in marriage then me onely. I am prince of this citie, and through my meanes she
hath continued a virgin, and by my procurement she is nowe come vnto the knowledge of thée her father. Apollonius courteously embracing him answered: I thanke you most heartily, good Prince Athanagoras, for your friendly offer, which I may in no wise gain∣say both in respect of your owne woorthinesse, and for the pleasure which you haue shewed my daughter, and therfore you haue my goodwill to be her husband. Then turning his face towards Tharsia, how say you my deare daughter, saide he, are you contented to bee wife vnto Athanagoras? Tharsia with blushing chéeks answered: Yea forsooth father, for since I came from Stranguilioes house, I neuer found rest nor pleasure sauing through his alonely curtesie. Nowe whether Athanagoras reioyced at this answere or not, I re∣ferre me to the iudgement of those, who being passio∣nate with the same affection, woulde be well pleased with a ioyntly grant of the like goodwil. When these matters were thus concluded, Apollonius mooued A∣thanagoras concerning reuenge to be executed vppon the bawd. Then Athanagoras tooke his leaue for a while of Apollonius and departeth vnto the citie, and calling al the citizens togither to the market place, he spake thus vnto them: My friends and welbeloued citizens, vnderstand ye that Apollonius prince of Ty∣rus and father vnto Tharsia, is arriued in our coast with a great fléete of ships, wherein hée hath brought a mighty army of men to destroy our city for ye bawds sake, who placed his daughter in a common brothell, to hire out the vse of her body for monie. Wherefore looke vnto your selues, and aduise your selues what you were best to doe, for it were pittie that the whole citie should perish for one wicked mans sake. When as hée had made an ende of this spéech, the whole multitude trembled and was sore afraide, and foorthwith determined that they would all, as well
men, women and children goe foorth to sée Prince A∣pollonius, and to craue pardon of him. Not so, said A∣thanagoras, but we will desire him to come peaceablie into our citie, and what he list to commaund, shall be fulfilled. The people liked well of that counsel, & com∣mitted the matter vnto his discretion wholly to pro∣uide for their safetie. Then went he foorth vnto Apol∣lonius, and desired him in the peoples name to come into the citie, where he should be most heartily wel∣come. Apollonius refused not that friendly offer, but immediately prepared himselfe to goe with him, and caused his head to be polled, and his beard to be trim∣med, and his nailes to be pared, and put on a princely robe vpon his backe, and a crowne of golde vpon his head, and so passed foorth togither vpon the way. And when they were come into the citie, the citizens sa∣luted Apollonius, and hee was placed in the highest seate whence the prince was woont to giue iudgemēt, and his daughter Tharsia by his side, and he spake vn∣to the people in this manner following: Good people of the city of Machilenta, you sée the virgine Tharsia, whome I her father haue found out this present day, hir hath the most filthie bawd, as much as in him lay, constrained to dishonest her body, to her vtter destruc∣tion. From which his deuillish purpose no intreatie could persuade him, no price could allure him. Wher∣fore my request vnto you (good people) is, that I may haue due reuenge on him for the iniury done vnto my daughter. When the people heard his reasonable de∣maund, they cried out with one accord, saying: My lorde Apollonius, we iudge that he be burned aliue, and his goods be giuen vnto the maiden Tharsia. The reuenge pleased Apollonius well, and foorthwith they apprehended the bawd, and bound him hand and foot, and they made a great fire, and at Apollonius com∣maundement cast him aliue into it, and burnt him to
ashes. Then called Tharsia for the villaine, and saide vnto him: Because by thy meanes, and all the citi∣zens, I haue hitherto remained a virgine euen vntill my fathers comming, my will is that thou be frée, and moreouer, héere I giue vnto thée two hundred péeces of gold for a reward. Secondly, she called for all the women that were in the bawdes brothell, and saide vnto them: good women, whose chances perhaps hath beene as gréeuous vnto you as mine was vnto me, I set you al at liberty, and whereas heretofore you haue gained money by hiring foorth the vse of your bodies, receiue of mée here this rewarde, that you may liue hereafter more in the feare of God, and practise some more commendable way to sustaine necessitie, and therewithall she gaue to euerie one of them a reward, and so dismissed them. And when all these things were ended, Apollonius minding to depart, spake vn∣to the people saying: Noble Prince Athanagoras, and beloued citizens of Machilenta, I acknowledge my selfe much bounden to you, and I yéeld you hearty thanks for all your benefites bestowed vppon me and my daughter. And now in recompence thereof, I giue vnto you fifty poundes weight of golde to be diuided amongest you, that when I am gone from you, you may be mindefull of me. The citizens thanked him, and bowed their heads in token of reuerence, and they agréed together, and they erected two statues of brasse one vnto him, another to his daughter in the market place of the citie, with these superscriptions written in their bases: Vnto Apollonius prince of Tyrus, the preseruer of our houses, and vnto his vertuous daugh∣ter Tharsia, a virgin, the mindefull citizens of Machi∣lenta haue erected those monuments. But Apollonius remembring the great curtesie of Athanagoras, and his promise made vnto him concerning Tharsia, ap∣pointed a short time for their mariage, against which
there was great prouision as might be at so smal war∣ning, the solemnities, riches, brauerie, cost, feasts, re∣uelles, intertainement, and all things else appertain∣ing thereunto, and requisite for so great personages, I shall not here néede particularly to set downe, since euery man may iudge what belongeth to such a mat∣ter, and none can precisely describe this vnlesse he had béene there present. Of this thing sure I am, that this mariage brought great pleasure to the father, content∣ment to the parties, and ioy to all the people. CHAP. XIX. How Apollonius meaning to saile into his owne coun∣trey by Tharsus, was commaunded by an Angel in the night to go to Ephesus, and there to declare all his aduentures in the Church, with a loude voice. THe solemnities of the wedding being finished, A∣pollonius made haste to depart, and all things be∣ing in a readinesse, he tooke shipping with his sonne in lawe and his daughter, and weyghed anchor, and committed the sailes vnto the winde, and went their way, directing their course euermore towarde Thar∣sus, by which Apollonius purposed to passe vnto his owne countrie Tyrus. And when they had sailed one whole day, and night was come that Apollonius laide him downe to rest, there appeared an Angell in his sléepe, commaunding him to leaue his course to∣ward Tharsus, and to saile vnto Ephesus, and to go into the Temple of Diana, accompanied with his sonne in lawe and his daughter, and there with a loude voyce to declare all his aduentures, whatsoeuer had befallen him from his youth vnto that present day.
When Apollonius awoke in the morning, hée woondered at the vision, and called for Athanagoras his sonne in lawe and his daughter Tharsia, and de∣clared it to them in order as is before recited. Then saide he vnto them, what counsell do you giue me in this matter? They answered, whatsoeuer it pleaseth you to doe that we shall well like of. Then Apollo∣nius called vnto him the Master of the shippe, and commaunded him to winde saile and to coast towards Ephesus, which he did, and immediately the winde serued them so prosperously, that in fewe dayes they safely arriued there, Apollonius and his companie foorthwith forsooke their shippes, and came aland, and according to the commaundement of the Angell, tooke his iourney to the Temple of Diana, whereas it is before mentioned, his long lamented wife lady Lu∣cina remained in vertuous life and holy contemplati∣on among the religious Nunnes. And when he was come thither, he besought one of the Nunnes that had the kéeping of the Temple, that he might haue licence to go in, and she willingly granted his request, and o∣pened the doore vnto him. By this time report was blowen abroad, that a certaine strange Prince was lately landed with his sonne in lawe and his daugh∣ter in very costly and rich ornaments and gone into the Temple: and the ladie Lucina as desirous as the rest to sée the strangers, decked her head with rich at∣tire, and put on a purple robe, and with conuenient retinue attending vpon her, came into the Temple. Now Lucina was passing beautifull and for the great loue which she bare vnto chastitie all men reue∣renced her, and there was no virgin in al the number in like estimation vnto her. Whom when Apollonius beheld, although he knew not what she was, yet such was the excéeding brightnes and maiestie of her coun∣tenance, that he fel down at her feet, with his sonne in
lawe likewise and his daughter, for hée thought shée glittered like a diademe, and excéeded the brightest starres in beautie. But Lucina curteously lifted them vp from the ground, and bid them welcome, and after∣ward went to bestow the plate and ornaments of the temple in decent order, which thing was part of the Nunnes duety. Then Apollonius setled himselfe to doe as the Angell had commaunded him in the vision, and thus he beganne to say: I being borne Prince of Tyrus, was called Apollonius, and when in youth I had attained vnto all kinde of knowledge, I resolued the cruel king Antiochus parable, to the intent to haue married with his daughter, whome he most shame∣fully defiled, and kept her from all men to serue his owne filthie lust, and sought meanes to stay me. Then I fled away, and lost all my goodes in the sea, hardly escaping my selfe with life, and in my greatest extre∣mitie I was courteously intertained by Altistrates king of Pentapolis, and so highly receiued into fauor▪ that he left no kindes of fauour on me vntried, inso∣much that hee bestowed vpon mee his faire daughter and onelie childe Lucina to be my wife. But when Antiochus and his daughter by the iust iudgement of God, were stroken dead with lightning from heauen, I carried my wife with me to receiue my kingdome, and she was deliuered of this my daughter and hers vpon the sea, and died in the trauell, whome I enclo∣sed in a chest, and threwe into the sea, laying twen∣tie sestercies of golde at her head, and as much in sil∣uer at her féete, to the intent that they that should find her might haue wherewithall to bury her honorably, leauing also a superscription that they might perceiue with what griefe of her friends she died, and of what princelie parentage shée descended. Afterwardes I arriued at the citie of Tharsus, where I put in trust my yoong daughter to be brought vp vnto certain wic∣ked
persons, and from thence I departed vnto the higher partes of Egypt. But when from that time fourtéene yeeres were expired, and I returned thi∣ther to fetch my daughter, they told me that shee was dead, which I beleeuing to be true, put on mourning attire, and desired nothing so much as to die, and while I was in that extremitie of sorrowe, and deter∣mined to haue sayled vnto Tyrus, while I was on my way vpon the sea: the winde turned, and there a∣rose a tempest, and draue me vnto the citie Machilen∣ta, where my daughter was restored vnto me. Then went I with my sonne in law, and my daugter once againe, to haue sailed vnto Tyrus by Tharsus, and as I was now in the iourney, I was admonished in my sleepe by an Angell to turne my course vnto E∣phesus, and there in the temple to declare aloud al my aduentures that had befallen me since my youth vnto this present day, which hath hitherto guided me in all my troubles, will nowe send an happy end vnto all mine afflictions. CHAP. XX. How Apollonius came to the knowledge of his wife the ladie Lucina, and how they reioyced at the mee∣ting of ech other. THe ladie Lucina was not so busie in executing her office in the Church, but that she gaue also atten∣tiue eare vnto her lord Apollonius talke, whom at the first she knew not. But when shee heard the long dis∣course, whereby she knewe by all signes that hee was her husband and shee was his wife, her heart burned within her, and she could scarce temper her affections vntill hee had done talking. Yet measuring her loue
with modestie, as nowe of long time hauing learned the true trade of pacience, shee gaue him libertie to make an end: which done, shee ran hastily vnto him, and embraced him hard in her armes, and woulde haue kissed him. Which thing, when Apollonius sawe, hee was mooued with disdaine, and thrust her from him, as misliking such lightnesse in her whose modestie and good grace hee had so lately before com∣mended in his heart, and nothing at all suspecting that she had béen his wife. Then shee pouring foorth teares aboundantly. O my lord Apollonius, said she, the one halfe of my life, why deale you thus vngent∣ly with me? I am your wife, daughter vnto Altistra∣tes king of Pentapolis, and my name is Lucina. And you are Apollonius, prince of Tyrus, my lord and deare husband, and you are my schoolemaister which taught mée musicke: and moreouer you are the Sea-wrecked man whom I especially loued aboue many, not for concupiscence sake, but for desire of wisedome. When Apollonius heard those words, he was sodain∣ly astonied, and as the strangenes of the chance appal∣led him much: so the great ioy reuiued his spirites a∣gaine, and he cast his eies earnestly vppon her, and immediatly called her to remembrance, and knewe perfitly that it was shée indéede, and hée went vnto her, and fell vppon her necke, and for excéeding ioy brast out into teares, and then lifting vp his handes and eyes to heauen, hee saide: Blessed be the moste mightie God of heauen, which sitteth aboue and beholdeth the state of men on earth, and dealeth with them according to his great mercie: who nowe also of his vnspeakeable goodnesse, hath restored vn∣to mée my wife and my daughter. Then did hee most louingly embrace and kisse his ladie, whom he suppo∣sed long before to be dead: and shée likewise requited him with the like fruites of good will and courtesie,
whom she surely thought she should neuer haue séene againe. And when they had continued a good space in intertaining the one another: O my moste deare lord Apollonius, saide the lady Lucina, where is my childe, whereof I was deliuered? Apollonius aun∣swered: my best beloued ladie, it was a daughter, and she was named Tharsia, and this is she, and there∣withal he shewed her Tharsia. Then kissed and embra∣ced she her daughter, and likewise her sonne in law Athanagoras, and they greatly reioyced one in ano∣ther. And when report héereof was spread abroad, there was great ioy throughout all the Citie of Ephesus, and the report was blowen about in euerie place how prince Apollonius had found out his ladie and wife among the Nunnes in the Temple. Then Lucina discoursed vnto her lord and husband Apollonius, of all the strange accidents that happened vnto her after his casting her forth into the Sea: Namely, howe her chest was cast on land at the coast of Ephesus, and taken vp by a Phisition, and how she was reuiued and by him adopted, and for preseruation of her ho∣nestie, placed among the Nunnes in the Tem∣ple of Diana, where hee then found her, accordingly as it appeareth before in the historie, wherefore they blessed the name of God, and yéelded most hear∣tie thankes vnto him, that hée had preserued them thitherto, and graunted them so ioyfull a mee∣ting.
CHAP. XXI. How Apollonius departed from Ephesus, and sailed himselfe, his wife, his sonne and daughter vnto An∣tiochia, and then to Tyrus, and from thence to Thar∣sus, where he reuenged himselfe vpon Stranguilio, and Dionisiades. APollonius and Lucina his wife, and the residue of their traine, hauing rested themselues and made merrie sufficient time at Ephesus, when the winde serued, tooke leaue of their friendes and went aboord of their ships, and lanched from the shore and depar∣ted vnto Antiochia, where according as Calamitus the maister of the ship of Tyrus had tolde him before, the kingdome was reserued for him since the death of Antiochus. But when the citizens heard that he was arriued, they were all exceeding glad, and put on their brauest apparell, and garlandes of bayes vpon their heads, and went forth in procession to méet him, and brought him in triumph into the Citie, and crow∣ned him king with all ioy and gladnesse. And when all the solemnities of the coronation, the feastes, tri∣umphes, largesses, and pardons were finished, hée a∣bode with them certaine daies to dispose some mat∣ters in order that required redresse, and to establish certaine lawes for the due administration of iustice. Which being all accomplished according to his desire, he tooke his leaue of the Citizens, and with his wife, sonne, and daughter, departed to the sea, and sayled vnto Tyrus his owne natiue country, where he was ioyfully receiued of his subiects, and found his king∣dome gouerned in good order. There placed he for his lieuetenant his sonne in lawe Athanagoras, which had married his daughter Tharsia, to rule the coun∣trey
in his absence, and when he had aboden a conue∣nient time amongst them to make merrie, and to pro∣uide necessaries for his farther affaires, he leuied in shorter space a mightie armie of the best approoued souldiours, with sufficient store of money and muni∣tion, and taking with him moreouer his lady, and his daughter Tharsia, tooke shipping in the hauen▪ and had so prosperous winde, that in few dayes they landed in the coast of Tharsus. And when they were come all ashoare, they marched forward in battell a∣ray, and came into the Citie to the great terrour of al the inhabitantes. When hee was come into the mar∣ket place, he commaunded that Stranguilio and Dio∣nisiades should be brought before him, which being done, he thus spake vnto the people. Ye Citizens of Tharsus, I am come hither in armes as you sée, not moued by my will, but constrained by iniurie. Wher∣fore tell me, was I euer vnthankfull vnto your Citie in generall, or vnto any of you al in particular? They all aunswered with one voice no my lord, and ther∣fore wee are ready all to spend our liues in thy quar∣rell: and as thou knowest well wée haue erected heere in perpetuall memorie of thee, a statue of brasse, be∣cause thou preseruedst vs from death, and our citie from vtter destruction. Then said Apollonius, vn∣derstand then this much my friends, that when I de∣parted last from this citie, I committed my daugh∣ter in trust vnto Stranguilio and his wife Dionisiades, and when I came to require her they woulde not deli∣uer her vnto me, nor tell me the trueth what is be∣come of her. Immediatly they were both called forth to aunswere vnto these matters before Apollonius, where falling downe on their knees before him, Dio∣nisides answered in this manner: My lord, I beséech you stand fauourable vnto my poore husband and mee, and not to beleeue any other thing concerning
your daughter, then that shée is departed this life. And as for hir graue, you haue seene it, and also the monument of brasse erected by the whole citie in the memoriall of her, and moreouer you haue read the su∣perscription. Then Apollonius commaunded his daughter to stand foorth in the presence of them all, and shée saide vnto Dionisiades: beholde thou wic∣ked woman, dead Tharsia is come to greete thée, who as thou diddest well hope, shoulde neuer haue béen forth comming to haue bewrayed thy wickednesse. But when the miserable woman beheld Tharsia, her heart quaked for feare, and shée fell to the ground in a swoond: and when shée recouered againe, shee cried out vppon the iust iudgement of God, and cursed the time that shee was borne. And all the people ranne thronging about Tharsia, and wondered at her, think∣ing howe greatly they had been of long time abu∣sed by Stranguilio, and Dionisiades, and they reioy∣ced much in her safetie, and all knewe by her coun∣tenance that it was shée, and none other. O now, who were able to declare the bitter griefe and intollera∣ble care which eftsoones assaied the wearisome con∣sciences of these twaine, the husband and the wife when they sawe her liuing and in good liking before their faces, whose death they had so traiterously con∣spired? Euen hell it selfe is not comparable vnto so heauie a burden, the vnspeakable weight whereof all men ought to feare, and none can sufficiently describe vnlesse hée haue been semblably plunged in the like gulfe of horrible desperation. Then Tharsia called for Theophilus Stranguilios villaine, and when hée was come into her presence, shée saide vnto him: Theophilus, aunswere mée aloud that all the people may heare, who sent thee forth to slay me? Hee aunswered, Dionisiades my Mistresse. What mooued her thereunto saide Tharsia? None other thing, I
suppose, saide the villaine, but to enioy the money and ornamentes, and also because thy beautie and comelinesse were commended aboue Philomacias her daughters. Nowe when the people heard this, they ranne vppon Stranguilio, and Dionisiades, and tooke them violently, and bound them, and drew them out of the citie and stoned them to death, and would like∣wise haue slaine Theophilus the villaine, for that, that at his mistresse commandement he would haue murdered the innocent maiden. But Tharsia intrea∣ted for him, saying: Not so my deare friends, I pray you let me obtaine pardon for him at your handes: for vnlesse he had giuen me respite to say my praiers, I had not been heere now to haue spoken for him: and when she had said so, the furious multitude was ap∣peased. And Apollonius gaue many exceeding rich giftes vnto the citie, and repared it strongly in ma∣ny places where it was decaied, and abode there with them the space of three monthes in feasting and ma∣king merry before he departed. CHAP. XXII. How Apollonius sailed from Tharsus to visite his father in law Altistrates king of Pentapolis, who died not long after Apollonius comming thither. THe terme of thrée monethes, that Apollonius pur∣posed for his delight to remaine at Tharsus, was almost expired, and he cōmanded all things to be pre∣pared for the iourney, and when the day was come, hee made generall proclamation vppon paine of death euery man to ship. And when the whole army was imbarked, he took ship himselfe with his wife and
his daughter, being honourably accompanied by the citizens vnto the water side, and after due courtesie on both sides done and receiued, hee hoysed sayle and de∣parted towardes Pentopolis king Altistrates Citie. And when they had sailed with prosperous winde ten dayes vppon the Sea, they discouered a farre off the Steeples and Towres of Pentapolis, and the Soul∣diers reioyced and gaue a shout for gladnesse that they were so neere to their wished land. Then they cast a∣bout and cut towards the hauen, and cast anker, and landed all safe, and Apollonius with his wife and daughter after hee had taken order for the companie, rode vnto the court vnto king Altistrates, whom they found in good health and merry. And when Altistra∣tes saw his sonne in lawe, his daughter and his neece Tharsia, hee bid them welcome, and reioyced excee∣dingly, and sent for the Nobles of his land to keepe them companie, and gaue them the best entertaine∣ment that hee could deuise, and they soiourned with him an whole yeare in pleasure and pastime, whereof the king tooke as great comfort, as was possible for a man to doe in any worldly felicitie. But as there was neuer yet any thing certaine or permanent in this mortall life, but alwaies we be requited with sowre sauce to our sweete meate, and when wee thinke our selues surest in the top of ioy, then tilt wée downe soo∣nest into the bottome of sorrow, so fared it now vnto these personages in the midst of their iollitie. For the good old king Altistrates fell sodainly sick which much appalled them all, and grew euerie day weaker than other. Then were the Phisitions sent for in haste, who left nothing vntried that appertained vnto Art and experience to doe, and aboue all Apollonius and Lucina his wife plaied the parts of duetifull children, in tendring their aged and weake father with all care and diligence possible. But alas, olde age which
of it selfe is an vncurable sickenesse, and had béene growing nowe well nigh an hundred yeares lacking seuen vpon him accompanied with the intollerable paine of the gowt, and the stone of the bladder, had consumed naturall moisture, so that his force gaue ouer to the disease, and shortely after changed this transitorie life for a better. When report was spread abroad of the kings death, there was great sorrowe and lamentation made in all places, neither was there any that tooke not grieuously the losse of so good a Prince. But to describe the inward affliction of A∣pollonius, and the teares of the Ladie Lucina and Tharsia her daughter, woulde make any heart of flint to bléede, considering the tender affections of women aboue men, and howe prone they bee that way, yea, sometime (God knowes) in smaller causes than at the death of husband, father, or mother. But as al things haue their time, so haue sorrowe and teares also, which are best dried vp with the towell of continu∣aunce, which gaue nowe iust occasion vnto Apollo∣nius to cast off drowsie sorrowe, and to prouide for the funeralles of his father in lawe, which he accompli∣shed with so seasonable expedition, and in so honoura∣ble a sort, as was féemely for so mighty a king, and so vertuous a prince, whome hée buried among the aun∣tient race of Kings his auncestours in the Temple within the citie of Pentapolis. Which beeing all fi∣nished, as it is also a worke of charitie to fulfill the will of the dead, he applied himselfe to execute his fa∣thers testament, wherin he had giuen halfe his king∣dome vnto Apollonius, and the other halfe to Tharsia his néece, to haue and to holde to them and to their heires for euer.
CHAP. XXIII. ¶ How Apollonius rewarded the fisherman that re∣leeued him after hee had suffered shipwracke: howe hee dealt also with olde Calamitus, and likewise with the Pyrates that stole away Thar∣sia. BY this time, when all cares were banished, and Apollonius inioyed his kingdome in quiet posses∣sion, he gaue himselfe sometimes to delight as o∣ther Princes are wont to do. And it fortuned that on a day when he had dined, he walked foorth for re∣creation vnto the sea side, with his wife and a fewe seruants. And when hée came there, he sawe a small fisher boat fléeting vnder saile, which hee thought by all signes he should knowe well, for hee supposed it to be the fishermans boat which succoured him, when he had suffered shipwracke in sailing from Tharsus to∣wardes Pentapolis. Wherefore hee commaunded some of his seruantes, to take an other shippe which rode at anchor there on the shore, to go after and take him, and to bring the fisherman vnto him vnto the Court. When the poore man saw himselfe boorded of so many and so gay a multitude, hée feared they had béene pyrates, and that they woulde haue slaine him, and he fell downe on his knées, and besought them to haue compassion vpon him, he was but a poore fisher∣man, and had not that which they sought for: it were others that were more fit for their purpose to méete withall, such as ventured further in greater vesselles, carrying foorth great summes of money, and bringing home plenty of costly merchandize: As for him, they should not only find miserable pouertie in ransacking his boat, but if they were also determined to take a∣way
his life from him, they should likewise with the same stroke bereaue the liues of his poore wife, and many small Children, which were maintained by his hand onely. These or the like words vttered then the poore fisherman. But they smiling in their con∣ceits, and mindefull of their Princes commaunde∣ment, bade him not feare that they would robbe him, but saide that he must goe with them, and brought him away vnto the court. And when he was come in∣to the kings presence, Apollonius knewe him well, and saide vnto the Quéene and the Nobles that were about him: Beholde, this is the man that receiued me into his house, and succoured mée when I suffe∣red shipwracke, and shewed me the way into the Ci∣tie, by which meanes I came acquainted with good king Altistrates. And he rose out of his seate, and em∣braced him and said: I am Apollonius Prince of Ty∣rus whome thou diddest succour, and therefore bée of good chéere▪ for thou shalt be rewarded. And the poore fisherman wept excéedingly for ioy. And Apollonius commaunded two hundred sestereies of gold to be gi∣uen vnto him, and thirty seruants, and twenty hand∣maides, and fortie horses, and fiftie sutes of apparell, and a faire pallace to dwel in, and made him an earle, and vsed no man so familiarly as he did him all the dayes of his life. Nowe it was not long after that these things were done, but one called Calamitus the master of the ship of Tyrus, an olde man, who, as we haue before declared, shewed vnto Apollonius as hée was walking by the sea side with Lucina that Antio∣chus and his daughter were dead, and the kingdome was reserued for him, came before Apollonius, and falling downe on his knées: Remember me, my most gratious Lorde Apollonius saide hée, since the time I tolde your grace the good tidings of king Antiochus death.
Then king Apollonius tooke him vp by the hand, and caused him to sit downe by him and talked fami∣liarly with him, and gaue him great thankes, and made him a great lord in his countrey. Thus Apol∣lonius busied himselfe, not onely in bestowing him∣selfe curteously at home, but he also prouided as well for the quiet gouernement of the state abroad, as it appeared by the diligence of his officers, who hauing lately taken certaine pyrates vpon the sea, brought them to Pentapolis, where Apollonius then remai∣ned, to haue iustice executed vpon them. When they were arriued, they were found guilty of the facte of which they were accused, and the next day being ap∣pointed for them to suffer, when they came vnto the gallowes, they confessed many robberies: and among store, how once at Tharsus they rescued a maide na∣med Tharsia, from a villaine that woulde haue slaine her, and brought her to Machilenta, where they solde her to him that offered most money, and hée which bought her (as they thought) was a bawd. When the citizens, who were none of them ignorant of the Ladie Tharsias aduentures heard this, they stayed execution, and sent word vnto king Apollonius say∣ing: May it please your grace to vnderstand, that we haue certaine pyrates at the gallowes ready to be exe∣ted, & it appeareth that they be those that stole away the Lady Tharsia your daughter from Tharsus, and sold her to the bawd at Machilenta. Which when we perceiued, we thought it good to know your Graces pleasure what shall be doone with them. Apollonius thanked them, and willed the pirats to be brought be∣fore him, & examined them diligently, and found that they were the same men indéede that had preserued Tharsias life. And hée gaue great thankes vnto God and them, and imbraced them, & willingly pardoned them their liues.
And for that he knew that the sinister means which they hitherto had insued, was caused most by con∣straint, for want of other trade or abilitie to liue by, he therefore made them all knights, and gaue them plenty of gold and siluer, and indowed them also with great possessions. CHAP. XXIIII. ¶How Apollonius had a yoong sonne and heire by his wife Lucina, likewise of Apollonius age, and how he died: with some other accidents thereunto in∣cident. WHile king Apollonius thus passed foorth his time, in rewarding his friends which had doone him pleasure in his aduersitie, the part of a thankeful and good natured man, and also vnto his enemies in ministring iustice with mercie, which is the duetie of a vertuous prince, the quéene Lucina in the meane season conceiued childe, and grewe euery daie bigger bellied then other. And when the time came that she attended for a good houre, she was deliuered of a faire sonne, whome some of the Ladies that were present saide hée was like Apollonius the father, othersome, like king Altistrates the grandfather, and others iud∣ged otherwise, according as is the custome of women to doe, when as (God knoweth) there is no more like∣nesse betwéene them sauing that the childe hath the generall shape and proportion of a man, than is be∣twéene Iacke fletcher and his bolt. Howbeit the boy was called Altistrates after the grandfathers name, for whome there was much ioy and triumphing, that it had pleased God to send an heire male to gouerne the land, for whose life and preseruation the people
daily prayed, that as he was like to succéede his grand∣father in place and name, so hée might also be succes∣sour to his father and grandfather in honour and ver∣tue: which as they are the true goods, so are they the chiefest inheritance of a king, and to be preferred be∣fore the gréedie séeking for large dominion and riches, which are the foolish scales whereby Fortune intrap∣peth vs, But to returne againe to our story, great was the care and prouision for the diligent bringing vp of this yoong gentleman: who as he grew vp more and more euery day to the strength of lusty youth, so his father Apollonius decayed continually through the infirmity of weake olde age: Who hauing passed his life with one Ladie the faire Lucina, by whome hée had two beautifull children, the ladie Tharsia and yoong Alti∣strates, he liued to the age of fourescore and foure yéers, and obtained the empire of thrée kingdomes, to wit, Tyrus, Antiochia and Pentapolis whome with the helpe of his sonne in lawe Athanagoras he gouerned peaceably and prosperously. Moreouer, when hée had disposed the affaires of his realmes vnto such of his nobilitie as were in credite about him, although at all times he had recourse vnto his accustomed studies of humanitie, yet then especially hée applied his vacant time to his booke, and hée wrote the whole storie and discourse of his owne life and aduentures at large, the which he caused to be written foorth in two large vo∣lumes, whereof he sent one to the Temple of Diana at Ephesus, and placed the other in his owne library. Of which historie this is but a small abstract, pro∣mising if euer the whole chance to come into my hands, to set it forth with all fidelitie, diligence, and expedition. But when the fatall time was come that Apollonius olde age could no longer be sustained by the benefite of nature, he fell into certaine cold and
drie diseases, in which case the knowledge of his phy∣sitions could stand him in little stéed, either by their cunning or experience. For there is no remedie a∣gainst olde age, which if the noble skill of phisicke could euer haue found out, doubtlesse it would haue obtained the meanes to haue made the state of man immortall. Howbeit, God hath determined other∣wise, and as he appointed all worldly things to haue an end: so Apollonius had his dying day, wherein in perfect sense, and readie memorie hee departed this transitorie life in the sweete armes of his louing la∣die Lucina, and in the midst of his friendes, Nobles, Allies, kinsfolke and children, in great honour, and loue of all men. His kingdome of Tyrus, he gaue by will vnto Athanagoras and his daughter Tharsia, and to their heires after them for euer: who liued long time togither, and had much issue, both boyes and girles. Unto the quéene Ladie Lucina, hée gaue the two kingdomes of Antiochia and Pentapolis, for terme of her life, to deale or dispose at her pleasure, and after her decease vnto his sonne lusty yoong Al∣tistrates, and to his heires for euer: But Lucina, as she could not then be yoong, since Apollonius died so old, enioyed not long her widdows estate, but pining away with sorrow, and wearing with age, forsooke this present world also, and followed her deare lord into the euerlasting kingdome that neuer shall haue end, which so farre exceedeth the kingdome, which forthwith she left vnto her yoong sonne Altistrates to inherite, as heauenly ioyes surmount the earthly, and the bright sunne surpasseth the smallest starre. FINIS.
