76 S115592 99850810 16038
THE DIGNITY AND DVTY OF A CHRISTIAN. PVBLISHED AND SET FORTH TO COM∣fort and encourage all those which be truly Christs, to continue in him, and to be faithfull to the death. By Mr. IOHN ABERNETR, Bishop of CATHNES in Scotland. LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for Iohn Budge, and are to bee sold at the signe of the Greene Dragon, in Pauls Church-yard. 1620.
TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE and Religious Lady, Dame Margaret Stuart, Lady Ochiltrie, all happinesse bee multiplied. AS many seeme to themselues to bee some∣thing, when they are nothing, deceiuing themselues in their owne imagination: So many (out of an idle presumption, and
bare profession) dreame to themselues that they are Christs, when they are none of his, vnder the vaile of hypocrisie, hauing onely a name that they are liuing, when they are dead. If they had any sparke of a true de∣sire of their owne saluation, they should rather giue all diligence to make their Cal∣ling and Election sure, and carefully endeuour both to become, and to bee assured that they are Christs; which is mans highest happinesse: And to testifie the same, by crucifying of the flesh, with the affections and lusts; which is mans most thankfull duty. This little
Treatise serueth to giue in∣struction herein, and to comfort and encourage all those that are truly Christs; to continue in him, and to be faithfull to the death. I deliuered it in one of my ordinary Sermons, whereof (Madam) you were then one of my accustomed hea∣rers. It was immediatly penned, but it came not a∣gaine into my hands till now. I haue thought it good to put it forth vnder your Ladiships name, worthy to bee remembred. Your La∣diship is the godly mother of many godly children: and in speciall, the mother of that worthy and truly re∣ligious
daughter, Dame Anna, Lady Ferniherst, my faithfull friend, who now rests in the Lord, and fully feeleth that shee was, and is Christs. Your Ladi∣ship hath been alwayes to all, a mirrour of sincere and constant godlines: and, for that respect was had of your true piety and grauity; your Ladiship obtained once that honour, as the fittest Lady to attend our late gracious Queene of worthy memory; and to haue vnder your hand this our most gracious Prince in his tender Infancy. But a∣boue all these, God hath ho∣noured you by his speciall
and sauing grace: and gi∣uen you this dignity with the rest of his Saints, to be verily one of Christs, that you may confidently say, and sing with the Church, My Beloued is mine, and I am his. These considerati∣ons (amongst many other) haue moued me to dedicate this Manuell vnto you. If by perusing it, you reape any cōfort, as once you did when you first heard it: and if it can benefit any other, it is all the gaine that I expect for my paines. And so wishing your La. all happinesse in Christ our Sauiour, I shall e∣uer abide, Your La. very af∣fectionate friend, I. B. of Cathnes.
A CHRISTIAN, HIS DIGNITY and Duty. Galat. 5.24. For they that are Christs, haue crucified the flesh, with the affections and the lusts. 1. The dignity of a Christian. THe Apostle in these words perswadeth the Galati∣ans, that there is no law
against them that bring forth the fruits of the Spirit: because that such are Christs, who doe crucifie the flesh, with the affections and lusts. So that the fruit∣full in Christ the root, Reuel. 22.16. are saued; not for the fruits cause, but for the roots cause: For There is no condem∣nation to them that are in Christ Iesus, which walke not after the flesh, but af∣ter the Spirit, Rom. 8.1. These words con∣taine our greatest dig∣nity; which is, to bee Christs. And our most necessary duty, to cru∣cifie
the flesh, &c. This is the Christian dignity of those Excellent ones, The Chri∣stian dig∣nity. Psa. 16.3. who in Christ haue their Priuiledge to become the sonnes of God, Ioh. 1.12. and a right to the tree of life, Reuel. 22.14. and that because they are Christs. Wherein these things following are to bee considered. 2. What is it to be Christs? THey yt are Christs, A descrip∣tion of those that are Christs. are not onely his in generall, or by professi∣on:
but in speciall, by his sauing grace, as e∣lected in him, before the foundation of the world: and in his owne time vnited to him by faith, into a most neere fellowship, by the po∣wer of the holy Spirit: that they may bee so wholly his, and parta∣kers of all his blessings, that they may apper∣taine to him more than to all others, and that he may be also theirs, whereof they haue a comfortable sence and feeling in this life, and a full fruition in the life to come.
This descriptiō doth spread it selfe into ma∣ny branches, to bee ex∣planed as followeth. Some are Christs in generall, some in speciall. For hee hath giuen to him of his Father, po∣wer ouer all flesh, that hee should giue eternall life to as many as the Father hath giuen him, Ioh. 17.2. To be Christs in generall by subiection. They that are Christs in generall, are his, as he is the Head of all prin∣cipalitie and power, Col. 1.18. Reuel. 1.5. and 17.14. and 19.16. All po∣wer is giuer to him both in heauen and in earth, Mat. 28.18. In all things
he hath the preeminence, Colos. 1.18. He is exal∣ted aboue all things. Eph. 1.20. Exalted highly a∣boue euery name, Phil. 2.9. All things were created by him, and for him: hee is before all things, and in him all things doe con∣sist, Col. 1.16, 17. Ioh. 1.3. Bearing vp all things by his mighty word, Heb. 1.3. Hee is Lord ouer the quicke and the dead: Iudge ouer all, Rom. 13.9, 10. So all men are Christs in generall: and (with all other things) are put in subiection vnder his feet, Ephes. 1.20. Heb. 2.8. That at the name of
Iesus, euery knee should bow, Phil. 2.9, 10. To be Christs this way, All things are Christs in generall. is very common. All men are Christs, as hee is their Lord. All reprobates and diuels are Christs, as hee is their Iudge. All the Regenerate are Christs, as hee is their King. To be Christs af∣ter this manner, is not the Saints prerogatiue. We must therforegiue all diligence to goe be∣yond the whole crea∣tures, Admoni∣tion. in appertaining to Christ, and become Christs in a neerer and more speciall man∣ner.
They that are Christs in Speciall (here speci∣ally meant) are his: To bee Christs in speciall by grace. as he is the Prince of their saluation, Heb. 1.10. The head of his body which is his Church, Ephes. 1.22. Col. 1.18. Ephes. 5.23. As a Sonne, he is ouer his owne house: whose house we are, Heb. 3.6. Their Redeemer, Ephes. 1.7. The Sauiour of his body, Ephes. 5.23. Hee hath bought them for a price, 1. Cor. 6.20. Hee hath purchased them with his owne blood, Act. 20.28. He knits them to him∣selfe: he furnisheth them with his grace, and ma∣keth
thē encrease with the encreasing of God, Col. 2.19. Let vs therfore haue a speciall care to be∣come Christs in speci∣all. Admoni∣tion. Many say, Who will shew vs any good? Psalm. 4.6. But heere is of all good things the best, to be Christs. And as Peter said to Christ at his Transfiguration: It is good for vs to bee heere, Luk. 9.33. So wee may all say in our Regenera∣tion, It is good to bee Christs. It is the most happy estate of man: there is no solid nor constant comfort, but
in it, and as Dauid said, I had rather bee a doore∣keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the Tabernacles of wicked∣nesse, Psal. 84.10. So euery one should say, I had rather be the least of those that are Christs; than to be the heire of ye greatest Mo∣narch, without Christ, Gal. 3.29. 3. Who are not Christs? AS Christ said, Many are not Christs. Hee that is not with me, is against me, Math. 12.30. shewing that there
was many both against him, and not with him. So doth the Apostle heere insinuate that all are not Christs. For all men haue not faith, 2. Thes. 3.2. neither doe all crucifie the flesh. It is therefore requisite that we know who are not Christs. The diuels are not his: as that Le∣gion cried, What haue I to doe with thee, Iesus, the Sonne of the most high God? Mark. 5.7. A Re∣probate shall neuer be∣come Christs. An A∣theist, an Epicure, an Impenitent, a swinish and worldly Gadarene,
Mark. 5.17. is not Christs. The Hypocrite is not his. Hypocrites are not Christs. Profession maketh not one to be his; nei∣ther doth externall Vo∣cation, nor vulgar gra∣ces of the Spirit make any to be his. One may haue the shew & forme of godlinesse, The forme of their hypocrisie. 2. Tim. 3.5. and yet not be his, because hee wants the sauing power of it. Ma∣ny haue a name that they are aliue, but in truth they are dead, Reu. 3.1. Fruit∣lesse trees, shadowing onely with leaues: who haue the light of God, but not the life of God.
A dead faith, without workes: sorrowing for sinne, but not sorrow∣ing to repētance: mour∣ning without amend∣ing. Their loue of God is but general and mer∣cenary: a zeale without knowledge: a seruile feare: restraining sin, but not crucifying it: a taste of the heauenly gift, Heb. 6.4. friuolous and superficiall moti∣ons: fantasticall and fleeting comforts and ioyes. These things make not one to bee Christs. Admoni∣tion. Let vs there∣fore search our owne hearts; let vs examine
our selues, and prooue our selues whether wee haue faith or not: let vs know our selues, if Christ be in vs, and wee his, except we be repro∣bates, 2. Cor. 13.5. that if as yet we be not truly Christs, wee may study by all meanes (in this acceptable time) to be∣come his. 4. Who are Christs? THe Apostle posi∣tiuely sets downe, Some are Christs by Election onely. that they who are Christs, haue crucified the flesh. Wee must there∣fore
know who are Christs. Some are Christs onely in Gods prescience and secret Decree, and counsell: whereof some (as yet) are not borne, some are Infants, and some (as yet) not called, & with∣out Christ, and with∣out God in the world, Ephes. 2.12. Some are Christs im∣properly, Some are Christs im∣properly. onely in ap∣pearance. The grosse Hypocrite is Christs, onely in the worlds ap∣pearance. The formall and temporizing Hy∣pocrite is Christs, both in the worlds, and in
his owne appearance, and no further. But some are Christs most properly, Some are Christs pro∣perly. and tru∣ly to be counted his: as those that are vnited to him by a liuely faith, who apprehend him, and are apprehended of him, Phil. 3.12. The Elect, who are regenerate, effectually called, iustified, adop∣ted, sanctified, and are to be glorified, Rom. 8.30. They are Christs in their owne perswasion, and they are his also by profession before the world. They are his, both in appearance,
and in effect, both by Election and Vocation effectuall. But as there are ma∣ny called, Admoni∣tion. and few cho∣sen, Mat. 22.14. so, ma∣ny are not Christs, and very few are his: yet the Lord knoweth who are his: and let euery one that calleth on the name of the Lord, depart from iniqui∣ty, 2. Tim. 2.19. The question may be moued concerning In∣fants, How In∣fants are Christs. if they be Christs when they die in their infancy. The answere is, If an Infant bee a reprobate, in that case (because of
his naturall pollution, whereof he is guilty) he is left to himselfe, and reiected eternally. But if the Infant bee a cho∣sen child, hee may bee Christs both externally in the iudgement of the Church, as one within the couenant of grace: and internally also hee is Christs in a most se∣cret and vnspeakable manner; being insert in Christ by the Spirit of God, 1. Cor. 12.13. The Apostle in this place speaketh not of Infants; neither of their prerogatiue in Christ; but onely of those that
are Christs, and that crucifie the flesh; who are come to perfection of yeeres, and endeuour to bee perfect men in Christ. Admoni∣tion. Bee not there∣fore so curious to know who are Christs; as carefull, that thou thy selfe may be truly his; that thou maist find the vigour and quickening life of him in thy heart, wherby thou maist cru∣cifie the flesh, with the affections & lusts there∣of: and that thou maist confidently say with the Spouse in the Can. 7.10 I am my Well-beloueds, & his desire is towards me.
5. How are we Christs? SIth that all are not Christs, and those that are his, are few. And sith none are his by na∣ture, but by grace only; it is needfull therefore to vnderstand how wee are Christs. We are his in a true, Wee are Christs in a spirituall vnion. pure, and spirituall vni∣on, by being one with him, Galat. 3.28. and build on him, Eph. 2.20. By the vnity of faith, Ephes. 4.13. Wee abide in him, 1. Ioh. 2.27. He dwelleth in vs, and wee
in him, 1. Ioh. 4.13, 16. This vnion is not lo∣call, The man∣ner of this vnion. neither doth di∣stance of place impaire it: it is not visible nor bodily: it is not super∣ficiall nor fantasticall: yet it is reall and spiri∣tuall, Ioh. 17.20. They that are vnited to Christ, must bee first separated from the world, Ioh. 17.6. that is, from the condemnati∣on and corruption that is in the world through lust, 2. Pet. 1.4. This vnion is wrought by the Application and Apprehension of Christ. In Christs application,
the holy Spirit really exhibits & offers Christ vnto vs, Ioh. 17.6, 9. and 10.29. and vs againe to Christ, and giueth either of vs to other, This is called the com∣munion of the Spirit, Phi∣lip. 2.1. whereby we are all baptized into one Spirit, 1. Cor. 12.13. & are al made to drinke into one Spirit. In Christs apprehen∣sion, the holy Spirit likewise is effectuall. He moueth the heart of the beleeuer, by a most secret and vnspeakable power, to imbrace and receiue Christ: like as Christ receiueth and apprehendeth by the
same holy Spirit the beleeuer, Phil. 3.12. and so is vnited to him, Ioh. 1.12. Rom. 13.14. Gal. 3.27. Ephes. 3.20. and 1.19. Col. 2.6. To be Christs there∣fore is a worke superna∣turall, diuine, and from aboue; and who are once his, are euer his thereafter. His sheepe shall neuer bee pulled out of his hands, Ioh. 10.28. and that because of that omnipotēt Spi∣rit, who linketh them together. Comfort. Heereupon ariseth that vnspeakable com∣fort to all those that are
Christs: so farre, as it is an inseparable vnion that causeth them be so sure, and so eter∣nally his, Rom. 8.38. 6. Wherein are wee Christs? IF wee be Christs, The resem¦blance of our vnion and com∣muniō with Christ. hee must haue some kind∣ly and neere respect & relation to vs, and wee to him. It is needfull therefore to bee consi∣dered wherein we are Christs, and what is our communion with him. There is no vnion in this world so neere, and
so strong, as is our con∣iunction with Christ. Similitudes are borro∣wed, to resemble and represent vnto vs the same: and yet the vni∣on is stricter, and more neere & sure, than they can declare, and is ac∣companied with a de∣pending communion. Hee is our head, and wee are the members of his body, 1. Cor. 6.15. Ephes. 5.30. we get life and motion from him, as the members doe from the head. We are Christs as a Spouse to the husband, Cant. 4.9. Reuel. 19.7.
we are his Loue, Cant. 1.14. We are set on his heart as a Seale, and as a Signet vpon his arme, Cant. 8.6. We are his brethren, and fellow-heires with him, Heb. 1.12. Rom. 8.17. And he is the first begotten amongst many brethren, Rom. 8.29. Wee are Christs, as the branches of that ho∣ly and true Vine, Ioh. 15.1. We are engrafted in the Vine by grace. We are his, and are vp∣holden by him, as the tree doth beare the branch, not the branch the tree. Wee get life
and sap from this Vine, and wee must beare fruit, not of our selues, but because we abide in the Vine: For without him wee can doe nothing, Ioh. 15.4, 5. Wee are his Sheepe, and he our chiefe Shep∣heard, 1. Pet. 5.4. Wee are his liuely Stones, and he the chiefe Corner-stone, on whom we must be builded, and bee made his spirituall house, 1. Pet. 2.5, 6. Heb. 3.6. We are his, and are as deare to him as him∣selfe: hee loued vs, and gaue himselfe for vs,
Gal. 2.20. He loued his Church, and gaue him∣selfe for it, Ephes. 5.25. Hee that toucheth vs, toucheth the apple of his eye. Zach. 2.8. Our troubles are his, Act. 9.4. his glory is ours, 2. Thes. 1.19. and hee thinks himselfe vncom∣plete, if hee want vs. Who would not striue now to becom Christs? Admoni∣tion. It is our greatest digni∣ty, it is our finall and full felicity to bee his. Christ intreats vs to be his, he calleth vpon vs: he careth not although we be blacke and brused, Cant. 1.5. and with sins
weary and loden, Math. 12.20. and 11.28. If so be we come to be eased and washed by him. Hee saith to euery one of vs, Admoni∣tion. as hee said to his Spouse in Cant. 2.10. Arise my loue, my faire one, and come away: the winter is past, the raine is gone, the flowers appeare, the birds doe sing. His delight is to bee with the sonnes of men, Pro. 8.31. Say thou againe to Christ, as Dauid said to the Lord, What am I, O Lord, that thou hast brought mee to this? 2. Sam. 7.18. And with Mephibosheth, say thou
to Christ, as hee said to Dauid: What am I, that thou shouldest looke on me a dead dog as I am? 2. Sa. 9. Behold, Lord, thou shalt haue mee, aboue, beyond, and before all. For whom haue I in the heauen beside thee? Psal. 73.25. I shall count all things but dung for the vantage of Christ, Phil. 3.8. And he shall be to me both in life & death my onely vantage, Phil. 1.21.
7. Who maketh vs Christs? IF nature did make vs to be Christs, then all should be Christs, and all should crucifie the flesh: and to be Christs should bee both easie and common. The causes of our vni∣on with Christ. But sith it is a matter diuine, so high, and so holy, and proper onely for some; we must vnderstād who doe make vs Christs. We are Gods work∣manship, The Father created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, Ephes. 2.10. We
are the children which God hath giuen to Christ, Heb. 2.13. And no man can come to Christ, except the Fa∣ther draw him, Ioh. 6.44. Of God wee are in Christ Iesus, 1. Cor. 1.30. And he which stablish∣eth vs in Christ, & hath anoynted vs, is God, 2. Cor. 1.21. Christ gaue himselfe for vs, The Sonne. that he might re∣deeme vs from all ini∣quity, and purge vs, to be a peculiar people to himselfe, Tit. 2.14. The Holy Spirit, The Spirit. that Anoynting, as it taught you, ye shall abide in him,
1. Ioh. 2.27. And they shall be all taught of God, Ioh. 6.45. This is the communion of the Spi∣rit, Phil. 2.1. As the Trinity doth worke internally: The Word. So the VVord and Mini∣stery worke externally. The weapons of the ministeriall warfare do bring into captiuity e∣uery thought to the o∣bedience of Christ, 2. Cor. 10.5. The Sacra∣ments. By Bap∣tisme we are all bapti∣zed into Christ, and haue put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. The Ministery tra∣uelleth in birth as a The Mi∣nistery
woman, till Christ bee formed in vs. Gal. 4.19. The Ministers and Preachers of the Word are giuen by Christ, for the repairing of the Saints, and edification of the body of Christ, Ephes. 4.12, 13. Wee see therefore how that both God and man doe concurre to make vs Christs. Admoni∣tion. Man with the letter of the Word without; God and Christ, by the Spirit within. VVee want no calling vpon; wee lacke no labouring vpon. God calleth, and would haue all men to
bee saued, 1. Tim. 2.4. Christ stands at the doore of our hearts and knockes, to come in, Reuel. 3.20. Shall wee still resist the holy Spi∣rit? Shall wee still pull backe the shoulder and harden our harts? Shall wee still stop our eares, as the Serpent doth at the Enchanter? Shall wee both depriue our selues of Christ, and bring vpon our selues swift iudgement, and e∣uerlasting wrath? Far be that from vs all: yea rather, let vs lift vp the ports of our soule, and let the King of glory
enter in. Let vs re∣nounce our selues, that we may be his: let vs be led (by the VVord, and by the Spirit) captiue to his obedience: let vs be heartily content that he betroth vs; and most heartily suffer our selues to bee cut off from the wild Oliue, that we may bee ingraffed into the true Vine. 8. How farre are we Christs? THe body is for the Lord, What part of vs is Christs, viz. our Body. 1. Cor. 6.13. It is a member of his
body, Ibid. It is his in the graue; and is neuer destitute of his Spirit, Rom. 8.11. It waiteth for the Adoption, euen the redemption of the body, Rom. 8.23. Hee shall change it (though neuer so vile) that it may bee fashioned like vnto his glorious body, Phil. 3.21. The soule is Christs: Our Soule. it hath saluatiō of him, 1. Pet. 1.9. Hee is the Shepheard and Bishop of our soules, 1. Pet. 2.25. Both body and soule are his; hee suffered for both; hee ransomed both; hee sanctifieth
both, 1. Thes. 5.23. and shall glorifie both. Our sinnes and debts are his, Our sinnes. by imputation; as hee is a sufferer and satisfier for them. Hee did beare our sinnes in his body on the tree, 1. Pet. 2.24. He suffred for our sins, the iust, for the vniust, 1. Pet. 3.18. Hee is the Lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the world, Ioh. 1.29. The Lord laid vpon him the iniquities of vs all, Isa. 59.6. He made him sinne for vs, 2. Cor. 5.21. Our good workes are Christs, Our good workes. as he is the first author and worker
of them in our hearts. For Without him we can doe nothing, Ioh. 15.5. VVe are Gods workman∣ship, created in Iesus Christ, vnto good workes, Ephes. 2.10. Hee is also an accep∣ter of our good workes, as if they were all done to him. A cup of cold water, giuen to one of his little ones, hee ac∣counts the same as gi∣uen to him, Math. 10.42. Hee claimes the ser∣uice of all our actions, as done to himselfe, E∣phes. 6.5, 6. And what∣soeuer wee doe, wee must doe it heartily, as
vnto the Lord, Col. 3.23. Our sufferings are Christs, Our suffer∣ings. in that hee is a Sympathizer with vs, Act. 9.4. He that touch∣eth vs, toucheth the Ap∣ple of his eye, Zach. 2.8. Hee is touched with the feeling of our infir∣mities, Our infir∣mities. Hebr. 4.15. So all that wee are, is his; and all that wee haue, is his. Of all our euils hee doth ease, and empty vs: with all his good he doth fill vs. He is ours, as our all, in all things: so euery one of vs is his all, in all respects.
But in what degree wee are Christs, In what degree we are Christs. in the de∣gree of Election: or in what degree wee are Christs, in Gods present acceptation and estima∣tion: or in what degree we are to be Christs, in the life to come, it is very hard to discusse; and more curious then profitable to enquire. It may very well con∣tent, euen the best of vs, to bee a dore-keeper in the house of God, Psal. 84.10. Yet we should know in what degree wee are Christs, Admoni∣tion. in our appre∣hension of him by faith:
For according as is the measure of our faith, more or lesse; a weake faith, or a strong faith: so, in that same measure wee finde and feele our selues to bee Christs: and according to that same degree of our faith and feeling, wee doe crucifie the flesh more or lesse. It is our part, more to know the mea∣sure and degrees of our faith, than to know in what measure and de∣gree we are his. It may suffice vs very well, that now we are the sonnes and daughters of God; although as yet it bee
not manifest what wee shall be, 1. Ioh. 3.2. Let vs striue to grow in grace and faith: let vs stirre vp our gifts: and forget that which is behind; and endeuor our felues vnto that which is before vs, and follow hard toward the mache, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Iesus, Phil. 3.13, 14. vntill wee all meere together vnto a perfect man; and vnto the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ, Ephes. 4.13. And that we may daily encrease with the encreasing of
God, Colos. 2.19. 9. Whereto are wee Christs? THis so great a Dig∣nity to bee Christs, The endes wherefore we must be Christs. with so great a taske following thereupon, to crucifie the flesh; must haue some speci∣all ends and purposes, vnto the which, and for the which, we are made Christs. And what bee those? That wee may bee Gods, 1. Cor. 3.22, 23. and be made partakers of the diuine nature, 2. Pet. 1
That through Christ, wee may haue an en∣trance to the Father, by one Spirit, Ephes. 2.18. That wee may be no more strangers and for∣reiners, but Citizens with the Saints and houshold of God, Eph. 2.18, 19. That wee may ob∣taine this prerogatiue, to be the sonnes of God, Ioh 1.12. Gal. 3.27. and 4.6, 7. The heires of God, and annexed heires with Christ, Rō. 8.17. and be made vn∣to God Kings and Priests, Reuel. 1.6.
That wee may get in him redēption through his blood, Colos. 1.14. euen reconciliation by the blood of that his Crosse, Col. 1.20. That we may eschew condemnation, Rom. 8.1. and bee deliuered frō the power of darknesse, Colos. 1.13. and that principalities may bee spoyled, Col. 2.15. That we may obtaine mercy and peace, Gal. 5.16. and the remission of our sinnes, Col. 1.14. and that the obligation of our debts may bee rent, Col. 2.14. 1. Cor. 1.31.
That we may become new creatures, Gal. 6.15 2. Cor. 5.17. That in him we may be complete, circumci∣sed with his circumci∣sion; buried with him, quickened and raised, Col. 2.10, 11, 12, 13. That wee may walke after the Spirit, and not after the flesh, Rom. 8. That all other things in this world may bee ours, that is, for our be∣nefit, 1. Cor. 3.22. Rom. 8.28. That wee may liue and die to the Lord, Rom. 13.8. That whether wee
wake or sleepe, we may liue together with him, 1. Thes. 5.10. That we may get par∣ticipation of the Saints inheritance, and may bee translated vnto his owne glorious King∣dome, Col. 1.12, 13. To conclude this poynt, the whole world doe spend their life, and whole actions, vpon purposes & ends where∣at they continually aime. Some intend their fame, some their gaine, and some their delights. But what are all these? But shadowes of farre much more,
euen of spirituall and eternall blessings in hea∣uenly things, & places, that those get, that are Christs. What can thy heart desire or need, Comfort. but if thou bee Christs, thou shalt haue it, euen that same very thing thou crauest, or else a farre better thing? For if God spared not his owne Sonne, but gaue him for vs to death; how shall hee not with him giue vs all things also? Rom. 8.32.
10. Wee are Christs, and no others. BVt fith wee must be Christs, Wee are Christs, and the whole Trinities. wee should be his alone, and no o∣thers, Math. 10.37, 38, 39. To be Christs, doth not hinder vs to bee his Fathers, but furthers vs: neither doth it stay vs from being the holy Spirits. For whosoeuer are Christs, they doe appertaine to the whole Trinity. By Christ wee are the temple of God, and of the Spirit,
1. Cor. 3.16. and 6.19. If we be Christs, We are not our owne. wee are no more our owne, for we are bought with a price, 1. Cor. 6.19, 20. Wee must forsake our selues, & follow Christ, Math. 16.25. We must no longer imploy our body and soule to the vse of sensuality and va∣nity, or of fond fashions of the world; neither to walke in our owne wayes. Wee may belong to no others any more, We belong to no other, vnlesse they be subordi∣nate to Christ. vn∣lesse they bee subordi∣nate to Christ. Yea ra∣ther, ere wee bee not Christs, wee ought to
leaue father, mother, sonnes and daughters, and the whole world, Math. 10.37. Wee may belong to father, mo∣ther, brethren, or chil∣dren, so far as they hin∣der vs not from Christ: but if they would pre∣sume to draw vs from Christ, in that case wee should forsake them, al∣though they were neuer so deare to vs. We may belong to none that are meerly contrary, And not contrary to Christ. or opposite to Christ. We may be the sub∣iects of vngodly and vn∣christian tyrants, and
the sonnes and daugh∣ters of vngodly parents, and the feruants of wic∣ked masters; wee are bound to serue them, and obey them in all things lawfull, and in God, 1. Pet. 2.18. Eph. 6.5, 6, 7. These are not meerly opposite to Christ; and the things wherein wee should o∣bey them, doe stand with the will of Christ. Wee should not be∣long to sinne, Wee must not be sins, nor Satans, nor the worlds. neither to Satan; because these are meerely opposite to Christ. If we be Christs, wee must not let sinne raigne in our mortall
bodies, that wee should obey it in the lusts ther∣of Neither should wee giue our members as weapons of vnrighte∣ousnes vnto sinne, Rom. 6.12. We may not walk according to the course of the world, and after the prince that ruleth in the aire, Ephes. 2.2. We must not make the diuell our father, in do∣ing his lusts, Ioh. 8.44. For all these sin within vs, Because they are di∣rectly oppo∣site to Christ. which is our corrup∣tion; and sinne with∣out vs, which is the wic∣ked course of the world; and Satan, with all his circumuentions & me∣thodicke
stratagems, Ephes. 6.11. wherewith he goeth about to snare vs, are meerly & direct∣ly opposite to Christ: so that none can both serue Christ, and Belial, 2. Cor. 6.15. Wherefore it is our speciall dignity and se∣licity to be Christs tru∣ly; Admoni∣tion. and his aboue all o∣thers: preferre none to him; adequate none with him; ioyne none to him, that is contrary to him: whatsoeuer e∣state thou art in, study to bee Christs. If thy estate bee high in the world, to bee Christs,
will sanctifie and blesse that estate to thee. If thy estate bee low and abiect, to bee Christs, honours thy poore e∣state, and makes thee ioyfully and heartily content therewith. Prease not to bee Christs, & Satans too: serue not two opposite masters, Math. 6.24. be not double-harted, Iam. 4.8. Carry not two fa∣ces; but be Christs sin∣cerely, throughly, and constantly.
11. When, and where are we Christs? WEE were once not Christs, when wee were vnwise, disobedient, deceiued, seruing lusts, &c. Tit. 3.3. when wee were dead in trespasses and sinnes, Ephes. 2.1. Colos. 2.13. Gentiles in the flesh; once farre off, without Christ, Ephes. 2.11. We are then Christs euidently, Wee are Christs whē we are cal∣led. when we are effectually called. Some hee taketh to himselfe sooner, some later: hee
hath his owne time in his owne hand, in ma∣king vs to become his own, when, and where, and how it pleaseth him. When we are made Christs, Wee are Christs in life, and after death. then we are his in life, in death, and af∣ter death, Rom. 13.8. Our bodies cease not to be his when wee are dead: he esteemeth thē his own, although they bee resolued into dust and ashes, Rom. 8.11. Our soules are his when wee are dead; which maketh his Saints de∣sire to be dissolued and to be with Christ, Phil.
1.23. and in their death to cōmend their spirit into his hāds, Act. 7.59. Wee are Christs now, but as yet it doth not appeare what wee shall be, 1. Ioh. 3.2. Here in this life we are his by grace; hereafter we shal bee his in glory. Heere we are Christs, and wee must crucifie the flesh: hereafter wee shall bee his, and he shall glorifie our flesh. Let vs not therefore bee any longer Satans vassals, sinnes slaues, Admoni∣tion. nor the worlds drudges. But into whatsoeuer estate God hath cast thy lot,
bee thou Christs aboue all; giue him thy heart aboue all; that thou maist haue this prero∣gatiue, to be his aboue all. Delay no longer to become his: come out of Sodome: looke not backe with Lots wife: striue to be his quickly: put not off till death; death giueth no war∣ning. Become his be∣fore thou die, and thou shalt be his eternally. 12. How is Christ ours? BVt sith that wee are Christs by a cer∣taine
relation, and by a mutuall vnion, as is spe∣cified before: wee can∣not be his, vnlesse hee bee as truly ours. It would bee therefore knowne how he is ours. Christ is ours, How Christ is ours. as the Spouse doth make her claime, saying, I am my Well-beloueds, and my Well-beloued is mine, Cant. 6.2. Hee is ours, and our onely and chiefe van∣tage, both in life and in death, Phil. 1.21. He is our Head, that quickeneth all the bo∣dy, Ephes. 5.30. Hee is our Husband,
most louing to his Spouse, Reu. 19.7. Hee is our Corner∣stone, on whom wee are all builded, 1. Pet. 2.6. He is that true Vine, into the which wee are ingraft to bring foorth fruit, Ioh. 15.1. Hee is our Food, to nourish our hungry soules. His flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed, Ioh. 6.55. He is our garment, to bee put on to couer vs, that our filthy naked∣nesse doe not appeare, Gal. 3.2. Rom. 1.3, 14. Reuel. 3. He is our eldest Bro∣ther,
yea, the first begot∣ten amongst many bre∣thren, Rom. 8.29. He is our chiefe Shep∣heard, to rule and feede his wandring flocke, Ioh. 11.14. Heb. 13.20. 1. Pet. 2.25. and 5.4. His God-head is ours, All that Christ is, is ours. that wee may be parta∣kers of the Diuine na∣ture, 2. Pet. 1.4. His Humanity is ours, that he might be like vs, in all things except sin, Heb. 2.17. and 4.15. His death is ours, to ransome vs, 1. Tim. 2.6. His merits are ours, to iustifie vs, 1. Cor. 1.30. Rom. 3.24. and 5.9.
His life is ours, to quicken vs, Colos. 3.3, 4. His Spirit is ours, to comfort vs, Ioh. 14.16. and 15.26. His Kingdome is ours, to glorifie vs, Ioh. 17.22. Hee is our Sauiour, 1. Tim. 4.10. our Me∣diatour, 1. Tim. 2.5. our Aduocate, 1. Ioh. 2.1. our Redeemer, Col. 1.14. That we all may be one, as the Father is in him, and hee in the Father, that wee may bee all one in them; Christ in vs, and the Father in Christ, that we may bee made
perfect in one, that wee may bee there euen where hee is; that wee may behold that his glory, Ioh. 17.21, 23, 24. Hee is our All in all things, Ephes. 1.23. and 4.10. Col. 3.11. He is all these things to vs, because his Fa∣ther hath giuen him to vs, Rom. 8.32. And hee is ours also out of his owne super-aboundant kindnesse, and vnspeak∣able loue, Tit. 2.14. He had no need that wee should be his; wee had great need that hee should be ours. Wee
are his by debt; hee is ours by gift, Ioh. 4.10. He makes vs his; we are not able to make him ours. If Christ bee thine, Admoni∣tion. say with thy selfe, I haue the greatest gift, the gift of all gifts; and a greater gift God cannot giue: for the which cause I shall bee his againe, and none but Christ shall haue me. 13. To know that we are Christs, and that he is ours. TO bee Christs, and Christ to be thine,
thou maist thinke the comfort of all comforts: and that it would not onely giue thee sound peace and contentmēt of heart; but also moue thee very much to cruci∣fie the flesh: if so be thou wert perswaded of the same, and haue the cer∣tainty of it in thy heart. How shall it therefore bee knowne certainly that one is Christs? There is no doubt but the Lord knoweth who are his, 2. Timoth. 2.19. Rom. 8. There is also no doubt but one may know his neighbor to be Christs,
by a charitable constru∣ction, beholding his good workes. And most necessary it is, that we all prooue our selues, if Christ bee in vs, except wee be re∣probates, 2. Cor. 13.5. But how shall one know within himselfe if hee bee Christs? It is knowne by the perswa∣sion of faith, and by the effects and fruits therof. They that are Christs, Testimonies to know that we are Christs. haue their owne war∣rant within them. As Christ set a marke on the fore-heads of the mourners for sinne, E∣zech. 9.4. So God hath
sealed those that are Christs, and giuen thē the earnest of the Spirit in their hearts, 2. Cor. 1.22. That as the seruants of God are said to bee marked in the fore∣head, with the signe of the liuing God, Reuel. 7.2. So in Christ they are sealed with the holy Spirit of promise; which is the earnest of their in∣heritance vnto the day of Redemption, Ephes. 1.13, 14. and 4.30. They haue receiued a new name that no man knoweth, but they who haue receiued it, Reu. 3.12
The Spirit of God gi∣ueth them this certifi∣cate, The Spirit. that they are both Christs, and the sonnes of God, Rom. 8.16. And if any man haue not the Spirit of Christ, the same is not his, Rom. 8.9. Hereby wee know that we dwell in him, and he in vs, because hee hath giuen vs of his Spirit, 1. Ioh 4.13. The fruits of the Spi∣rit are also certificates to vs yt wee are Christs, Fruits of the Spirit. if wee haue the spirit of prayer & deprecation, 2. Tim. 2.19. If the same mind be in vs, that was in Christ Iesus: to wit,
that same mind of mo∣desty, humility, pati∣ence, and of other Chri∣stian vertues, Phil. 2.5. whereby we doe walke in the Spirit, Rom. 8.1. If wee depart from iniquity, 2. Tim. 2.19. and doe crucifie the flesh. If thou haue these fruits in any true mea∣sure, and doe therein continue and grow; thou maist bee perswa∣ded that thou art his. Of this perswasion that thou art Christs, thou maist make great vse. Hereby thou maist bee daily stirred and prouo∣ked to thankfulnesse of Admoni∣tion.
hart, to crucifie the flesh and mortifie sin at the root. Thou maist also reap matter of vnspeak∣able comfort and ioy, and reioyce in the Lord alway, Phil. 4.4. Thou maist say, Who shall condemne me? Christ, whose I am, is dead for me; or rather, risen a∣gaine for me; who is at the right hand of God, and maketh request for me. Who shall separate mee from the loue of Christ? No creature shall bee able to sepa∣rate mee from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord,
Rom. 8.34, 35, 39. 14. The estate of those that are not Christs. AS the godly know, They that are not Christs, are miserable. that they thēselues are of God; so they vn∣derstand likewise, that the rest of the whole world lieth in wicked∣nesse, 1. Ioh. 5.19. be∣cause they are not Christs, they are dead in sinnes; the children of disobedience: the diuell possesseth and ru∣leth them: the worlds fashions & course doth guide them: and as they
neuer once thinke of the crucifying of the flesh: so they euer fulfill the wil of the flesh, Eph. 2.1. They are strangers from the couenant of grace; they haue no hope, and are without God in the world, Eph. 2.12. They are by na∣ture the children of wrath. And when the Lord Iesus shall shew him∣selfe from the heauens with his mighty An∣gels, A Threat∣ning. in flaming fire, he shall render vengeance vnto them, 2. Thes. 1.7, 8. Psal. 110.
15. The happy estate of them that are Christs. IF thou bee Christs, Excellency. thou art for excellency and dignity aboue all o∣thers in the world: like a Lilly among the thornes, Cant. 2.1. Psal. 16.3. He hath made thee vnto God one of his Kings and Priests, Reuel. 1.6. Thou art very come∣ly in his sight, Comelines. as one of the fairest among women, Cant. 1.8. made beauti∣full by his merits and spirit, without spot or wrinkle, Eph. 5.27. And
with the ioy of the Bride∣groome toward the Bride, shall thy God reioyce ouer thee, Isa. 62.5. All other beauty shall fade, but thine shal encrease with the encreasing of God, Col. 2.19. And daily shalt thou looke foorth as the morning, faire as the Moone, pure as the Sun, Cant. 6.9. The sauour of the garments of thy con∣uersation is most deli∣cate, Acceptable conuersa∣tion. as the Sauour of Le∣banon, Cant. 4.11. And all thy walkings are ac∣ceptable before God: Thou art in his eyes, as one that findes peace, Cā. 8.10
Thou art as a Garden inclosed, Protection. as a spring shut vp, and a fountaine sealed vp, Cant. 4.12. He shall protect thee from outward iniuries, and preserue thee from secret corruptions. His loue is spread into thy heart, which is like a banner ouer thee, Cant. 2.4. to draw thee, to di∣rect thee, and protect thee. And because thou art dearly beloued; Comforts. and art as a seale on his heart, and as a Signet on his arme, Cant. 8.6. in all thy feares, troubles and ter∣rours, thou shalt delight
vnder the shadow of his presence. Cant. 2.3. In the sence of thy wants, his presence shall sup∣port thee: hee will stay thee with the Flaggons of his promises; and comfort thee with the Apples of his graces, Cant. 2.5. At the last Day thou shalt arise like a pillar of smoke, Glorifica∣tion. perfumed with the Myrrha and Incense, and with all the chiefe spices of the graces of perfect sanctification, Cant. 3.6. and shalt bee quic∣kened and raised together with Christ. Ephes. 2.5. as one of the Congre∣gation
of the first borne, Heb. 12.29. vnto that e∣ternall glory, where thou shalt rest in a bed better than Salomons, Cant. 3.7. and shalt perfectly enioy all those things that God hath prepared for them that loue him. Which things eye hath not seene, no eare heard, neither haue entred into the mind of man, 1. Cor. 2.9.
THE CHRISTIAN DVTIE. To crucifie the flesh. 16. The Christian dig∣nitie and dutie are in∣separable. HItherto is set down the great dignity of those excellent & stately ones That are Christs. It is not an idle prerogatiue. It is that greatest benefit, that bindeth all in an obligation of all dutie.
There is one dutie here made mention of: but many moe are vnder∣stood by a necessarie consequent, as In Christ to become new creatures, Duties of Christians. 2. Cor. 5.17. Gal. 5.14, 15. To walke after the Spirit, and not after the flesh, Rom. 8.1. To abstaine from for∣nication, 1. Cor. 6.13, 15 To rise with Christ, and seeke those things that are aboue, where Christ sitteth at the right hand of God, Co∣los. 3.1. To glorifie God in body and spirit, sith we
are not our owne, but Christs, 1. Cor. 6.20. All these things doe they that haue crucified the flesh, To crucifie the flesh, what a worke. with the affecti∣ons and lusts. A taske indeed great, and hard. Only proper to those that are Christs, and to none others: and they only fit for it, which no other, but themselues can performe. A worke both necessarie & com∣fortable: most displea∣sant to vs, and impossi∣ble, by nature: yet by grace made easie and delightfull: and to God in Christ very accep∣table.
The matter of this worke is three-folde: 1. The flesh. 2. The affe∣ctions. 3. The lusts. The forme of the worke, is to crucifie. 17 The flesh visible. THe flesh is either vi∣sible or inuisible. The visible flesh is that which is subiect to sen∣ses, and may be felt and seene: this is our body. Man is called flesh, Ge∣nesis 6.12. Why man and his life are called Flesh. And this pre∣sent life is called flesh, 1. Cor. 7.28. To resemble the life
of man, as it is indeed euer in a flowing. Our flesh is euer flowing in by nourishment, and flowing out by wasting and euaporation: that what of it is emptied by this, if it be not restored with the other, it must needs perish. Three no∣table things within our selues doe continually warne vs, that our liues are changeable, that we be euery moment ready to lay it downe. Our waking & sleep∣ing againe, for resto∣ring of our Animall spi∣rits: Our continuall beating of heart and
arteries by Systole and Diastole, for repairing of our vitall spirits, and our voiding, filling and feeding, for repairing of our naturall spirits, and sustaining of this masse of our flesh; doe shew vnto vs, that wee all must flit, and that this house of clay wher∣in we liue, some one day will fall downe about our eares. Flesh in the holy Scriptures, Diuers sig∣nifications of flesh. is often ta∣ken for that outward part of our person, the body, 2. Cor. 7.1. Some∣times againe it is taken for our mortality, im∣becillity,
and misery, 1. Tim. 3.16. 2. Cor. 10.2. Phil. 1.24. compared with Isa. 31.3. It is taken other times for our whole hu∣manity, and is attribu∣ted to Christ, Ioh. 6.51. Act. 2.30. 1. Pet. 3.8. Here by this visible and externall flesh, is vnderstood our body, our bodily part of our person, which must bee crucified; not with hands of man, but by the hand of the holy Spirit: as shall hereaf∣ter be mentioned, Sect. 27.
18. The flesh inuisible. THe inuisible flesh is not subiect to the eye of the body, Our corrup∣tion is cal∣led flesh, and why. but to the eye of the soule, Rom. 8.24. It is our na∣turall corruption in sin, which is called very of∣ten flesh: but improper∣ly, and Metonymically: not so much for that it is propagated thrugh the flesh, or that it is nou∣rished in the flesh; or executed by the flesh, or encreased with bait∣ing of fleshly obiects. As for that, the chiefe
end that this our cor∣ruption aimeth at, in all motions and actions, is, the sensuall delights of the flesh and body. For what doe the whole vn∣regenerate in the world respect, in their sinfull honors, profits, or plea∣sures, 1. Ioh. 2.16. but only the body, and such things as concerne the same? Neuer a true thought, nor care, haue they of the poore soule, nor of the immortalitie and saluation thereof: They minde alway earthly things, Phil. 3.19. Their wisedome is sensuall and fleshly, Iam. 3.15.
This is yt flesh where∣in dwelleth no good, The inui∣sible flesh described by other places of Scripture. Rom. 7.18. This is the law in our members, rebelling a∣gainst the law of our minde: and leading vs captiue vnto the law of sinne, Rom. 7.23. This flesh maketh mē to sauour the things of the flesh, Rom. 8.5. This flesh is that bo∣die of sinne, Rom. 6.6. That wisdome of the flesh, which is death and en∣mity against God, Rom. 8.6, 7. They that are in this flesh, cannot please God, Rom. 8.8.
The whole world by nature are poysoned with this Sinning Sinne. Why this flesh should be cruci∣fied. It causeth euery one to become an auowed e∣nemie against God. It is the fountaine of all wic∣kednesse: It tieth men to the earth, and ma∣keth thē slaues to their owne sensualitie: And finally brings euery one to euerlasting perditi∣on. And therefore most needfull it is that it be crucified.
19. Affections holy. AFfections, Affections three-fold. as they are meerely natu∣rall, wee cannot want them. As they are holy, wee must needes haue them. As they are vnho∣ly, we must needs cruci∣fie them. Holy affe∣ctions. As for Affections that are holy: they are al∣waies rightly moued: they exceed neither in matter, nor in measure: they are stirred by their right and proper ob∣iects: they intend euer a godly end: they are
ruled by the Word, and sanctified by the Spirit. They are onely moued by that Good, that God calleth Good: and by that euill that God cal∣leth euill. They embrace no∣thing but Good. They reiect nothing but euill. They are good ser∣uants to the soule: and burning sparks of grace to kindle pietie. 20. Affections vnholy. VNholy affections are to bee crucified. Vnholy af∣fections what they are.
These are the affections of Sinnes, Rom. 7.5. And those vngodly cōmotions of the soule, accompanied euer with pleasure or with paine. The soule of man is full of euill motions. For the imaginations of the thoughts of his heart are euill continually, Gen. 6.5. They are perturba∣tions, and passions, stir∣red by our corruption, that doe tyrannize ouer the soule, to make it sla∣uishly serue sensuality. They are motions that moue the soule to perpetrate sinne: They
haue strange force in our members; that is, The force of wicked affections. amongst our faculties, Rom. 7.5. whereby the soule is moued to swell with ambition, to rise with presumption, to be deiected with despe∣ration, to pine with en∣uie, to fret with anger, to rage with malice, to faint in doubt, to bee puffed vp with prospe∣ritie, cast downe with aduersitie, oppressed by battels, betwixt ioy and sorrow, hope and de∣spaire, feare and care, loue and hatred, and pitie and rage. And o∣uerhaled in one instant
with a tempest, & con∣trary tide, in a sudden change of excessiue pas∣sions: as of ioy in a mo∣ment turned to sorrow: of loue to hatred: and of confidence to feare, &c. The most part of those that doe professe thēselues to be Christs, The euill of wicked af∣fections. haue their soules dis∣quieted with affections, their wit is defaced, grace is extinguished: they proue at last fooles before the world: ene∣mies to themselues: and culpable before God. That vnlesse they will most willingly runne
from Christ, to their owne perdition: it be∣houeth them of necessi∣tie to crucifie their affe∣ctions. 21. Lusts Spirituall. LVsts are either Spi∣rituall, Naturall, Spirituall lusts what they are. or Sinfull. Lusts Spirituall are such as are contrarie to the flesh: as the flesh lusts against them, Gal. 5.17. They are sanctified desires. They are engen∣dred by the Holy Spirit. They are agreeable to
Gods will. They are conuersant about hea∣uenly and holy obiects. They are not to be cru∣cified, but entertained. By them we haue our conuersation in hea∣uen. By them we walke not after the flesh: but after the Spirit. And by them we haue our inte∣stine battels and victo∣ries against the lusts of the flesh. 22. Lusts naturall. LVsts naturall, Lusts natu∣rall what they are. are such as are commō to all, both to those that
are Christs, and to those that are not Christs. And are such as meerly nature prescribeth, (na∣ture I vnderstand in so farre as it is not vitiate) as the lusting for things lawfull, necessarie, mo∣derate, they are more to be called naturall de∣sires then lusts: and are in themselues indiffe∣rent. As those lusts are that concerne the law∣full vse of meate and drinke, and such things as appertaine to the ne∣cessitie and honestie of this life. These lusts are not to be crucified, but moderate.
23. Lusts sinfull. LVsts spirituall are proper to those that are Christs. Lusts sin∣full are proper to those that are not Christs. Lusts sinfull, are those, that they that are Christs haue crucified. Lust is taken some∣times generally, Sinfull lust two∣fold. for ori∣ginall sinne and natu∣rall corruption; and then it is all one with the flesh. Sometimes it is taken more specially, for those sinfull desires that do spring from our
flesh and corruption; and are stirred vp, and set forward by wicked affections; and are pra∣ctised by the members of the body. Iames the Apostle, Epist. 1.14. sets downe sixe particu∣lar poynts in the pro∣cesse of humane tentati∣ons, The pro∣cesse of hu∣mane ten∣tations. whereof Concupis∣cence is the ground; and is that same, that flesh is in this place. The draw∣ing and baiting of the heart by alluring ob∣iects, are two sinfull af∣fections. The conceiuing of sinne, and trauelling therewith, are the two∣fold rage of raigning
lusts, and heere are to bee vnderstood, and by those that are Christs to be crucified. The fi∣nishing of sinne, and bringing forth of death, are all those externall euils both culpae & pae∣nae that doe fall, and fol∣low vpon the flesh, the affectiōs & lusts, if they be not in time crucified. 24. The nature of these wicked lusts. THey are called the lusts of the flesh, 1. Sinfull lusts, what they are. Ioh. 2.6. Eph. 2.3. Gal. 5.16. 1. Pet. 2.11. They are called the
lusts of the world, Tit. 2.12. 2. Pet. 1.4. They are called mens own proper lusts, 2. Pet. 3.3. 2. Tim. 4.5. They are also called the lusts of vncleannes, 2. Pet. 2.10. the lusts of the eyes, 1. Ioh. 2.16. the lusts of corruption, 2. Pet. 1.4. the lusts of men, 1. Pet. 4.2. euill lusts, Colos. 3.5. decei∣uing lusts, Ephes. 4.22. The force of wicked lusts. These are the lusts which fight against the soule, 1. Pet. 2.11. A re∣probate minde is giuen vp to these lusts, Rom. 1.24. The wicked giue obedience to these lusts,
Rom. 6.12. and are led with many noysome & foolish lusts, 1. Tim. 6.9. This doth declare in what danger they liue and die in, that crucifie not their lusts, and are not Christs. 25. What is it to crucifie the Flesh. TO crucifie the flesh, and to mortifie the flesh, Sanctifica∣tion hath two parts. are all one. It is the former part of our sanctification; as viuifi∣cation or resurrection to a new life, is the o∣ther part thereof, Eph. 4.23. Tit. 2.12.
To crucifie the flesh, To crucifie, what it is. is a metaphorical phrase, alluding vnto the cru∣cifying of the body of any one that is condem∣ned to die, by that form of death of malefactors: or because it must bee according to the simili∣tude of Christs crucify∣ing, Rom. 6.5. Or most of all, because it must be done by that vertue that is in the Crosse of Christ, and communi∣cated to vs by the Spi∣rit. For if we be planted with him vnto the simi∣litude of his death: euen so shall wee be vnto the similitude of his resur∣rection:
knowing this, that our old man is cru∣cified with him, that the body of sinne might be destroyed, that hence∣forth wee should not serue sinne, Rom. 6.5, 6. The very proper mea∣ning of this crucifying of the flesh is this, What is meant by crucifying. accor∣ding to the Apostles counsell. Let not sinne raigne in your mortall bodie, that ye should obey it in the lusts therof, Rom. 6.12. Let not sinne haue dominion ouer you, vers. 14. Let sinne bee subdued and destroyed,
vers. 6. Serue sinne no longer, vers. 16. Become free of sinne, vers. 18. Cease from sin, 1. Pet. 4.1. and doe all this by the onely vertue and power of Christs death & Crosse, Rom. 6.1, &c. and by a true conformi∣ty therewith, Phil. 3.10. This crucifying of the flesh importeth ne∣cessarily the other part of our Sanctification, The cruci∣fying of the flesh is in∣separable from a new life. to wit, a rising to a new∣nesse of life, without the which, the other can∣not be a true & a right crucifying, Col. 3.9, 10. so as they that are Christs, haue crucified
the flesh: euen so like∣wise they haue risen to a newnesse of life, Rom. 6.5, 11, 18. 26. How the internall flesh, affections and lusts, are to be crucified. THe crucifying of the flesh depends vpon our vnion with Christ: The cruci∣fying of the flesh de∣pends on Christs vni∣on with vs: our vnion with Christ, is by faith, Eph. 3.17. By faith he is ours, and we are his. By faith we apprehēd in Christs death and Crosse, both merit and vertue. By the merit of his Crosse wee
are iustified: by the ver∣tue of his Crosse we doe crucifie our flesh. And on the power of his Crosse. The power of his Crosse is effectuall in vs, by the secret operation of his holy Spirit: so that our old man is crucified with Christ, Rom. 6.6. We are crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20. The holy Spirit stirreth vp the faith of those that are Christs, How Christs Crosse workes in vs. by a consi∣dering or iudging with themselues, 2. Cor. 5.14 and conceiuing a dis∣dainfulnesse at sinne; Hatred of sinne, how wrought in vs. and a thankefulnesse to Christ. A disdainfulnesse at sinne, is conceiued in
the consideration of Christs Crosse: when as wee thinke earnestly vpon Christ, so inno∣cent, and so great in dignity, &c. and vpon his Crosse so cursed, so shamefull, and so pain∣full; accompanied with the most horrible sence of Gods anger; we con∣ceiue a detestation and hatred at sinne, being so infinite and great an euill in it selfe, that it could no otherwise bee expiated, but by the fa∣cred blood of the most High God, Act. 20.28. And hereupon wee are moued more and more,
both to disdaine it, and to dis-haunt it; yea, by time to kill it, and to bury it, that it haue no more power in vs to raigne in our mortall bodies. A great poynt of thankfulnesse to Christ is likewise conceiued, Thankful∣nesse how wrought. in the right meditation of Christs Crosse. Wee see in Christs Crosse the most excellent be∣nefit of our redemption, the greatest beneficence of the greatest Benefa∣ctor: euen that bounti∣fulnesse of that loue of God our Sauiour, Tit. 3.4. when wee were of
no strength, he died for the vngodly, Rom. 5.6. He loued vs, & washed vs in his blood, from our sinnes, Reuel. 1.5. There is no greater loue, than this his loue, whereby he gaue his life for vs, Ioh. 15.13. It passeth all knowledge, Ephes. 3.19. It pleaseth God by his holy Spirit, to shed abroad this loue in our hearts, Rom. 5.5. which when wee feele, it con∣straineth vs, 2. Cor. 5.14. That we henceforth liue not vnto our selues, but vnto him that died
for vs, and rose againe, 2. Cor. 5.15. Arraigne therefore with expedition, An admo∣nition al∣luding to the Crosse of Christ. thy flesh, thy affections and lusts, vnto the consisto∣ry of thy conscience: trie and iudge them by the Word: conuince and condemne them most iustly to be cruci∣fied with Christ. Leade them foorth without the Campe of thy heart, vnto the vilest Golgotha, there to suf∣fer. Strip them naked of all their false externall vestures of profit, plea∣sure and honour, with
all their deceitfulnesse; that their filthy naked∣nesse may appeare, to their further detesta∣tion. Crucifie thy affecti∣ons, and fixe them by faith vpon the Crosse of Christ; who is that tree of life, Reuel. 22. which giueth death vn∣to sinne, but life and health to his owne. Curse them from thy heart, and hate them with a most deadly ha∣tred. Giue them to drinke the bitterest Aloes of a contrite heart. Cease not from cruci∣fying,
them till they bee fully dead. Then bury them with Christ, vntill they bee throughly wasted and consumed. At last lift vp thy heart & head with ioy, vnto thy Redeemer, and say confidently, Now I know that my Well-beloued is mine, and I am his: hee feedeth a∣mong the Lillies, Cant. 2.16. For I hate them that hate thee (chiefly sinne and Satan) with an vn∣fained hatred, as they were my vtter enemies, Psalm. 139.22. and for thy sake I haue crucified
the flesh, with the affe∣ctions and lusts. And because I delight and reioyce in nothing so much as in thy Crosse: I am likewise crucified to the world, and the world is crucified to me. As the world despi∣seth me for thy Crosse sake; so by the ver∣tue and power of that same Crosse, I despise the world, Galat. 4.16. yea, for thy sake I count my greatest vantage to bee losse, and doe e∣steeme all things but dung to gaine thee, Phil. 3.8. And all ye that loue the Lord, hate euill,
Psalm. 97.10. And let vs all walke worthy of the Lord, Colos. 1.10. and of that great vocation and estate wherein wee are called to bee his, Ephes. 4.1. And let vs, with those ten thou∣sand times ten thou∣sand, & thousand thou∣sand of Angels, say with our hearts, Worthy is the Lambe that was killed, to receiue power, and ri∣ches, and wisedome, and strength, and honour, and glory, and praise, Reuel. 5.11, 12, 13.
27. How the externall flesh, and body is to be cru∣cified? TO crucify the flesh, What it is to crucifie the body. is not to put vio∣lent hands into the bo∣dy; as did Achitophel and Iudas. Neither is it, to plague it with needlesse and superstiti∣ous austerities; of watch∣ings, fastings, nakednes, pilgrimages, scurgings, &c. As parts of that Pa∣pisticall penall-satisfa∣ction for appeasing of diuine wrath: which things haue indeede a
shew of wisedome, in a voluntary religion, and humblenesse of minde, and in not sparing the body, Col. 2.23. But to crucify the bodily flesh, is to abstaine from all things, so farre as it may serue to obtain that incorruptible crowne: To beat down the body, and to bring it to subie∣ction, 1. Cor. 9.25, 27. If wee giue the body too much, we feede a foe: if too little, wee kill a friend. The necessitie of the body (not the super∣fluitie) is to bee regar∣ded. It must serue and not command: The ser∣uant
must not bee pre∣ferred to the Master. It is a shame to any to be a slaue to his owne bo∣dy. Euery one should say with himselfe: Ma∣ior sum, & ad maiora ge∣nitus, quàm vt sim man∣cipium corporis mei, Senec. epist. 66. I am greater, and borne to a greater estate, then I should be∣come a slaue to my bo∣dy. Wee should alwaies be conuersant with our best and diuine part: Admoni∣tion. but with that querulous & fragill part, seldome: and onely vpon necessi∣tie. What needes the
prisoner haue such care of his prison? Whilest thou liuest in the body, liue not for the body: Hold it vnder obedi∣ence. If it be pampered, it will repine: delicately to entertaine it, is to quench fire with gun∣powder. By externall abstinence and exerci∣ses, fit it for internall mortification. Accustome thy selfe to command thy de∣lights. Shun all that are vnlawfull In those that are lawfull, keep a mea∣sure. Sustaine and ab∣staine. Giue thy body nothing, that thy con∣science
bids withhold. Be not so like Martha, to the body, as like Ma∣ry, for the soule. 28. To crucifie the flesh, &c. is with difficultie and paine. THe word it self (cru∣cifie) sheweth that this worke cannot bee without difficultie and paine. And as it is not done in one moment, so it is not done with a wish. There must bee a labour, a businesse, a tra∣uell in the dolours of the new birth.
Such two old intire friends, as is the Flesh, The cruci∣fyng of the flesh begin∣neth at sor∣row for sin. and the Spirit, cannot part company, without teares. The olde man cannot bee mortified, without the sorrow of a contrite spirit. The fore-skinne of our flesh cannot be circumcised, without some sense of secret griefe. We cannot be deli∣uered of our false con∣ception of that bodie of sinne, without some ma∣nifest dolour. If thou wouldest ther∣fore rightly attempt the crucifying of the flesh, Admonitiō. &c. thou must begin at
a humbled heart: thou must sow in teares, that thou maist reape in ioy: Psal. 126.5. Thou must not thinke to flie the wrestlings, without a wounded conscience. Thou must sorrow to Godward: and suffer some secret pangs of the sense of thy owne sins, and Gods wrath: and of battels betwixt the flesh and the Spirit. Thou must lament before the Lord; that thou hast been so long in beginning to crucifie the flesh. Thou wilt find many secret perplexi∣ties in parting with thy
domesticke gods, thy fond affections & lusts. Whosoeuer haue not found within thēselues, these secret terrors, do∣lours and battels, as yet they haue not knowne, nor felt what it is to crucifie the flesh, &c. But here is thy com∣fort; Comfort. If thou hast cruci∣fied that old man, thy sorrow shall be turned to ioy, thy battels to peace: and thy terrors to comforts, which are vnspeakable and glo∣rious.
29. Who doe crucifie the flesh? SOme do cherish their flesh, Only they that are true Chri∣stians doe crucifie the flesh. affections and lusts, as the Epicure. Some doe crosse a little their flesh & affections, as the Moralist. Some doe curse them, as the desperate. The Hypocrite may co∣uer or colour his flesh and affections, but hee cannot crucifie them. But none doe crucifie them, but they that are Christs. It is one thing to re∣straine
or bridle ye flesh and the lusts, and ano∣ther thing to crucifie them. Only a true Chri∣stian, who is Christs in∣deed, doth truly crucifie his corruptiō and lusts. It may be said to him, as the Angell said to Gedeon: The Lord is with thee, thou valiant man, Iudg. 6.12. The sword of the Lord and of Gedeon a∣gainst Iericho, Iudg. 7.20. So, The sword of the Spi∣rit, and of a Christian a∣gainst sinne, to crucifie the flesh and the lusts, &c. Many poynts of our fleshly corruption; ma∣ny
lusts and affections may lie long hid and sleeping within men; because they want oc∣casion of obiects and tentations to stir them and awake them. But this sleeping of affecti∣ons, is not the crucify∣ing of affections. Onely those that are Christs, doe crucifie the flesh, with the affections and lusts. 30. Who crucifie them not? They that are not Christs can∣not crucifie the flesh. WHosoeuer are not Christs they
cānot crucifie the flesh; they haue neither see∣ing eyes, nor feeling hearts, to perceiue their flesh and affections. Without Christ, they can doe nothing: with∣out Christ, they are meerly naturall, sensu∣all, carnall, and in great confederacy with their lusts and flesh. Their amity and wisedome, is enmity against God: the body cannot liue without the head: the branch cannot beare fruit without the tree: the house cannot stand without the corner∣stone: no more can
they that are without Christ, crucifie their flesh, affections & lusts. They are enemies of Christs Crosse, whose end is damnatiō, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is to their shame; which minde earthly things, Phil. 3.19. They that are with∣out Christ, To restraine sinne, is not to crucifie sinne. may hide sin and restraine sinne: but cannot crucifie sin. Ma∣ny corruptions may bee lurking within them, and as yet not awaked. Many I haue seen walk∣ing, eating, drinking, going abroad, atten∣ding
their affaires, their mirth, & their pastime: and yet hauing within their body with many secret sleeping obstru∣ctions, corruptiōs, shir∣rouses, malignities, rea∣dy to be impregnat and stirred vp, and to be∣come most painfull, dangerous and deadly diseases. So may those that are without Christ haue their flesh, affecti∣ons and lusts in many poynts, lying in a drow∣sinesse, and brought a∣sleepe for a time: this is not to haue the flesh in any wise crucified. They may haue their
flesh and affections re∣strained: their office, e∣ducation, imitation, af∣fection, feare, ingenuity of nature, infancy, age, sexe, morall vertues, and the generall and commō repressing gifts of the Spirit, may bri∣dle their flesh and lusts in many degrees: and yet neuer a whit truly crucified. Admoni∣tion. Let vs not therefore thinke our selues the more happy, or the more to be Christs: for all our simple restraint of sinne, conformity of Christian māners, stop∣ping of grosser sinnes,
ciuill or morall carri∣age, faire and seemly fa∣shions, vnlesse by the vertue of Christs Crosse we doe mortifie sinne at the root: and except wee finde sensible, that nothing in this whole world moues vs more to crucifie sin, and beate downe any corruption or lust in vs; as the spe∣ciall consideration of the power of Christs crosse.
31. How farre can the flesh, &c. be cru∣cified? THe body may most of all be easily cru∣cified, It is easier to crucifie the body, than the lusts: and the lusts, than the affections. by beating it downe, and holding it vnder some obedience of abstinence and auste∣rity, & weaning it from many delights. Lusts againe are more easily crucified than af∣fections; because they are more neere the ex∣ternall body, and acti∣ons thereof: affections againe hardlier are cru∣cified
than lusts. But the flesh it selfe, The inter∣nall flesh is most hardly crucified. that body of death, and sin, most hard∣ly of all: for it is the strong root, out of the which the rest doth spring vp. And yet none of all these can be truly crucified, vnlesse they al bee crucified in some true measure & degree. Many branches of our lusts haue been cut, and yet spring againe: many quenched, yet kindled againe: ma∣ny affections subdued, yet rebelling againe: because the root (the flesh) hath yet neuer bin rightly rooted out.
The flesh can neuer bee fully and perfectly crucified, The flesh cannot bee perfectly crucified. so long as we are in this tabernacle of clay. They that are Christs, must not bee tryed by perfect sancti∣fication. Sinne will re∣main, though not raign. Wee must see and feele our corruption, but not walke after it: yet while wee are disclaiming it, it will bee disquieting vs; and while wee are mourning for it, it will still be marring vs. And although Sarah and Hagar bee dwelling in the house of Abra∣ham, Hagar must bee
subiect to Sarah; or else both Hagar & her chil∣dren must bee cast out, Gen. 16.6. 32. When doe we crucifie the flesh, &c? IT is once truly be∣gun, Our whole life should be a cruci∣fying of sinne. but neuer in this life fully finished. For as the inward man is renued daily, 2. Cor. 4.16. So the outward man (the flesh) is crucified daily. And although the Apo∣stle vseth the praeterit time, wherby he vnder∣standeth the true be∣ginning of this worke:
yet so long as wee liue, the continuall practice of it remaines, and shall not bee finished vntill death. The mortified Ro∣manes are still exhorted to mortifie the lusts of the body, Rom. 8. The renued Ephesians and Colossians are willed to doe the same, Ephes. 4.22. Col. 3.8. We must still be doing this work, wee must crucifie the flesh, and crucifie it a∣gaine. Admoni∣tion. Let vs be doing this euer without inter∣mission. There will euer remaine some parts of the root of sinne; out of
the which, some new & noysome branches will spring out, vnlesse we be stil crucifying: vntill the time we see God face to face, we wil euer see an∣other law in our mēbers, repugning against the law of our mind, Rom. 7.23. Against the which we must haue a continu∣all battell; which also by the power of Gods Spirit wee must be still crucifying; and conti∣nually wee must ende∣uour, Our imper∣fection. that as the flesh and the Spirit (our vn∣regenerate and regene∣rate parts) are neuer ful∣ly sundred: they both
concurre in place and action: they are mixed through all, and in all our naturall faculties and actions; whereby all our best workes are imperfect. So I say, wee should endeuour so to crucifie the flesh, that the Spirit may haue the preeminence in all things; although with some opposition, and contagion of the flesh, 1. Ioh. 5.45. Hereof it followeth, that both we, and all our best workes are but imperfectly good; Our per∣fection. yet wee are acceptable be∣fore God, through Iesus
Christ, 1. Pet. 2.5. All our perfection is but ei∣ther comparatiue, being compared with the vn∣godly; or imputatiue, being ours in Christ; or inchoatiue, being begun by the Spirit: or affe∣ctiue, more in the affe∣ction, than effectiue in action. 33. Why must the flesh, &c. be crucified? BVt what? may wee not be Christs, and doe as we please? what need is there, to those that are Christs, to cru∣cifie
the flesh? May we not turne the grace of God to wantonnesse? may wee not sinne, that grace may abound? Is there such a necessity that wee must crucifie the flesh? Truly a necessity lieth vpon vs, To crucifie the flesh, &c. a thing most neces∣sary. to crucifie the flesh; for vnlesse we kill sinne, it will kill vs. The flesh lusts against the Spirit, Galat. 5.17. wee must crucifie the flesh, that wee may liue in the Spirit. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God, Rom. 8.8. Carnall men walke as men in the workes of
the flesh, 1. Cor. 3.3. If we liue after the flesh, we shall dye. Rom. 8.13. Fleshly lusts doe fight a∣gainst the soule, 1. Pet. 2. They that sow to the flesh, of the flesh shall reape corruption, Gal. 6. And they that doe not crucifie the flesh, & the works thereof, shall not inherit the king∣dome of God, Gal. 5.19, 21. It stands vs therefore vpon the perill of con∣demnation, Admoni∣tion. if we do not crucifie truly the flesh. Who can liue with a deadly foe, from whom they cannot flie, vnlesse they make battell to o∣uerthrow
him? Who can willingly keepe a Scorpion in their bo∣some, and not kill it? Our flesh and affections and lusts, must either bring on vs an eternall curse, or else we must in time crucifie them. We must consume all those, which the Lord our God doth giue vs to consume: Deut. 7.16. compared with 13.6. And if our dearest friēd (which is as our owne soule) intice vs secretly to sin, our eye should not pitie him, but euen kill him. This was an ordinance to the peo∣ple of Israel, to saue thē
from offending of God. This same in effect should we doe with our intestine enemies, the fleshly affections and lusts, our greatest sedu∣cers to offend God. A∣gag and the Amalekites of our flesh, euen our affections, whom God commands to be killed, must not bee spared, 1. Sā. 15.3. Let vs shew herein our greatest o∣bedience to God, and the most allowed zeale of Phineas, in killing and crucifying the vilest Zimri and Cozbi of our lusts, Numb. 25.
34 A conclusion for those that are Christs. HEre is the dignitie & dutie of a Chri∣stian described. His dig∣nitie, is to bee Christs. His dutie is, to crucifie the flesh. Many sorts of false Christians. As for ye Chri∣stian dignitie: Many carry the name of a Christian to their con∣demnatiō; because they will not be truly Christs to their owne saluation. Many haue the face and the mouth of a Chri∣stian; but neither the heart nor hand of a Christian. Some are e∣nemies to Christ, open
or secret. Some are Christs, onely in shew; but not in substance: in appearance onely, and not so in effect. Some are but almost his, with Agrippa, Act. 26.28. and not farre from the king∣dome of God, with the discreet Scribe, Mark. 12.34. Some intend to become Christs: and are onely his in a naked purpose, but not in pra∣ctice. The false Christian described. Some would be Christs, but not per∣emptorily: onely with reseruations, and cer∣taine conditions: To crucifie their flesh or to deny themselues, they would haue excepted:
If, to forsake the worlds vanities, customes, abu∣ses, and sinfull fashions were permitted: and if to shun all crosses, and become a temporizer, were things tolerable and indifferent. They would be Christs, if the word, repentance, faith, conscience, and all pie∣tie, were subordinate to their humour; or might stand without preiu∣dice of their fleshly affe∣ctions, and lusts. All, al∣most will doe violence to the kingdom of God, and will be Christs, vn∣till it come to the swine of their lusts, with the Gadarenes, Luke 8.37.
then hee must depart. The sacrilegious, the a∣dulterers, the enuious, ambitious, malicious, auaricious, &c. will bee Christs, they will serue two masters, erect two opposite Kingdomes within them, Gods and Satans. They will haue their light to haue a com∣munion with darknesse: And Christ to bee in concord with Belial, 2. Cor. 6.14. But (alas) are not all these strongly deluded? They deceiue them∣selues in their own ima∣gination: thinking with themselues to be some∣thing,
when they are nothing, and worse then nothing, Gal. 6.3. And many (if they had the occasion and meanes) with all the nerues of their hart, would aspire to become great in the world: But who doth take thought to attaine to the greatest good, Ʋery few are true Christians. & best greatnesse, to bee Christs? Wee see our calling, how that not many wise, not many mightie, not many no∣ble (yet some) are cal∣led. But God hath cho∣sen the worlds foolish, weake, vile, and naugh∣tie things, to confound the wise, mightie, pre∣cious
& worthy things thereof, 1. Cor. 1.26. Earthly prerogatiues are in price: worldly dignities are hunted af∣ter. But who doth re∣gard that most excel∣lent prerogatiue; To be the sonnes of God, Ioh. 1.12? And that their right may bee in the tree of life, Reuel. 22.14? The most part therefore see not their miserie, and feare not that condem∣nation that hangeth a∣boue their heads. Let vs aboue al things endeuour to become Christs truly and con∣stantly. An exhor∣tation that men may become true Christians. Let vs esteeme it the highest dignitie,
the greatest felicitie, the sweetest contentment, the surest peace, and the most vnspeakable & glo∣rious ioy to be Christs. VVithout him, thy bles∣sings are curses; thy light is darknesses; thy glory is but shame; thy life is but a death; and all thy hope is perditiō. But if thou be Christs, thou thy self and all that thou hast, is blessed: thy crosses are for thy good; all things are thine, and for thy comfort. VVith a cheerfull heart (filled with the ioy of the holy Spirit) thou maist look downe to thy sinnes, as pardoned: looke vp to
God, as reconciled: look into thy self, as the heire of God: and looke vp to heauen, as thy dwelling place and endlesse para∣dise: and finally, delight thy selfe more in this, that thou art Christs, thē in a thousandworlds beside. So heare, that thou maist bee his: so striue, that thou maist be his: so liue, that thou may be his: and so die, that thou maist be his. 35. A conclusion for the crucifying the flesh, &c. AS for the duty of a Christian (the cru∣cifying of the flesh) the most part are farre from Impedimēts that stay the crucify∣ing of the flesh.
this poynt. They are so sunke deepe in rebelliō, Isa. 31.6. so accustomed to euill, that they can do no good: they cannot change their Morian blacknesse, nor Leopard spots, Ier. 13.23. They are past feeling, & sense∣lesly doe boyle in their lusts & affections, Eph. 4.18. They are like the wild Asse vsed to the wil∣dernes, that snuffeth vp the wind by occasion at her pleasure, &c. Ier. 2.24. Some doe hide and couer their flesh, Diuerssorts of the false crucifying of the flesh, &c. affecti∣ons and lusts, vnder hy∣pocrisie. Some doe re∣straine them at times by some occasions and re∣spects.
Some doe enter∣taine them within, and keep them in, frō break∣ing forth into capitall & groser impieties: as into murther, adultery, in∣cest, theft, &c. yet they permit them to haue a full vent vnto lesser sins: as vnto anger, enuy, The flesh doth cruci∣fie vs to our damna∣tion. cō∣tempt, backbiting, for∣ged cauillation, priuate iniuries, &c. We cā suf∣fer nothing yt toucheth our name, our goods, or persons; no delight∣full obiects are refrai∣ned; no tentations are resisted. It is a shame to see what slaues we are to our selues, and what obedience wee giue to
sin vnto death, Rom. 6.16. & how far the flesh, affections and lusts doe crucifie vs, and wee not them. Beside that, our affections & lusts breed vs many incurable and dangerous diseases, and make much disquietnes to the mind; they pro∣duce the greatest wic∣kednesses vnnatural cru∣elties and vilenesse, and procure endlesse wrath to thēselues: whose end is dānation, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is to their shame, which minde earthly things, An exhor∣tation to crucifie the flesh. Phil. 3.19. If wee bee therefore Christs, or would be∣come
Christs: Let vs condemne our selues, that we haue walked so vnworthy of him, and for that we haue prefer∣red our flesh and lusts to him, and giuen too great a testimony that we are not Christs. If we be Christs, let vs ac∣count him deare to vs, as we are to him. Let vs apply his death and crosse to our harts; that as by the merit thereof wee get our sins pardo∣ned; so by the vertue of the same wee may haue thē also mortified. Look vpon him whom thou hast pierced, & lament for him, as one mourn∣eth
for his onely sonne; and bee sory for him, as one is for his first borne, Zach. 12.10. And so de∣test sinne to the death: feare Gods wrath, re∣ioice greatly in thy ran∣some, and in nothing more; and let this ioy stir vp thy heart both to crucifie thy flesh, & the world to thy selfe, and thy selfe to them, Gal. 6.14. Let his loue sharpen thy loue: Cos amoris a∣mor, Pro. 8.17. His loue is without paragon. It e∣uer standeth in the Ze∣nith. Hee loued vs vnto the death. Greater loue than this hath no man, whē any mā bestoweth
his life on his friends, Ioh. 15.13. He is rich in mercy, Ephes. 2.4. His loue passeth all know∣ledge, Eph. 3.19. It is e∣uerlasting, and insepara∣ble from vs, & we from it, Ier. 31.3. Rom. 8.35. It is neither hid, neither treasured vp only in his Word; but shed abroad into our hearts by the Spirit, Rom. 5.5. Wee must know it, and sen∣sibly feele it, Eph. 3.19. That by these cords of man, and bands of loue, Hos. 11.4. he may draw vs to himselfe, and that wee may come to him both weeping, Ier. 31.9. and reioycing with ioy
vnspeakable & glorious, 1. Pet. 1.8. euen reioy∣cing in trembling, Psal. 2.11. because of that great consolation in Christ, and comfort of loue, Phil. 3.1. And ha∣uing our harts constrai∣ned by his loue, 2. Cor. 5.14. that we may cru∣cifie these both his and our most deadly ene∣mies. God of his super∣abundant mercy grant, yt we may once truly become Christs, & that both in him, & by him, and for him, wee may crucifie the flesh, the affections and lusts, Gal. 5.24. FINIS.
