A143 11967198 51752
AN ABSTRACT OF The several Letters, and choice Occurrences, brought by the last Post from Denmark, France, Sweden, and Holland, concerning the Affaires and Designes of the Common-Wealth of ENGLAND. Comprising these ensuing Particulars, viz. I The new Orders and Instructions of the States of Holland, sent to Admiral Vantrump; With his Letter to their Lordships; The advancing of the Fleet from the Isle of Rhee; the randezvouzing of their forces at Saint Martins; their Message to the East-Indy Company, Merchants, and Hans-Towns; And their Decree and Declaration for the supplying of Ʋantrump with Men, Monies, and a new Fleet of shipping. II The advancing of the King of Scots from France; and a bloudy Fight between the French and Dutch at the City of Bourdeaux; with the full particulars, and the event and success thereof. III The rising of the Hollanders against Mr. Bradshaw, the Parlia∣ments Agent in Denmark; their falling upon him with sword and pistol; his Letter to the King; and his Majesties answer. IIII The taking of a Coach laden with Gold, going for Holland; and the manner thereof; with the Resolution of the Officers and Sea-men at Chattam. Licensed according to the late Act for Printing. London, Printed for George Horton, 1653.
The Orders of the States of Holland touch∣ing Vantrump; and the Instructions sent by Sea and Land to his Ran∣dezvouz at St. Martins. SIR, THe States have dispatched new Orders to Van-Trump; and their Instructions are gone both by Sea and Land to his Randezvouz at St. Mar∣tins. Not withstanding, frequent allarmes arrive daily about the greatness of your English prepa∣rations; yet their Lordships seem resolved to cast all upon the chance of War. And to heighten the people in Zealand, they are fed with abundance of Rumors touching England. At Middleburgh and other places it is given out, that Gen. Blake is laid aside, at put in prison. At London they say the people are in a great upror, and that they came in mighty Tumults to the Parliament, requiring an immediate peace to be made with the United Provinces; so that the Zealan∣ders say, The Parliament was forced to make them believe that Ambassadors were coming hence to Treat of a peace, before they could pacisie and reconcile the people. Such phantsies are very frequent in these parts.
But how they will salve their own sores, I know not; for Trump hath lost his main mast, and a great hole has bin made in the sides of his fleet. Certain it is, that no lss then 19 are cast away and spoiled since he came on your Channel, and di∣vers others since that time missing. Others are so foul, that they must be sent home for Trimming and Tallowing. And therefore the States here have ordered 60 fresh Sail, as a Re∣cruit, to be ready against the 2 of February; 30 whereof are to be speeded away with all possible expedition. And for the better dispatch they have sent Dewit to quicken all the Ad∣miralties; he and the Directors have already been at Amster∣dam and Saerdam to give Order. Messengers have been likewise sent to the East-Indy Com∣pany to borrow what ships they can spare for the publike service, but they have returned no answer as yet. Neverthe∣less, here is talk of nothing but the having a hundred ships ready against Spring; and yet there are but few visible, un∣less the new ones now a building, to the number of 30 or 40. And for sea-men you may guess they are not over-stockt, seeing they resolve no Fleet shall go now for Greenland, hav∣ing use for the men against you in England. Wherefore the Drums have been thundering again at Amsterdam, to awaken the people, and new Orders are issued out to quicken the Work of new Frigots. The great East Indy ship is making ready for Tromp at Ancusen; and of this new supply resolved on, they intend about 30 for the Sound. Great brags are made here of their alliance with Denmark, giving our, That they expect great supplies thence for their assistance. But the Danish Resident here in the Hague has made an unexpected motion to their Lordships for laying a∣side the Treaty of Redemption, formerly made betwixt them and his Master, and resume another way, which fills their heads with jealousie. They have likewise an eye still upon the intercourse be∣twixt
England and France, suspecting the worst of this French application. They have news also, That the Swede will insist resolute∣ly upon the maintaining of a free Trade betwixt the Hans-Towns and Sweden; wherein they resolve here to cross the Swede, and give a stop to that Trade, by placing 3 or 4 men of War to lie in the Emes to block up the Trade of Emden, and will fortifie Delf Seilar, that they may prevent you by hook or by crook of all necessaries for shipping out of those parts. Vantrump hath sent a short Letter to his mighty Masters, de∣claring, That he was forced to pass from Gravelin to the Isle of Rhee, by reason he could not get convenient supply of pro∣visions; insomuch that many of his men are visited with sic∣ness, and made disserviceable for want of food; his ships and rigging much shatter'd and torn, by distress of weather and storm, and therefore desires that some Vessels may be speed∣ed to him with supplies, both of Vessels, Men, and Provisi∣ons; without which he must be forced to return, and leave the Merchants ships behind him. Whereupon the States im∣mediatly ordered that a considerable sum should be forth∣with sent unto him. Here is a great decay of Trade, and a mighty increase of Taxes; instead of comfort, our sorrowes increase, and the Lord knowes when we shall have an end; for now there is Excize laid upon Butter, Egges, Cheese, and the smallest Fowl; and no man dare say, Why must we not be free? But this is our comfort, Extremes seldome but break their own Necks. And that which doth most startle them at present, is, That those English ships which were blockt up by ours at Porto∣longone, are gotten out to sea, and, in defiance of the Dutch, gave them all the go-by. And we likewise hear that the rest of your ships in Leghorn, are resolved to fight their passage through Van Galens Fleet. From the Hague Jan. 24. stilo novo
SIR, THe Merchants are now in great hopes, that fom good will be done with the King, in reference to our ships detained; because our Resident Mr. Brad∣shaw hath now had audience in a very honourable manner, though his Majesty was not there, which so netled the Dutch spectators, that within two houres after the Residents return to his lodging, a desperate Crew of Varlets set upon his Coach-man as he was coming home; and all that they did then, was onely to affront the man without blowes. But within a short space after, the same pack of Beagles scenting two of the Residents servants as they were going to com∣plain of the first affront, fell upon them, and immedi∣atly wounded one of them in the hand, pursuing them even home to the door of the Residents house, and endeavoured to force their passage by sword and pi∣stol; but it pleased God to prevent them, though not∣withstanding the assault and tumult continued for half an hour. Immediatly hereupon the Resident sent to acquaint the King with this violence, which both him∣self and his Councel seemed to resent very highly, re∣turning answer, That care should be taken to find out the chief Actors, and punish them severely; and there∣upon the Guard was sent abroad to discover them; but as yet I hear not of a man taken. The Resident hath
been abroad since to visit some of the principall men of the Kingdom, who promise fair, assuring him of the Kings and their own deep sense of the violation, and willing him to rest confident of the same security here as their Ambassadors lately found in England. The Dutch here hath been very studious to mag∣nifie their own cause and affaires, in hope to draw on this King to imbark with them, and become Englands declared enemy. His Fleet is fitting as fast as may be; and large sums are promised by the Lord Keysar, Bur∣gomaster of Dort, who hath likewise given out, That their Admiral Tromp hath taken seventy of your ships laden with Coales, and nine of your men of war, which were their Convoy. But there are few of belief to credit this high-bounc'd story. From Hamburgh news is come hither, that the Senate there is resolved to send their Syndic or Recorder to the Parliament of England, which invites the Danish Court to have a more watchful eye toward the design of Sweden. From Copenhagen in Denmark, Jan. 1. stilo novo. From France they write, That there hath been a very dangerous Conflict between the Dutch Cap∣tains, and the Citizens of Bourdeaux, the manner thus: Divers of the Flemins being walking upon the wharf and in the streets, were commanded by the Elmers to cry, Vive le Roy, & les Princes de Conde and Conti, that is, God save the King, and the Princes of Conde
and Conti; but they refused, saying, That they ac∣knowledged no other Powers but the King of France and the Prince of Orange. Upon which answer, the stout Elmers went from words to blowes, and for a short time exceeding hot was the dispute; but, at last, the Hollander being weary of action, and pretty han∣somly bang'd, retired on shipboard, from whence they ltstly many pieces of Ordnance; but immediatly af∣ter weighed anchor, and with their whole Fleet sailed towards Lermont, a Road on the other side of the Ri∣ver. In this conflict many was killed and wounded on both sides; what the event will be, few dayes will ma∣nifest; in the interim you may behold it as a singular piece of great consequence. The great talk is now of Charles Stuarts leaving of France; but first he stayes to see what hopes the Lord Wilmot will be able to send him out of Germany, whither it is supposed he intends, if any thing can be effected there to gain him an ho∣nourable and favourable Reception, and allowance to live on. The Royal party presume much of the German Princes, who have fish of their own to fry good store, notwithstand∣ing the solemn Courtship and Complement of those Princes to each other. From Chattam it is advertised, That the Fleet will be sud∣denly ready to put forth to sea; and that great is the resolu∣tion both Officers and Sea-men, not withstanding the late private differences amongst them. We hear of a Coach car∣rying gold is stop'd going for Yarmouth, and 'tis suppos'd it was design'd for Holland; but it's now secured for the States of England; no less then two Firkins, the one cover'd over with Butter; the other with Sope: But where the Button∣makers are, I cannot (as yet) resolve you. Finis.
