A4100 17758109 106585
At the Queens-House in East Greenwich, in the County of Kent, the Ninth Day of March, in the Fifth Year of the Reign of Their Maiesties King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, &c. COMMISSIONERS then Present, The Right Reverend Fathers in God Henry Lord Bishop of London, Simon Lord Bishop of Ely, Thomas Lord Bishop ofLincoln, Richard Lord Bishop of Bath and VVells, Dr. Thomas Plume Arch-Deacon of Roche∣ster, Sir John Shaw, Sir VVilliam Langhorn, Sir John Morden, Baronets, Sir VVilliam Hooker, Sir Algernoon May,Knights, Humphrey Styles, Edward King, Abraham Harrison, Edmond Tooke, and Philip Boddenham, Esquires. Kanc. ss.WHEREAS a Commission under the Great Seal of England bearing Date at Westmin∣ster the Third Day of November last past, hath been directed to the most Reverend Fa∣ther in God John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; To the Right Reverend Fathers in God Henry Lord Bishop of London, Thomas Lord Bishop of Rochester, Simon Lord Bishop of Ely, John Lord Bishop of Oxford, Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln, Richard Lord Bi∣shop of Bath and Wells, Dr. Thomas Plume Archdeacon of Rochester, Sir Stephen Lennard, Sir John Shaw, Sir William Langhorn, Sir John Morden, Baronets; Sir William Hooker, Sir Algernoon May, Knights, and to divers other Honourable and Worthy Persons in the said Commission Nominated and Appointed, Authorizing the said Commissioners, or any Four, or more of them, by such ways and means as therein is directed, to Enquire what Lands, Tenements, Rents, Annuities, Profits, Heradita∣ments, Goods, Chattels, Money, and Stocks of Money, have been heretofore given by any well dispo∣sed Person or Persons, for Relief of Aged, Impotent, and Poor People, Maintenance of sick and maimed Souldiers and Mariners, Schools of Learning, Free-Schools and Scholars of Universities, Repair of Bridges, Ports, Havens, Causways, Churches, Sea-banks and Highwaies, for Education and Preferment of Orphans, for or towards the Relief, Stock, or Maintenance for Houses of Correction, Marriage of poor Maids, Supportation, Aid, and Help of Young Tradesmen, Handicrafts-men, and Persons decayed, Re∣lease and Redemption of Captives, Aid or Ease of any poor Inhabitants concerning payment of Fifteens; Setting out of Souldiers and other Taxes, and of the Abuses, Breeches of Trust, Negligences, Misimploy∣ments, not Imploying, Concealing, Defrauding, Misconverting, and Misgoverning of the same Lands, Te∣nements, Stocks of Money, and other things given to any of the Charitable Uses aforesaid, and to set down such Orders, Judgments and Decrees, as that the same Lands, Tenements, Money, and other Things, may be duely employed to and for such of the Charitable Uses aforesaid, for which they were given, limi∣ted and appointed by the Doners and Founders thereof. And whereas we the abovenamed Commissio∣ners appointed, with others for the Purposes aforesaid, having this day considered the Usefulness of the said Commission, in respect of many concealments, and misimployments of several Charitable Uses, within the said County of Kent. To the end therefore that all Persons that please, may have the Benefit and Ad∣vantage thereof, We have thought fit, and do recommend it to the abovesaid Lord Bishop of Roche∣ster, that he will please to direct that Publication hereof be made in all Parish-Churches and Chappels, within the said County, and that we intend to meet frequently at the Queens House in East Greenwich, or elsewhere within the said County, to receive and examin all such complaints as shall be Exhibited to Us. And to the end that all Persons for that purpose may come prepared, We have thought fit to direct, that they bring with them all such VVills, Evidences, Charters, and other VVritings, whereby the respe∣ctive charitable Uses were given, limited and appointed as concern the same. And that any Person or Persons in the mean time may apply themselves to the Clerk attending Us in the Execution of this Commis∣sion for further direction and assistance therein. And that his Lordship having been therewith atten∣ded, did approve of the Order above-mentioned, and directed the same should be forthwith Printed, and Pu∣blished in all Parish-Churches and Chappels, within the said County of Kent accordingly. I do Allow this Order to be Printed and Published in my Diocess. Tho. Roffen. LONDON, Printed by Alex. Milbourn, in Green-Arbor-Court in the Little Old-Baily. 1693.
