b2536 18170262 106868
King David playing the harp KING DAVID Blessed be the Kingdome of our Father David, that cometh in ye name of the Lord. Hosannah in the highest.Mar. 11. 10.
A CENTURY OF Select Psalms, And Portions of the PSALMS of DAVID, Especially those of praise. Turned into Meter, and fitted to the usual Tunes in PARISH CHURCHES. For the use of the Charter-House, LONDON. By JOHN PATRICK, Preacher there. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Richard Royston, Bookseller to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, at the Angel in Amen-Corner, 1679.
A PREFACE TO THE READER. WERE it not that the Singing-Psalms, commonly used in Churches, labour under the Pre∣judice of an ill Translation, whose dress is course and homely, the Me∣ter rugged and unequal, being patched up with little care, the words many of them out of use and scarce intelligible, without fancy, and sometimes, which is worse,
without any sense; I cannot think that any sober devout person, would decry or sleight the singing of them in the Church: wherein tho' the common People cannot attain in this, more than in other matters, to much skill or art; yet however they seem to me to be imployed more affectionately in this, than in any other part of the Service: and considering that praising God is the most excellent part of it, by the same reason that the Apostle prefers Charity before Faith and Hope, be∣cause when they cease to be of use, this remains for ever, even in Heaven it self; it may seem very reasonable to afford the people all furtherance and assistance to the
better performance of that, to which they have already a laudable pro∣pension. I confess there are discourage∣ments to undertake such a work and particularly that, which some others have deservedly complain'd of, viz. the ungracefulness of the Measures of our Common Tunes: which I think happens to have been the worst chosen of any Meter extant in any Language, and scarce admits, when words are fitted to them, of any Elegancy; which therefore the Excellent Poets of our own have balked, and chosen in their Translations, to use Pinda∣ric's or other measures of their own fancying, wherein without being
so much straitned, they had more scope for their flights and Elegan∣cies. But since the people cannot be wound up to them, he that in∣tends their benefit, must condescend, and take as he finds it, the Meter they are accustomed to; and fit such words to them as they can under∣stand, and may conveigh naturally and easily into their minds, that pious sense which every where breaths in the Psalms of David. And perhaps this may be a harder task to do well, than he that has not try'd it would imagine: espe∣cially when he must not take leave to Paraphrase largely in strains of his own, but must keep closely, tho' not to every word, yet to the sense
of the Text as it lies before him. This has been attempted I know by many, but I think not so success∣fully as might have been wisht. For the most have plainly miscar∣ried, by tying themselves too strict∣ly, I had almost said superstitiously, to the words of the English Text, which in a Thousand places cannot be made to fall Naturally, without botching, into verse; so that there is little more of Poetry in them, than meer Rhime. A Reverend Bishop, that saw this fault and avoided it, yet pitch∣ed upon an unlucky method in his Translation, to make every first and second, every third and fourth line of a Psalm to answer and rhime to
one another; whereby, in the short measures especially of eight and six feet (which is the common one) he was too much hamper'd and confi∣ned, so that the words could not fall in so naturally as they ought; which appears (the better to ex∣plain what I mean) even in the two first lines of the first Psalm, which in his Version are these, The Man is blest, whose feet not tread, By wicked Counsels led: where the Rhime returning so quick, forced the last word of the first line, out of its proper order. Another Ingenious Gentleman since that, bestowed very commend∣able pains in this work, but yet
(which was great pity) his Ver∣sion seems to me less fitted for com∣mon use than the former: For tho' sometimes he may be thought to have chosen too great bluntness and homeliness of phrase, as if intend∣ing to comply with the vulgar, wit∣ness such as these, for instance — Good Fellows in their Wine — Goblin of the Night — Gates of gaping Death — Created at a blast. — Potters brittle Ware. — Muttons to the Shambles sold. — Water swell his Guts, and such like; yet at other times his Phra∣ses, especially his Epithets, are not to be understood by the vulgar without a Comment: such as these. Libyan Fields. — Torrid Climes.
Phoenician die. — Oazy Beds. — Deaths Carnivals. — Ophir In∣gots. — Aromatick Unguents, &c. Very often again (without oc∣casion given by the Psalm) his phrase is too Poetical, and not be∣fitting the Gravity of the Subject: for instance in such as these. — Suns. Western Inn (for his set∣ing) — Wind-rockt Cradles, (for Birds Nests) — Air-fann'd Flames. — Feathered show'r — Grey feathered Morn. — Heav'ns winged Posts. — Heav'ns starry Canopy, and a great many such like. When I observed these things, tho' at first I only intended to make a Collection of Psalms out of others,
for the use of that Society to which I relate (where we are bound by the Orders of the House, upon Sun∣days and Festivals and the Eves of them, to sing the Psalms to an Organ, tho' without a Quire) I altered my thoughts, and resolved to try as others had done before me, so to fit the Psalms to the common Tunes, that the vulgar might bear their part in them, and the more intelligent and skilful might not have reason to despise this part of the Service. Which design whe∣ther I have performed, I must leave others to judge; only desiring when they do so, to remember that this was my end, and not to set up for a Poet.
And now to give the Reader some account of my manner of pro∣ceeding herein; Because (for the reason before given) I resolved not to ty up my self strictly to the use of the words of the English Text, un∣less they would fall in naturally, but rather to clear the phrases by a short Paraphrase, tho' still keeping to the sense; I therefore consulted the Criticks and other Expositors upon places of difficulty, and espe∣cially the Paraphrases of the Learn∣ed Dr Hammond and Amyral∣dus. I have endeavoured to suit my Version to the strain of the Psalms, which are very different; some more humble and plain, best suited to Davids afflictive Com∣plaints,
plaints, or to those Psalms that in∣struct mens manners: Others are more lofty, elegant, and poetical; as when he sets out the worlds of God, his Creation and Providence, or the perfections of the Almighty Ruler of the World; or propheti∣cally describes things that relate to the Messiah. Instances of which may be seen in Psalm 23.29.45. 65.91.93.96.104.139. not to mention many others. I foresee two Objections against my method of proceeding; which I shall briefly endeavour to satisfie. The one is, that I have left so ma∣ny Psalms untranslated: the other, that I have taken at other times only some portions of Psalms, and
left out many Verses in those I have translated. In Answer to both which, I think it may suffice to re∣turn; That in the choice I have made, I considered and pitched up∣on those Psalms or portions of them, which were most proper and of most general use to us Christians. Such are Psalms of Thanksgiving, or of Petition for mercies we all need, or that instruct us in our Duty. But I balked those whose aspect was up∣on Davids personal troubles, or Is∣raels particular condition, or rela∣ted to the Jewish and legal Oecono∣my, or are prophetical of the Na∣tions they should subdue, or respect∣ed their deliverances, or such as refer not to us, but by a more diffi∣cult
Accommodation; or where they express a temper not so sutable to the mild and gentle spirit of the Gospel, such as our Saviour repres∣sed in his Disciples, not allowing imprecations of vengeance against our Enemies, but rather praying for them; especially when that pro∣phetick spirit do's not now rest up∣on us, that did upon David. So also such Psalms as are of very Artificial contrivance in the He∣brew, the Verses beginning with the several Letters of the Alpha∣bet, and the phrases with great Art varied, tho' containing the same repeated sense, which cannot be imitated so well in other Tongues, many Verses in them are
left out; as among others in the 37th Psalm; and especially in the 119th Psalm, which therefore I have contracted into six parts: I might also add, that I have some∣times omitted a few Verses that preface to a Psalm. If these rea∣sons will be allowed me, then I sup∣pose there will be very little found either in whole Psalms or pieces of them, that is not translated. If this satisfie not, I have only one thing further to offer, which me∣thinks may. That I desire only that I may have the same favour that is granted to every Parish Clark; who in setting the Psalms, is not wont to run through them in order, nor to appoint at all times a
whole one to be sung, but only such portions of them as are suitable to the occasion; or to the time allotted not for this alone, but for other services to be performed in the Con∣gregation: And if I had said no more, I know not why I may not take liberty to pick and chuse por∣tions of Psalms, as well as he. I have nothing more to add, unless it be fit to mention, that I have put very many of the Psalms into the Meter of the Hundred Psalm, which measure, as well as the Tune, I judge to be the best we have: but for those that may be of another mind, I have complyed so far, as to repeat the far greater number of such Psalms in the com∣moner
Meter: and that I know but of one only hard word, that may trouble an ordinary Reader, which he will find in the first line of the 127th Psalm, viz. the word Architect, which signifies a Master-Builder, and I hope he will not meet with such another throughout the whole work. IMPRIMATUR, Nov. 21. 1678. GUIL. JANE.
Psalm I. [To the 100. Psalm Tune.] 1 BLest is the Man whose vertuous steps No wicked Counsels lead aside; No stands in Sinners ways; nor sits Where God and Goodness men deride. 2 But on the Laws Divine his love Is plac'd, his Souls entire delight; On these his mind is fix'd by Day, On these his wakeful thoughts by Night. 3 He like a Tree, from living streams Derives his sap and kindly juice; His Leaves are ever fresh and green, His Branches timely Fruits produce. No cross events shall blast his hopes, Nor spoil the pleasures of his mind; 4 Whilst the ungodly are dispers'd Like chaff, by every stormy wind. 5 Tho' Sinners here may pass for Saints, And vile Hypocrisy for Grace; Their Guilt, when judg'd, will find no Plea, Nor they among the Just a place.
6 God will reward the Just mens works, As he approves the ways they tread; But the smooth Paths of Sinners, down To Death and to Damnation lead. Psalm II. 1 WHY do the Heathen Nations rage, And foolish things surmise; 2 Kings set themselves against their God, Rulers his Christ despise? 3 His gentle Government they count Their Yoke, his Laws their Chain; Freedom they'l have without controul, No Bonds shall them restrain. 4 But God above will scorn their rage, Their vain attempts deride; 5 His Pow'r shall fright them, and his wrath Vex their defeated Pride. 6 For all their spite, I've set my King Securely on his Throne: 7 And, what I had decreed before, Proclaim'd him now my Son. This is the Birth-Day of thy Rule, 8 Thy Scepter I'll advance O're all the Earth; the Gentiles give For thine inheritance. 9 Thou with an Iron Rod shalt bruise Their disobedient Neck; Like brittle Potsherds, all their powers Without resistance break.
10 Let the Great Rulers of the World, This greater Lord revere; 11 Serve him with chearful willingness, And to displease him fear. 12 In low submissions to his Son, Your happiness does lye; Then you are safe, when hee's well pleas'd; When hee's provok'd, ye dye. Psalm III. 1 WHat numbers, Lord, against me rise, And in my troubles boast? 2 That say my hopes in God are vain, And my Condition lost? 3 But, Lord, I'll glory in thee still, And on thy Power rely; Thou shalt defend me as a shield, And list my head on high. 4 To thee I cry'd in my distress, And thou from Heav'n didst hear; 5 Safely I slept without concern, And wak'd without all fear. 6 Tho' thousands of my Foes conspir'd, My courage should not fail; Tho' they besieg'd me, I should be Secur'd, or else prevail. 7 Arise, and save me, O my God; For thou hast heretofore Turn'd back my Enemies with shame, And broken all their pow'r.
8 Those whom the Lord do's Love and own, He still will bless and save; Then let this Author of their good, Their chearful praises have. Psalm IV. 1 HEar me, O Lord, the great support Of mine Integritie; Thou hast my former troubles eas'd, Now to my Pray'rs draw nigh. 2 Fond men! that would my Glory stain, My Government despise; How long will ye pursue vain hopes, And please your selves with lies? 3 Know that the Lord do's Righteous Men With special favour own: Tho' you despise me, he ne're will On my Petitions frown. 4 Sin not, but fear; let quiet thoughts Instruct and make you wise; 5 Join a pure heart with trust in God As the best Sacrifice. 6 Tho' others in distrust of thee, To other succours fly; Thou art our hope, Lord, cast on us A favourable Eye. 7 Thy Love more chears my heart, than when Their Corn has wish'd increase; Or when a happy Vintage makes Their Wine o'reflow the Press.
8 Down will s lye in Peace, and sleep Shall close my wearied Eyes; No fears disturb me, whilst I know In God my safety lies. Psalm VI. [To the 100. Psalm Tune.] 1 LOrd, I can suffer thy rebukes, When thou dost kindly me chastise; But thy fierce wrath I cannot bear; O let not that against me rise. 2 Pitty my languishing Estate; And tnose perplexities I feel, 3 While crushed by thy heavy hand, O let thy gentler touches heal. 4 Lord for thy goodness sake return And save my life; for in the Grave 5 None can remember thee, nor thou Thankful acknowledgments canst have. 6 See how I pass my weary dayes In sighs and grones; and when 'tis night, I drown my Bed and self in tears: 7 My grief consumes and dims my sight. 8 Depart ye wicked Foes; your hopes Are dash'd; for this my mournful voice, Will bring God nearer to mine aid, When you come flocking to rejoice.
9 The Lord hath heard my Pray'r; and those 10 That gap'd upon me as their prey, Will vex themselves at their defeat, And with confusion turn away. Psalm VI. [Another Metre.] 1 LOrd, I can well endure, when thou Dost kindly me chastise; But thy fierce wrath I cannot bear, O let it never rise. 2 Pity my weak Estate, and those Perplexities I feel, 3 While crushed by thy hand; O let Thy gentler touches heal. 4 In mercy, Lord, return and spare My Life; for in the Grave 5 None can remember thee; nor thou Acknowledgments canst have. 6 See how I pass my weary dayes In groans; and when 'tis night, I drown my Bed and self in tears; 7 My grief consumes my sight. 8 Depart ye wicked Foes; your hopes Are dash'd, my mournful voice Will bring me help from God, when you Come flocking to rejoice. 9 The Lord hath heard my Pray'r, and those That gaped for a prey;
Vexed at their defeited hopes With shame shall turn away. Psalm VIII. 1 O Lord our Governour, on Earth Thy Name is Excellent: Thy Glory is exalted far Above the Firmament. 2 From the weak Pow'rs of Babes, thou mak'st Thy Victories arise; They still the Triumphs of thy Foes, And shame thine Enemies. 3 When I to Heav'n, thy glorious work, Raise mine admiring Eye; And there behold the Moon and Stars That beautify the Sky: 4 Lord! what is man, that he should have In thy kind thoughts a place? Why dost thou thus advance and bless His miserable Race? 5 Tho' lower than the Angels made, He wears a Glorious Crown: 6 Thy works below all stoop to him, And for their Sov'raign own. 7 The Beasts that in the Pastures feed, Or in the Deserts lie; 8 Fishes that move within the Seas, And Fowls beneath the Sky; 9 These are his Slaves; but let not Man Disown Gods Government;
Whose Pow'r do's rule the World, whose Name Alone is Excellent. Psalm IX. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 WIth all my Soul I'll bless the Lord, And all his mighty works proclaim: 2 Gladness and Joy shall fill my heart, Whilst I sing praises to his Name. 7 Th' Eternal God, from chance secure, Has plac'd his Throne in glorious Light; 8 When he appears to judge the World, His sentence will be just and right. 9 From him th' oppress'd will find relief, Hee'll be their refuge in distress; 10 No good Mans Faith was ever sham'd, His Pray'r ne're wanted good success. 16 God, by the judgments he inflicts, Declares his Righteousness to all: They that lay Trains to hurt the good, Set Traps t' occasion their own fall. Yea Hell the ruine of them waits, Who God and Justice disregard: When poor mens wronged Patience Obtains sure rescue and reward. Arise, O Lord, and interpose 19 To blast the wickeds good success,
20 And by thy Terrors make them feel They are but Men, and so confess. Psalm IX. [Another Metre.] 1 I'Le bless the Lord with all my Soul, And all his works proclaim; 2 Gladness shall fill my heart, whilst I Sing praises to his Name. 7 Th' Eternal God has plac'd on high His Throne in glorious light: 8 When he appears to judge the World, His Sentence will be right. 9 From him th' oppress'd will find relief, And refuge in distress: 10 No good mens hopes return asham'd, Nor Pray'rs without success. 16 God by his Judgments do's declare His righteousness to all: They that lay Trains to hurt the good, Set Traps for their own fall. 17 Yea Hell their ruine waits, who God And Justice disregard; 18 When poor mens wronged Patience Shall find a sure reward. 19 Arise, O Lord, and overturn The wickeds good success: 20 Affright them so, that they may know They're men, and so confess.
Psalm XI. 1 I Trust in God, why should I then By those discourag'd be, Who bid me like a frighted Bird Unto the Mountains flee? 2 For crafty Foes my ruine wait, Have ready bent their bow: 3 If the Foundations be destroy'd, What can the righteous do? 4 God in his Sanctuary dwells, Heav'n is his glorious Throne; From whence he views the Sons of Men, And judges every one. 5 When he examines righteous men, He do's their works approve; Such as are wicked and unjust, His Soul can never love. 6 Snares shall befal them, and for these This mixture is made up, Fire, Brimstome, and tempestuous storms, The portion of their Cup. God, who himself is righteous, do's In righteousness delight; And still will favour and protect The man that is upright.
Psalm XII. [As the 100. Psalm.] IF thou, Lord, dost not rise and help, Goodness from Earth will fly away; And faithful men will hardly find A place, if thou much longer stay. 2 Dissimulation credit gains, They're counted wise that act a part; Who tho' their words are smooth and fair, Intend no kindness in their heart. 3 God will base Flatterers destroy, And their deceitful arts will shame; Whose Pride no vengeance fears from God, And count Religion but a name. 4 Pow'r is their Justice; whose defects By fraud and falshood they supply; And plead for their injurious tongues An uncontrouled Liberty. But God who hears the poor man sighs, And groans of such as are opprest; At length will vindicate their cause, And raise his Pow'r to give them rest. 6 Gods words from all deceit are pure, His faithfulness has oft been try'd; Refined Silver's not so free From dross, tho' seven times purify'd.
7 Thy promises shall never fail; Thou Lord shalt keep the just from harm; 8 Tho' when the vilest men have pow'r, The wicked every where will swarm. Psalm XII. [Another Metre.] 1 LOrd, if thou dost not come and help, Goodness will fly away; And faithful men will find no place, If thou much longer stay. 2 Dissimulation credit gains, They'r wise that act a part: Who tho' their words are smooth, intend No kindness in their heart. 3 God will base Flatterers destroy, And all their Arts will shame; Who fear not Gods Revenge, and count Religion bur a name. 4 Pow'r is their Justice; whose defects By falshood they supply; And plead for their injurious tongues Unbounded Liberty. 5 But God that hears the sighs and grones Of such as are opprest; Will vindicate their cause, and raise His pow'r to give them rest. 6 Gods words from all deceit are free, His Truth has oft been try'd;
Silver is not so free from dross, Tho' seven times purify'd. 7 Thy promise, Lord, shall never fail To keep the just from harm; 8 Tho', when the vile have pow'r, bad men On every side will swarm. Psalm XIV. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 THE Fools believe there is no God That minds th' affairs of men below: For tho' they speak it not aloud, They live as if they thought it so. Their principles are all corrupt, Hateful and vile their actions are; They're only skilful to do ill, But from all good estranged far. 2 God from his glorious Throne above, Look'd down and took a strict survey, What men did seek and know the Lord, And did his just Commands obey. 3 He found them all degenerate, With loathsome wickedness o'regrown; None were Religious and Just, Or practis'd goodness, no not one. 4 'Tis strange, they should without remorse, Like bread thy people thus devour;
Yet neither own thee by their Pray'rs, Nor dread the vengeance of thy pow'r. 5 For all their confidence and pride, Terrors shall seize them unawares; When God appears to help the just, And punishment for these prepares. 6 You now deride their trust in God ; 7 But when from bondage he shall bring Salvation to his people; then You shall be sad and they shall sing. Psalm XIV. [Another Metre.] 1 FOols in their hearts have said, No God Do's mind th' affairs below; For tho' they speak it not aloud, They live as if 'twere so. Their principles are all corrupt, Their actions hateful are; They're skilful only to do ill, From good estranged far. 2 God from his Throne above look'd down, And took a strict survey, What men did seek and know the Lord, And his just Laws obey. 3 He found them all degenerate, With loathsome sins o'regrown; What was Religious, just and good, None practis'd, no not one.
4 Strange! that they should without remorse, Like Bread the poor devour: Yet neither own thee by their Pray'rs, Nor dread thy mighty pow'r. 5 For all their confidence, strange fears Shall seize them unawares: When God do's help the just, for these Due vengeance he prepares. 6 You now deride their trust in God, But when his pow'r shall bring Salvation to his people, then You'll sigh, and they shall sing. Psalm XV. LOrd let me know that happy man, Whom thou so well dost love; That he may praise thee here below, And dwell with thee above. 2 'Tis he, whose life is free from blame, Whose works are right and just; Whose heart and words are true, and whom One my securely trust. His Neighbours credit do's not wound By a detracting tongue: Nor in his Infamy delights; Much less would do him wrong. 4 Vile men and their lewd practises, His vertuous Soul do's loath; But shews to such as fear the Lord, Kindness and honour both.
Who do's not break his Oath, when he To his own damage swears; But his strict vertue far before His interest prefers. 5 Who hates exaction, and rejects Bribes to betray the just: This man shall ne're be mov'd, but may In God securely trust. Psalm XVI. 5 GOD is my Portion, all my good From his rich mercy slows; And his good Providence secures The blessings he bestows. 6 I envy not the great mans state, Nor pine to see his store: With what I have I'm pleased much, With what I hope for more. 7 I'll bless the Lord, ev'n when he makes Troubles mine exercise; Those sad and solitary thoughts Instruct and make me wise. 8 When God is present to my mind, My fears are over-blown; When he stands by me with his aid, No pow'r shall cast me down. 9 Therefore my heart and tongue rejoice, In him my flesh shall trust; 10 My Soul shall not remain in Hell, Nor Body in the Dust.
11 The path of life they both shall find; And in thy presence tast Pleasures to full perfection grown, And joys that ever last. Psalm XIX. 1 THE Heav'ns, whose beauteous frame we see, Gods Skill and Pow'r proclaim; 2 The Laws by which each Day succeeds The Night, declare the same. 3 These tho' they have no voice like ours, Nor words to them belong; 4 Yet they express to all the World Thy praise, without a tongue. 5 The Sun has there a glorious Tent: No Bridegroom shews his Face So chearful, nor no Champion runs With so much strength his Race. 6 Forth from the Eastern Coast he bends His course unto the West: All th' Earth rejoices in his light, And by his heat is blest. 7 Gods Law's a perfect Rule of Life, Our errours this descries; Sinners to goodness this converts, And makes the simple wise. 8 To Reason and our better Pow'rs His just Commands accord: Their joys are pure, and to the Soul Both Food and Light afford.
Part. II. 9 Thy fear, O Lord, can cleanse our Souls, And keep them pure and bright: Thy Judgments are exactly true, And altogether right. 10 More to be pris'd than treasures, which With finest Gold are fill'd: Sweeter than Honey, and the drops From Honey-Combs distill'd. 11 These are my Monitors, to whom My prosperous state I own; And in observing these shall gain Rewards that are unknown. 12 But all the failings of his life What man can call to mind? Lord, let those faults thy pity move, And easy pardon find. 13 Tho' frail I am, let no bold crimes Enslave my Soul to sin: So shall I blameless innocence Maintain, and peace within. 14 My Pray'rs and praises then shall be A pleasing Sacrifice To thee, my God, in whom my strength And my Salvation lies.
Psalm XXI. 1 O Lord, how joyful is the King With thy Salvation blest! 2 Thou'st given him his hearts desire, And granted his request. 3 Prevented by thy wond'rous Love A splendid Crown he wears; 4 The Life he asked was prolong'd To' innumerable years. 5 By thee preserv'd, his Glory's great, With Majesty array'd: 6 By thee for ever highly blest, And in thy favour glad. 7 The King do's on the Lord rely, Whose grace will make him stand: 8 But those that are thy Foes, shall know The Terrour of thy hand. 9 Thy flaming wrath shall them devour, 10 And all their Seed root out: 11 Repay the mischief they design'd, But could not bring about. 12 These shall be made the mark, at which Thy killing Arrows aim; 13 Thus, Lord, exalt thy Pow'r, and we Will sing and praise thy Name.
Psalm XXII. 25 THE praises due to thee, O Lord, Shall in thy Church be pay'd; Before thy Saints those vows perform'd, That in distress I made. 26 The longings of the poor and meek Thy goodness shall supply: Thou shalt revive their fainting hopes, That on thy strength rely. 27 The Gentiles by his kindness won, Shall turn unto the Lord; By all the Kindreds of the Earth His name shall be ador'd. 28 The Lord is King; and under him Princes their Sceptres sway; All Nations pay him homage, and His pow'rful Rule obey. 29 The prosperous Rich shall worship him; And they that to the Grave Descend, shall bow to him; for none His Soul alive can save. 30 A chosen Seed shall to their Race Declare his Righteousness; 31 What God has done for them, will raise His Mercies same no less.
Psalm XXIII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 GOD is my Shepherd, who will see That all my wants be still supply'd; I shall not be expos'd to wrong, Nor left to stray without a Guide. 2 The Pastures they are fresh and green, Where I have case and sweet repast: The streams are cool and quiet, where I quench my thirst and please my tast. 3 His comforts, which revive my Soul, Lifes tedious journey pleasant make; And in the peaceful ways of Grace He leads me, for his goodness sake. 4 Tho' I should walk, where black despair, And sorrow casts a dismal shade; Thy Power and thy tender care Would chase my fears, and make me glad. 5 Thou spread'st my Table, where my Foes Behold thy Bounty, and repine To see rich Oyls anoint my Head, And see my Cup o'reflow with Wine. 6 Surely the Goodness of the Lord Shall still surround me all my days: I will frequent thy House, and there Display thy Love, and sing thy praise.
Psalm XXIII. [Another Metre.] 1 THE Lord my careful Shepherd is, I to his flock belong: I shall not stray without a Guide, Nor be expos'd to wrong. 2 The pastures they are fresh and green, Where I have food and ease: He leads me to the quiet streams Where I my thirst appease. 3 His comforts which refresh my Soul, Lifes journey pleasant make; He guides me in his righteous paths, For his own Goodness sake. 4 Tho' I should walk where black despair Reflects a dismal shade; Thy Rod and Staff would chase away My fears, and make me glad. 5 In presence of my Foes, thou spread'st My Table, who repine To see rich Oyls anoint my Head, My Cup o'reflow with Wine. 6 Surely the Goodness of the Lord Shall Crown my future days; I will frequent his House, to shew His Love, and sing his praise.
Psalm XXIV. 1 THE Earth's the Lords, to him belong All Creatures it contains; His gracious care to all the World Extends, o're which he Reigns. 2 He did upon the floating Seas The Earths great Fabrick lay; And on th' unstable Floods, he made Her fixt Foundations stay. 3 Into that Hill where God resides, Who shall admitted be? Lord, who within thy holy place, May stand and worship thee? 4 He whose unspotted hands no crimes, Whose heart no stains defile; whose tongue blasphemes not God, nor swears His Neighbour to beguile. 5 Such men unto thine Altar may Their free approaches make; God hears their Pray'rs, and they are sure His blessings to partake. 7 Ye Gates and everlasting Doors, Be open and make room; Lift up your Heads, and you shall see The King of Glory come. 8 If you demand, what Lord is this? And who's this Glorious King?
It is the Mighty Lord of Hosts, Who do's Salvation bring. Psalm XXV. 1 TO God I make my Pray'r, In him my trust repose; 2 O let me not become a scorn Or triumph to my Foes. 3 Let no Events deject Their Souls that wait on thee; Let disappointments shame their hopes, That deal perfidiously. 4 The ways thou, Lord, dost chuse Make me to know aright; And teach me always to perform What's pleasing in thy sight. 5 From the straight paths of Truth Ne're let me go astray; From thee, my Saviour, I beg Direction every day. 6 Lord, call to mind thy Love, Ever of old exprest; How thou hast graciously reliev'd Thy Servants, when distrest. 7 Into my youthful sins No strict inquiry make; Those early faults, O Lord, forgive, For thine own goodness sake.
Part. II. 8 God who is good and just, Will erring Souls instruct; Their wandring steps to the safe paths Of Vertue will conduct. 9 The humble Souls hee'l guide, And teach the meek his way; 10 Kindness and Truth express to such As his just Laws obey. 11 Incourag'd by thy grace, For mercy I intreat; Pardon my Sins, O Lord, that are Both numerous and great. 12 Who is that happy Man That fears the Lord above? Hee'l ever lead him in the ways That he himself doth love. 13 Possess'd with quiet thoughts His Soul shall dwell at ease; His Seed shall after him enjoy Prosperity and Peace. 14 The secrets of his Love God will make known to those That fear him, and the blessings he Reserves, to them disclose. Part. III. 15 In all my troubles, Lord, Mine Eyes are towards thee;
I hope thy goodness at the last From all will set me free. 16 Lord turn a gracious Eye To me, and mercy show; Great are th' afflictions I endure, And find no help below. 17 My troubles are enlarg'd, Lord send me quick relief; 18 Grant me forgiveness of my sins, And then remove my grief. 19 Consider how my Foes In number still increase; How they with causeless hatred seek The ruine of my Peace. 20 Preserve and keep my Soul From shame as well as guilt; O never disappoint the hopes That I on thee have built. 11 Let my try'd Innocence Find sure supports from thee; At length thy chosen people, Lord, From all their troubles free. Psalm XXVI. 1 PLead thou my cause, O thou that know'st My Souls integrity: Nothing shall shake my Confidence, Whilst I on thee rely.
2 Mine inmost thoughts I offer, Lord, To thine impartial Eye; O try my heart, least any sin Should there concealed lie. 3 The contemplation of thy Love Gives me the best delight: This both engages and excites My care to walk aright. 6 My thoughts and actions I'll preserve Free from impurity; And then th' Oblations I present, Shall acceptable be. 7 Then I aloud with chearful voice Thy goodness will proclaim; And tell of all thy wond'rous works, To magnify thy Name. Psalm XXVII. 7 TO my Petitions, Lord, return An answer full of grace: 8 Thy face thou bad'st me seek, and I Resolve to seek thy face. 9 Lord, do not in displeasure hide Thy face, nor me reject; Those succours I have had before, From thee I still expect. 10 My Parents Love is not so great As thine, nor care so large;
When they forsake me, I become Still more thy care and charge. 11 Lord, let me plainly see the way Where I may safely tread; Avoiding all the cunning snares Mine Enemies have laid. 13 How wretched had I been, when I With troubles was opprest, Had I not hop'd thy mercy would Secure my Peace and Rest. 14 Wait still on God, my Soul, from him Courage and Strength derive; Tho' he delay, he will at length Thy fainting heart revive. Psalm XXVIII. 1 HEar me, O Lord, my sure defence, When I thy succour crave; Else I shall be like them that lie Neglected in the Grave. 6 Blest be the Lord, who bow'd his Ear To those requests I made; 7 I trusted in his strength and found His seasonable aid. Thy favour, Lord, has made my heart Exceedingly rejoice; In grateful Hymns I will advance Thy praise with chearful voice.
8 Those that upon his Pow'r rely, God will protect and own; And his Anointed save, whom he Has raised to his Throne. 9 Lord, bless thy people, who to thee Do all their safety owe; Feed thou thy Flock, and raise them up When they are fallen low. Psalm XXIX. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 THE glorious Empire of the Lord Ye Rulers of the World proclaim; 2 And in his Sanctuary give The Honour due unto his Name. 3 Heark, how his Thund'ring voice do's run Through all the Regions of the Sky; The Clouds are frighted with the noise, 4 So full of Pow'r and Majesty. 5 The lofty Cedars bow their Heads, And break before the mighty sound; 6 Mountains that bear them feel the shock, And like a frighted Calf rebound. 7 Before this voice the dreadful flames Of pointed Lightnings tear the air,
8 Wild Creatures, that in deserts dwell, Think they're not safe, but quake for fear. 9 This makes the timerous Hinds to Calve, Wild Beasts the naked Thickets leave; But in his sacred Temple all Fearless to God their praises give. 10 The Lords Dominion do's extend To Clouds above and Floods below; 11 This great Protector of the good, Will rest and Peace on his bestow. Psalm XXX. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 MY God, since thou haft rais'd me up, Thee I'll extoll with thankful voice; Who hast secur'd me from those harms, That would have made my Foes rejoice. 2 With troubles worn, and grief oppress'd, To thee I cry'd, and thou didst save; 3 Thou didst support my sinking hopes, My Life didst rescue from the Grave. 4 Wherefore rejoice ye Saints of his, Proclaim the praises of the Lord; His goodness often call to mind, And his Fidelity record.
5 His anger is but short; his Love, Which is our Life, do's longer stay; Grief may continue for a night, But comfort rises with the day. 11 By thee my mournful state is chang'd, My Sackcloth now is thrown away; And gladness girds me, who before In black despair and horrour lay. 12 My tongue no longer silent be, But to the Lord due glory give; And strive that in thy thankful Verse His same Eternally may Live. Psalm XXX. [Another Metre.] 1 SInce thou hast rais'd me, I'll extoll My God with thankful voice; Who free'd me from those harms, that would Have made my Foes rejoice. 2 With grief and troubles worn, to thee I cry'd, and thou did'st save: 3 Thou, Lord, my sinking hopes and life Didst rescue from the Grave. 4 Then let the Saints with joy proclaim The praises of the Lord; His goodness call to mind; and his Fidelity record.
5 His wrath's but short; his Love, which is Our Life, do's longer stay: Weeping may for a Night endure, But joy comes with the Day. 11 My mournful State is chang'd, and now My Sackcloth's thrown away; Gladness surrounds me, who before In dismal sorrows lay. 12 My Tongue no longer silent be; To God due praise give; That in thy thankful verse, his same Eternally may Live. Psalm XXXII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 O Happy Man! whom God forgives, And hides what he has done amiss; 2 Owns him as if he had not sinn'd, Whose heart sincere and upright is. 3 My woes increas'd, whilst I supprest My guilt, no quiet I could get; 4 Thy wrath did press me like a weight, And scorch'd me like the Summers heat. 5 I then resolved to disclose My crimes, and open all my wound; I humbly did confess my sins To thee, and easy pardon found.
6 This mercy shall invite good men In season to implore thine aid; Then tho' their troubles like a Flood Should rise, they need not be afraid. 7 Thou, Lord, shalt be my safe retreat, To thee I'll fly in all distress; Thou wilt preserve me; and in Songs Of Victory I'll thee confess. 8 I'll counsel Sinners to obey; 9 And not be like the Horse or Mule, Whose fury, till they're broke and tam'd, No Rein can guide, no Curb can rule. 10 Such Sinners meet with heavy strokes; 11 Whilst those that trust in God, shall prove The happy men: then let the Just Rejoice and triumph in his Love. Psalm XXXII. [Another Metre.] 1 O Blessed man whom God forgives, And hides what's done amiss: 2 On whom no sin is charg'd; whose heart Sincere and upright is. 3 Whilst I suppress'd my inward guilt, No quiet 1 could get: 4 Thy hand did press me, and thy wrath Scorch'd me like Summers heat.
5 I then resolved to disclose My Crimes, and ope' my wound: I humbly did confess my sins, And easy pardon found. 6 This mercy shall in season draw Good men t' implore thy aid: Then tho' the Floods of Trouble rise, They need not be afraid. 7 Thou art my Refuge, Lord, to thee I'll fly in all distress; Thou wilt preserve me; and my Songs Thy mercies shall confess. 8 I'll teach proud men t' obey; and not Be like the Horse or Mule; 9 Whose Fury till they're broke, no Rein Can guide, no Curb can rule. 10 Such meet with heavy strokes; whilst those That trust in God, shall prove The happy men: then let them joy And Triumph in his Love. Psalm XXXIII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 YE righteous in the Lord rejoice, And let his praise be your delight; For praise is lovely, and becomes The lips of those that are upright.
4 Gods word is, like its Author, good, His Laws from all injustice free; His promise sure, and all his works Are done in Truth and Equity. 5 Works that are right and just, secure His favour, and his pleasure are; The Earth with various blessings fill'd, To us his kindness do's declare. 6 The vast extended Orbs of Heav'n By his commanding word were made; And all its numerous Hosts, from his Creating breath their beings had. 7 The Seas proud Waves within the shores To which they are confined, keep; Whose Waters safely are laid up In the great Store-House of the deep. 8 Then to the Lord by men on Earth Let fear and due regard be shown; May all the World his awful pow'r By humble adorations own. Part. II. 12 O happy he! whose service shows That God his chosen Ruler is; And happy they! whom God declares By's special care, that they are his.
13 Th' Almighty on the Sons of Men Looks down from his Celestial Throne; 14 And all the dwellers on the Earth Views from his glorious Mansion. 15 He equally did make them all, Their hearts he fashion'd one by one; And all their inmost thoughts, to him Better than to themselves, are known. 18 The Lord on those that fear his Name Looks with a favourable Eye; He ne're will fail their hopes, that on His goodness stedfastly rely. 20 Now, Lord, we wait for thee, thou art Our succour and our sure defence; 21 What e're befals us, we may trust In thee with cheerful confidence. 22 So let thy mercies, Lord, on us Descend, like a refreshing show'r; As all our hope and joy depends Upon thy favour and thy pow'r. Psalm XXXIII. [Another Metre.] 1 REjoyce, ye Righteous, in the Lord, And praise him with delight:
For thankfulness becomes the lips Of those that are upright. 4 His word is good, and all his Laws Are from injustice free; His promise sure; and all his ways Are Truth and Equity. 5 Works that are just secure his Love, As they his pleasure are; The Earth with Blessings fill'd, to us His goodness do's declare. 6 Th' extended Orbs of Heav'n, by his Commanding word were made: And from his Breath its numerous Hosts Their several Beings had. 7 The Seas proud Waves within the shores Confined limits keep; Whose Waters are laid up within The Store house of the deep. 8 Let all men fear the Lord, to him Let due regard be shown: May all the World his awful pow'r By humble worship own. Part. II. 12 O happy he! whose service shows That God his Ruler is; And happy they! whom God declares By's Care, that they are his. 13 God on the Sons of men looks down From his Celestial Throne;
14 Views all the dwellers on the Earth From his bright Mansion. 15 He made them equally, their hearts He fashion'd one by one. More clearly all their thoughts to him, Than to themselves are known. 18 The Lord on those that fear his Name Looks with a Gracious Eye: And ne're will fail their hopes, that on His Goodness do rely. 20 Now Lord we wait for thee, who art Our help and our defence: 21 In all Estates we trust in thee With chearful confidence. 22 Lord, let thy grace on us descend Like a refreshing show'r; For all our hope and joys depend On thine Almighty Pow'r. Psalm XXXIV. 1 GOD, who my kind Preserver is, I will at all times bless; My tongue shall daily be imploy'd His goodness to confess. 2 In God my Soul shall boast, good men Shall hear it, and rejoice; 3 And to exalt his glorious Name, Join both in heart and voice.
4 I sought the Lord in my distress, And graciously he heard; His timely succours did prevent The threatning harm I fear'd. 7 Blest Angels, which on God attend, Yet wait t' encompass such As fear him, to preserve them safe When dangers near approach. 8 O tast and see, as I have done; And then confess you must, That God is good, and they are blest That in his goodness trust. Part. II. 12 What man would have his years prolong'd, And happy days would see? 13 Refrain thy tongue and lips from all Deceit and Injury. 14 From all unrighteous ways depart, From doing good ne're cease; Seek all mens quiet, and pursue The things that make for peace. 15 God loves the righteous, and on them He casts a gracious Eye; His Ear's attentive to their suits And open to their cry. 17 Nor do they cry in vain : wish'd help And case their troubles have; 18 God will draw near to broken hearts, And contrite spirits save.
19 Tho' good men oft afflicted are, At length God sets them free; 20 His care do's to their Bodies reach, No bone shall broken be. 21 Bad men shall perish, when they're plagu'd, With all that hate the Just; 22 Whom God will keep, and never fail Their hopes that on him trust. Psalm XXXVI. 5 BEyond the limits of the Skie Thy mercy, Lord, extends; Thy faithfulness the narrow bounds Of space and time transcends. 6 Mountains may be remov'd, before Thy truth shall fail the least; Thy judgments none can fathom; thou Preservest Man and Beast. 7 But who can prize enough that Love God bears unto the just; Under whose Providence and care Good men securely trust. 8 They to the Plenty of thy House For all supplies shall look; And freely of thy pleasures drink As from a running Brook. 9 For all the Springs of Joy and Life Derived are from thee;
From thy continued favour flows All our Felicity. 10 To those that thus esteem thy Love, Thy kindness still impart; And all thy promises fulfil To men of upright heart. Psalm XXXVII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 LET none be envious, when he sees The wickeds prosperous Estate; Nor, tempted by their good success, Grow bold their Crimes to imitate. 2 For so the Grass is fresh and green, Before the Mower cuts it down; And beauteous Flow'rs, within a while Are withered by the scorching Sun. 3 Hee's wise that's always doing good, And on Gods goodness, do's rely; 4 Thus thy Enjoyments hee'll secure, And all thy just desires supply. 5 Leave thy concerns unto his care, In firm dependance on him live; Hee'll either grant what thou wouldst have, Or what he knows is better give.
6 Tho' slanders and detracting tongues, Like Clouds, thy Righteousness obscure; Hee'll clear thy Innocence, the Light At Noon shall not appear more pure. 16 Think not meer wealth makes happy men; That little which contents the poor, Is better far, than wicked mens Ill got or ill-employed store. Part. II. 23 The Lord directs a good mans steps, And he delighteth in his way; 24 He is not ruin'd by his falls, Gods pow'r is his support and stay. 25 In all th' experience of my life, That Liberal man I ne're could see, Whose Alms expos'd himself to want, Or brought his Race to Beggery. 26 Hee's ever merciful and lends, And thus his Seed a blessing gain; 27 If thou wouldst therefore happy be, Do good and from all sin abstain. 28 For God whose Nature's good and just, Those that are like himself will own; They shall continue; when the race Of wicked men is overthrown.
35 I've seen the wicked rise to pow'r, Flourish like Lawrels ever green; 36 But suddenly their ruine came, And no remainder could be seen. 37 Mark but the good and perfect man, And him that's upright in his ways; Mercy attends his happy life, And quiet peace concludes his days. Psalm XXXVII. [Another Metre.] 1 LET none be trouble to behold The wickeds prosp'rous State; Nor by their good success grow hold Their crimes to imitate. 2 For Grass is fresh and green, before The Mower cuts it down; And beauteous Flowers within a while Are withered by the Sun. 3 Hee's wise that's doing good, and on Gods goodness do's rely; 4 Thus thy Enjoyments hee'll secure, Thy just desires supply. 5 Leave thy concerns to him, in firm Dependance on him live; Hee'll either grant what thou would'st have, Or what is better give.
6 Tho' slanderous tongues should like a Cloud Thy Righteousness obscure; Hee'll clear thy innocence, the light Shall not appear more pure. 16 Think not meer wealth makes happy men; For what contents the poor, Is better than Bad mens ill-got Or ill-imployed store. Part. II. 23 The Lord that guides a good mans steps, Delighteth in his way; 24 He is not ruin'd by his falls, Gods pow'r will be his stay. 25 In all my Life I never yet That liberal man could see; Whose Alms expos'd himself to want, Or Race to Beggery. 26 He mercifully lends, and thus His Seed a blessing gain; 27 If thou wouldst then be blest, do good And from all sin abstain. 28 God that is Good and Just, will those That him resemble own; They shall continue, when the Race Of Bad men is o'rethrown. 35 I've seen the wicked rise and spread Like Lawrels fresh and green; 36 But when his hasty ruine came, No remnant could be seen.
37 Mark but the perfect: man, and him That's upright in his ways; Mercy attends his happy life, And peace concludes his days. Psalm XXXIX. [As the 100. Psalm.] 4 LOrd teach me, when my latter end And number of my days I view; To measure right my self and them, How I am frail, and they are few. 5 My days extent is but a span, Mine age is nothing unto thee; Man in his flourishing estate Is altogether vanity. 6 A shadow's all that he pursues, But his vexations real are; He heaps up wealth, and knows not who Shall reap the profit of his care. 7 Let others Foolishly expect How kind the flatt'ring World will prove; I'll seek my God alone to please, And be ambitious of his Love. 11 How weak and nothing we appeal, When God for sin do's man chastise!
Like Garments fretted by the moth, So all his beauty ruin'd lies. 12 My poor Petitions, Lord, regard, And to my mournful cry give Ear; A wandring stranger here on Earth I am, as all my Fathers were. 13 Lord, my decaying strength repair, And spare me yet a while, that I May make my peace with thee, before I go away from hence, and dye. Psalm XXXIX. [Another Metre.] 4 LOrd teach me, when my end and days I have to live, I view; To know my self and them, how frail I am, and they are few. 5 My days are but a span, mine Age Is nothing unto thee; When man is in his best estate, Hee's only vanity. 6 A shadow he pursues, but his Vexations real are; Gets wealth, but knows not who shall reap The profit of his care. 7 Let others foolishly expect How kind the World will prove;
I'll seek to please my God, and be Ambitious of his Love. 11 How weak alas! we are, when God For sin do's Man chastise; Like Garments fretted by the moth, His Beauty ruin'd lies. 12 My mournful State, O Lord, regard, And to my cry give Ear; I am a Stranger here on Earth, As all my Fathers were. 13 Repair my strength, O God, and spare Me yet a while, that I May make my peace with thee, before I go from hence, and dye. Psalm XL. 1 'TIS good with patience to attend, And on the Lord rely; When other succours fail'd, to him I pray'd, who heard my cry. 2 I that in misery was plung'd, Surrounded with despair; Am safely plac'd above my fears, And firm my goings are. 3 And now I'll chearful praises sing To God, that set me free; Whilst this thy goodness do's invite Others to trust in thee.
4 O happy man that trusts in God, And can the proud despise! With the deceitful arts of such As turn aside to lies. Part. II. 5 Thy wond'rous works and thoughts of Love To us so many are; If I would tell them, they exceed My thoughts and value far. 6 When Sacrifices, Lord, to thee No longer grateful were; And when obedience thou before Burnt Offerings didst prefer; 7 Instead of these, that I should come, Thy Sacred Books recite; 8 Thy Law is in my heart, and I To do thy will delight. 9 Within thy Church I have made known How great thy Mercies are; Thy Truth and Faithfulness, my tongue To publish shall not spare. 11 O let my preservation speak How true thou art and kind; And those compassions I proclaim, Lord, let me ever find.
Psalm XLI. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 BLest is the man, whose tender sense Is touched with anothers grief; Who when he hears the poor mans cry, Affords him pity and relief. God will his Charity repay, In time of need will be his Friend; When troubles to his Lot shall fall, Hee'll make them have an happy end. 2 Threatned by danger or disease, His Life hee'll rescue from the Grave; Prosper his State on Earth; and from His Foes and all their malice save. 3 Hee'll strengthen him upon his Bed Of languishing infirmity; Secure of Gods compassions, His weary Limbs will softer lie. 4 Wounded and sore opprest with guilt, I cry'd for pity and for ease; Lord let thy mercies heal my Soul, Whose sins are only less than these. 13 Blest be that Majesty above, Whom all true Worshippers adore;
Let every Age consent, and say Amen, till time shall be no more. Psalm XLII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 O God the Spring of all my joys, For thee I long, to thee I look; No chased Hart do's pant so much After the cooling Water-brook. 2 Less grief it is to be exil'd From mine own House, than, Lord, from thine; Oh how I wish t' approach that place, Where all thy Glories use to shine. 3 The sorrows of my Banishment Increase, and tears become my food; Whilst mine insulting Foes reproach My Faith, and say, where's now thy God? 4 Past joys renew my Grief, to think How to thine House in Troops we came; What chearful Feasts we kept, and sang Praises in consort to thy name. 5 Why should I cherish these sad thoughts, Whence nought but perturbation flows? Since you procure not what I wish, Why should you hinder my repose? I've learnt the Remedy at last; To keep my Passions calm and still;
I'm nearer help by hope in God And resignation to his will. Psalm XLII. [Another Metre.] 1 Blest Fountain of my joys, for thee I long, to thee I look; No chased Hart do's pant so much After the Water-brook. 2 Less grief it is to be exil'd From mine own House, than thine; Oh how I wish t' approach the place, Where all thy Glories shine! 3 This makes my sorrows to increase, And tears become my food; To hear my Foes reproach my Faith, And say, where's now thy God? 4 Past joys renew my Grief, to think How to thine House we came In Troops to Feast, and praises sang In consort to thy name. 5 Why should I cherish these sad thoughts Whence nought but trouble flows? Since you procure not what I wish, Hinder not my repose. I've learnt this Remedy, to keep My Passions calm and still: I'm nearer help by hope in God, And a resigned will.
Psalm XLIII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 THou righteous Judge of all the World, Be thou my gracious Advocate; And clear mine Innocence from those Whose craft is equal to their hate. 2 Why, Lord, dost thou with-hold that pow'r On which alone my Soul relies? And look'st not on my mournful state, Opprest by cruel Enemies? 3 Thy mercy and thy truth display; That by the conduct of thy Light Thy Courts I may attain, and there May have of thee a fuller sight. 4 T' approach thine Altar would revive My Spirit, and all my gladness raise: Where I thy goodness would proclaim With all the Instruments of praise. 5 Why should I entertain sad thoughts Whence nought but perturbation flows? Since they procure not what I wish, Why should they hinder my repose? I've learnt this Remedy at last, To keep my Passions calm and still;
I'm nearer help by hope in God, And resignation to his will. Psalm XLIII. [Another Metre.] 1 GReat Judge of all the World, be thou My gracious Advocate; To plead my cause 'gainst those, whose craft Is equal to their hate. 2 Why, Lord, dost thou with-hold that pow'r On which my Soul relies? And look'st not on my state oppress'd By cruel Enemies? 3 Thy Mercy and thy Truth display, That, guided by thy Light, I may attain thy Courts, and have Of thee a fuller sight. 4 T' approach thine Altar would revive My Soul, my joys would raise: Where I thy goodness would proclaim With instruments of praise. 5 Why should I entertain sad thoughts, Whence nought but trouble flows? Since you procure not what I wish, Hinder not my repose. I've learnt this Remedy, to keep My passions calm and still; I'm nearer help by hope in God, And a resigned will.
Psalm XLV. [As the 100. Psalm.] 2 O Glorious King! thy form Divine Created Beauties do's outshine; All graces on thy Lips are powr'd, On thee Eternal Blessings showr'd. 5 Gird thy bright Sword upon thy thigh, The Ornament of Majesty; Like an illustrious Prince appear, And shew how great thy Glories are. 4 Ride on in triumph, and maintain The Vertues that adorn thy train; Wrong'd Meekness, Truth and Equity Look only for support from thee. Thine Enemies amazed stand, Struck with the Terrour of thy hand; Who needs must fall, since thy keen Darts Will find a passage to their hearts. 6 Thy Throne, O God, is fixed sure, Thy Kingdom ever shall endure; Thy Laws, the Sceptre in thy hand, Oppress not those whom they command. 7 Vice thou dost hate and Justice love; Therefore thy Glories far above
Thy Fellows shine; thy God has shed More Oyl of Gladness on thy head. Psalm XLVI. 1 TH' Almighty Lord is our defence, The strength whereby we stand; When troubles their approaches make, His help is nigh at hand. 2 Our Faith may then remain unmov'd, Tho' th' Earth should be displac'd; Or tho' into the Seas vast gulph The Mountains should be cast. 3 Although the Oceans troubled waves A frightful noise should make; Should rise and swell unto the Clouds, And cause the Hills to shake. 4 There is a quiet stream makes glad The City of the Lord; 5 His presence will secure her peace, And timely help afford. 6 The Nations rage and threaten War, But God is on our side; 7 One word of his dissolves their force, And daunts their swelling pride. 8 See what his hand has done; it draws The Sword out of its sheath; Which, while he gives it leave, triumphs In slaughter and in death.
9 Then by another word he makes Destructive Wars to cease; He breaks their Arms, the Bow and Spear, And crowns the Earth with Peace. 10 Cease then, fond men, to strive with God, Whose pow'r is over all; For fear lest he exalt himself In your unpittied fall. Psalm XLVII. 1 O All ye people, clap your hands, And make a chearful noise; With Acclamations to your God Declare your inward joys. 2 His high Perfections do proclaim Him greatly to be fear'd; This King of all the World commands Your honour and regard. 5 In a triumphant state our Lord Is gone above the Skies; Trumpets proclaim our joys, and all Applaud his Victories. 6 Sing chearful praises to our God, Sing praises to our King; 7 Hee's Lord of all the Earth, his praise With understanding sing. 8 God o're the Heathen people reigns; And in that Throne is plac'd,
Where he in Glory sits, and thence Shall judge the World at last. Psalm XLIX. [As the 100. Psalm.] 5 WHY should the Man that trusts in God, Affright himself with needless fear, To see th' approaches of old Age, Or that unwelcome Death draws near? 6 Vain men applaud their stores; yet none 7 His Brother can from dying save; 8 Lifes purchase is too great; no wealth 9 Can buy our freedom from the Grave. 10 The Ashes of the wise and good With Fools together mingled lye; The rich, tho' loth to go, must leave The World with all their wealth, and dye. 11 Some think on Houses that they build, Their Fame eternally shall stand; And, to preserve their Memory, Give their own names unto their Land. 12 Death levels all their state with Beasts, Makes all their splendid Titles, fade; 13 Yet their Posterity approves The Follies and mistakes they made.
14 Driv'n to the Grave like Sheep, their strength And Beauty shall consume away; And in Deaths fold inclos'd shall lye, Till the great Resurrection Day. A Day, wherein the Just shall reign, And o're the Bad Dominion have; 15 Then I shall be receiv'd to bliss, After I'm raised from the Grave. Part. II. 16 Be not concern'd, when one's made rich, Or honour'd here; for when he dies, 17 Naked he goes away from hence, And stript of all his Glory lies. 18 Tho' whilst he liv'd he bless'd himself; And other men are apt to praise His prudent management, that strives His Wealth or Family to raise; 19 It's Folly all; since he must tread The Path his Fathers went before; And in the place where now he dwells, Never see light or comfort more. 20 Man that to Honour is advanc'd, And with true wisdom is not blest, Tho' pleas'd with false and flatt'ring hopes, Shall die and perish like a Beast.
Psalm XLIX. [Another Metre.] 5 WHerefore should he that trusts in God, Affright himself with fear, To see old Age approach, or when Unwelcome Death draws near? 6 Men boast their stores, and yet none can 7 From Death his Brother save; 8 Lifes purchase is too great, to buy 9 Our freedom from the Grave. 10 The Ashes of the wise, with Fools Together blended lie; The rich, tho' loth, must leave the World With all their wealth, and die. 11 Some think on Houses that they build Their Fame shall ever stand; And that their names may not be lost, They give them to their Land. 12 Death levels all their pomp with Beasts, Makes all their Titles fade; 13 Yet their Posterity approves All the mistakes they made. 14 Driv'n to the Grave like Sheep, their strength And Beauty fades away: And there shall lie inclosed, till The Resurrection Day.
Then shall the Just men reign, and o're The bad Dominion have; 15 Then I shall be receiv'd to Bliss, When raised from the Grave. Part. II. 16 Envy not him that's glorious here Or rich; for when he dies, 17 Naked he goes away, and stript Of all his Glory lies. 18 Tho' whilst he liv'd he bless'd himself; And men are apt to praise That prudent management, which wealth And Families do's raise; 19 'Tis Folly all; for he must go Where others went before, And never, where he now must dwell, See light or comfort more. 20 Man that is honour'd here, and with True wisdom is not blest; Tho' pleas'd with flattering hopes, shall die, And perish like a Beast. Psalm LI. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 LOrd, look upon my sinful Soul, That unto thee for mercy flies;
As thy Compassions boundless are, So blot out mine iniquities. 2 Oh wash me throughly from my crimes, For thou alone canst make me clean: 3 With tears I now confess my guilt, Amaz'd to see how vile I've been. 4 None else can call me to account; But thy Tribunal, Lord, I fear; For if arraign'd and judg'd by thee, I must be cast, and thou be clear. 5 I was conceiv'd and born in sin, Too prone and bent to do amiss; 6 But inward Purity to thee, And truth of heart most pleasing is. 7 Lord shew me thou art reconcil'd, As those with Hyssop sprinkled know They are absolv'd; thy Grace can wash And make me whiter than the Snow. 8 My sins have forfeited the joys And inward peace that once I had; Thy pard'ning voice would heal again My broken Bones, and make them glad. 9 No longer, Lord, behold my sins With a severe and angry look; Oh take their stains out of my Soul, And blot their guilt out of thy Book.
Part. II. 10 Create in me, O God, a heart Clean and unspotted in thy sight; Renew a well composed mind, Unmov'd from goodness, and upright. 11 Lord do not cast me from thy sight, As one whom thou no more canst love; Nor let thy Spirit, whose grace I need, Tho' griev'd too much, from me remove. 12 Its saving comforts and free aids, T' uphold my feeble pow'rs, afford; 13 Thus Sinners will be drawn t' amend Their ways, and turn unto the Lord. 14 Oh save me from the crying guilt Of blood, that sin of Crimson dy; I'll then thy faithfulness proclaim, And loudly sing thy Clemency. 15 My opened lips shall speak thy praise; 16 For this thou rather dost desire Than costly Sacrifice of Beasts, Consumed wholly in the fire. 7 Thou, Lord, a broken contrite heart Dost more than bloody off'rings prise; This present now I humbly make, Which God, I trust, will not despise.
Psalm LI. [Another Metre.] 1 BEhold, O Lord, my sinful Soul To thee for Mercy flies; Thy Mercy boundless is, blot out All mine iniquities. 2 Oh wash away my crimes, for thou Alone canst make me clean, 3 I now confess my guilt, amaz'd To see how vile I've been. 4 Tho' none can call me to account, Thy Sentence, Lord, I fear; If judg'd by thee, I know I must Be cast, and thou be clear. 5 I was conceiv'd and born in sin, Too prone to do amiss; 6 But purity and truth of heart To thee most pleasing is. 7 Shew thou art reconcil'd, as those Whom Hyssop sprinkles, know They are absolv'd; thy Grace can wash, And make me white as snow. 8 My sins have forfeited the joys And peace that once I had; Thy voice would heal my broken Bones, Thy Pardon make them glad.
9 No longer, Lord, behold my sins With a displeased look; Oh take their stains out of my Soul, Their Guilt out of thy Book. Part. II. 10 Create in me, O Lord, a heart Unspotted in thy sight; Renew in me a mind unmov'd From goodness, and upright. 11 Lord do not cast me from thy sight, As one thou canst not love; Nor let thy Spirit, tho' griev'd too much, Its grace from me remove. 12 Its comforts and free aids, t' uphold My feeble pow'rs afford; 13 Thus Sinners will amend their ways, And turn unto the Lord. 14 Oh save me from the guilt of blood, That sin of Crimson dy; Then I'll proclaim thy faithfulness, And sing thy Clemency. 15 My opened lips shall speak thy praise; For this thou dost desire 16 Rather than Sacrifice of Beasts, Consumed in the Fire. 17 Thou dost a broken contrite heart More than all off'rings prise; This present now I humbly bring, Which God will not despise.
Psalm LIII. [As the 25. Psalm.] 1 THE Fools believe no God Do's mind th' affairs below; For tho' they speak it not aloud, They live as if 'twere so. All are corrupt and vile, Their actions hateful are; They're only skilful to do ill, From good estranged far. 2 God from his Throne look'd down, And took a strict survey, What men did seek and know the Lord, And his just Laws obey. 3 All were degenerate, With loathsome sins o're-grown, What was Religious, just and good, None practis'd, no not one. 4 Strange Madness! that they should Like Bread the poor devour; And neither own thee by their Pray'rs, Nor dread thy mighty pow'r. 5 Where all their fears were vain, Great terrours feis'd them there; God that despis'd them made their fall As shameful as their fear.
6 Lord, let thy peoples hopes Be with deliverance Crown'd; When thy Salvation shall appear, Their joys shall then abound. Psalm LVII. 1 LOrd, since I trust in thee alone, Mercy to me extend; I fly for shelter to thy Wings, Till all my troubles end. 2 To him whose Pow'r is over all, In my distress I'll cry; Since thou hast sav'd me heretofore, Thy help will still be nigh. 6 When with the Fowlers treacherous arts, My ruine was prepar'd; Their Pits occasion'd their own fall, Their Nets themselves insnar'd. 7 My heart, O God, is now prepar'd, And this my tongue shall raise; 8 Which with my Harp shall early sing A Consort to thy praise. 9 The great Salvation thou hast wrought, I'll to the World proclaim; The scattered Nations shall assist My Songs, to spread thy fame. 10 Thy mercy reaches to the Heav'ns, Thy Truth unto the Skies;
11 Then let thy Glories, Lord, above Both Earth and Heaven rise. Psalm LXII. [As the 25. Psalm.] 1 MY Soul doth wait on God, My Rock and my defence; 2 I shall not greatly then be mov'd, For safety comes from thence. 8 Ye people trust in him What time you are afraid; Hee'll be your refuge in distress, When you implore his aid. 9 The men of low-degree Are vain; great men a lie; Both, in the ballance laid, appear Lighter than vanity. 10 Wealth makes not happy men, And trust in this is vain; Then seek not by oppressive arts, Or fraud t' increase your gain. If riches should abound By Heavens blessing sent; Take heed they do not gain your hearts, Or make you insolent. 11 That all may know from whence Their help they should derive;
Thou, Lord, hast ost declar'd, that pow'r Is thy Prerogative. 12 And that uncessant streams Of mercy flow from thee; So that according to mens works Their due reward shall be. Psalm LXIII. 1 EArly, O Lord, my fainting Soul Thy Mercy do's implore; No Travellour in desert Lands Can thirst for Water more. 2 I long t' appear as I was wont, Within thy holy place, Thy Pow'r and Glory to behold, And to partake thy Grace. 3 For Life it self, without thy Love, No relish do's afford; No other joys can equal this, To serve and praise the Lord. 4 I'll therefore make my Pray'rs to thee, And bless thee whilst I live; 5 This, like the choisest dainties, will Both food and pleasure give. 6 When others sleep, my wakeful thoughts Present thee to my mind; And in the night I think how good My God has been, and kind.
Since thou alone hast been my help, To thee alone I fly; And on thy watchful providence With chearfulness rely. 8 Dangers, whilst thou art near to me, Do threaten me in vain; When I keep close to God, his care And Pow'r will me sustain. Psalm LXV. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 PRaises in Sion wait for thee, And there the Vow perform'd shall be. 2 To thee, O God, that hearest Pray'r, All flesh shall chearfully repair, 3 Our Sins may justly put a stop To all that good from thee we hope; Thy Mercy do's those fears allay, For this will purge our sins away. 4 O happy they that may draw near To thee, and in thy Courts appear; For these shall all refreshments have, Thy House can give, or they can crave. 5 By thy amazing wonders, thou Thy kindness to the good dost show; The ends of th' Earth in thee confide, And th' Isles that in the Sea reside.
6 Mountains that seem to touch the Skie, Gain from thy strength stability; 7 The roaring Seas God do's asswage, And stills the peoples madder rage. Part. II. 8 O're all the Earth the Nations spred, Thy works of pow'r and anger dread; And all adore thy goodness great, Where e're the Sun do's rise or set. 9 Thy care prevents a threatning Dearth; Thou visitest the thirsty Earth; Showrs to inrich her barren Womb From thy full Springs above do come. Thy Bounty do's that food provide, By which our needs are all supply'd. 10 The hardned ridges of the Field, Water'd with showrs, are soft and yield. Its Furrows setled and deprest, Its Spring by after Rains is blest. 11 The fruitful year thy blessings Crown, And plenty from the Clouds drop down, 12 The Wilderness refresht with rain, Tho' parch'd before, now Springs again: The little Hills new Garments wear, And in their youthful green appear.
13 Flocks are the Cloathing of the plain, The Vales are cover'd o're with grain. All nature seems to shout and sing, To welcome in the hopeful Spring. Psalm LXVI. 1 LET all the Earth with joy resound, To God their voices raise; 2 Extoll him in their Songs, and make Him glorious by their praise. 3 Proclaim his mighty works, in which Such terrour do's appear; As makes his Foes to crouch, and feign Obedience through their fear. 4 Ev'n all the Earth shall worship thee, And sing unto thy name: 5 To see the wonders thou hast wrought, To raise and spread thy Fame. 6 He turn'd the Sea into dry Land; The swelling Flood made way For Israel to pass; who there His glories did display. 7 He views the Nations, and his Rule Do's o're the World extend; Then let not men rebel; for pride Will in their ruine end. 8 Let all the people bless the Lord, And loudly sing thy praise,
9 Thou great Preserver of our Lives, And Guide of all our ways. Part. II. 13 I'll go into thine House, O Lord, And thankful offerings lay 14 Before thy Altar; and the vows I made in trouble, pay. 15 To honour him from whom all good Do's come, I'll spare no cost; I'll offer what he do's require, And what will please him most. 16 You that are pious, come and hear What God for me has done; His mercies show'd to me, will be For your instruction. 17 When I with grief opprest, to him My fervent cryes did raise; He heard me graciously, and turn'd My sighing into praise. 18 God will not favour me, if I Iniquity regard: 19 But he inclin'd his Ear to me And my Petitions heard. 20 O let the glorious Name of God Be ever magnify'd; Who neither did reject my Pray'r, Nor his own Grace deny'd.
Psalm LXVII. 1 SHew mercy to us, Lord, Bless us with gifts divine; O let the Glories of thy face, On us thy Servants shine. 2 May thy hid ways be known, Thy fear on Earth abound; And thy Salvation over all The Heathen World resound. 3 Let all in Psalms of praise Their grateful thoughts express; Let all the people round the World Thy mighty Name confess. 4 The Nations now may sing Their joys, since God do's reign; He rules with wisdom, this great Judge Will righteousness maintain. 5 Let all in Psalms of praise Their grateful thoughts express; Let all the people round the World Thy mighty Name confess. 6 Then shall th' enriched Earth With Plenty overflow: And God on all his other gifts, His blessing will bestow. His blessings showr'd on us, Our happy days shall crown;
His pow'r and greatness all the World With humble fear shall own. Psalm LXVIII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 LET the Great God arise, and then His scattered Foes will flee for fear; 2 Vanish like Smoak, and melt like Wax Before the Fire, when he draws near. 3 But let the Just rejoice, and praise 4 His name, to whom all pow'r belongs; He rides on High above the Clouds, Let him be rais'd too in your Songs. 5 He pitties Orphans, Widdows wrongs 6 He rights, brings chained Prisoners out; He for the desolate provides, But plagues the Rebels land with drought. 7 Lord, when thou brought'st thy people forth From Egypt, with a mighty hand; And led'st them through the Wilderness, To bring them to the promis'd land; 8 The Heav'ns before thy Lightnings dropt, The Earth did with thy Thunder quake; Mount Sinai, when the Lord came down, Did from its firm foundation shake.
17 Thousands of Angels (Heav'ns great Host) Like Guards took up their Station there; Gods special presence was declar'd, When these Attendants did appear. Part. II. 18 Our God, like a great Conquerour, Ascended is above the Skies; And after him in triumph draws, As spoils, his Captiv'd Enemies. He scattered his various gifts Around, to make his Bounty known; Ev'n Rebels had a share, 'mongst whom He dwells, and they his kindness own. 19 God heaps his daily benefits On us, and he shall have our Songs; 20 He is our Saviour, to whom The Pow'r of Life and Death belongs. 21 In his just vengeance he shall wound The heads of all that him resist; On whom no methods of his Love Prevail, but still in sin persist. 32 Praise him ye Kingdoms of the Earth: 33 Who governs all the Heav'nly Spheres; From thence he Thunders with his voice, Which every Creature dreads that hears.
34 Give him the Glory of his Pow'r, Illustriously to Israel shown; Its wonders in the Heav'ns appear, And thence by all the World is known. 35 They that behold his Majesty In holy places, are amaz'd; 'Tis God that giveth strength and pow'r Unto his Saints. His Name be prais'd. Psalm LXX. [As the 25. Psalm.] 1 BEhold my Troubles, Lord, How they with haste advance; O do not stay, but come as fast To my deliverance. 2 Let those that seek my life, Their own confusion meet: When they attempt my hurt, with shame Be forced to retreat. 3 Let such as make my griefs Their sport, unpittied be; Those that deride my trust in God, Reward with infamy. 4 But all true worshippers That seek their God to please, Thy favour towards them express, And make their joys t' increase.
Let those that hope in thee, And thy Salvation love, Ever occasion have to say, Praised be God above. 5 Look on my state opprest With misery and grief; Thou art my Saviour and my help; Lord send me quick relief. Psalm LXXI. [As the 25. Psalm.] 1 MY Soul on God relies, Let none disgrace my trust; 2 Lord hear and save me when I call, As thou art good and just. 3 Be thou my sure defence, Whereto I may resort; Make good thy gracious promise, Lord, Be thou my Rock and Fort. 4 Save me from cruel men, And those that are unjust; Thou, Lord, alone hast been my hope, And from my youth, my Trust. 6 Thou took'st me from the Womb, When my first breath I drew; Thou hast sustain'd me ever since, All praise to thee is due.
7 Many with wonder gaze On me, as one forlorn; 8 But by my praises and thine aid, I shall confute their scorn. 9 Lord when my strength decays, And when my years decline, Do not forsake or cast me off, But own me still for thine. 14 In thee I'll place my hopes, Thee with more praises crown; 15 Thy Truth and Mercies I'll proclaim, Whose measures are unknown. Part. II. 16 To no supports I'll fly, But to the strength divine: No other goodness shall be nam'd, Or faithfulness, but thine. 17 These from my youth I've learnt; And hitherto declar'd Thy wonderous works. Forsake me not 18 Now when I am grey-hair'd. Till I have further shown Thy pow'r, and taught thy fear, Both to the present age, and those That after shall appear. 19 Thy goodness, Lord, is great, Thy works illustrious are; All thy perfections have no bounds, None can with thee compare.
20 Thou shalt again revive My Soul, with grief deprest; 21 Thou, Lord, wilst raise my low estate, Comfort and give me rest. 22 Then to proclaim thy Truth, I'll all my Powers raise; And to improve my Songs, will add Sweet instruments of praise. 23 My chearful tongue and lips, Shall loudly bear a part In praising thee, when set on work By a most thankful heart. 24 This shall be my great work, To celebrate thy fame; Who hast redeemed me, and brought Mine Enemies to shame. Psalm LXXIII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 CErtain it is, that God is kind To those that are sincerely good; 2 But yet my Faith was at a loss, My feet did stagger where I stood. 3 I saw the wickeds prosperous state, My envy at those Fools did rise; 4 That, when a healthful Age was past, A quiet Death should close their Eyes.
5 Exempt from Plagues and miseries That others seek t' escape in vain; 6 They're covered o're with violence, And Pride surrounds them like a Chain. 7 Pamper'd with ease and luxury, Their Body thrives, looks fat and fair; Their wealth rolls in with a full tide, Beyond their hopes, without their care. 8 Such is their Pride, that they profess Oppressive courses without shame; 9 Dare Heav'n it self with blasphemies, And freely blast the good mans name. 10 This gives disturbance to his mind, And passion makes his tears to flow; 11 Doubts rise within him, whether God Discerns or minds things done below. 12 Th' ungodly are the prosperous men, Thrive in the World and riches gain; 13 I've wash'd my hands in innocence, And cleans'd my heart, says he, in vain. 14 For every morn renews my Plagues, And I whole days in sorrow spend. 15 But stay; thus speaking, I against The Faith of all good men offend.
Part. II. 16 I oft consider'd with my self Th' unequal ways of Providence; I found them hard to be resolv'd, And doubts long kept me in suspence. 17 At last I' enquired at Gods House, And there did my mistakes amend; Before I only view'd their way, But now I understood their end. 18 I saw the slippery precipice On which their tottering feet were plac'd; 19 And with what Terrours they were seis'd, When down to sudden ruine cast. 20 Their happiness was like a Dream, Or shade that quickly vanishes; 21 Lord! what a stupid Beast was I, 22 To vex my self at their success. 23 For all this while I was thy care; By thee sustain'd, tho' suffering; 24 Thy Counsels here shall guide me still, And afterward to Glory bring. 25 Lord, there is none in Heav'n or Earth, On whom I can rely, like thee; 26 For when my heart and hopes here fail, My stay and Portion thou wilt be.
27 But those that are from God estrang'd, Or unto hateful Idols bow, Shall surely their own ruine meet, And a deserved overthrow. 28 God is my chiefesl Good; 'tis best To keep me to my God most nigh; Then I his Mercy and his Truth Shall praise, when I on him rely. Psalm LXXXII. [As the 113. Psalm.] 1 YE Rulers of the World, that bear Gods Name, and represent him here, Know that this Judge among you sits. 2 If you enact unrighteous Laws, Or countenance a wicked cause, Your guiltiness no Plea admits. 3 You act like God, when you defend The poor, and your assistance lend To helpless men that Justice crave. 4 Absolve the Innocent with speed, Obnoxious only by their need, And from th' Oppressors Power save.
5 They cry too oft to you in vain, Who'll know no other right but gain, Whose Eyes are blind by Bribes you take. Thus Justice cannot find its course, But Laws neglected lose their force, And all the Lands Foundations shake. 6 I said y' are Gods, but you shall dye, And fall, tho' Sons of the Most High, 7 As other Men and Kings have done. 8 Arise, great Judge of all, and reign, Fall'n Justice then will rise again, When God doth sit upon his Throne. Psalm LXXXIV. 1 HOW beauteous is the place where thou Thy presence, Lord, dost grant! 2 Oh how I long t' approach thy Courts, Impatient of restraint! 3 The little Birds the Liberties Enjoy, which I'm deny'd; Near to thine Altars they prepare Their Nests, and there reside. 4 Oh happy men! that may frequent Thine House, to praise thee still; 5 Whose trust is in thine aid, whose heart Devout affections fill.
8 Great God of Hosts, attend when I My Pray'r to thee address; 9 Look graciously on mine Estate, And thine Anointed bless. 10 A thousand joyous days elsewhere, Yield me not such content, As one days freedom at thy House, And in thy service spent. There let me have the meanest place, And at the Threshold lye; Rather than all the wickeds state Without this liberty. 11 God is a glorious Sun, from whom We Light and Life derive; A Shield for our defence, and he Will Grace and Glory give. No good will he with-hold, from him That's upright in his way. 12 Oh happy man! that makes the Lord His only trust and stay. Psalm LXXXV. [As the 113. Psalm.] 1 THY Mercy, Lord, has chang'd our doom, 2 Thy Captives to their Land are come, And all their sins are done away.
3 Thine Anger which was fierce before, Is now remov'd and flames no more; 4 O let it ever cease, we pray. 5 When wilt thou, Lord, from wrath refrain? 6 Raise and revive our joys again? 7 Thy saving mercies, Lord, restore. 8 I'll listen to the voice of Peace, Which God will to his Saints express, If they return to sin no more. 9 Surely thy saving help is near To such as thee sincerely fear, And glory to our Land will bring. 10 Mercy and Truth together meet, Justice and Peace each other greet, 11 And truth out of the Earth shall spring. From Heav'n shall righteousness look down; 12 God with his Blessings will us Crown, Our Land with Plenty shall o'reflow. When Righteousness prepares his way, Justice with us shall longer stay, And Mercy tread where this do's go.
Psalm LXXXVI. 1 LOrd, bow thine Ear to my requests, Tho' poor and in the dust; 2 O save my righteous Soul, for Lord In thee alone I trust. 3 Be merciful to me, O God, And hear my mournful voice, 4 Daily my Soul to thee ascends, Oh make it to rejoice. 5 Thou, Lord, art gracious and good, To pardon sins inclin'd; And all that humbly thee implore, Shall plenteous mercy find. 6 To thee I call in my distress, In hope thou wilst attend; 7 On thee with patience wait, till thou A gracious answer send. 8 Tho' Heathens boast of other Gods, And talk of Pow'rs Divine: There's none that can compare with thee, Nor any works like thine. 9 All the deceived Lands at length Their Maker shall adore; Shall glorify thy Name, O Lord, And celebrate thy Pow'r. 10 When they behold how great thou art, What wonders thou hast done;
Their Idols they'll disown; and say, That thou art God alone. Part. II. 11 Lord, guide my steps, that from the way Of truth I ne're may err; My loose affections so unite, That I thy name may fear. 12 With all my Soul I'll praise the Lord, His glories ever tell; 13 By whose great goodness I have been Freed from the lowest Hell. 15 Thou, Lord, art pittiful and kind, To punish Sinners slow; Goodness and faithfulness from thee Abundantly do flow. 16 Thy merciful regard I need, And strength from thee I crave; From all designed mischiefs, Lord, Thy humble servant save. 17 Some signal mark of favour show, Which all my Foes may see, And at their malice blush; when thou Dost help and comfort me.
Psalm LXXXIX. 1 THY Mercies, Lord, I'll ever sing, Thy truth to all proclaim; 5 The Heav'nly Angels sacred Quire Shall celebrate the same. 6 These never with the Lord compare, Nor his Commands contest; 7 But give attendance at his Throne, With awful fear possess'd. 8 Great God! there's none that's arm'd with pow'r, Or girt with Truth like thee; 9 Thou, when the Waves arise, dost rule And still the raging Sea. 10 Thy arm alone brake Egypts pow'r; And Israel did adore, When they beheld the drowned Host Lie scattered on the shore. 11 The World, with all therein, is thine, Made by thy pow'rful voice; 12 With all the Quarters of the Earth, Which in thy care rejoice. 13 Thy great and uncontrouled Pow'r Can no resistance fear; 14 Yet Mercy, Righteousness, and Truth, In all thy Rule appear. 15 Blest are the Men that understand The joyful sound of praise;
They through thy favour shall enjoy Pleasant and happy dayes. 16 Th' expressions of thy wond'rous Love Will fresh delights create; And thou, the Glory of their strength, Wilt raise their low Estate. Psalm XC. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 LOrd every Age and Race has seen Thou hast our help and refuge been. 2 E're that the Mountains had a Birth, Or ever thou hadst form'd the Earth, Thou hadst a Being long before, And shalt abide when time's no more. 3 Thy first Decree 'gainst man was just, Bidding him Turn again to Dust. 4 A thousand years, if we could stay In life so long, is but a day Compar'd with thee; and in thy sight, Like the short Watches of the Night. 5 Death like an over-flowing stream Sweeps us away; our Life's a Dream. 6 Like Flow'rs i'th' Morning fresh and fair, Cut down e're Night, and withered are.
7 Thine Anger and our Wickedness, 8 Makes the short Term of Nature less; 9 And thus our years to' an end are brought, As swiftly as a breath or thought. 10 Our Age to Seventy years is set; If to another Stage we get, And unto Fourscore years arrive, We rather sigh and groan, then live. Part. II. 11 Lord, who enough considered hath The Pow'r and Terrour of thy wrath? Wrath that is equal to our dread, And strikes so often Sinners dead. 12 Oh that the sense of our last end, And Sorrows that this Life attend, May more excite our fear of thee, And a wise care of Piety. 13 When, Lord, shall thy displeasure cease? When wilt thou give our troubles ease? Now we are humble and repent, Shew pity to us and relent. 14 Oh let that mercy come at lasl, We long impatiently to tast: 15 And in proportion to our tears, Let Gladness crown our future years.
16 Since Acts of Grace thy Glory are, And please thee most; do thou appear In those to us and to our Race: 17 Shew us the Beauties of thy Face. Afford thy Light to guide our way, That we may never go astray: All our good undertakings bless, And prosper with desir'd success. Psalm XCI. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 HE that has God for his retreat, Has gain'd a safe and quiet seat. For Gods o're-spreading Providence Will like a shade be his Defence. 2 To him as to my Fort, I'll fly; On him, my pow'rful God, rely. 3 When noysome Plagues infect the air, Hee'll save thee from the secret snare. 4 His care, like Wings, shall safety yield, His faithful promise be thy shield: 5 So that no dangers of the Night Shall seise thee with a sudden fright. 6 Plagues that like poisoned Arrows kill, And all around with slaughter fill,
Walking unseen both Night and Day, Shall miss their aim, or balk their way. 7 Thousands shall fall on every hand, And thou the while unhurt shalt stand: 8 And only with thine Eyes shalt see What shall the wickeds portion be. Part. II. 9 Since thou hast made the Lord most High Thy Refuge and Security; 10 No evil shall thy joys molest, Nor Plague thy dwelling shall infest. 11 Blest Angels charg'd to guard thy way, To thee shall kind attendance pay. 12 These in their hands shall thee support, Lest thou shouldst stumble to thy hurt. 13 The Lyon thou maist safely meet, Tread th' Aspe and Dragon under feet. 14 Since he has set his Love on me, From dangers I will set him free. Becaufe he knows and fears my Name, I'll honour him and raise his Fame. 15 When he invokes me in his need, I'll hear and answer him with speed. When hee's in Trouble I'll stand by, To save, and set him up on High. 16 Give him long Life; and when that's done, Will shew him my Salvation.
Psalm XCII. 1 O What a pleasant work it is, To praise the Lord above; 2 Morning and Evening to proclaim His faithfulness and Love; 3 Sweet Notes of Instruments to join With an Harmonious voice! 4 Thy gracious dealings with me, Lord, Have made me to rejoice. 5 Great are thy works, and thy designs Contain the deepest sense; 6 Tho' wicked Men and Fools mistake Thy ways of Providence. 7 They spring and flourish like the Grass, With good success o'rejoy'd: And only grow to be mown down, And utterly destroy'd. 12 But righteous men like fruitful Palms, Or stately Cedars grow: For planted in thy Courts, they're fed With Springs that ever flow. 14 There they are fair and ever thrive, And still more fruit shall bring: Age that makes other things decay, Makes them more flourishing. 15 Thus God appears to all the World To be both good and just;
No falseness can be charg'd on him That is my Rock and trust. Psalm XCIII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 THE Lord do's reign, and like a King Puts on his Robes of Glorious Light; Tremble thou Earth, when he appears Cloathed and girt about with might. Under his Rule th' unquiet World Will gain stability and peace; 2 Of old his Empire did begin, And, like himself, can never cease. 3 In vain the Worlds rebellious pow'rs In Tumults and Commotions use; Like troubled Waters of the Sea, That bid Defiance to the Skies. 4 Resist not his unequal strength, That's far above your threatning noise; For ev'n the Seas unruly Waves Do calmly listen to his voice. 5 Lord, as thy Pow'r can never fail, So all thy promises are sure: 'Tis thy Perfection to be true, And theirs that serve thee, to be pure.
Psalm XCIII. [Another Metre.] 1 THE Lord do's reign, and cloaths himself With Robes of glorious Light: Tremble thou Earth, when he appears Girded about with might. Now the unquiet World will gain Stability and peace, 2 His Empire was of old, and like Himself can never cease. 3 In vain the Worlds rebellious pow'rs Combin'd in Tumults rise; Like Waters of the Sea, that bid Defiance to the Skies. 4 Resist not his unequal strength, That's far above your noise; For ev'n the Seas unruly Waves Are calmed at his voice. 5 Thy Power, Lord, can never fail, Thy Promises are sure; Thy Glory's to be true, and theirs That serve thee, to be pure.
Psalm XCIV. 1 THou great Avenger of all wrongs, At length thy Justice shew; 2 Arise, and render to the Proud Rewards that are their due. 3 How long shall evil men triumph, And boast their Villanies; 4 Speak scornfully of God himself, And providence despise? 5 Who, whilst the ruine of the poor 6 And innocent they plot, 7 Say that the Lord do's not discern, Or else regards it not. 8 When will these brutish Sinners learn, These senseless Fools be wise? 9 Shall not he hear that made the Ears, And see that form'd the Eyes? 10 He the rude Nations do's instruct, And teaches Man his skill: Shall not he know then, and chastise Thy disobedient will? 11 O flatter not thy self, nor these Impieties maintain: God knows these very thoughts of thine, How false they are and vain.
Part. II. 12 Lord, hee's a happy man, whom thou By chastisements hast taught; And thereby to a sense of thee, And of his Duty brought. 13 God will in Mercy at the length From troubles set him free; Whilst vengeance ruins wicked mens Short-liv'd prosperity. 14 Tho' good men for a while chastis'd May under troubles grone; God will not utterly forsake, Nor cast away his own. 15 Neglected judgment shall return Again to act its part; And then felicity shall crown The men of upright heart. 16 T' oppose my wicked Foes, I call'd To other aids in vain; 17 Without thy succours, in the Grave I and my hopes had lain. 18 When I despair'd to keep my feet, Thy mercy me upheld: Thy comforts eas'd my troubled thoughts, And swelling passions quell'd.
Psalm XCV. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 COme let us all unite our joys, And to the Lord our voices raise; 2 Before his presence let us come With thankful hearts and Psalms of praise. 3 Our Lord is a great God and King, Of power super-eminent Above all Gods; him Angels serve, And Princes only represent. 4 The secret places of the Earth, And strength of Hills are in his hand: 5 He made the Waters of the Sea, And for their bound prepar'd the Land. 6 To him that made us let us kneel, And humble Adorations give; 7 Who are the people of his care, The Sheep that on his pastures live. 8 To day let's hearken to his voice, And not such hardned Sinners prove, 9 As those that in the Wilderness Provok'd and tempted God above. They prov'd his pow'r, and saw his works, 10 And griev'd his Patience fourty year;
Till, wearied with their murmurings, That Race he could no longer bear. He did their stupid unbelief, And base Ingratitude detest; 11 And in his Indignation sware They should not come into his Rest. Psalm XCV. [Another Metre.] 1 COme let us with united joys To God our voices raise: 2 With thankful hearts before him come, And loudly sing his praise. 3 Our Lord is a great God and King, In power eminent Above all Gods: him Angels serve, And Princes represent. 4 The secrets of the Earth, and strength Of Hills are in his hand; 5 He made the Waters of the Sea, And for their bound, dry land. 6 To him that made us, let us kneel, And Adorations give; 7 Who are his people, and the Sheep That on his pastures live. 8 To day let's hear his voice, and not Such hardned Sinners prove,
9 As those that in the Wilderness Provoked God above. They prov'd his pow'r, and saw his works, 10 And griev'd him fourty year; Till, wearied with that murm'ring Race, He could no longer bear. He did their unbelief, and base Ingratitude detest; 11 And in his Anger sware, they should Not come into his rest. Psalm XCVI. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 LEt all the Earth their voices raise, To sing the choicest Psalm of praise; 2 To sing and bless Gods sacred name, And all his saving works proclaim. 3 His Glory let the Heathen know, His wonders to the Nations show; 4 Let him be prais'd that is so high; More fear'd than any Deity: 5 For Heathen Gods but Creatures are; He made the Heav'ns and every Star. 6 He in Majestick splendor dwells In Beauty and in strength excels.
7 Let every Tongue and every Tribe, Glory and Pow'r to God ascribe: 8 The Glory give that is his due, Their Off'rings in his Courts renew. 9 Fall down before him, and confess His Majesty and Holiness; Let all the Earth the Lord revere, And by their Duty shew their fear. 10 Say to the World th' Almighty reigns, A Judge that equity maintains; Hee'll make their Wars and Tumults cease, And bless the Earth with quiet peace. 11 Let Heav'n and Earth then tell their joys, The Ocean by its roaring noise; 12 Fields by the fairness of their Crops, Trees by the Fruits that Crown their Tops. 13 At his approach all Nature's glad, And only Sinners are afraid: All whom he judges shall confess His Equity and Righteousness.
Psalm XCVII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 LET th' Earth rejoice, since God do's reign: 2 For tho' thick darkness do's surround, And cloud his ways of Providence, Yet perfect justice is their ground. 3 When God prepares himself for wrath, 4 His Lightnings flame around the Skies; A dreadful Fire before him goes, To burn up all his Enemies. Th' amazed Earth sees this and quakes, 5 The Hills like melted Wax flow down: 6 The Heav'ns his Justice do proclaim, And Men below his Glories own. 7 Confounded be those Worshippers, That to a graven Image bow, And boast of Idols; worship him, Angels above and Gods below. 8 Good men will hear the news with Joy, When Judgments on these Sinners fall; 9 Which tell the World their Gods are vain, And thou art high above them all. 10 All ye that Love and serve the Lord, Strictly preserve your innocence;
Then let the wicked seek your fall, God will stand up for your defence. 11 Th' immortal Seeds of light and bliss, For truly pious men are sown: A joyful Harvest will at length Their labours and their sorrows Crown. 12 Then let your chearful temper show, The God you serve is good and kind: Praise him for all his Mercies past, And wait with joy for those behind. Psalm XCVII. [Another Metre.] 1 GOD Reigns, let all the Earth rejoyce: 2 Tho' darkness may surround And Cloud his ways of providence, Yet Justice is their ground. 3 Lightnings, when God prepares for wrath, Do flame around the Skies; 4 A Fire before him goes, to burn Up all his Enemies. The Earth sees this and quakes, the Hills 5 Like melted Wax flow down; 6 The Heav'ns his Righteousness declare, And Men his Glories own. 7 Confounded be those Worshippers, That to an Image bow,
And boast of Idols; worship him, Angels and Gods below. 8 Good men will joy, when punishments Shall on these Sinners fall; 9 Which shew their Gods are vain, and thou Art high above them all. 10 All ye that love and fear the Lord, Preserve your innocence; Then let the wicked seek your fall, God will be your defence. Th' immortal Seeds of light and bliss For pious men are sown; A joyful Harvest will at length Their work and sorrows crown. Then let your chearful temper show The God you serve is kind; Praise him for Mercies past, and wait With joy for those behind. Psalm XCVIII. 1 REnew your Songs to God, and tell What wonders he hath done; Let all proclaim the Victories His pow'rful Arm has won. 2 His Mercy which was kept before A secret, and inclos'd; Now to the clear and open view Of Heathens is expos'd.
3 His promis'd goodness and his Truth Was first to Israel shown; But now the ends of th' Earth have seen His great Salvation. 4 Let all the Earth this welcom News 5 Applaud, with loudest noise; 6 Join Musick to their Hymns of praise, To testifie their joys. 7 Let swelling Seas roar, and excite The joys of Neighbouring lands; 8 Let Echoing Hills the noise repeat, And Rivers clap their hands. 9 Whole Nature well may feel a change When Gods approach is nigh: Who comes to judge and rule the World With Truth and Equity. Psalm C. 1 LET all the Nations of the Earth, To God their chearful voices raise; 2 With Gladness worship him, and come Before his Face with Songs of praise. 3 Know that our Lord is God alone Who did to all their Beings give; We are the people of his Care, The Sheep that on his pastures live.
4 Enter his Gates with thankful hearts, His praises in his Courts proclaim; And let his pow'rful love excite Each Soul to bless his Sacred Name. 5 For God is infinitely good, His mercy is for ever sure; His Truth from Generation To Generation shall endure. Psalm CII. 1 LOrd hear the Pray'rs and mournful cries Of mine afflicted State; 2 And with thy Comforts cheer my Soul, Before it be too late. 11 My days, like the declining shades, Make hast and fly away; As Flow'rs before the scorthing Sun, They wither and decay. 24 Lord, take me not away before My better days be past; Thine undeclining years beyond All Generations last. 25 Th' unknown foundations of the Earth Of old by thee were laid; The Fair and Beauteous Heavens shew The work thy hands have made.
26 These all shall perish, and wax old Like Garments throws aside; But when they change, thy years ne're fail, 27 Thou dost the same abide. 28 Thy Kindness to the good is firm, Thy Word to them is sure; Tho' strange Events may change the World, Their Race shall still endure. Psalm CIII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 BLess thou the Lord, my Soul; his name Let all the pow'rs within me bless; 2 O let not his past favours lie Forgotten in unthankfulness. 3 It's he that pardons all thy sins, He that in sickness makes thee found: 4 It's he redeemed from the Grave Thy Life, with Love and Mercy Crown'd. 5 It's he that fills thy mouth with good, And all thy just desires supplies: Who, like the Eagles, makes thine Age To a renewed youth arise. 6 From his strict justice sure relief Oppressed Innocence shall find:
7 Moses and Israel knew his ways, And th' inclinations of his mind. 8 Abundant Mercies flow from God, Love is his Nature and Delight; 9 Slow is his wrath, and tho' he chides, Intends not to destroy us quite. His Anger in its rise and stay, From Rules of Justice never swerves; 10 And when he punishes our faults, The measure's less than sin deserves. 11 As Heav'n is far above the Earth, So his Rewards exceed our Love; 12 Farther than East is from the West, His pardon do's our sins remove. Part. II. 13 A father's pity to his Child, Resembles God's, tho' shorter far; 14 For he considers our weak Frame, That only quickned Dust we are. 15 Mans days are like the Grass, or Flow'r That in the Field its beauty shows; 16 But fades with every blasting wind, And then its former place none knows. 17 But Gods Eternal Truth and Love, Is to good men and to their race: 18 Those that his Laws and Covenant keep, His favour ever will embrace.
19 This they may well expect from him Whose Throne is plac'd in Heav'n above; Whose mighty Pow'r and Soveraign Rule, Extends o're all that Live and Move. 20 Bless God ye Angels, who in strength And ready services transcend; 21 Bless him ye Hosts and Ministers, Who all, to do his will, attend. 22 All ye his works, that subject are In every place to his controul; Bless ye your Maker; and with them Join in his praises, O my Soul. Psalm CIII. [Another Metre.] 1 MY Soul bless thou the Lord, his Name All Pow'rs within me bless; 2 O never let his favours be Lost in unthankfulness. 3 It's he forgives thy sins, and do's Thy sicknesses remove; 4 It's he redeems thee from the Grave, And Crowns thy Life with Love. 5 It's he that fills thy mouth with good, Thy just desires supplies; Who, like the Eagles, makes thine Age To a new youth arise.
6 From his strict justice sure relief, Wrong'd Innocence shall find: 7 Moses, his ways; and Israel knew Th' Intentions of his mind. 8 The Lord is kind; and Goodness is His Nature and Delight; 9 Slow is his wrath, and tho' he chides, Would not destroy us quite. His anger in its rise and stay From Justice never swerves: 10 And when he punishes our faults, It's less than sin deserves. 11 As Heav'n do's far exceed the Earth, So his Rewards our Love: 12 Farther than East is from the West, He do's our sins remove. Part. II. 13 A Father's pity to his Child Than God's is lesser far; 14 For he considers our weak Frame, And knows that Dust we are. 15 Mans days are like the Grass, or Flow'r Fresh when it's newly blown, 16 But fades with every blasting wind, Whose place no more is known. 17 But God is true, and ever kind To good men and their Race: 18 Those that his Laws and Covenant keep His favour will embrace.
19 This they may surely hope from him Whose Throne's in Heav'n above: Whose Soveraign Empire do's extend O're all that live and move. 20 Bless God ye Angels, who in strength And services transcend; 21 Bless him ye Hosts and Ministers, Who all his will attend. 22 All ye his works in every place, Subject to his controul, Bless ye your Maker; and with them Join in his praise, my Soul. Psalm CIV. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 MY Soul for ever bless the Lord; To this his Greatness do's invite; Honour and Majesty's his Robe 2 His beauteous vesture splendid light. He as a Tent the Heav'ns extends, 3 Whose Rooms on liquid Waters stay; Clouds are his Chariot, and the Winds With their Wing'd Wheels mete out his way. 4 Angels as swift as air, as bright As flames, with quick obedience move; To publish and effect below, His pleasure, giv'n in charge above.
5 The Earths foundations are unknown, No Pillars rais'd its weight to bear; And yet no pow'r can make it move, Tho' it hangs loose in fluid air. 6 The Earths first covering was the Deep, Whose Waves the Highest Hills surpass'd; 7 Till at thy check and thunders voice, They shrank and fled away in hast. 8 The Mountains by hid ways they climb, Thence to the lower Vales descend; Till in the Sea, whence first they came, At last their winding courses end. 9 In vain the Oceans swelling Pride, Threatens again the Earth to cover; It's fixed bounds no rising Tides, Without new leave, can e're pass over. Part. II. 10 He from the Hills, through secret veins, Causes the Crystal Springs to burst; 11 They glide through Vallies, where the Beasts, And the wild Asses quench their thirst. 12 There Birds are taught with curious Art Their Nests in shady Boughs to raise; And by their chearful Notes reprove Our Silence in our Makers praise.
13 Nor can the higher grounds, which gape For thirst, complain that they're forgot: Clouds big with show'rs on them distill, And water every barren plot. 14 By his Command th' enriched Earth Food for all Creatures do's produce; The Grass springs up to serve the Beasts, And Herbs for Mans peculiar use. 15 Rich Wine that chears mans heart, and Oyl That makes his Countenance look bright; Bread the support of Life; all made To serve our needs, or our delight. 16 Trees that on barren Hills are plac'd, Need not be water'd by our care; Where Lebanon do's highest rise, Cedars are ever fresh and fair. 17 There Birds obtain secure retreat; Storks for their dwelling chuse the Pine; 18 Wild Goats find refuge in the Hills, Conies in Rocks they undermine. Part. III. 19 The Moon whose varied Face we see, Measures the Seasons of the Year; And having run his daily course, The Sun knows when to set, and where.
20 Darkness, as well as day, thou mak'st; 'Tis Night that brings wild Beasts abroad; 21 Fierce Lyons roaring for their prey, By hunger taught, leek meat from God. 22 At the Suns rise, those scattered Beasts Crowd to their Dens with hasty flight; 23 Men share the Day, whose work begins, And ends together with the Light. 24 Great God! how various are thy works, Created all with wonderous skill. Thy Blessings, Lord, enrich the Earth, 25 And the Seas spacious bosom fill. Whose yielding Waves the Ships divide; There Fishes move of different size; 26 And there the great Leviathan Do's play, and Mans attempts despise. 27 These all wait humbly to receive Thine Alms of seasonable food: 28 And what thine opened hand bestows, They gather, and are fill'd with good. Part. IV. 29 If God but in displeasure frown, The whole Creation needs must mourn; If he with-holds his breath, or theirs, They die, and to their dust return.
30 His quickning spirit, when it breaths, All things with Life and Joy endues; His pow'rful word, that made the Earth At first, its Face again renews. 31 While this Worlds Frame and Order lasts, Gods Glory never can beless; And what his wisdom made so good, His favour will delight to bless. 32 But let not sinful Man presume Gods dreadful Anger to provoke; Whose Look can cause the Earth to quake, His Touch make proudest Hills to smoak. 33 The Great imployment of my Life Shall be to praise this mighty Lord; 34 To meditate his Love and Works, The sweetest pleasure will afford. 35 While Sinners from the Earth consume, No place or thought regard them more: Bless thou thy Maker, O my Soul, Let Heav'n and Earth his Name adore. Psalm CIV. [Another Metre.] 1 BLess thou the Lord, my Soul, to this His greatness do's invite,
Honour and Majesty's his Robe, 2 His Vesture splendid Light. 3 He as a Tent the Heav'ns extends, Whose Rooms on Waters stay; Clouds are his Chariot, and the Winds Wing'd Wheels mete out his way. 4 Angels as swift as air, as bright As flames, attend and move, His pleasure to effect below, That's giv'n in charge above. 5 The Earths foundations are unknown, Its weight no Pillars bear; Yet none can move it, tho' it hangs Loose in the yielding air. 6 The Earths first covering was the Deep, Whose Waves the Hills surpass'd: 7 Till at thy check and thunders voice, They shrank and fled in haste. 8 The Mountains by hid ways they climb, Thence to the Vales descend; Till in the Sea, whence first they came, Their winding courses end. 9 In vain the Oceans swelling pride, Threatens the Earth to cover; Its fixed bounds no swelling Tides Can, without leave, pass over. Part. II. 10 He from the Hills by secret veins Makes Crystal Springs to burst;
11 The watered Valleys give all Beasts Drink to allay their thirst. 12 There Birds are taught their artful Nests In shady boughs to raise; Whose cheerful notes our silence shame In our Creators praise. 13 Nor can the higher grounds, which gape For thirst, say they're forgot; Clouds big with show'rs on them distill, And water every plot. 14 By his Command th' enriched Earth Do's food for all produce; The Grass springs up to serve the Beasts, And Herbs for humane use. 15 Rich Wine that chears Mans Heart, and Oyl That makes his Face look bright; Bread the support of Life; all serve Our Needs, or our Delight. 16 The Trees on barren Hills will thrive, Unwatered by our care; Cedars i'th' heights of Lebanon, Are ever fresh and fair. 17 There Birds find sure retreat, the Stork Dwells in the lofty Pine; 18 Wild Goats in Hills, Conies are safe In Rocks they undermine. Part. III. 19 The Moons oft-varied face do's show The Seasons of the Year;
After his daily course, the Sun Knows when to set, and where. 20 Darkness, as well as Light, thou mak'st, Night brings wild Beasts abroad; 21 The hungry Lyons roar for prey, And seek their meat from God. 22 At the Suns rising, to their Dens They crowd with hasty flight; 23 Men share the day, whose work's begun, And finisht with the light. 24 Great God! how various are thy works, All made with wond'rous skill! Thy blessings, Lord, enrich the Earth, 25 And Seas large bosom fill. There go the Ships, and there do move Fishes of different size; 26 There great Leviathan do's play, And Mans attempts despise. 27 These all wait to receive thine Alms Of seasonable food; 28 They gather what thine hand bestows, And all are fill'd with good. Part. IV. 29 If God but in displeasure frown, All Creatures needs must mourn; If he with-holds their breath, they die, And to their Dust return. 30 His quickning spirit, when it breaths, All things with life endues;
His pow'rful word that made the Earth, Its face again renews. 31 Whilst this Worlds Frame and Order lasts, Gods Fame will ne're be less; And what his Wisdom made so good, Will still delight to bless. 32 But let not sinful man presume, Gods anger to provoke; Whose look can cause the Earth to quake, His Touch make Hills to smoak. 33 My lifes great business shall be this, To praise this Mighty Lord; 34 To meditate his Love and Works, The sweetest Joys afford. 35 While Sinners from the Earth consume, No place regards them more; Bless thou the Lord, my Soul, his name Let Heav'n and Earth adore. Psalm CV. 1 O Let us all give thanks to God, And call upon his Name; His gracious and his mighty works, To all the World proclaim. 2 Let us in Songs and sacred Hymns Our great Creator bless; And what his pow'rful hand has wrought, Our joyful tongues express.
Give to the Lords most holy Name, The praise that is his due: And your unfeigned inward joys, By chearful voices shew. 4 Within his Sanctuary let Your Pray'rs to him be made; Your hopes upon his favour rest, And his Almighty aid. 5 O let the works that he hath done Your admiration move; Think on the judgments of his mouth, And wonders of his Love. 7 We glory that this mighty Lord Us for his people owns; Whose judgments make th' amazed Earth To tremble when he frowns. 8 His Covenant with his people made, He ever call'd to mind; And will his promises fulfil To Ages still behind. Psalm CVI. 1 O Render thanks unto the Lord, For he alone is good; His mercies they continue sure, As they have ever stood. 2 But equal to thy Glories height None can their voices raise;
Nor, as Gods mighty Acts deserve, Can shew forth all his praise. 3 O happy they who thy just Laws Observe with due regard; And by well-doing to receive Gods mercies are prepar'd. 4 To thee I humbly look, on me With favour, Lord, look down: And bless me with the saving grace Afforded to thine own. That I the present happiness Of thine Elect may share; And may hereafter sing thy praise, In joys that endless are. Psalm CVII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 LET all give thanks to God above, So full of kindness and of Love; Whose Mercy Ages past have known, And those that are to come shall crown. 2 O let it be by them confess'd, Whom he redeem'd when sore oppress'd: 3 And made the scattered people come From all the Lands to their own home.
4 They pass'd through Deserts, where no way They found, nor City where to stay: 5 No food to ease their hungers rage, Nor Water-Springs their thirst t' asswage. 6 In their distress to God they cry'd, Who prov'd their Saviour and their guide: 7 He the right path where they should go, And place where they should dwell, did snow. 8 Let all men praise Gods goodness then, His wonders to the Sons of Men; 9 Whose bounty longing Souls supplies, Their craving hunger satisfies. Part. II. 10 Those that are in dark Prisons laid, So nigh to Death, they're in its shade; On whom the sorrows that they bear, Sit heavier than the Chains they wear: 11 These having proudly God withstood, Contemn'd his Counsels for their good; 12 He then resolv'd with pain and smart, To quell the stoutness of their heart. Before his stroaks they could not stand, Nor none could raise them, but his hand. 13 Then to the Lord they're forc'd to fly, To importune his Clemency;
Who did regard their low address, And sav'd them out of their distress; 14 He chang'd their gloomy state to light, And brake their bands in sunder quite. 15 Let all men praise his goodness then, His wonders to the Sons of Men. 16 His strength, that all things do's surpass, Brake Bars of Ir'n, and Gates of brass. Part. III. 17 Fools to lewd courses wholly bent, Prepare for their own punishment. Sickness and loathsome maladies, From Luxury and Lust arise. 18 The Gluttons appetite o'rethrown, His tastful meats will not go down. Nature with heavy loads oppress'd, Beckons to Death to be releas'd. 19 Then do these frighted Sinners fly To God for help; whose earnest cry Mov'd a regard to their address, Heav'n sav'd them out of this distress. 20 No need of Med'cines for their cure, Their vertue's not so quick nor sure; Deaths sentence only he repeal'd, He sent his word, and they were heal'd.
21 Let all men praise his goodness then, His wonders to the Sons of men; 22 And by their grateful Sacrifice, Declare his Works and their own joys. Part. IV. 23 They whom the Ships on th' Ocean bear, 24 Do see Gods works and wonders there. 25 For at his word fierce Tempests rise, And lift its Waves unto the Skies. 26 One while they mount to Heav'n aloft, They sink into the Depths as oft. 27 The Passengers strange terrours feel, Like Drunkards to and fro they reel. 28 Lost to all hope, to God they cry For help in their extremity; He lends an Ear to their address, And brings them out of this distress. 29 For at his beck the storms asswage, The furious Waves depose their rage. 30 They welcome now the calm, and see The Haven where they wish'd to be. 31 Let all men praise Gods goodness then, His wonders to the Sons of men; 32 Nor only private off'erings bring, But in the Church his Glories sing.
Part. V. 33 When God's provok'd, his pow'rful hand Turns Rivers to a desert land; 34 Their fruitfulness to barren grounds, When wickedness therein abounds. 35 Dry grounds by Springs (to shew his Love) To fruitful Pastures do improve. 36 Thither the poor for dwellings flow, Which after to a City grow. 37 They sow the Fields and Vineyards plant, Whose Fruits supply their growing want. 38 Their Race springs fast from fruitful stocks, Their wealth increases with their flocks, 39 By Heaven blest: but when they sin, They're punisht and brought low again. 40 Ev'n Princes are expos'd to scorn, And wander in a state forlorn. 41 But he exalts the poor on high, And spreads their numerous Family. 42 The Just with Gladness this shall see, And wickedness shall silent be. 43 How few there are with care record These wonderous dealings of the Lord? All wise observers still shall find, That God is infinitely kind.
Psalm CX. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 THus spake the Lord unto his Son, Sit thou advanc'd on my right hand, Till all thy conquered Foes shall crouch, And wait their doom from thy command. 2 From Sion shall thy word go forth, Which like a Sceptre thou shalt sway; To bring the stubborn under rule, And make them willingly obey. 3 Thy Conquests shall be great that day, The numerous Converts thou shalt view, Shall make an Army that exceeds The Crystal drops of Morning dew. 4 The Lord hath all his Truth engag'd By Oath, which he can never break, To make thee an eternal Priest, Of th' Order of Melchizedeck, 5 And when hee's raised to his Throne, Proud Monarchs that oppose his Reign 6 Shall fall, and all the Wicked World That will not stoop to him, be slain 7 While he pursues this Work, hee'l stoop To mean refreshments in the way;
But with a glorious reward, God will his sufferings repay. Psalm CXI. 1 MY Souls best Pow'rs I will engage, And with affection join In those Assemblies, where the Saints To praise the Lord combine. 2 They that contemplate thy great works, Will soon with pleasure see 3 Thy pow'r how glorious it is, How great thy purity. The wonders of thy Providence They'll often call to mind; With grateful hearts proclaim, that God Is gracious and kind. 5 How in the Wilderness he gave Food with a liberal hand; 6 And made his people to possess The Heathens pleasant land. 7 Faithful and just are all his works, His word is no less sure; 8 When once his promise is engag'd, Performance is secure. Israel, from slavery redeem'd, His Holiness did know; Their Foes the Terrour of thy Name Felt in their overthrow.
10 To fear the Lord true wisdom is, And he that strives to please His Maker, understands him best, Whose praise shall never cease. Psalm CXII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 BLest is the Man that fears the Lord, Whose pleasure 'tis to do his will; 2 His Seed shall be renown'd on Earth, His happy race shall flourish still. 3 His House with plenty shall be fill'd; And as his wealth and stores increase, His Bounty is enlarg'd; no fear Of future want do's make it less. 4 When troubles fall unto his share, They'll in his greater comfort end; What kindness God on him bestows, The same to others hee'll extend. 5 He lends assistance to the poor, Discreetly orders all his way; 6 Nothing shall move this Righteous Man, Or make his Memory decay. 7 No news of threatning dangers can His confidence in God displace;
8 He with undaunted courage looks His Foes securely in the face. 9 God his diffusive Charity With sutable rewards will crown; Not only those above bestow, But honour here and great renown. 10 Mean while the wicked shall repine With indignation at his Bliss; And melt away with grief, to see This Man obtain, what they shall miss. Psalm CXII. [Another Metre.] 1 O Happy man that fears the Lord, And joys to do His will; 2 His Seed shall be renown'd on Earth, His race shall flourish still. 3 His House with plenty shall be fill'd; And as his stores increase, His bounty is enlarg'd; no fear Of want do's make it less. 4 When troubles fall unto his share, They'll in his comfort end; What kindness God on him bestows, To others hee'll extend. 5 He lends assistance to the poor, Discreetly guides his way;
6 Nothing shall move this man, or make His Memory decay. 7 His Trust in God, no threatning News Of Danger can displace: 8 He with undaunted Courage looks His En'emies in the Face. 9 God his diffusive Charity With great Rewards will Crown; Both those above bestow, and here Honour and great Renown. 10 Mean while the wicked shall repine With envy at his Bliss; Consume with grief, to see this Man Obtain, what they shall miss. Psalm CXIII. 1 YE Servants of th' Eternal King, To God your cheerful praises sing, 2 Whose Name be blest for evermore. 3 His goodness over all is great, Where e're the Sun do's rise or set; Since all are blest, let all adore. 4 O're all the Earth the Lord do's reign, And Heav'n's too narrow to contain His Glories that are infinite. 5 Let not poor borrow'd greatness dare With his Perfections to compare, Who dwells in uncreated Light.
6 He condescends so far, to know Th' affairs of Mortals here below, As well as those in Heav'n above. 7 To shew how he o're all things sways, He from the Dust the poor do's raise, And from his vile estate remove: 8 From thence advances him on high To unexpected Dignity, And sets him in a Royal Throne. 9 When Age and Nature both despair, He makes the Barren Womb to bear: O therefore praise this God alone. Psalm CXV. [At the 100. Psalm.] 1 NOT unto us, Lord, not to us But to thy name the praise we owe; To thy free goodness and thy Truth, The Springs whence all our Blessings flow. 2 Why should the Heathen ask in scorn, Where is the God whom you adore? 3 In Heav'n he Reigns; but do's on Earth What e're his will ordain'd before. 4 Silver and Gold their Idols are, And all their worth derive from thence; With no Divinity inspir'd, Since they are void of Life or sense.
5 For tho' the Maker forms an Eye, 6 A Mouth, or any other part; 7 He cannot give them sight or breath, Nor lively motion by his Art. 8 Fond men! to think your Hands can make A God, to which our Knees should bow; You trust what cannot help it self; Statues have sense as much as you. Part. II. 9 All ye that know and fear the Lord, In him repose your Confidence; 10 With all that at his Altars wait, 11 He is their helper and defence. 12 God has been mindful of our good, And those that fear him still will bless; 13 His Mercies both to small and great, 14 And to their Race shall never cease. 15 O happy state thus to be blest By him that made both Earth and Heav'n; 16 His Throne in Heav'n is plac'd, the Earth In kindness he to Man has giv'n. 17 The silent Grave cannot declare Thy wonders, nor proclaim thy praise; 18 Wee'll now begin that Blessed work, Which shall continue all our days.
Psalm CXV. [Another Metre.] 1 LOrd not to us, but to thy name We give the praise we owe; To thy free goodness and thy truth, Whence all our Blessings flow. 2 Why should the Heathen ask us, where's The God, whom you adore? 3 In Heav'n he Reigns, but do's on Earth What he ordain'd before. 4 Silver and Gold their Idols are, Their worth derive from thence; With no Divinity inspir'd, Since void of Life or sense. 5 For tho' the Maker forms an Eye, 6 A Mouth or other part; 7 He cannot give them sight or breath, Motion, or Life, by Art. 8 Fond men! With Hands to make a God To which our Knees should bow: You trust what cannot help it self; Statues have sense like you. Part. II. 9 All ye that know the Lord, in him Repose your confidence:
10 Ye that attend his Altars, trust This helper and defence. 12 God has remembred us, and those That fear him still will bless; 13 To you and yours, both small and great, 14 His mercies ne're shall cease. 15 Oh happy! to he blest by him That made both Earth and Heav'n; 16 His Throne's in Heav'n, the Earth to Man In kindness he has given. 17 The Grave thy wonders cannot show, Nor celebrate thy praise; 18 Wee'll now adore thy sacred name, And bless thee all our days. Psalm CXVI. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 SInce God so tender a regard To all my poor requests did give; 2 My best affections he shall have, And best Devotions, whilst I live. 3 Assayl'd with grief and pains, that seem'd The sad Forerunners of the Grave; 4 To thee I made request: O Lord, My life from threatning danger save. 5 Nor did I cry to God in vain, Nor did his Mercy come too late;
6 But when my skill was at a loss, His kindness rais'd my low estate. 7 God and thy self, my Soul, enjoy In quiet rest, freed from thy fears; 8 Who sav'd thy Life, upheld thy steps, And dry'd up all thy falling tears. 9 I still shall live and praise thy name, 10 Thus did I speak, and thus believ'd; 11 Tho' in distress I rashly said, All men will lie, and I'm deceiv'd. 12 What shall I render to the Lord, For all the kindness he has shown? 13 I'll humbly offer him my praise, And thankfully his favours own. 14 The solemn payment of the vows I made to God, shall be my care; 15 Who sav'd me from approaching death, And shew'd my Life to him was dear. 16 By all engagements, Lord, I'm thine, Thy Servant whom thou hast set free; The very Bonds that thou hast loos'd Shall tie me faster unto thee.
Psalm CXVI. [Another Metre.] 1 GOD that so gracious a regard To my requests did give; 2 Shall have my choisest Love, and best Devotions whilst I live. 3 Assayl'd with grief and pains, that seem'd Forerunners of the Grave, 4 To thee I cry'd: O Lord my life From threatning danger save. 5 Nor did I cry in vain, nor did His Mercy come too late: 6 But when my skill was at a loss, He rais'd my low estate. 7 God and thy self, my Soul, enjoy Quiet and free from fears; 8 Who sav'd thy life, upheld thy steps, And dry'd up all thy tears. 9 I still shall live to praise thee; thus 10 I spake and thus believ'd; 11 Tho' once I rashly said, All men Will lye, and I'm deceiv'd. 12 What shall I render, Lord, for all The kindness thou hast shown? 13 Praises I'll offer, and with thanks Will all thy favours own.
14 The payment of the vows I made To God, shall be my care: 15 Who saved me from death, and shew'd My Life to him was dear. 16 By all engagements I am thine, Thy Servant, Lord, I'll be; The bonds that thou hast loos'd, shall tye Me faster unto thee. Psalm CXVII. 1 LET all the Nations of the World Their great Creator praise; And all its scattered people join His mighty Name to raise. 2 Whose kindness towards us is great, His Mercies ever sure; Then let our praises like his Truth, For ever still endure. Psalm CXVIII. 1 O Praise the Lord, whom Ages past Have known to be so kind; Whose mercies will continue sure To Ages still behind. 2 Let all his people, and his Priests 3 That in his House attend;
4 With all that fear the Lord, proclaim, His mercies have no end. 5 Bear thou thy part with them, my Soul, Gods goodness to express; Who heard my Pray'r, and set me free When I was in distress. 6 I need not fear what Man can do, When God is my defence: 9 Rather in him than greatest Kings I'll put my confidence. 15 The joyful voice of Triumph fills The dwellings of the Just; 16 His Pow'r do's mighty things for them That in his Goodness trust. 17 I hope to live and praise his works Ev'n to my latest Breath, 18 Who tho' he has chastiz'd me sore, Has sav'd me still from death. Part. II. 21 I'll praise thee, who hast heard my Pray'rs; And tho' thou wast before My gracious God, art now become My pow'rful Saviour. 22 The stone which by the Builders deem'd Unfit, aside was thrown; Is chosen and prefer'd to be The Head and Corner Stone. 23 This is the work of God alone, By us with wonder seen;
24 This is the Day the Lord hath made, And wee'll rejoice therein. 25 Wee'll join our Acclamations, And loud Hosanna's sing; Wishing prosperity may wait On him that is our King. 26 Blest Saviour! that from God to us On this kind errand came, We welcom thee; and bless all those That spread thy Glorious Fame. 27 Thou Lord hast mercifully shin'd On us with Light and Grace; And at thine Altar wee'll present Our Sacrifice of praise. 28 Thou art my God, my joyful tongue Shall ever sing thy praise; Thou art my God, and I on high Thy glorious name will raise. 29 Let all with thankfulness proclaim That God is good and kind; Whose mercies, which have ever been, Good men shall ever find. Psalm CXIX. 1 BLest is the Man, whose blameless life The Law of God directs; 2 Who keeps his Precepts, and whose heart To serve the Lord affects.
3 They never wilfully transgress, Who to these paths repair; 4 Thou, Lord, hast charged us, to keep All thy Commands with care. 5 O by thy Grace so guide my ways Never from thine to swerve; 6 Nothing shall shame my confidence, Whilst I thy Laws observe. 7 I'll praise thee better, when I'm more Instructed in thy fear: 8 To serve thee I resolve: O give Me grace to persevere. 9 But how shall youth, so prone to vice, Govern their Manners, Lord? By heedful listning to the wise Directions of thy word. 10 Sincerely I have begg'd thy Grace, O keep me close to thee. 11 I've treasur'd up thy word, that I Might not a Sinner be. Part. II. 13 My high esteem of all thy Laws I have declar'd around; 14 Herein my joy surpasses his That has a Treasure found. 18 Open my Eyes that I may see The wonders of thy Law. 19 Who in my Pilgrimage, from hence Must Light and Comfort draw.
30 I've chose thy Truths to be my Guide, Thy Law my Rule have made: 32 I'll run the way of thy Commands, Since thou hast made me glad. 34 Lord give me a discerning mind, And knowledge of thy will; Then, what thy sacred Law enjoins, I'll heartily fulfil. 36 Incline my heart to thy Commands, Whilst others riches prize; 37 From the vain pleasures of this World Lord turn away mine Eyes. To practise goodness, let my Love And quick desires appear; 38 Make good thy word to him, that is Devoted to thy fear. Part. III. 57 Thou art my Portion, and thy word I count to me most dear; Thy promis'd mercy and thy Love Before this World prefer. 59 My former wand'rings I review'd; And then without delay Resolv'd to change my course, and turn Into thy safer way. 67 Whilst I was prosp'rous, from thy paths Too soon I turn'd aside; But by thy chastisements reduc'd, Thy Precepts were my guide.
68 Thou, Lord, art in thy Nature good, And dost all good afford; By my afflictions make me more Obedient to thy word. 73 Thy hands have made and fashion'd me, With Wisdom me endue; And by the knowledge of thy Laws, Lord, form my Soul anew. 75 I know thy Judgments righteous are, And all my troubles just; 76 Lord let thy mercy comfort me For in thy word I trust. Part. IV. 89 For ever, like the Heavens, Lord, Thy word is setled fast; 90 As firmly as the Earth, thy Truth Do's to all Ages last. 91 These all in their appointed course Continue to this Day: And all like ready Servants stand Thine Orders to obey. 92 Had not thy Truth been my support, Thy Law been my delight, Under the pressure of my woes, I' had sunk and perisht quite. 96 Of all perfection here below I soon discern an end; But thy large Precepts, to all times And states of life extend.
97 O how I love thy Law! it is My daily exercise; 98 This studie makes me wiser far Than all mine Enemies; 103 Honey no sweetness do's afford, Like what thy words create; 104 From thence I learn the flatt'ring sweets, Of every sin to hate. Part. V. 105 Thy word is to my life a Guide, Unto my Paths a light; 106 I've sworn to keep thy Righteous Laws, Which I'll perform aright. 115 Ye wicked doers that corrupt The World, depart from me; From faithful serving of my God You shall no hindrance be. 120 The sense of thy just vengeance, Lord, Fills me with fear and awe. 126 It's time for thee to work, for now Proud men despise thy Law. 132 O let thy dealings towards me, And mercy be the same, Thou usest to express to those That love and fear thy name. 133 Order my goings in thy word, And my Director be; Then no iniquity shall gain Dominion over me.
136 I see how Sinners break thy Laws By bold impieties; This makes me sadly to lament, And tears o'reflow mine Eyes. Part. VI. 137 Thy Nature, Lord, and thy Commands Exactly do agree; 138 Holy, and just, and true thou art, And such thy Precepts be. This sets my zeal on fire, and makes My indignation rise; To see my Foes forget thy words, And thy just Laws despise. 140 Thy word from all impurer dross Refin'd, is my delight: 148 On this I meditate before The watches of the Night. 165 Those men are Crown'd with inward peace, Who thy Commandments love: And no Temptations unto sin, To them a scandal prove. 167 My Soul do's all thy Precepts keep, And Testimonies prise; 168 For all my actions naked are To thine All-seeing Eyes. 176 Like a lost Sheep I've gone astray, But now to thee I come; Thy Precepts I resolve t' obey, Lord bring thy Servant home.
Psalm CXXI. 1 I'LL lift mine Eyes unto the Hills, And thence will look for aid: 2 Vain thought! it's God alone can help, Which Earth and Heaven made. 3 He will sustain thy weaker pow'rs With his Almighty Arm; 4 And keep thee with unwearied care From all surprising harm. 5 The Lords Protection, like a shade, Will be thy sure Defence; 6 Nor Sun nor Moon shall hurt thee with Malignant influence. 7 From harm thy Body hee'll protect, Preserve thy Soul from sin: 8 Will prosper thy Designs abroad, And bless thy coming in. Psalm CXXIII. O 1 Thou that in a glorious Throne Art plac'd above the Skies! To thee for succour I direct Mine heart, and lift mine Eyes. 2 No Servant by his Lord chastis'd With more submission stands: Nor Maids with greater Duty wait Their Mistresses Commands:
Than we that justly undergo The Discipline of God Wait for a merciful release, When hee'll remove his Rod. 3 Have mercy, Lord, on us, whose hope In thy Compassion lies; And, whom insulting Foes do scorn, Lord, do not thou despise. 4 For our deprest estate now gives Advantage to their Pride: And they that live in wealth and ease, Our miseries deride. Psalm CXXIV. 1 HAD not the Lord our cause espous'd, His people now may say; 2 Had not the Lord engag'd his pow'r To succour us that day, When wicked men, with cruel wrath Inflam'd, against us rose; 3 Too feeble all our pow'rs had been Their fury to oppose. 4 To their devouring Jaws our life Had been an easy prey; 5 Their rage, like an impetuous stream, Had swept us quite away. 6 Blest be the Lord, that chose this way His mercy to enhance;
Then when our dangers loudest call'd To send Deliverance. 7 We lay like poor entangled Birds, Caught in the Fowlers Net: Gods power broke the snare, and we At Liberty were set. 8 Since all our help lies in his name That Earth and Heaven made: Our future hopes shall all depend On his Almighty aid. Psalm CXXV. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 THey that in God their Confidence Repose, and him their Fortress make, Remain unmov'd, like Sions Mount, Which Storms and Tempests never shake. 2 Jerusalem with Hills begirt, Derives great safety from that fence; Good Men much more from Angels guard, And Gods surrounding Providence. 3 The wickeds Pow'r shall not too long Oppress the good, and vex their peace; Lest the Temptation prove so strong, They imitate their wickedness.
4 Bless those that are sincerely good; 5 And when thy vengeance shall come down, Rebellious Sinners to destroy, Then, Lord, with peace the Righteous crown. Psalm CXXV. [Another Metre.] 1 THey that repose their trust in God, And him their Fortress make, Remain unmov'd, like Sions Mount Which Tempests never shake. 2 Jerusalem with Hills begirt, Is safe by this defence; Good Men are more secure from Gods Surrounding Providence. 3 The wickeds pow'r shall not too long Oppress and vex their peace; Lest, through discouragement, they prove Like them in wickedness. 4 Bless all the truly good; and when Thy vengeance shall come down Proud Sinners to destroy; then, Lord, With Peace the Righteous crown.
Psalm CXXVI. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 WHen God from Bondage set us free, It seem'd a strange and pleasant dream; 2 Our Mouth was fill'd with laughter then, To tell this News was all our Theam. This great and unexpected change Forced the Heathens to confess 3 The wonders of that day; let us The same with greater joy express. Great are thy Mercies shown to us; 4 Lord, perfect what thou hast begun; 'Twill be like welcome show'rs to ground That's partched with the scortching Sun. 5 We wait with patience, Lord, till thou All needful Blessings dost restore; And hope our former tears will make Our after joys to be the more. 6 So he that in prepared ground His scattered handfuls sadly leaves, Will shout at Harvest, when he sees That Seed become a Load of Sheaves.
Psalm CXXVI. [Another Metre.] 1 WHen God redeem'd our Captive State, It seem'd a pleasant dream: 2 Our Mouth was fill'd with Laughter then, And joy was all our Theam. This mercy so unlook'd for, mov'd The Heathens to confess 3 The wonders of that Day, let us With joy the same express. Great are thy Mercies shown to us: 4 Lord, perfect what's begun: 'Twill be like welcome show'rs to ground Partch'd with the scortching Sun. 5 We wait with Patience, Lord, till thou All good to us restore; And hope our former tears will make Our after joys the more. 6 So he that in prepared ground His scattered handfulls leaves; Will shout at Harvest, when that Seed Becomes a Load of Sheaves.
Psalm CXXVII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 IF God be not the Architect, Men strive in vain a House t' erect: Unless the Lord the City keep, The watchfull Guards as well may sleep. 2 Your Labours with the rising Sun Begin, and last when Day is done: T' avoid that Poverty you dread, With carefulness you eat your Bread. But all in vain: by Heaven blest You may enjoy both wealth and rest; 3 A numerous Race and fruitful Womb As Gods rewards to Goodness come: 4 Their Parents strength and Glory are, Like Arrows to a Man of War: 5 Well furnished with these supplies, A Man may dare his Enemies. Psalm CXXVIII. 1 BLest is the Man, whose fear of God Is by obedience shown: 2 Plenty thy Labours shall reward, And good success shall crown.
3 Thy fruitful Wife, like a fair Vine With Clusters shall abound; Whose Children like green Olive Plants, Thy Table shall surround. 4 Such Blessings to thy House shall fall When God's thy chiefest fear 5 Thou in the publick joy and good Shalt have the greatest share. 6 A numerous Race from thee deriv'd Thy lengthned Age shall see; And, the great wish of all good Men, The Lands prosperity. Psalm CXXX. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 PLung'd in the Confines of despair, To God I cry'd with fervent Pray'r; 2 O lend to me a gracious Ear; Not sunk so low but thou canst hear. 3 Should'st thou against each evil deed In strict severity proceed, Who would be able to abide Thy censure, and be justify'd ? 4 But thou forgiveness dost proclaim, That men may turn and fear thy name. 5 To thy rich Grace, O Lord, we fly, And on thy promises rely.
6 My Soul less brooks thy seeming stay, Than Guards that watch th' approach of day. 7 O therefore let the good and just In God alone repose their trust. The frailty of our state he knows; His plenteous Mercy ever flows. 8 To humble Souls he gracious is, And pardons what they've done amiss. Psalm CXXXI. 1 LOrd, I have no aspiring thoughts, Nor Eyes that lofty are; Nor meddle with the things advanc'd, Above my lower Sphere. 2 But humble and resign'd I lie Compos'd to silent rest; Mine as a Childs behaviour is, Wean'd from his Mothers Breast. 3 Let pious Souls no more admire The Worlds deceitful shows; But with an undisturbed mind In God their trust repose.
Psalm CXXXIII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 O Blest Societies on Earth, Resembling that of Heav'n above! Where Brethren peacefully unite In sweet accord and hearty Love. 2 It's like the precious Ointment pour'd On Aarons consecrated head; Which first ran down his face, and thence Unto his costly vesture spread. 3 Like dews that visit every Hill, Or as the fruitful show'rs of rain; Tho' first on higher grounds they fall, Descend, and water all the plain. Innumerable comforts meet, Where Love and Amity abound; Their Souls are fill'd with inward peace, Their prosperous State with blessing crown'd. Psalm CXXXIII. [Another Metre.] 1 O Happy Companies on Earth, Resembling Heav'n above;
Where Brethren peacefully unite, In sweet Accord and Love. 2 It's like the precious Ointment pour'd Upon the High Priests Head; Which first ran down his Face, and thence Unto his Garments spred. 3 Like dews that visit every Hill, Or fruitful showrs of rain, Tho' first on higher grounds they fall, Thence water all the plain. Innumerable comforts meet, Where mutual Love is found; Their Souls are fill'd with inward peace, Their State with blessing crown'd. Psalm CXXXIV. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 YE Servants of th' Eternal King, Who early at his Temple wait, And there your late attendance give, See that his Name ye celebrate. 2 And, as that Holy place requires, Pure hands in your Devotions raise; To all your other offerings join The grateful Sacrifice of praise. 3 God the Great Maker of the World, As great in Goodness as in pow'r,
Give gracious Answers to thy Pray'rs, And bless his people every hour. Psalm CXXXIV. [Another Metre.] 1 YE Servants of the Lord above, Who at his Temple wait; See that before the rising Sun His name ye celebrate. 2 And in that Holy place, pure hands In your Devotions raise; To all your other offerings join The Sacrifice of praise. 3 The Lord that made the World, as great In goodness as in pow'r, Give Ear to thy requests, and bless His people every hour. Psalm CXXXV. 1 YE Servants of th' Almighty Lord, That Heav'n and Earth did frame; 2 Who at his House and Altar wait, Praise ye his Glorious Name. 3 O let the Goodness of the Lord Your best affections raise; Your inward Pleasure will increase, Together with your praise.
5 In him do all perfections meet, His Greatness knows no bound; What'ere by other Gods is claim'd, In him alone is found. 6 His Pow'r created all at first, His Pleasure rules them still; His uncontrouled mind the Heav'n, The Earth and Seas fulfill. 7 By undiscerned force he makes The vapours to arise, Which frame the Clouds, where fire unquench'd, Mingled with water lies. From thence the dreadful Lightnings burst, And Rains are poured down; He brings his boysterous Winds and Storms, From Treasuries unknown. 13 Supported by thy Glorious Works, Thy Fame can never die; But thy Memorial shall endure To all Eternity. Psalm CXXXV. [Another Metre. As the 148. Psalm.] 1 YE Servants of the Lord That Heav'n and Earth did frame; 2 Who at his Altars wait, Praise ye his glorious name.
3 His goodness doth To this invite; His praise will give The best delight. 5 In him all Glories meet; His Greatness knows no bound; What other Gods do claim, In him is only found. 6 Who as at first He all things made, Still rules o're all, By all obey'd. 7 All things in Heav'n above Are subject to his will; The Earth and Seas below His pleasure do fulfil. At his Command, From the Worlds end, Vapours to frame The Clouds ascend. Lightnings from thence burst out, And Rains are poured down; He brings his boyst'rous Winds From Treasuries unknown. 13 Thy name and thy Memorial, For ever, Lord, Continue shall.
Psalm CXXXVI. [As the 148. Psalm.] 1 GIve thanks unto the Lord That is so kind and good; Whose mercies firmly last, As they have ever stood. 2 To this great King All Gods do bow, 3 Angels above And Pow'rs below. 4 His works our wonder raise; 5 The Heav'ns his wisdom made; 6 And he th' out-stretched Earth Above the Waters laid. 7 He made the Sun 8 The Days great Light, 9 The Moon and Stars To rule the Night. 10 Egypts first-born he smote, 11 And by his pow'rful hand 12 He brake off Israels Yoke, And brought them from that Land. His Mercies shown To Ages past, Eternally Shall spring and last.
13 The parted Sea made way 14 For Israel to pass; 15 There the pursuing Host Of Pharaoh drowned was. 16 His people through The Desert led, By Miracles Were daily fed. 17 18 Kings that oppos'd their way, 19 20 Sihon and Og he smote; 21 And made their fruitful land 22 Fall to his peoples Lot. His Mercies shown To Ages past Eternally Shall spring and last. 23 He sav'd us when our State 24 Was low and sore opprest; 25 Food to all flesh he gives, 26 The God of Heav'n be blest. Whose Mercies shown To Ages past, Eternally Shall spring and last.
Psalm CXXXVIII. 1 TO magnify the Lord, my Soul Thy best affections raife; Angels shall hear my Songs, and be The Partners of my praise. 2 Within thy Church thy constant truth And goodness I'll proclaim; These raise my wonder, and advance The Glories of thy Name. 3 In my distress to thee I cry'd, And thou my Pray'r didst hear; Thou didst support me with thy strength, And with thy comforts cheer. 4 Kings shall thy promis'd goodness know, And take occasion thence 5 To praise thy Mercy, and admire Thy ways of Providence. 6 God from his high and Glorious Throne The lowly views and owns; But scorns the proud, and on their height With indignation frowns. 7 Thy former kindnesses prevent My fears, when in distress; Thy hand shall save me from my Foes, Thy Pow'r their wrath repress. 8 Thy never-failing Goodness will Compleat what is begun;
O never suffer thine own work, Nor me to be undone. Psalm CXXXIX. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 LOrd, when I have to do with thee, In vain I seek to be conceal'd: 2 Thou know'st me perfectly, to thee My very thoughts are all reveal'd. 3 Both when I sit and when I rise, My walking and my lying down; 4 To thee my works and all my words, Better than to my self, are known. 5 On every side within the reach Of thine encircling Arm I lie; 6 Whose force I neither can resist, Nor scape the notice of thine Eye. 7 Whither can I retire, and find A place where God do's never come? 8 His Glories I should meet in Heav'n; His Pow'r, had I in Hell a room. 9 Could I remove to th' utmost Sea Wing'd with the swiftest Morning ray; 10 Thy hand that thither must support My flight, would my abode betray.
11 If o're my sins I think to draw The blackest Curtains of the Night; 12 All will be clear to thee; for what We Darkness call, to thee is Light. 13 My inmost Reins by thee possess'd, With all th' affections seated there; To thee, that made'st those hidden Springs Within the Womb, must needs appear. Part. II. 14 In all thy works, O Lord, I see The Footsteps of thy wond'rous skill; And to excite my praise, I find Within my self more wonders still. 15 Unseen by all, when form'd within The dark recesses of the Womb; Before the fine Embroidery Of parts was to perfection come; 16 In that rude Mass, thou didst discern The daily growth of every part; And what th' Eternal mind had fram'd, Was copied out with curious art. 17 Lord, I admire the various thoughts And the wise Counsels of thy mind; Their sum is infinite; yet all Are dear to me, because they're kind.
18 Their number's greater than the sand; Which whilst my busy thoughts run o're, I sleep; and sind when I awake, I'm only where I was before. 23 Lord, since my thoughts accuse me not Of living in a false disguise; I'm less afraid to undergo The Tryal of thy piercing Eyes. 24 Search me; and if thou see'st that I Unwillingly have done amiss, Correct my errours, and reduce My wandrings to the way of Bliss. Psalm CXXXIX. [Another Metre.] 1 WHen, Lord, I deal with thee, in vain I seek to be conceal'd. 2 Thou know'st me perfectly, my thoughts To thee are all reveal'd. 3 Both when I sit and when I rise, Walking and lying down; 4 My works and words, better to thee Than to my selfs are known. 5 Ever within the reach of thine Encircling Arm I lie; 6 Whose force I neither can resist, Nor scape thy piercing Eye.
7 In vain, where God do's never come, I seek to find a Seat; 8 For plac'd in Hell, thy Pow'r; in Heav'n, Thy Glories I should meet. 9 Could I remove to th' utmost Sea, Wing'd with the Mornings Ray; 10 Thy hand that must support my flight, Would my abode betray. 11 If o're my sins I think to draw The Curtains of the Night; 12 All's clear to thee, for what we call Darkness, to thee is Light. 13 My Reins by thee possess'd, with all Th' affections seated there, To thee, that mad'st within the Womb Those hidden Springs, appear. Part. II. 14 In all thy works, O Lord, I see Footsteps of wond'rous skill; And in my selfs, t' excite my praise, I find more wonders still. 15 When form'd unseen, within the dark Recesses of the Womb; Before th' Embroidery of Parts Was to perfection come; 16 In that rude Mass, thou didst discern The growth of every part; And what th' Eternal mind had fram'd, Was drawn with curious Art.
17 Lord, I admire the various thoughts, And Counsels of thy mind; Their sum is infinite, yet dear To me, because they're kind. 18 Their Number's greater than the Sand; Which whilst my thoughts run o're, I sleep; and find, when I awake, I'm where I was before. 23 Lord, since my thoughts accuse me not T' have liv'd in false disguise; I'm less afraid to undergo The Tryal of thine Eyes. 24 Search me, and where unwillingly Thou see'st I've done amiss; Correct, and lead my wandring steps Into the way of Bliss. Psalm CXLIII. 1 REgard the fervent Pray'rs I make, The hopes I have in thee; And, Lord, according to thy Truth And Goodness answer me. 2 Let not my failings be before Thy strict Tribunal try'd; For, Lord, if thou should'st be severe, None could be justify'd. 6 I'll ne're cease asking till my Soul Shall thy refreshments gain;
Thy mercy which I gasp for more, Than thirsty ground for rain. 7 My Spirits sink while thou delay'st Th' assistance I would have; If God still frown on my requests, 'Twill sink me to the Grave. 8 The Night is witness of my tears As well as trust in thee; O let the joyful Morning tell Thy kindness towards me. Lord be my Guide, that I may find The way where I should go: 9 Be thou my refuge from their pow'r That seek my overthrow. 10 Teach me, my God, to do thy will; And let thy spirit of Love, Conduct me in the paths that lead To happiness above. 11 Revive my fainting Soul, thy Name And honour to advance; Thy faithfulness will brightly shine In my deliverance.
Psalm CXLV. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 I Will extol thy sacred Name, Thou King of Saints and God of Love; 2 I'll bless thee daily now, 'twill be My work eternally above. 3 Our praises should be high like thee, Whose greatness all our thoughts exceeds; 4 And what one Age do's not confine, The next shall tell thy mighty deeds. 5 I'll show the glories of thy State, And thy amazing works proclaim: 6 All men that hear my Songs of praise, Shall gladly join to do the same. 7 And like the unexhausted Springs Of mercy; so their joys shall flow; Their tongues thy faithfulness shall sing, And thine abundant goodness show. 8 Thou Lord art full of Grace and Love, To anger slow, bur glad to spare; 9 To all thy Creatures thou art kind, O're all thy tender mercies are. 10 Thou, Lord, from all these works of thine Some thankful Tribute dost receive;
But where their powers fail, thy praise Among the Saints shall ever live. 11 These happy Subjects to declare, Thy Kingdoms glory never cease; 12 That Men the Triumphs of thy Grace May know, and all thy Pow'r confess. Part. II. 13 Thy Kingdom, Lord, shall ever stand, Tho' often undermin'd in vain; 14 Oppressed goodness is sustain'd By thee; when falling, rais'd again. 15 All Creatures do expect from thee Supplies of seasonable food; 16 Thy open-handed bounty fills Their longings with desired good. 17 Gods Goodness and Fidelity In all his Ways and Works appear; 18 He gives kind answers to their Pray'rs That call on him, and are sincere. 19 There's none that fear him need complain That they in vain have sought his aid; He hears their cries, when in distress, And saves them when they are afraid. 20 Gods Preservation shall reward The Good Mans Duty and his Love; But the bold crimes of wicked men, Shall at the length their ruine prove.
21 Mean while my tongue shall be imploy'd Thy cheerful praises to proclaim; Let all the World adore thy pow'r, And ever bless thy Holy name. Psalm CXLV. [Another Metre.] 1 THY sacred name I will advance, My King, and God of Love; 2 I'll bless thee now, 'twill be my work Eternally above. 3 Our praises should be high like thee, Whose Greatness all exceeds; 4 One Age t' another shall declare, And praise thy mighty deeds. 5 I'll show the Glories of thy State, Thy wondrous works proclaim; 6 All men that hear my Songs of praise, Shall join to do the same. 7 And as thy Mercy ever springs, So shall their comforts flow; Their tongues thy faithfulness shall sing, And thy great goodness show. 8 Thou, Lord, art slow to wrath, but full Of Love, and glad to spare; 9 To all thy Creatures kind, o're all Thy tender Mercies are.
10 Some thankful Tribute, Lord, from all Thy works thou dost receive; But where they fail, thy praise among The Saints shall ever live. 11 Thy Kingdoms Glory to declare These Subjects never cease; 12 That men thy wond'rous Grace may know, And all thy pow'r confess. Part. II. 13 Thy Kingdom, Lord, shall ever stand, Tho' undermin'd in vain; 14 Goodness is stay'd by thee, when weak; When falling, rais'd again. 15 All Creatures do expect from thee Supplies of daily food; 16 Thy open-handed bounty fills All their desires with good. 17 Gods Goodness and Fidelity, In all his ways appear; 18 He gives kind answers unto such As pray, and are sincere. 19 There's none that fear him need complain They've sought in vain his aid; He hears their cryes when in distress, And saves them, when afraid. 20 Gods care and preservation Rewards the good mans Love; But the bold crimes of wicked men At length their ruine prove.
21 Mean while my tongue shall be imploy'd Thy praises to proclaim; Let all the World adore thy Pow'r, And ever bless thy Name. Psalm CXLVI. 1 MY Soul to praise the Highest Lord Thy best affections raise; 2 For whilst I live my God shall be The subject of my praise. 3 Vain are our hopes from Mighty Kings; Whose Glories at their Death 4 Sink to the Grave, and all their thoughts Do vanish with their Breath. 5 Happy is he, who in that God That made the World do's trust; 6 Which World may sooner fail, than he Cease to be good and just. 7 He rights the injur'd, and defends The good Mans cause oppress'd; He feeds the hungry, and by him The Prisoners are releas'd. 8 He cures the blind, and sorrow from Dejected Souls removes; And by his special care protects The Righteous whom he loves. 9 Strangers and Widdows he preserves, He do's the Orphans own;
As for the wickeds prosperous state He turns it upside down. 10 This Mighty King shall ever Reign, As he do's ever Live; Let all the World he rules, to him Eternal praises give. Psalm CXLVII. [As the 100. Psalm.] 1 O Blest imployment of our Lives To praise the God whom we adore! How grateful to our selves and him! Nothing becomes a good man more. 2 The Lord of old the broken state Of Captive Israel did repair; 3 The sorrowful and broken hearts He binds and heals with tender care. 4 He numbers all the Stars, and knows What vertue comes to us from thence; For 'tis from him they borrow all Their Lustre, and their Influence. 5 Unsearchable his wisdom is, His pow'r so great it knows no bound; 6 He raises up the meek, and throws The stubborn Sinners to the ground.
Part. II. 7 To God your chearful praises sing, Whose bounty all things do's maintain; 8 Who covers Heav'n with watry Clouds, And for the Earth prepares the rain. He makes the tender Grass to grow On Mountains which are parch'd and dry; 9 Wild Beasts are fed without our care, And the young Ravens when they cry. 15 All Creatures haste t' obey his word; 16 Like softest Wooll he sends the Snows: 17 His Crystal Ice like Morsels casts, And the Hoar-frosts like ashes strows. None can endure his piercing cold; 18 But at his word warm winds do blow; Then Rocks of Ice are soon dissolv'd, And the congealed Waters flow. 19 All see these works: to Israel He greater favours did afford; The clearer knowledge of his will And Laws they had. Praise ye the Lord.
Psalm CXLVII. [Another Metre.] 1 HOW well we are imploy'd, to praise The Lord whom we adore! How grateful to our selves and him! Nothing becomes us more. 2 The Lord of old the broken state Of Isra'el did repair; 3 The sorrowful and broken hearts He heals with tender care. 4 He numbers all the Stars, and knows What vertue comes from thence; For 'tis from him they borrow all Their Light and Influence. 5 Unsearchable his wisdom is, His Pow'r admits no bound: 6 He raises up the meek, and throws Proud Sinners to the ground. Part. II. 7 To God your chearful praises sing, That all things do's maintain: 8 Who covers Heav'n with Clouds, and for The Earth prepares the rain. He makes the tender Grass to grow On Mountains parch'd and dry; 9 Wild Beasts need not our care, he feeds Young Ravens when they cry.
15 All Creatures haste t' obey his word: 16 Like Wooll he sends the Snows; 17 His Crystal Ice like Morsels casts, Hoar-frosts like ashes strows. None can abide his piercing cold: 18 He bids warm Winds to blow; Then Rocks of Ice dissolve, and soon Congealed Rivers flow. 19 All see these works; to Israel More grace he did afford; The clearer knowledge of his will And Laws. Praise ye the Lord.
Psalm CXLVIII. 1 TO laud the Heav'nly King Let all their voices raise: 2 Ye Angels first begin The great Creator's praise. 3 Let Sun and Moon And every Star His Glory show That's brighter far. 4 Ye Regions of the air, And watry Clouds that move Within the liquid Skie, 5 Praise ye the Lord above; Whose pow'rful word Made you to be; 6 And fix'd your bounds By his Decree. 7 All that the Earth do's bear; Whales in the Depths conceal'd; 8 Lightnings, and Hail, and Snow, Vapours to Ice congeal'd, The stormy Winds Rais'd at his will, Which at his word Are calm'd and still. 9 Praise him ye Mountains high, And Hills that lower are;
Cedars with lofty heads, And Trees that fruit do bear. 10 Beasts that in Fields Or Pastures lye; Both creeping things And Fowls that fly. 11 Ye Kings that Scepters sway, People of meaner Birth; Princes that rule the World, And Judges of the Earth. 12 Let every Sex And every Age 13 To praise the name Of God engage. His Glories all that shines In Earth and Heav'n excel; 14 He special mercy show'd T' his people Israel; A people dear And highly rais'd; His Holy Name Be ever prais'd.
Psalm CL. 1 PRaise God within that sacred place Where he his Grace bestows; Your wondering thoughts to Heaven raise, Where he his Glory shows. 2 Let all his Mighty Acts of Pow'r Your inward Passions move; That your Acknowledgments may suit The Greatness of his Love. 3 Musicks soft notes, and louder sounds 4 Of Instruments imploy 5 T' excite Devotion, and attend The triumphs of your joy. 6 Since all to this Creator owe That Breath by which they live; Let every thing that breaths, to him Their chearful praises give.
Select Hymns, Taken out of the NEW TESTAMENT, And used in the CHURCH-SERVICE. Hymn I. Benedictus. [The Song of Zacharias. Luc. 1.68.] LET Isr'els pow'rful God and King Eternally be blest; Who came from Heav'n to visit us, And all our Bonds releas'd. In Davids House a Saviour rais'd, To sit upon his Throne; This, ever since the World began, His Prophets have fore-shown. That he would save us from the Pow'r And Malice of our Foes;
And would perform the Mercy he T' our Fathers did disclose. To call to mind how he engag'd His Truth by Covenant; His solemn Oath to Abraham sworn; That he his Grace would grant, To serve him without fear, from all Our Adversaries free'd; And to continue all our days A Holy Life to lead. And thou blest, Child to this high Lord Shalt have a Prophets place; Like a preparing Harbinger Shalt go before his Face. By the Remission of Mens sins To make Salvation known. Gods tender mercy, when this Sun Arose, to all was shown. He will our sad and dismal state With Light and Comfort bless; And guide our feet into the way Of Peace and Happiness.
Hymn II. Magnificat. [As the 100. Psalm.] [The Song of the Bl. Virgin. Luc. 1.46.] MY Soul doth magnify the Lord, In thee my spirit do's rejoice My God and Saviour; who deserv'st The Praises of my heart and voice. For to his humble Handmaids state, He show'd regard, when 't was deprest; All Ages shall from henceforth judge Me Happy, and shall call me Blest. He that is Great hath done to me Great things, and Holy is his Name; His Mercy through all Ages is, To them that fear him, still the same. He with his Arm his strength hath show'd, Confounded what the proud men thought; Put down the Mighty from their Seat, And rais'd them who are set at nought. He fill'd the Hungry Souls with good, The Full and Rich for want complain'd; His Mercy he has call'd to mind, And Israel his help has gain'd.
The Promise to our Fathers made So long before, in which God stood Engag'd to Abraham and his Seed, Is all performed and made good. Hymn III. Nunc Dimittis. [The Song of Simeon. Luc. 2.29.] I Now can leave this World, and die In Peace and quiet rest; Since that mine Eyes, O Lord, have been With thy Salvation blest. The Prophecies are all fulfill'd, Thy Promises are true; And thy Mysterious Love disclos'd In all the Peoples view. All the dark shadows fly away, Now this bright Sun appears; Whose saving Light the Gentile World With unknown comfort cheers. Well may the long expected sight Make Isr'els Joys abound; Before with special Favours grac'd, But now with Glory Crown'd.
Hymn IV. [Out of several Passages of the Revelations.] ALL ye that serve the Lord, his Name R. 19.5. See that ye celebrate; And ye that fear him, sing aloud His praise, both small and great. O thou great Ruler of the World,R. 15.3. Thy works our wonder raise. Thou Blessed King of Saints, how True And Righteous are thy ways! Who would not fear and praise thy Name Thou only Holy one? The World will worship thee, to whom Thy Judgments are made known. Most Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord Ca. 4.8. Almighty is thy Name; Which was before all time, and is, And shall be still the same. All Glory, Pow'r, and Honour, thou Ve. 11. Art worthy to receive; For all things by thy Pow'r were made, And by thy Pleasure live. To thee of right, O Lamb of God, C. 5.12. Riches and Pow'r belong; Wisdom and Honour, Glory, Strength, And every praising Song.
Thou, as our Sacrifice, wast slain, Ve.9. And by thy precious Blood, From every Tongue and Nation, hast Redeem'd us unto God. Blessing and Honour, Glory, Pow'r, V. 13. By all in Earth and Heav'n, To him that sits upon the Throne, And to the Lamb, be giv'n. Hymn V. Te Deum. [As the 100. Psalm.] O God we praise thee, and we own Thee to be Lord and King alone. All the whole Earth doth worship thee, Thou Father from Eternity. To thee all Angels loudly cry, The Heav'ns and all the Pow'rs on high; Cherubs and Seraphins proclaim, And cry thrice Holy to thy Name. Lord God of Hosts, thy Presence bright, Fills Heav'n and Earth with beauteous Light. Th' Apostles glorious Company, The Prophets Fellowship, praise thee.
The Crowned Martyrs Noble Host, The Holy Church in every Coast, Thine Infinite perfections own, Father of Majesty unknown. Giving all Adoration Unto thy true and only Son; And to the Holy Ghost, from whom As the sole Spring, our Comforts come. O Christ, thou Glorious King, we own Thee to be Gods Eternal Son: Who, our deliv'rance to obtain, Didst not the Virgins Womb disdain. When Deaths sharp sting destroy'd by thee Gave thee a Glorious Victory, Heav'ns Gate, that Entrance had deny'd, Then to Believers opened wide. Part. II. At Gods Right hand thou, Lord, art plac'd, And with thy Fathers Glory grac'd; And we believe the Day will come, When thou as Judge shalt pass our doom. Promote, we pray, thy Servants Good Redeemed with thy precious Blood: Among thy Saints make them ascend To Glory that shall never end.
Thy people with Salvation Crown; Bless those, O God, that are thine own; Govern and lift them up on high. Thee, Lord, we daily magnify. Thy Name we worship and adore, Ever, when Time shall be no more; Vouchsafe this Day to keep us pure, From harms and wilful sins secure. O let thy mercy, Lord, descend On us, whose hopes on thee depend: Lord, since my Trust is fix'd on thee, O let me ne're confounded be. Gloria Patri. [To the Common Tunes.] TO thee, O Father, to the Son And Holy Ghost, we give Glory that was of old, is now, And shall this World survive.
Gloria Patri. [As the 100. Psalm.] TO thee, O Father, to the Son And Holy Ghost, whom we adore, Be Glory, as it was of old, Is now, and shall be Evermore. FINIS.
An Advertisement. THo' all these Psalms are to be sung to the Tunes commonly used in Churches; yet more of them are fitted to some of those Tunes than before. Not to mention the many that may be sung as the 100. Psalm; These following are to be sung as the twenty fifth Psalm: viz. Psal. 25.53.62.67.70.71. These as the Hundred and thirteenth: viz. Psal. 82.85.113. And these as the Hundred Forty Eighth: viz. 135. (second Metre) 136.148.
