B3992 12774108 93729
Medicinal Experiments: OR, A COLLECTION OF Choice Remedies, Chiefly Simple, and easily Prepa∣red: Useful in Families, and fitted for the Service of Coun∣try People. By the Honourable R. BOYLE Esq late Fellow of the Royal Society. The Third and Last Volume. Published from the Author's Original Manuscripts. Whereunto is added, Several other Useful Notes expli∣catory of the same. LONDON, Printed for J. Taylor, at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1694.
Licensed, Novemb. 24th 1693. Edward Cooke.
THE PREFACE. THE Honourable Robert Boyle Esq Deceased, bath gratified the whole Race of Mankind, by his Public Labours. The World may be divided in∣to the Learned and the Unlearned Part thereof. The former he much ob∣liged
by his Elaborate Discourses on several Sub∣jects: The latter, which are far more numerous, he hath condescended also to oblige, by consulting their Health in the ensu∣ing Receipts. For, where∣as the Ordinary and In∣feriour Sort of Men, ei∣ther have not Ability (by reason of the Tenuity of their Estates) to reward Physicians; or by reason of the Remoteness of their
Habitations, have not Opportunity to Consult them: Here they have Remedies provided to their Hands, and almost at their own Doors; some of which the Learned Collector had Experience of Himself; and others were recom∣mended to him by Credi∣ble Persons, who had Experienced their Bene∣fit in themselves, or their Friends.
And though those ways of Probation might be sufficient to justify their Publication; yet such was the scrupulous Care and Zeal of this Author, that he would not suffer them to see the Light, till they had been first perused by some Eminent Physicians of his Acquaintance; to whom he was pleased to commit the Supervisal of his Medicinal Receipts, both Galenical and Chy∣mical.
This Century bears the Name of Parable Receipts; because they may be easily procured and prepared by Country Peo∣ple, as their respective Dis∣eases do require. What comes forth in the Name of Mr. Boyle, and is genuinly His, needs no farther Recommenda∣tion. His Ipse Dixit is suf∣ficient, and such are these Praescripts, as being found
among his many other Pa∣pers of like Import, which in time may be Published also. I shall therefore only re∣commend them, and their Success to the Blessing of God, the alone Giver, Preserver and Restorer of Health. J. W.
THE INDEX· A AFter-birth to bring away Page 10 Ague to prevent or Cure Page 13.14.81 Agues Tertian Page 14 Ague Page 30.44 Aching of a hollow Tooth Page 36 Apoplectic Fits Page 40 Astmatic Distempers Page 43.86 Aqua Opthalmica Page 62
B BOdy bound, to loosen Page 35.83 Biting of a Viper Page 29 Blood-shot Eyes Page 6.80 Blood to stench Page 11.55.57.88 Burns Page 16.55.88 Burns recent Page 20 Breath shortness Page 31 Blood to sweeten Page 33 Bloody Flux Page 4.36.56.56.79 Belly Fluxes Page 53 Blood Cleansing by Troches of Vi∣pers Page 67 Burn or Scald in the Eye Page 7 Bruise of the Eye Page 46.93
C CAtaract beginning Page 74 Cold newly taken, a good Me∣dicine Page 1 Corns, a try'd Medicine Page 11.54.87 Cholic Page 15 Cholic, a simple Remedy Page 18 Costiveness Page 35.83 Convulsive Fits Page 51 Cholic, a Medicine Page 66 Cinamon drink for Gripes Page 37 Courses to provoke Page 39 Contusion of the Eye Page 46.69.70 D DRopsy Page 5.80 Dentrifice Innocent Page 7.81 Distempers of the Genus Nervo∣sum Page 9
Dead Child to bring away Page 10 Defluxions of Rheum Page 12 Deafness Page 15 Drink for the Scurvy Page 20 Drink for the Kings Evil Page 24.82 Dysentery Page 4.36.56.56 Dysenteric Fluxes Page 56 Defluxion in the Eyes Page 72 Dry Inflammation Page 76 E EYes that are foul, a good Wa∣ter Page 2.62 Eyes Inflamed Page 6.23.38.42.58.80.85 Eyes Burnt or Scald Page 7 Electuary, Purging Page 22 Erysipelas Page 47.86 Eye-Water, by a Famous French Man Page 60 Eye-Water, a Caution about the Vitriolate Page 69 Eye-Water famous Page 90
Eyes red Page 38.58.77.85.89 Eyes to Strengthen, subject to Rheums Page 72.91 Eye-Lids sore Page 74 Eye bruised Page 46.69.70 Eyes dry Page 63 Eyes with hot and sharp humours Page 73 Eyes pained Page 75 F FIlms of the Eyes Page 71.93 Fluxes of the Belly Page 4.37.53.79.84 Fits of a Furor Ʋterinus Page 19 Fits of the Head ach Page 32 Fluor-Albus in Women Page 48 Fumigation for pains in the Eyes, and over-great Driness, and when one fears the beginning of a Cataract Page 74 Fits of the Mother Page 9.65 Furor Ʋterinus to cure Page 19
G GRavel to Expel Page 25.83 Gleetings, a good Liquor Page 28 Gripes and Fluxes Page 37.84 Gonorrheaa Page 45 Gums to fasten and help Page 8 Gums Scorbutick Page 68.92 H HEad to clear Page 3 Head-ach Page 17.31 Hiccup in Fevers ibid. Hordeum on the Eye-Lids Page 42 Hysterick Affections Page 9 Humours hot and sharp in the Eyes Page 73
I INflamation of the Eyes Page 23.42.80 Itch, a good Medicine Page 33 Inflammation dry Page 75 K KIngs-Evil, a useful Drink Page 24.82.94 Kings-Evil, an approved Remedy Page 26 L LEprosy, a Specifick. Page 16
M MEdicine for the Dropsie Page 5 Medicine for Hysterical Affections Page 9 Medicine for Genus Nervosum ibid. Medicine to cleanse the Womb Page 18 Medicine for the Tooth-ach Page 21 Menses suppressed Page 39 Medicine to kill Tetters Page 44 Medicine to prevent Driness, and some other Disaffections of the Eyes Page 64 Medicine for the Stone, by a Fa∣mous Emperie Page 64 Medicine for Fits of the Mother Page 9.65 Medicine for the Cholic Page 66 Medicine for Scorbutic Gums, and to fasten the Teeth Page 68.92
Medicine for a Stroke or Contu∣sion of the Eyes Page 69 Another excellent Medicine for a Bruise in the Eye Page 70 O OCulorum Propter gravedi∣nem & dolorem Page 75 P PAin of the Teeth, from Rheum Page 3.36 Pain in the Eyes Page 75 Plaister preferr'd to the Soap Plai∣ster Page 28 Pericarpium for Agues Page 14 Pleurisie Page 36.56 Piles Page 52
Plaister to strengthen the Eyes and stop Defluxions Page 72 Pouder Styptick Page 11 Purging Electuary for Children Page 22 R RElaxation of the Ʋvula Page 59 Redness of the Eyes Page 38.58.77.85.89 Remedy for an Ague Page 13.30.44 Rheums a powerful Medicine Page 12.60 Remedy to take off Films, and such like things from the Eyes Page 71.93 Remedy for sharp and hot Humours in the Eyes Page 73 Rheumatick pain of the Teeth Page 3 Running of the Reins to cure Page 45 Rheums to stop Page 60 Running of the Eyes Page 72.73.91
S SOap Plaister for the Gout Page 28 Sight to strengthen Page 19 Scurvey beginning Page 20 Stone in the Bladder Page 21 Strains Recent Page 41.85 Sternutatory to clear the Head Page 3 Shortness of Breath Page 31 Scrophulous Ʋlcers Page 40 Sores and Ʋlcers Page 49 Scorbutick Gums Page 68.92 Stroke of the Eyes Page 46.93 Sleep wanting Page 50 Stenching of Blood Page 11.55.57.88 Stone a famous Medicine Page 64.91.95 Stoppage of Ʋrine Page 25.30
T TErms to provoke Page 39 Teeth to fasten Page 8.92 Tumours, a Fomentation ibid. Tooth-ach Page 12.21.27.36 Tooth Hollow Page 27.36 Teeth to fasten Page 68 Tumors from sharp Humours Page 8 Tettars to kill Page 44 U URine to provoke Page 25.83 Viper Biting Page 29 Ʋrine supprest Page 25.30 Vapours of the Spleen Page 31 Ʋlcers, an excellent Medicine Page 34 Ʋlcers Scrophulous Page 40 Ʋvula relax'd Page 59.89
Ʋlcers and Sores Page 49 Vitriolate Eye-water Page 69 W WEakness to help Page 67 Womb-Madness to cure Page 19 Womb to cleanse Page 18 Womb of a Puerpera, to cleanse Page 10 Wounds Green to heal Page 39 Whites in Women Page 48.87
These following BOOKS, Published by the Honourable Author, and Printed for J. Taylor at the Ship in St. Paul's Church-Yard. 1. A Free Inquiry into the vulgarly receiv'd Notion of Nature. 2. A Disquisition about the final Cau∣ses of natural things, with Observations about vitiated Sight. 3. The Martyrdom of Theodora and Dydimus. 4. The Christian Virtuoso. 5. Experimenta & Observationes Phy∣sicae, with a Collection of strange Re∣ports. 6. A Natural History of a Country, great and small, for the Use of Travellers and Navigators. 7. His Seraphick Love.
Books printed for  J. Taylor. DR. Salmon's Practical Physick. Dr. Yworth's new Art of Brewing. —His whole Art of Distillation. Logick, or the Art of Thinking. Lord Viscount Shandon's Moral Essays. —His Characters and Discourses. —His Letter to an Atheist Acquaintance. Dr. Salmon's, with Dr. Sydenham's and Monsieur Blanchard's new Method of caring the French Disease. Loue's whole Art of Surveying. Strodes's easy Method for the Art of Dy∣alling. Plutarch's Morals, 5 Vol. english'd by se∣veral Hands. Culpepper's Directory for Midwives. Kirkwood's new Family-Book, with an Epistle by Dr. Horneck. Abbady's Truth of the Christian Religion english'd. Gouge's Words to Saints and Sinners. —His Christian Directions. Counsellor Manner's Legacy to his Son. Ryder's new Practice of Surgery. Evelyn's French Gardiner, with Cuts. Gilbert's Florists Vade mecum.
Baxter's Call to the Unconverted. Osborn's Works, Divine, Moral, Histori∣cal and Political. Virgilius Notis Minelii. Quintilian's Declamations, english. Legrand's Historia sacra. Newton's compleat Arithmetician. The Modern Courtier. Miracles perform'd by Money, a Poem. The Humours of a Coffee-house, a Poem. Foxes and Firebrands. A Defence of their Majesties King William and Queen Mary. Strode of Combinations, &c. The Swordsman's Vade mecum, by Sir William Hope. Dyer's Works. Vanity of the Creature. Publick Devotion, by Mr. Camfield.
A Collection of Choice and Safe REMEDIES. VOL. III. 1. A good Medicine for a newly taken, though violent, Cold. TAke about four Ounces of Spring-water, and in a con∣venient Vessel, put to it three Leaves of good Tussilago (Colts∣foot) and a pugil of Maiden-hair, and a Stick of Liquorish, for bigness and length, like the fur∣thest Joynt of the Little-finger; make the Water warm, and when 'tis ready to boil, put in the forementioned Ingredients, (the Liquorish being first slic'd and minc'd) cover the Pot well, let
it boil for a few walmes, then take it off the Fire, and ha∣ving presently strain'd it, let the Patient drink it hot like Tea, he being already in Bed; do this three or four Nights consecu∣tively, or till there be no more need of the Medicine. 2. A good Water for Eyes that are foul, and pain'd by sharp Humours. TAke prepared Pearl and Co∣ral, Ana one scruple, Aloes Cabalina finely pouder'd three grains, red Rose-water and Suc∣cory-water, Ana one ounce, mix them well; and if you would have the mixture stronger, put in a very few grains of Trochisci alli Rhasis in very fine Pouder.
3. A good Medicine for Pain of the Teeth that comes from Rheum. OF the Pouder of white He∣lebore, put into a clean Linen Rag like a Nodule, of about the bigness of the largest sort of Peas, or somewhat grea∣ter and let the Patient hold it between his Teeth, with his Head and Face somewhat inclined, that the Rheum may run freely out of his Mouth. 4. An Experienced Sternutatory to clear the Head. LEt the Patient snuff up in the Morning fasting, a small
Spoonful, or less, of the cla∣rify'd Juice of Haedera terre∣stris, i.e. Ground-Ivy, or of Beets, spitting out from time to time as much Liquor as comes into his Mouth. 5. An often try'd Remedy for the Dysentery and sharp Fluxes of the Belly. GIve from fifteen to twenty grains of carefully made Mercurius Dulcis incorporated, with about two ounces of Catho∣licon, or else with about one scruple of toasted or somewhat less of untoasted Rhubarb. See Numb. (1.)
6. A good, though uncommon, Medicine for the Dropsie. TAke Virginian Snake-weed a sufficient quantity, and having cut and slic'd it very small, infuse it into a competent quantity of good Sack till the Li∣quor be very strongly impreg∣nated with the Plant. Of this Infusion let the Patient take three, four or five Spoonfuls at a time (or more if the case be ur∣gent) when the Stomach is empty. See Numb. (2.)
7. An often Experienced Medi∣cine for Blood-shot, or Infla∣med Eyes. CUt a new-laid Egg boiled hard, into two halfs, (with∣out taking out the Yelks) and apply one of these considerably warm, but not too hot, to the part affected, and keep it on for some hours (six or eight if it need so long.) Note well, To the same purpose, you may apply with good effect, a Poultis made of a rotten Apple, the cold being first quite taken off. See Numb. (3.)
8. An Excellent Remedy for a Burn or Scald in the Eye. TAke Mucilages of Quince∣seed, Fleawort, Linseed and Fenugreek-seed, of each one scruple; boil it but very lightly in four ounces of Betony-water, filter it, and apply it to the Part. 9. A good and innocent Dentrifice. TAke Mastich and Dragon's-blood, of each a sufficient quantity; pouder them, and mix them together, and let the Patient use them as a Dentrifice. See Numb. (4.)
10. To Correct the Laxity of the Gums, and fasten the Teeth. TO a Pint of Red or Claret Wine, take about two drams of Japan Earth, and ha∣ving dissolv'd so much as you can, pour off the clear, and let the Patient wash his Mouth there∣with from time to time. 11. An uncommon, but effectual, Fomentation for Tumours ac∣company'd with sharp Hu∣mours. TO a Gallon of Spring-wa∣ter, put as much dry'd Sage, as you judg will afford a Decoction strong enough of the
Herb. Into this, when it first grows hot, cast about two oun∣ces or some drams of Castle-Soap, and let it dissolve there till your Decoction be compleated. With this and Stuphes, foment the part for a good while together. 12. A rare Medicine for Hyste∣rical Affections, and several Distempers of the Genus Ner∣vosum. TAke one ounce, or a suffi∣cient quantity of Volatile Salt of Harts-horn, (which need not be exactly pure) and drop on it as much Spirit of Tartar as will serve to satiate it, when the conflict is quite ceas'd. Di∣gest the mixture for a while,
that it may acquire a red Colour, and keep it carefully stopt for Use, and give four or five drops twice a day in any convenient Vehicle. 13. An often prov'd Remedy to bring away what is or should not be left in the Womb of a Puerpera, though it were part of a Dead Child. WIth the Juice of Sheeps Sorrel, and some of the strong infusion of the same Herb (unpress'd) in Water, and a suffi∣cient quantity of Sugar, make a Syrup: Of which let the Patient take about a Spoonful (a little more or less as need may require) twice or thrice a day.
14. A try'd Medicine to take away Corns. THe parts being made soft with Bathing, and scrap'd, apply to the Corn a Plaister of Shoe-maker's-wax; but if the part be very tender, your Plai∣ster may consist of equal parts of Shoe-maker's-wax and Diapalma melted together and spread some∣what thin. 15. To make an Excellent Styptic Pouder to stench Blood. TAke of White Sugar-Candy, Roach-Allom burnt (but not too much calcin'd) and white
Vitriol, and pulverize them ex∣ceeding well, and mix them dili∣gently; and having dip'd Plagets of Flax or Lint, moistened with the White of an Egg into this Pouder, apply them to the Ori∣fices of the Bleeding parts. Note well, 'twill do very well after the dry Ingredients are mix'd, to grind them with as much Whites of Eggs beaten to water, as will make a Paste, which is afterwards to be throughly dry'd in the Air, and then again reduc'd to Pouder. 16. For a Tooth-ach, proceeding from Defluxion or Rheum from the Gums. DIssolve one ounce of choice Japan Earth in a Pint at least of good Red or Claret Wine,
and let the Patient hold in his Mouth often, and a good while together. 17. To prevent the Fit of an Ague, or cure that Disease. TAke of the scraping or gra∣tings of the Root of An∣gelica half a dram, and of the Flowers of Antimony, mix them well, and let the Patient take them at the usual times. Note here, That the Flowers of Antimony are not to be given in∣wardly in Substance, but only in In∣fusion; for in Substance they will hazard life, bringing first strong Convulsions, and then Death: But you may make the Medicine thus. See Numb. (5.)
18. To make an often try'd Pe∣ricarpium for Agues, especi∣ally Tertians. TAke a handful and a half of fresh Rue, half a handful of fresh Sage, a small spoonful of Bay-salt, and a spoonful of good Vinegar. Beat all these very well together into an uniform Mass; which divide into two parts, and make thereof two Wrist Plaisters to be apply'd at the usual times before the Fit; and to be re∣newed, if there be Occasion, to keep them on till they grow dry and troublesom.
19. For the Cholic. ℞ ORange Peels dry'd till one may grate them to Pou∣der; and when they are pulveriz'd, take about a spoonful of the Pou∣der at a time, mix'd with a little white Sugar to sweeten it, in or before some spoonfuls of any con∣venient Vehicle. 20. An approved Remedy for Present Deafness. TAke of the Breast Milk of a Woman that has had her first Male Child some time before, and drop three or four drops of it warm as it comes from the Nip∣ple, into the part affected.
21. A choice Medicine for Burns. TAke Goose-grease, (which the Country People call the Leaf of a Goose) and having softly melted, and a little skim'd it, squeeze into it as much fresh∣ly exprest Juice of Ground-Ivy-Leaves, as by continual stirring, will bring it to the consistence of a Green Oyntment. With this anoint the part it self affected; and afterwards lay on it fine old Rags, well dipt in the same Oint∣ment. 22. An External Remedy, al∣most Specific for the Leprosie. TAke Pomatum one ounce, Flower of Sulphur one
dram, Sal Prunellae half an ounce, and having mixt them very well together, from time to time anoint the part affected therewith, as long as there is need. 23. For the Head-ach. TAke green Hemlock, that is tender, and put it in your Socks, so that it may lie thinly between them and the Soles of your Feet; shift the Herb once a day. 24. For the Hiccup (even in Fevers.) GIve two or three preserved Dampsons at a time.
25. A Simple Remedy for the Cholic. IN a Draught of any convenient Liquor, dissolve about one dram of good Salt of Tartar, and let the Patient take it for one Dose. 26. An Experienced Medicine to cleanse the VVomb. TAke a large white Onion, cut it into small pieces, and boil it in about a pint of Water, or less, as if it were to be dressed for eating. And of this Decoction give seven or eight ounces for a dose, mix'd with a∣bout half an ounce of fresh Oil of Walnuts.
27. To appease the Fits of a Fu∣ror Uterinus. TAke the Feathers of Par∣tridges (it matters not much from what part of the Fowl) and burn them for a competent time under the Patient's Nose. 28. A very good Syrup to strengthen the Sight. TAke about a small Spoon∣ful of a Syrup made of Betony-water and Honey, twice, thrice or four times a day.
29. An easily prepared, but useful Drink for a beginning Scurvy. TO a quart of Small-Beer (of six Shillings per Barrel) or Small-Ale, put over Night a∣bout a handful of Scurvy-grass-Leaves, and let the Patient drink this Liquor at Dinner for his ordinary drink for six or eight Weeks together. 30. A Parable Remedy for re∣cent Burns. APply as speedily as you can to the part affected an Onion, or more, (if the burnt place be large) beaten to a Mash.
31. For the Tooth-ach. APply a Plaister of Caranna to that part that burns, be∣tween the bottom of the Ear and the Temples, on the same side where the Pulsation of the Ar∣tery is the most manifestly or strongly felt. 32. An Excellent Medicine, tho not Curative, for those that are tormented with the Stone in the Bladder. TAke Pouder of Comfrey-Roots an ounce and half, Marsh-mallow-Roots three oun∣ces, Liquorice Pouder two drams, Seeds of Daucus of Creet two drams; Seeds of Purslane, of Win∣ter
Cherries, of each half a dram; Nutmegs two drams, Saffron one dram; the Species Diamargariton frigid, six drams; Syrup of Marsh∣mallows four ounces; mix and make a soft Electuary: of which let the Sick daily take the quan∣tity of a Walnut. It is profitable against the Stone in the Reins and Bladder, but chiefly against the latter; as also against the Stran∣gury, Dysuria, &c. 33. To make a Purging Electu∣ary, especially for Children. TAke an Ounce of choice Rhubarb reduc'd to fine Pouder, and eight ounces of very good Currans, pick'd, wash'd and rub'd dry; beat these together in a Glass or Marble Mortar for near
two hours. Of this Electuary, let the Patient take about the big∣ness of a small or a large Chesnut in the Morning fasting, and if need be at Bed-time. If the case be very urgent, the Medicine may be taken thrice in twenty four hours. 34. An excellent Remedy for an Inflammation of the Eyes. TAke a Pippin (or other Ap∣ple) cut it into two halfs, take out all the Core of each of them, fill up the Cavities with the tender tops of common Worm∣wood, tie the halfs together, and roast the Apple well. Then beat it and the Herb together to a kind of Poultis, and apply it warm (but not hot) to the part affected, and
bind it thereon, letting it lie all Night, or if you use it in the Day time, for six or eight hours. 35. An useful Drink for the Kings-Evil, and some Affe∣ctions that have the like Cau∣ses to it. TAke a large handful (or two little Physical handfuls) of the Leaves of Ground-Ivy, green, or (if the Season denies you them) well dry'd, wash off the Dust with Beer, (not Water) and put the Herb into a Gallon of Ale-wort; when 'tis ripe for drinking, draw it out into Bottles, and let the Pa∣tient take a draught of it twice or thrice a day, or if it be thought fit, he may use it at Meals. See Numb. (6.)
36. An often experienc'd Re∣medy to expel Gravel, and provoke supprest Urin. KIll a black Cock or Hen, (ra∣ther than one of any other colour) take out the thick Mem∣brane or Skin that lines the Giz∣zard or Stomach, and having wip'd it clean, dry it cautiously, so as it may be beaten to pouder: With this mix an equal part, or half so much of choice red Coral cal∣cin'd. Of this mixture, give from twenty or thirty Grains to forty or fifty Grains. See Numb. (7.)
37. An approved Remedy for the Kings-Evil. SEt a quart of new Milk on the Fire till it just boils up, then take it off, and put into it two spoonfuls of the best Honey, and stir it till it be dissolved: And then set it on the Fire again, and let it boil two or three walms: Then divide it into four parts, and drink one part warm early in the Morning, another about ten of the Clock, another about four in the Afternoon, and the last a little before Bed-time. Do this daily for two or three Months, except you purge, which must be once a Week, taking (if a grown Man) three quarters of an ounce of Caryo-costinum dis∣solved in Posset-drink: Dress the Sores if they run, with any draw∣ing
Sear-cloth, or a Plaister of Burgundy-Pitch. The Medicine, though not very promising, is ve∣ry famous, by the many Cures done with it, by a charitable La∣dy, of whose Ingenious Chaplain I procur'd it. 38. A good Composition to stop a hollow Tooth, and appease the Pain. TAke two parts of fine Sugar, (that of Lisbon does best) and one part of black round Pep∣per, both finely pouder'd and mixt; put them into a Silver spoon over two or three well-kind∣led Coals; and when the Sugar be∣gins to melt, take off the Spoon, and whilst the mixture is yet soft,
form it into little grains for size and shape, suted to the part af∣fected. 39. A Plaister prefer'd by an old Physician, that often try'd it, to the common Soap Plaister. MIx about one dram of Ca∣stle-Soap, with one ounce of Diachylum, and make thereof a thin Plaister, to be worn upon the part affected. 40. An Excellent Liquor to be u∣sed Topically in Gleetings. TAke four ounces of Spring-Water [or Plantane-Water]
and dissolve in it about one scruple of the Sympathetic-Pouder, or so much as will give it a sensible, yet but faint, Vitriol-like taste: And of this mixture, inject as much as is usual of a small Syringe, every Morning and Evening, as long as need require, directing the Patient to retain the injected Liquor as long as conveniently he can. 41. An approved Medicine in the biting of a Viper. TAke of white Horehound, and apply the Plant, well beaten into the form of a Poultis, to the part affected, and give the Patient a spoonful or two of the Juice of the same Herb to drink: 'Tis also very good for the Jaundice.
42. An almost specific Medicine for the suppression of Urin. TAke of Stoechas Citrina (in English, French Lavender) and infuse in a good heat, two handful of the Flowers in a pint of good Brandy, (not rectify'd Spi∣rit of Wine) and of this infusion, give about a small Wine-glass-full at a time [diluted, if there be great need, with a sufficient quantity of some appropriated Liquor.] 43. For an Ague often try'd. BOil Yarrow [Mille-folium] in new Milk, till it be ten∣der enough to have a Cataplasm made of it. Apply this to the
Patient's Wrists, just when the cold Fit is coming on, and let it lie on the parts till the Fit be gone; and if another Fit comes, use fresh Cataplasms as before. 44. An useful Plaister for those that are troubled with Vapours of the Spleen, and shortness of Breath, when 'tis a Nervous Affection. TAke two parts of strain'd Gal∣banum, and one part of Asa∣foetida, and make thereof, accor∣ding to Art, a Plaister of about the bigness of the Palm of one's Hand, taking care to leave a broad Edg quire round, to prevent its sticking to one's Linen and put∣ting a pretty large piece of Cotton
in the middle, that the Gums may not touch the Navel; to which the Plaister is to be apply'd. 45. A slight, but excellent, Me∣dicine to take off Fits of the Head-ach. TAke about a handful of fresh Rosemary, and boil it for a pretty while in a quart of com∣mon Water, then almost fill with it a pint Pot [or rather a Mug] let the Patient cover his Head and Face with a Napkin, so that he may receive the Steam as hot as he can well bear, and keep the Vessel there as long as he finds the Steam strong enough.
46. An easie and try'd Medicine for the Itch, Praenissis Uni∣versalibus. BOil four Ounces of clean Quick-silver in about a Gallon and a half of Spring∣water, and let the Patient take of this between a quarter and half a pint at a time, aromati∣zing it if he pleases with a little Lemon-peel. 47. An easie Medicine to purify and sweeten the Blood. TAke the Minera of Hunga∣rian, or other choice Anti∣mony, and having ground it to very fine Pouder, without suffe∣ring
it to touch any Metal, give of this dry Alcohole from ten Grains to a Dram, giving it once a day, and (unless some particu∣lar reason disswade that time) let it be at Dinner, that it may min∣gle with the Patient's Meat in his Stomach. 48. A cheap, but excellent, Me∣dicine for Ulcers. TAke one dram at least of Cor∣rosive Sublimate finely pou∣der'd, dissolve it in a quart of fair Water, and let it lie there, if you have leisure, four or five days (in a light Digestion) that it may be throughly dissolved. Then drop in it as much Spirit of Sal-Armoniac, or as much Oyl of Tartar, per deliquium, as will pre∣cipitate
it all: Then filter it care∣fully, and keep it stop'd for use, which is to imbibe Dorsels or Pla∣gets with it, and apply them to the Ulcer twice or thrice a day. 49. An easie and innocent Me∣dicine for Costiveness. BOil in as much Broth as will serve to fill a large Porin∣ger, about half a handful of the Leaves of common Mallows chop'd, and of this Broth (being strained) let the Patient make the first part of his Meal. See Numb. (8.)
50. For the Aching of a hollow Tooth. TAke Oil of Wax, and with it moisten well a little Cotton, and thrust it up into the hollow Tooth, letting it lie there till the pain be sufficiently asswag'd. 51. An often try'd Medicine for the Bloody-Flux, being good also for Pleurisies. GIve the weight of an Escu D'or (or near one dram) of the Seed of Sophia Chirurgorum, in English Flax-seed, in two or three spoonfuls of any convenient vehicle once or twice a day.
52. The Cinamon Drink, good in Gripes and Fluxes, &c. TAke two ounces of calcin'd Hart's-horn, pouder it, and boil it in three pints of Spring∣water, till a pint be wasted; then take it off the Fire, and infuse in it, an ounce and half of good Ci∣namon, setting it upon Embers in a cover'd Vessel for about an hour. Then sweeten it with Sugar to your Palat, and drink about a quarter of a pint at a time. If taken for prevention only, a fourth part of the Cinamon will serve the turn. See Numb. (9.)
53. An easie, but useful Medi∣cine for redness of the Eyes. TAke a Blanch'd Almond, and about three Grains of Cam∣phire, and in a Glass or a Mar∣ble Mortar, incorporate them by wary grinding; and then add to them little by little two or three ounces of red Rose-water, still grinding them till the whole be brought to a kind of Emulsion. Drop a little of this into the part affected. See Numb. (10.)
54. A most excellent Balsam for any green Wound, of what Na∣ture soever. OYl of St. John's-wort, and Ve∣nice-Turpentine, of each a like quantity, set them over the Fire in a gentle heat, half an hour or less, that they may incorpo∣rate. Then put them up, and keep it for use as one of the best of Balsams. 55. A good Medicine for sup∣pression of the Menses. GIve for three Mornings to∣gether, about the expected time of the Monthly Evacuation, a dram or dram and half or there∣abouts
of the Gauls and Livers of Eels dry'd and made into Pouder. 56. An experienced Remedy to prevent Apoplectic Fits. MAke at the crossing of the Sutures and Issue with Diapalma, and Oil of Vitriol, and keep it open the ordinary way. 57. To dry up, or correct the Humour that makes Scrophu∣lous Ulcers. TAke of the Bone of the Cuttle∣fish, and having reduc'd it to an impalpable Pouder, give about one dram of it at a time in any convenient vehicle.
58. An effectual Medicine for a recent Strain. TAke a handful of Worm∣wood-Leaves, and boil them in strong Ale, till the Consump∣tion of about a third, that you may reduce them to the Form of a Cataplasm, which when you take from the Fire, you must strengthen by putting into it two or at most three of Brandy, and apply it very warm, renewing it, if need be, in twenty four hours at least. See Numb. (11.)
59. For a slight Inflammation of the Eyes, as also a Hordeum growing on the Eye-lid. TAke fresh Housleek, and ha∣ving pouder'd it very well to a kind of Cataplasm, cover as much as is needful of it (for exam∣ple sake, to the thickness of a half-Crown, or a Crown-piece) in the fold of a Rag or Linen-cloth, that may be so apply'd that the Cata∣plasm may reach the Eye, and the rest of the Cloth be fastned about the Patient's Head. Let the Me∣dicine lie on all Night, and be taken off the next Morning. Re∣peat this Application two or three times, in case there be need.
60. For most Astmatic Distempers. TAke of the Roots of Elecam∣pain, thinly slic'd, one ounce, of the Leaves of Ground-Ivy, a good handful. Boil these in three pints of Spring-water to a quart, then strain the Decoction, swee∣ten it with a little live Honey, and let the Patient take it five, six or seven spoonfuls at a time. (Note well, Remember the efficacy of Saffron in the same Disease, as 'tis commended by Mr. Ray, in his Catalogue of Plants.) See Numb. (12.)
61. For an Ague. TAke of the Bone, call'd Patel∣la, of the Knee of a dead Man, and having reduc'd it to fine Pouder, give of it as much as will lie upon a Groat or a Six-pence for one Dose, in any proper Conserve or fit Vehicle, at a convenient time (before the cold Fit.) 62. An experienced Medicine to kill Tetters. TAke of Flowers of Brimstone, Ginger and Burnt-allum, of each alike, mingle them well, and of this mixture, incorporate as much with new unsalted Butter, as is requisite to bring it to the
consistence of an Unguent. With this anoint the part affected, as hot as the Patient can well en∣dure it, and let it stay on all Night; and the next Morning wash it off with Celandine-wa∣ter. But when the Patient goes to Bed, he is to take a Dose of some Alexipharmacal Medicine, as Gascon's Pouder, Treacle, &c. to keep the Humour from being driven into the Mass of Blood: He is also to bathe the part often∣times in a day with the Celan∣dine-water. 63. To make a good Pouder for a Gonorrhaea. TAke of choice red Coral, and of Mastich, equal parts, reduce them separately to fine
Powder. Mingle them very well, and of this mixture, give about thirty or forty Grains for one Dose. 64. A choice Medicine for a slight Stroke or Bruise of the Eye. TAke two spoonfuls of Fennel-water, or of Betony-water, and drop into it three or four drops (or five at most) of good clarify'd Honey: shake them well together, and use them twice or thrice a day. But you must have a care to make this mixture fresh once in four, or at most in five days, especially in Summer; for if it be longer kept, 'twill be apt to grow sowr.
65. An often try'd external Me∣dicine for an Erysipelas. TAke the Blood of a Hare, ('tis best if kill'd by Hunt∣ing in March) and if you can have it fresh, anoint the part af∣fected with it, otherwise apply on it a Linen Rag that has (though a good while ago) throughly imbib'd the fresh Blood of that Animal, and dry'd in the Air. But if the imbued Linen be too hard or stiff, it must be softned with a little fair wa∣ter, and then the cold taken off, apply'd to, and bound upon the part. See Numb. (13.)
66. An Emperics, much boasted Remedy for the Fluor Albus, or Whites in Women. MAke a strong Decoction of the Herb Alchymilla (in English, Ladies-Mantle,) and let the Patient drink of it about half a pint every Morning fasting; and if the case be urgent, make an Injection of the same Plant, boil'd till it be very tender, and let the Patient make use of it from time to time. See Numb. (14.)
67. An excellent Water for Ul∣cers and Sores [try'd with great Success.] TO a quart of Spring-water, take one dram of Mercury sublimate finely pouder'd; and when 'tis quite dissolved, drop in∣to the Solution, either Spirit of Sal Armoniac (which is best) or Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, till you see that no more will manifestly precipitate. This done, filter the mixture through Cap-paper, and reserve the Precipitate for o∣ther uses. The Liquor that pas∣ses, you must keep close stopt in a Glass-Viol; and when you will use it, you must dip Linen Rags in it, and being throughly wet∣ted, apply them to the part affe∣cted; single, or doubled, more
or less, as need requires. This Application may be renewed twice, or (if the case be urgent) thrice a day. 68. An experienced Medicine for want of Sleep, proceeding from great Heats of the Head. TAke the palest Carrots you can get, and scrape a suffi∣cient quantity of them to afford scrapings enough to make a Cata∣plasm of about two Fingers or two Inches broad, and of the thick∣ness of a Half-crown piece of Sil∣ver, or thereabouts. Let the Pa∣tient apply this in a piece of dou∣bled [Linen] to his Throat, so that it may reach to the Jugular
Vessels on each side, when he goes to Bed, and let it lie on all Night (for it will not easily grow dry,) if the first Application do not prevail, 'tis to be apply'd the fol∣lowing Night; and so a third and fourth time, if need require. 69. A Parable Medicine that has cured very many, espe∣cially Children, and young Boys and Girls, of Convul∣sive Fits. TAke of the Pouder (whether made by Filing, Rasping, or, otherwise) of the sound Skull of a Dead Man, and give of it a∣bout as much as will lie upon a Groat, made up into a Bolus with Conserve of Rosemary-Flowers
(or any other that is proper) to a young Boy or Girl: But in Persons more Aged and Strong, the Dose of the Pouder must be augmented to double the quan∣tity. The Medicine must be given often, if necessity requires it: If the Patient be a Child, 'twill be useful to apply to his Throat, a kind of Necklace, made of the Roots of Vervain cut into Beads. 70. An easie, and experienc'd Remedy for the Piles. IN four ounces of Spring-water, dissolve about one dram of Salt of Tartar, or as much as will give the Liquor a manifest, but not strong Alcalisate taste, and apply soft Rags dip'd in luke-warm or
somewhat more to the part af∣fected, shifting it from time to time. 71. A succcssful Medicine for Fluxes of the Belly. TAke Rice-Meal, and mix with it about a fifth part of finely pouder'd and sifted Chalk, boil these in Water, or which is bet∣ter, if it agrees with the Patient, in Milk, and make thereof a ha∣sty Pudding, to be moderately sea∣son'd with Sugar and pouder'd Cinamon; and let the Patient eat it at Meals, and if need be at some other times.
72. An often try'd Remedy for Corns. TAke the Juice of Housleek, and mix it up with about equal parts of the thick Balm or Yest, that sticks to the Barrel or to the Clay that stops it. Of these make a kind of Plaister, which being kept upon the Toe for a while, and then if need be, renew'd, will make the Corn very soft and easie to be drawn out and extirpated. See Numb. (15.)
73. A good Medicine for Burns and Stenching of Blood. DIssolve in Spring-water, or which is better Rain-wa∣ter, as much Sugar as will make it a strong Solution, and then with a sufficient quantity of Linseed-Oil, or Oil of Olives, beat up this Liquor till the Oil on it be brought to the consistence of an Unguent, with which anoint the part affected, as timely as you can, renewing the Application as often as need shall require. See Numb. (16.)
74. An approved Medicine for the Bloody-Flux, being good also for Pleurisies. GIve two or three scruples of Hare's Blood beaten to Pou∣der for one Dose, to be taken in a spoonful or two or three of Mint-water, or any other fit Ve∣hicle. 75. A very often (though homely) experienc'd Remedy for Dysen∣teric and other Fluxes. TAke the fresh Dung of a Hog, (and if you can, whil'st 'tis yet warm) and boil
in a Poringer full of new Milk, as much of it as may amount to the bigness of a Wal-nut; and also an equal quantity of fine Mutton Suet slic'd very thin: When these are well incorpora∣ted with the Milk, strain them well through a clean Linen cloth; and if there be need, sweeten them a little with Loaf-Sugar: Let the Patient take this warm, once or twice a day. 76. A powerful Styptic to stench Blood, where it can be apply'd. TAke the fine Pouder of Lapis Haematites, made by grind∣ing it exactly well with an equal or double weight of Sal Armoniac:
And of this high-colour'd Subli∣mate, put a little upon the Ori∣fice of the Vessel. 77. For a slight Redness of the Eyes. TAke of French Barley half an ounce, and Damask Ro∣ses half an handful. Boil them but very little in a pint of Spring∣water, and with this moisten the part affected. See Numb. (17.)
78. For the Relaxation of the Uvula. TAke blewish Pease (or in want of them, white ones) and chew them very well, so as to reduce them to the con∣sistence of a Poultis. Lay this warm upon the Crown of the Head, to the breadth and thick¦ness of a Five-shilling-piece of Silver, or somewhat larger, shift∣ing it in the Morning, and at Bed-time. See Numb. (18.)
79. A powerful Medicine to stop sharp Rheums. TAke a Dram of Catechu, or Japan Earth, and make thereof a Decoction in five or six ounces of good White-wine, or else of some Distill'd Water, or other Liquor appropriated to the Disease. Of this, give two or three spoonfuls at Night, and in the Morning as much also if need require. 80. The French-Man's Famous Eye-Water. TAke two or three ounces of the Water of Simple Pimpernel, distill'd in Balneo,
and put this into a little Pot or Poringer of Rose-Copper; then put into it, about the bigness of a Hazel-nut, or a Filbert, of strong Quick-lime: Cover the Pot, and let the Ingredients lie in it till the Liquor hath acquired a blewish colour. Then very warily pour off tke clear, and add to it as much live Honey, as will give a little, or but little, Taste: Use it after the wonted manner of such Waters; and if you find it too strong, dilate it a little with water of the same Plant, or good Spring-water, which for a need, may be used from first to last, instead of the Water of Pimpernel. See Numb. (19.)
81. Eye-Water. TAke Red Rose-water, Plan∣tane-water, of each an ounce; Tutia prepared, half a scruple; Lapis Lazuli prepared, six grains; red Coral prepared, five grains; mix and make a Collyrium or Eye-water. This drop'd into the Eyes, being first well shak'd, cures Inflam∣mations of the Eyes, provided there be no great foulness, nor Scrophulous disposition in the Pa∣tient. It takes off the redness of the Eye-lids, if with a Spunge dip'd in it, the Eye-lids be often wetted, it takes off Films very well.
82. A safe and useful Medi∣cine to prevent Driness and some other Disaffections of the Eyes. TAke of choice Virgin-Ho∣ney, two spoonfuls, of Suc∣cory-water, or the distilled Water, of each four spoonfuls; mix them, and in a very clean Vessel over a very gentle Fire, let them eva∣porate (taking off from time to time any Scum that may arise) till the mixture be brought to the consistence of a Syrup [or of Honey] keep this in a Glass well stop'd, and make use of it, by letting fall a drop or two, or at most three of it, at a time, into the Eye. See Numb. (20.)
83. The Medicine of a Famous Empyric for the Stone. TAke Amber (clear and yel∣low) Sea-horse Pizzle and Niter, of each a like quantity, (Note well, in case of Ulcerated Kidnies, put half the quanti∣ty of the Amber) and an eighth part of the Nitre (of Natu∣ral Balsam.) Pulverize each a∣part, and make them up into Pills with Chios (or at least clean Strasburgh Turpentine) take five, six or seven Pills (of above ten to one ounce) Morning and Evening. See Numb. (21.)
84. An excellent Medicine for Fits of the Mother. TAke Sagapenum dissolved in Vinegar of Squills, and strained through a Sieve, and a∣gain inspisiated or thickned: Ammoniacum in like manner prepared: Steel prepared, Myrrh, Fecula of Bryony, of each half a Dram: English Saffron, Casto∣reum, of each a scruple: Borax two scruples: Syrup of Staechas a sufficient quantity; mix and make Pills of a convenient big∣ness to be swallowed; of which take three Morning and Night, with care.
85. A choice Medicine for the Cholic. TAke clean white Chalk, and having dry'd it with a gen∣tle heat, reduce it to fine Pouder; wet this Pouder with the express'd Juice of Cammomil, and then let it dry in the Air, without the heat, either of the Fire, or of the Sun. This done, wet it again with new Juice of Cam∣momil, and dry it the second time as before. Wet and dry it again the third time, and, if you please, the fourth time; and then re∣duce the dry Mass to fine Pou∣der again. Of this Pouder, let the Patient take at a time, as much as will lie upon a Groat or a Six-pence, in some spoon∣fuls
of Wine, or other proper Vehicle. 86. Troches of Vipers, suc∣cessfully used to cleanse the Blood, and to strengthen weak Patients. TAke of Vipers reduc'd to fine Pouder one ounce, Dia∣phoretic Antimony half an ounce, clear yellow Amber two drams, of Starch as much as of all the rest, and of Sugar as much as of Starch; make them to a fine Paste, with Spirit of Wine, and then make them into small Cakes, whereof one may serve for a Dose.
87. An approved Medicine for Scorbutic Gums, and to fasten the Teeth. TAke of White-wine, a pint, of Alum half an ounce, of Juniper-berries and of red Sage ana one ounce: Boil these toge∣ther till a quarter of the Liquor be wasted, then put into the re∣maining part four ounces of Honey, and let it boil till the Scum be all risen; then filter it, and put into it one dram of Bal∣samum Vitae. See Numb. (22.)
88. A Caution about the Vi∣triolate Eye-water. TAke four grains of Roman Vitriol, not more, to four ounces of Distilled Water, either of Roses, Succory, Fennel, &c. 89. A good Medicine for a light Stroke, or Contusion of the Eye. TAke half an ounce of Ce∣lendine-water, and shake well into it, three or four drops of clarify'd Honey, and let fall of this into the Eye, a drop or two, twice or thrice a day.
90. An excellent Medicine for a Stroke or Bruise in the Eye. TAke of Betony-water and Hysop-water, of each one ounce, and in their mixture, stir some Blades of Saffron, till the Liquor be pretty well colour'd, and no more. And lastly, add to it four or five drops of cla∣rify'd Honey. See Numb. (23.)
91. An excellent Remedy to take off Films, and such like things from the Eyes. TAke choice Bole-Armonic, and reduce it to very fine Pouder, blow this gently into the Eye, once, or at most twice a day. But if the Patient be subject to, or fearful of, any swelling, heat, or disaffection in the Eye-lids, incorporate the Pouder with a little clarify'd Honey. See Numb. (24.)
92. To strengthen weak Eyes subject to Rheums. TAke Lapis Calaminaris four ounces, Rose-water a pint, shake them well together two days. Then let it settle, pour off this Water into a little Viol, and drop of it in weak Eyes, two or three times a day, &c. 93. A Plaister to strengthen the Eyes, and stop Defluctions on them. TAke of Frankincense two drams, Olibanum and Ma∣stic ana half a dram; Mix these well, and reduce them into fine Pouder: Of which, a convenient
quantity is to be melted and spread upon black Ribbon, or some such thing, with a hot Knife or Spatula, and so presently ap∣ply'd to the Temples. 94. An experienced Remedy for sharp and hot Humours in the Eyes. INto a quart of new Milk al∣ready boiling, put about two handfuls or less of green Housleek, freshly gather'd, and chopt small, and let the Milk boil on till 'twill yield no more Curd. Then strain the green Posset-drink, and let the Patient take every day, once or twice a pint (or as near that quantity as he can well reach to) sweeten'd a little if need be
with fine Sugar. The drink may be best taken cold. 95. An excellent Fumigation for Pains in the Eyes, and over∣great driness of them, and when one fears the beginning of a Cataract. TAke of Fennel, Hysop, Be∣tony, Celandine, Carduus, of each half a handful, or a hand∣ful; of the Seeds of Linseed, Quinces, Fenugreek, Fleawort, of each half a dram, of French Bar∣ley one ounce; Boil these in two quarts of fair water, and half a pint of White-wine: Let the Patient hold his Head over the Fumes for about a quarter of an hour every Morning.
96. For Sore Eye-lids. TAke Crums of White-bread half an ounce; Coral, and Pearl prepared, Tutia, White-Sugar-candy, of each half a dram; Pouder of Red Roses a dram and half; Flowers of St. John's-wort one dram: and with a sufficient quantity of Milk make a Cata∣plasm or Pultice, which spread upon linen Cloth, and bind it over the Eye. 97. For Heaviness and Pain in the Eyes. TAke Flowers of Melilot, of Elder, and of Marigolds, of each a small handful; Linseed,
Seeds of Fenugreek, Fleawort, Cumin, and Quinces of each half a scruple; French-Barley half an ounce; Damask Roses half an ounce; Spring-water a pint and half: mix and make a Decoction with which foment the Forehead, Temples and Eye-brows, being sufficiently warm. 98. For a Dry Inflamation. TAke of Betony, Hysop, Rue, Worm-wood, Ver∣vain, as also of Sage-flowers and Rosemary-flowers, of each of all these, half a handful. (To which may be usefully added Cummin-seeds, Fennel-seeds and Carduus-seeds, of each a quarter of an ounce.) Boil these a little in two or three quarts of fair Water,
and then let the Patient hold his Head for about a quarter of an hour over the Steam of this De∣coction, making use of a Nap∣kin, to keep the Smoke from dissipating, and direct it to his Eyes. A while after, he may put into them, if it be thought fit, a little clarify'd Honey. FINIS.
Several necessary Notes, Explicating, Illustrating, or Enlarging some of the Heads in the Preceding Volume. Numb. (1.) For the Bloody Flux, or other Fluxes. See Pag. 4. TAke Japan Earth, Pouder of Rhubarb, of each equal parts: of which give half a dram at a time every Morning fasting.
Numb. (2.) A good Medicine for the Dropsie. See p. 5. NOte, An Infusion of Me∣choacan in White-wine, (an Ounce and half thin-sliced to a pint) being infused 24 hours, and drank off every Morning for some days, is a most admirable thing: and if a little Mustard-seed be infused in it, it will be so much the better. Numb. (3.) A Medicine for Blood∣shot, or inflamed Eyes. See p. 6. THere is no better a Remedy for inflamed Eyes, than to wash them every day several times with this. Take Frog∣spawn-water, a pint; Salt of Tar∣tar,
a dram: mix and dissolve, and wash therewith. Numb. (4.) A good and innocent Dentrifice. See p. 7. BUt that which exceeds all, is a fine Pouder of Red Co∣ral, with which you may rub them two or three times a day, and then wash them with Wa∣ter in which Sal Prunellae is dis∣solved. Numb. (5.) To prevent or cure an Ague. See p. 13. TAke gratings of Angelica Root, Flowers of Antimony, of each half a dram; choice Canary three ounces: Infuse in a cold place
for one or two days, and pour off the clear for two Doses: It is a singular good Vomit for the cure of Agues of all sorts, be∣ing given in the Morning fast∣ing 4 or 6 hours before the com∣ing of the Fit; and if it be not a Quotidian Ague, then on the intermitting day. Numb. (6.) An useful Drink for the Kings-Evil. See p. 24. THere is no better thing in the World for the Kings-Evil than to give daily some spoon∣fuls of this following Liquor. Take White-wine a quart, Juice of Pellitory of the Wall a pint, Spirit of Wine half a pint, Sal Prunellae an ounce: mix and dissolve; then pour off the clear, and sweeten with white Sugar:
Dose 6 spoonfuls Morning and Night. Numb. (7.) An Experienc'd Re∣medy to expel Gravel, and pro∣voke Ʋrin. See p. 25. TAke the Juice of Onions two spoonfuls; White-wine half a pint or more: mix them, for a draught it gives present ease; and if repeated for some time, in a short season cures. Numb. (8.) An easie Medicine for Costiveness. See p. 35. A Turpentine Clyster thus made is admirable, to cause Stools in a very great Co∣stiveness.
Take Strasburgh Turpentine an ounce, Yolk of one or two Eggs, grind them well together; then put thereto a pint of fat Mut∣ton Broth, and exhibit it Blood∣warm. Numb. (9.) A Remedy for Gripes and Fluxes. See p. 37. A Most excellent Remedy for Gripings, is a Tincture of Corn Poppy-flowers made with common Spirit of Wine: of this you may give from a spoonful to two spoonfuls, in Spirit of Opium half an ounce, mixt with Black-cherry water four ounces: This gives ease upon the spot.
Numb. (10.) A Medicine for Red∣ness of the Eyes. See p. 38. IF the redness be with a fierce hot Rheum, it is from weak∣ness of the Eyes; and then the only Remedy is to wash them twice or thrice a day with Bran∣dy: there is no danger in it, nor will it smart much. Numb. (11.) An effectual Medicine for a Strain. See p. 41. TAke Comfrey-Roots beaten to a pulp, half a pound, Pou∣der of Japan Earth four ounces, Spirit of Wine a sufficient quan∣tity; mix, and apply it to the part.
Numb. (12.) For most Astmatic Distempers. See p. 43. TAke Juice of Hyssop, choice Honey, of each two pound: mix, boil, scum, and make a Sy∣rup; of which, let the Sick take four spoonfuls or more, Morning, Noon, and Night. Numb. (13.) An external Medicine for an Erysipelas. See p. 47. THe Blood of almost any living Creature is found by many Experiments to be a Specifick a∣gainst an Erysipelas, being often anointed on the affect, or Cloths dip'd in the some, being laid moist thereon.
Numb. (14.) A Remedy for the Whites in Women. See p. 48. THe best of Remedies in this case (after due purging) is to give two, three or four grains of Laudanum, and to inject three, four, or six times a day this water. Take Spring-water two quarts, white Vitriol, Roch Allum, of each two ounces: being in Pou∣der, mix and dissolve, let it set∣tle, and use only the clear. Numb. (15.) A try'd Remedy for Corns. See p. 54. TAke Ammoniacum strained, Emplastrum Diapalma, of each an ounce; Arcanum Corali∣num half an ounce; white Preci∣pitate
two drams: mix them them well together, and apply it only over the Corn, being first cut as close as it conveniently can be. Numb. (16.) A Medicine for Burns and stenching of Blood. See p. 55. BUt for stenching of Blood, there are but few Medicines which exceed the Colcothar of Vitriol, whether wash'd and free'd from its Salt, or not wash'd: 'tis but a common thing, but will do more than a thousand much more enobled.
Numb. (17.) For a slight Redness of the Eyes. See p. 58. ONe of the best of Remedies against Redness and Inflam∣mation of the Eyes, is often to wash them with this Water: Take Frog-spawn-Water a pint, Common Spirit of Wine four ounces; mix them: wash here∣with five or six times a day; and at Bed-time apply over the sore Eyes a Cataplasm of a rotten Apple. Numb. (18.) For the Relaxation of the Ʋvula. See p. 59. THis common Medicine is found very successful: The Throat being first gargled with Claret-wine, in which a little
Roch Allum has been dissolved, as hot as it can well be endured; then anoint it with this. Take Honey one ounce, Pouder of Ele∣campane two drams, Pepper in Pouder half a dram: mix them, and apply it thrice a day with your Finger. Numb. (19.) A famous Eye-Water. See p. 61. TAke Red Rose-water a quart; Aloes in fine Pouder, half an ounce; white Vitriol, Vitrum Antimonii, Crocus Metalorum, of each six drams; mix and di∣gest warm a Month: then use the clear water three or four times a day, it has scarcely any equal.
Numb. (20.) A Medicine to prevent Running of the Eyes. See p. 63. TAke White-wine half a pint, dissolve in it white Vitriol two drams; filter or strain, and therein dissolve choice Honey two ounces: with this fill the Eyes two or three times a-day; it is good against most Distempers of the Eyes. Numb. (21.) A Medicine for the Stone. See p. 64. TAke Strasburgh Turpentine two ounces, grind it well with Yolks of Eggs, and then mix therewith this following Syrup. Take water a pint and half, Sal Prunellae an ounce and half: mix and dissolve, and with Honey a
pound, boil it into a Syrup, which add to the former mix∣ture. Dose two or three spoon∣fuls Morning and Night. Numb. (22.) A Medicine for Scor∣butick Gums, and to fasten the Teeth. See p. 68. THere is nothing fastens the Teeth better than to wash them with this mixture. Take Claret-wine a pint, Roch Allum half an ounce; mix and dissolve, and then add thereto six ounces of a strong Tincture of Japan Earth, made with common Brandy.
Numb. (23.) For a Stroke or Bruise in the Eye. See p. 70. TAke Celandine-water three ounces, Spirit of Saffron one ounce, mix them, with which wash the Eyes several times a∣day; and if the Eyes be very sore, red, or blood-shot, after washing anoint them every time with a little pure Virgin Ho∣ney. Numb. (24.) An excellent Reme∣dy to take off Films from the Eyes. TAke Pouder of Coral levi∣gated one ounce, Pouder of Pearls levigated three drams, Crabs-Eyes levigated one dram, Virgin Honey two ounces; mix
them, and anoint four or five times a day, but chiefly Morn∣ing and Night. Numb. (25.) A Remedy for the Kings-Evil. TAke Roots of Pilewort a sufficient quantity, bruise them, and boil them in Hog's Lard till they are Crisp, after which press them hard out; and boil in like manner as many more fresh Roots, and press out again, doing it the third time: then keep the Ointment for use to anoint with, Morning and Night.
Numb. (26.) A Remedy for the Stone. GIve every Morning fasting, and every Night going to Bed, half a dram of the Pouder of Winter Cherries in a draught Parsly or Arsmart-water, or in Glass of White-wine. FINIS.
