B4882 10152263 44655
THE QUEENES EXCHANGE, A COMEDY Acted with generall applause at the BLACK-FRIERS BY His MAJESTIES Servants. WRITTEN BY MR RICHARD BROME, Regia res amor est— LONDON, Printed for Henry Brome at the Hand in Pauls Church-yard. 1657.
The Stationer to the Readers. Gentlemen and Ladies, THis short account I thought fit to give you of this Poem, that it came to my hands among other things of this nature written, and left by Mr. Rich. Broome a person whose excellency in Comical wit has been sufficiently proved, and needs not my partial and weak commendation. There are published already of his Playes, the Northern Lass, the Antipodes, the Sparagus-garden, the Merry Beggers, the Lancashire Witches, besides the 5. Playes lately published in a Volume. The good acceptance of all which encou∣rages me to publish this, being no way inferior to the rest; but when 'twas written, or where acted, I know not. Your kinde entertainment of this will enable me to make known to the World divers more of the same Authors works of this kind, which have not yet seen light; for my ayme is, & prodesse & delectare, by delighting thee to profit my self. H. B. Farewel.
The Queens Exchange. The Persons in the Play. OSriick, King of Northumbria. Theodrick his Favourite and Embassador. Ethelswick, his Substitute. Theodwald, Eaufride, Alfride, Edelbert, Lords of his Council. A Physition. Jeffrey, the Kings fool. 4. Clowns. BErtha Queen of West Saxons. Segebert, Alberto, two banished Lords. Anthynus, Offa, Segeberts Sons. Mildred, Segeberts daughter, Osri∣icks Queen. Arnold, an old servant of Offa. Kelrick, Elkwine, Elfride, three sycophant Lords. Hermit and his Servant. Keeper of Prison. Edith, Mildreds Nurse. A Carpenter, A Mason, A Smith, three Thieves▪ Scene England. Prolouge to the Queens Exchange. THe writer of this Play who ever uses To usher with his modesty the Muses Unto the Stage, He that scarce ever durst Of Poets rank himself above the worst, Though most that he has writ has past the rest, And found good approbation of the best; He as he never knew to bow, he saies, As little fears the fortune of his Playes: He yields their right to us, and we submit All that they are in learning or in wit To your fair censure. All is then but thus, As you approve they are good or bad to us; And all by way of favour we can crave, Is that you not destroy where you may save.
The QUEENES Exchange. ACT. I. SCEN. I. Enter Celerick, Elkwin, Segebert, Bertha, and Attendants. Hoboyes. Bart. SInce it has pleasd the highest Power to place me His substitute in Regal Soveraignty, Over this Kingdom, by the generall vote Of you my loyall Lords, and loving Subjects, Though grounded on my right of due Succession; Being immediate heir, and only child Of your late much deplored King my Father. I am in a most reverend duty bound Unto that Power above me, and a wel- Befitting care towards you my faithfull people, To rule and govern so (at least so neere As by all possibility I may) That I may shun Heavens anger, and your grief. Which that I may, at our last consultation The better to passe through my weighty charge, I gave you to consider of the Proposition Is made to me by the Northumbrian King Of marriage, not only to enable me In my government, but therby to streng∣then This Kingdom in succeeding times, by a line Of lawfull Successors. I gave you all My strong & most unanswerable reasons: To which you seemd contented, all but one, Who with the rest by this I hope is satis∣tisfied. 'Tis you, Lord Segebert, you it is I mean▪ Does it appear to you yet reasonable, That I be matcht to the Northumbrian King? I have with patience waited a whole moneth For you to rectifie your scrupulous judgement, Whereby it might comply with these, no way Inferiour to your self, but are your Peers, As well in their kown wisdom, as my favour. Seg. Thus low unto your sacred Majesty I here devote my self; and thus I meet With equal love, th' embraces of these Lords. Ile joyn & grow one body, and one voice With them, in all may adde unto your Honour, And your dear Kingdoms good. But pardon me My soverain Queen, and I beseech you my Lords, To weigh with your known wisdom the great danger This match may bring unto the Crown and Country. Tis true, the King Osriick as wel in person. As in his dignity, may be thought fit To be endow'd with all you seem to yeild him. But what becomes of all the wholsome Laws,
Customs, and all the nerves of Govern∣ment Your no less prudent than Majestick Fa∣ther With power & policy enricht this Land with; And made the Saxons happy, and your self A Queen of so great eminence. Must all, With so much Majestie and matchlesse beauty, Be now subjected to a strangers foot; And trod into disorder? All your wealth, Your state, your laws, your subjects, and the hope Of flourishing future fortunes, which your Father By his continual care, and teadious study Gave as a Legacy unto this Kingdom: Must all be altered, or quite subverted, And all by a wilful gift unto a stranger: Bart. Peace: stop his mouth. Unrea∣verend old man, How darst thou thus oppose thy Sove∣raignes will, So well approvd by all thy fellow Peers; Of which the meanest equals thee in judgement? Seg. Do you approve their judgments, Madam, which Are grounded on your will? I may not do't. Only I pray, that you may understand, (But not unto your loss) the difference Betwixt smooth flattery, and honest judgements. Bert. Do you hear this, my Lords? Celr My Lord Segebert, Though you except against this King, He may hereafter thank you in your kind. Seg. Mean time I thank you for your prophesie. Col. You cannot but allow succession is The life of Kingdoms; & if so, you cannot But wish the Queen (which Heaven grant speedily) An happy husband. Bert. I thank you, good my Lord. Elk. And if an husband, why not him she affects? Can it befit a Subject to controle The affection of his Princesse? Heaven forbid. Seg, This is ear taking Musick. Elk. Or suppose, You might controle it; whom in your great wisdom Would you allot the Queen? Seg. I see your aym; And know, when I have said all that I dare, What censure I must undergoe. And thus Ile meet it boldly: you are sycophants all, And doe provide but for your selves, though all. The Kingdom perish for't. May the justice▪ That follows flattery overtake you for't. Seg. Take hence the mad man. Colr. We are sorry for you. Elk. And wish the troublesome spirit were out of you, That so distracts your reason. Elf. We have known you Speak and answer to the purpose. Seg. Your question to no purpose, Sir, was this: Whom my great wisdom would allot the Queen? You are not worth my answer. But my Soveraigne, I do implore your gracious attention To these few words. Celr. Lesse sense. Elf. No mattet. Elk. Silence. Speak your few words, the Queen can give you hearing. Seg. I wish your Highnesse would com∣mand your women, That know their qualities to take up your Beagles. Their Petulances sort not with this place Nor the more serious matter of my speech. Bert. Speak, I can hear you though. Forbear him Lords. Seg. The King your Father, and my ne'r to be Forgotten Master, (please you to re∣member.) Although his memory be lost with these,
Who nere had grace to know him right∣ly, gave me Before his death strictly this charge; and in Your presence too, charging your selfe withal To give it due obedience: That you should Before all mens advice take mine for marriage, And that especially I should take care 'Gainst Innovation. That the laws he left Establisht with such care for good oth' Kingdome Might be maintaind by whomsoere you matchd with. I know, and you, if you knew any thing, Might know the difference twixt the Northumbrian lawes And ours: And sooner will their King pervert Your Priviledges and your Government, Then reduce his to yours: pure com∣mon sense, Even you me thinks, my Lords, may foretell that Bert. You have said enough. Seg. I doe beseech your Highnesse But for this little more. Bert. Ile hear no more. Celr. Pray heare his little more al∣though you send him Out of your hearing then for evermore. Seg. Your Father added this to his command, That rather then by marriage you should bring Your Subjects to such thraldome, and that if No Prince whose lawes coher'd with yours did seek you (As some there are, and neerer then th'Northumbrian) That he would have you from some no∣ble Stock To take a Subject in your own Domini∣on. Bert. Traytor! Seg. To urge your Fathers Testament? Celr. But did the King your ne're for∣gotten Master Bequeath her an affection to such blood? Bert. Forbear. Now he's not worth your speaking to. Celr. Now she'l ha'me I hope. What a foul beast Was I to undervalue subjects blood? Bert. I have forborn you long, for the old love My Father in his life conferr'd upon you And still I yield to it so much as saves Your head, bold talking fellow. But Sir hear Your doom. Since the Kings love hath puff'd your dotage With swoln conceit (for what can it be lesse That you are now my King (for sure you think so) I'll try my Title with you. Hence you Exile: Go in perpetual banishment from this Kingdome. Speak not a word for him. All. Insooth we meant it not. Celr. But may it please your Majesty, you mention'd His head erewhile. Now if I might ad∣vise— Bert. A way, you'l be too cruel. Celr. Another hope lost. Elkw. His lands and goods, Madam, would be thought on. Bert. No, he has children. Elfr. I'le take his daughter with all faults, and half his lands. Bert. Why are ye not gone? Seg. I have not much to say. Bert. Out with it then, and then out with your self. Seg. In the large History of your Fa∣thers life You find but one example for this doom Of Banishment. And that was of Alberte five years nce, For wronging me unto his Highnesse, when He stood in competition with me for The Honor in the State the King then gave me. Bert. And what of this? Seg. But thus. I stood by then, and then all knowing Heaven Saw that though he for wronging me was Banish'd, I was right sorry, and much pleaded for him.
Bert. It follows now that you would have these Lords, Whom you have so abus'd, to plead for you. Seg. Quite contrary, for they are my Abusers; Yet I do grieve for them, but more for you. To think on all your sorrows, when too late You'l wish for me to steer the State. Bert. Pray if you meet that good old Lord Alberto, Now in your exile, send him home to us; I'l promise him your Honour in the State. All. Ha, ha, ha. Bert. Go from my sight, and if after three dayes Thou art seen in my Dominion, I will give A thousand crowns to him that brings thy head. See Proclamation sent to that effect. Celr. I will, and as many Informers after The Proclamation, as there be crowns in't. Come we have spoken for you all that we can. Elsr. The Queen's implacable. Bert. Be gone I say, why dost thou stay? Sg. But to applaud your Mercy and Bounty, In that you post me from a world of care And give me the wide world for my share. Exit Seg. & Celr. Elk. Your Majesty has perform'd a point of justice Mingled with clemency beyond all pre∣sident. Bert. Enough to give a warning to all such As dare oppose their Princes purposes; Conduct in now th' Embassador of Nor∣thumbria. Whilst I review his Masters brighter Figure Exit Elkw. Elf. As ardently, (but with more pure affe∣ction) As ere did Cynthia her Endimion.Ent. Emb. My Lord, you have attended long, but now I shall return that answer to your King, That if his love be as you have pretended May well excuse your stay. Tell him this story, A King sent forth a General to besiege A never conquered City. The siege was long, And no report came back unto the King, How well or ill his Expedition thriv'd; Until his doubtful thoughts had given lost, His hope oth' City, and his Army both. When he being full of this despair, ariv'd Oth' suddam his brave General with Victory; Which made his thanks, as was his con∣quest double. You may interpret me my Lord. Emb. If so, I am to tell the King he has won your love. Bert. A blush may be excus'd in the confession: 'Tis my first answer to the question: Yes. Emb So from the doubtful darknesse of the night, The blushing morn Ushers the cheerful Sun, To give new light and life unto the World: I shall revive my King with these glad tydings. Bert. You have said well, Let us enform you better, Talk aside with him Elkw. I can but think what old Sege∣bert said Concerning Laws, Customes and Prive∣ledges. And how this match will change the Government.
I fear, how e'er the Laws may go, our Customes will Be lost; for he me thinks out-flatters us already. Elsr. He's the Kings Favourite; and has woed so well For him, that we may fear he'l wrigle in Twixt him and us, the prime man in her favour. Bert. Let it be so. The tenth of the next month I'l be prepar'd to entertain his Highness: First to confirm a contract; then as soon As he shall please to consummate our marriage. In the mean time this Figure, which you say Resembles him, as Painters skill affords: Indeed it is a sweet one. Shall be daily Kisses it My deer companion most unseparably; And when I sleep it shall partake my Pillow. Does he love mine as well d'ye think my Lord? Emb. Just with the same devotion; If I durst I would say more. Bgrt Nay, speak my Lord, pray speak. Emb. He do's allow't a Table, Waiters and Officers That eat the meat. Bert. Indeed. Elkw. O horrible. Elsr. Nay, We shall ne're come near him. Emb. And at night He lodges it perpetually on his bosome. Elkw. We are dunces to him. Emb Here, just here; And't please your Majesty o'the hearts side. shrugs Bert. Indeed I am pleas'd. I'l stay you but to night, To morrow you shall hasten towards the King. And for your speed wear this. Emb. Most gracious Queen kisses her hand. Exeunt Omnes. SCEN. II. Enter Segebert, Apthynus, Offa, Mildred. Seg. 'Tis the Queens pleasure children; I must bear it. Off. To Banishment, good heaven for∣bid. And Heaven I hope will not yet suffer it. Seg. Whilst we expect the best from Heavens high will, It suffers Princes to reward us ill. Yet can I think it shakes an angry hand Over my head, for some misdeed of mine, Which I have unrepented let go by. It must be something sure was pleasure to me. What in the World has most delighted me? To love my King and Country, Neigh∣bours, Friends, And sometimes Enemies. (I'l passe o're that) I have done well (though I do not to boast it) To succour and relieve all kind of wret∣ches; Poor souls that have half deafned me with Prayers, Loud Prayers. They'l misse me now; and I Shall have a misse of them too. (Let that passe) What have I done at home, since my Wife died? No Turtle ever kept a widowhood, More strict then I have done. Then for my Children, Offa. Come you hither. Off. My Lord Father. Anth. He might have call'd me first, I am the Eldest. Seg I am sure thou'lt answer in behal∣or one. Have I not lov'd thee alwayes? Off. O dear Sir, I am all unworthy to acknowledge half, Half of your pious bounties on a Son, A wretch so ill deserving as my self;
Your hand has evermore been open to me, Your' blessings still more readily have showr'd Upon my head, then I had grace to ask them. (For to my knowledge I ne're ask'd blessing yet With a good will in all my life; some would Do Pennance in the Church with lesse perplexity.) Seg. I, thou wast ever an obedient child, Next, you my Daughter. Aath. Then I must be last. Seg. How have you found my love? Mild Sir, far above my duty. Seg. Do not weep, but speak good child. I have not long to stay with yee; my three dayes Will scarce afford this hour to bide with you. Weep, Mild. Had I no tears nor sobs to in∣terrupt My flattering Tongue, but had speech as free As the best Orator that speaks for fee Could, or durst I attempt t' express your goodness, More then to say, 'tis more then I can say. Seg. 'Tis a good maid; O Queen thou art too cruel! Mild. But honour'd Father, grant me yet one Bone. Seg. What's that my Girle? Mild. You shall know presently Dries her eyes. Pray give me leave to kneel unto the Queen To try what I can do for your repeal. 'Twere shame we should sit down and lose you thus. The Queen affects me well. You know she loves me. And promis'd once she would deny me nothing. Seg. For this thou shalt not trouble her: besides You put me well in mind to charge you Daughter, Upon my Blessing, go no more to Court. Shun it I charge thee as thou wouldst my curse. If you have lovers there whom they call Servants, Do as neat Surgeons do when they have touch'd Loathsome or pestilent Sores; wash clean your hands Of all of 'em, that are far more infectious. And hear me daughter Mildred, I am told The Northumbrian Embassador now at Court, The great Kings greater Favourite made hot love to you. And that he obtained your Picture which he wears, More proud of't then his undeserved Honours. Let me now charge you further, and observe it, Shake off all thoughts of him. Upon the match now He and whole Sholes of upstart Brave∣ries, Must hither needs attend their King. But if Thou marry with him, or any amongst them, Though the greatest subject that his Master has, Thou art divorcd for ever of my blessing. Mild. I will in all obey you. Off. I shall look to that Sir. Seg. Enough. Anthynus. Anth. At last, yet I am thought on. Seg. Now there rests Of all my children but you to resolve me, How you have found my love? Anth. You ask me last Sir I presume, cause you have had me longest, To crown their testimony. Seg. Yet you seem Anthinus, by your leave, the least to know me,
But like a stranger look upon me when These give me due respect. Anth. Lesse then due I dare not give you; and more were to abuse you. Though I do not applaud, I must approve You are a right good father. Off. Umh. Seg. Yet you speak in this but coldly. Off. No, no, it sounds not well. But you are wise. Anth. I have observ'd, but specially at Court, Where flattery is too frequent, the great scorn You have ever cast upon it, and do fear To come within such danger of reproof. Knowing your reason may as well detest it In your own house, as in Kings Pallaces. And when I hear another (my dear Sister, Heaven know I mean not you) Speak like a flatterer, I hold my peace, And so come short of doing what I would, For fear of over-doing. But honour'd Sir, When a Son can be found that dares do more For's Fathers life or honour then my self, I'l forfeit mine inheritance and your blessing; So much your love engages me. Off. If this were hearty now, not hollow. Seg. No more, Time calls away apace, and I am satisfied Since I must undergo the Queens hard censure, That it falls not upon me like a curse, For wronging Crown or Country, Neighbours, Friends, Or you my dearer children. I will take it Not as a punishment but blessing rather. To be remov'd from miseries Are like to fall on this unhappy King∣dom. And I will think the Queen has done me favour To ease me of my cares a thousand wayes, To make my rest of life all holidayes. Now take my last directions. Son An∣thynus. Anth. Son! It is holyday with me to. 'Tis The first time he call'd me Son these three years. Seg. Though you are eldest, and my lawful heir, And must be Lord at my decease of all My large Possessions. Yet it is my will That till my death my Offa have the sway And government of all, allowing you That yearly stipen formerly I gave you. Let me not hear of any grudge betwixt you. And be you both respectful of your Sister, And you of them good Girle. It is decreed That I shall never see you more. Mild. Ay me. Cries Seg. Go get thee in I prithe Mildred, Go in I say, thy brothers shall a little Shew me my way. Go in, I shall not speak else, And I have more to say to them. Good now go. Mild. O, O, O. Seg. You will not disobey me? Hea∣ven blesse my Girle (go and come again) Mild. But must I never see you more? Seg. Yes child in Heaven; and then for evermore. Mild. To wait your coming thither I'l afore. Exit. Seg. Thither shall be my first journey. But after you shall still hear from me where e're I wander. Anth. Not I Sir, by your favour. Seg. Why I pray? Anth. I must be nearer you. I kneel for't Sir, And humbly pray I may not be denied To wait on you in Exile. Take me with you.
Off. Do you not find him? Seg. This is but your stoutness (Though you seem humble unto me) against Your brother, because I leave the rule to him. Anth. Far be it from my thoughts dear Sir, consider He has had that rule already divers years Ere since my mother die, and been your darling Heaven knows without my grudge, while you were pleas'd. Off. Heaven knows his thoughts the while alack a day. Anth. I never envied him, though I have found You have severely over look'd my Actions, When you have smil'd on his, though but the same. I have been still content while I have found my duty firm. Seg. You shall along. Anth. You have new begotten me. Off. Sir. Seg. Peace, I know thy fear my dearest Boy. Off. Does not your blood begin to chil within you? Great heirs are overhasty Sir, And think their Fathers live too long. Pray Sir Take heed of him. Though he should act the Parricide abroad, our laws acquit him. Seg. I'l give my self to Heaven, quit thou thy fear. I am not worth a life. I'l take him hence That thou mayst be secure from bloody spite. I fear him not, mischief has spent her selfe And left her sting within me for a charme That quit me from the fear of further harm. Go get thee home, my blessing and fare∣well. Off. Pray Sir excuse me, I cannot speak for laughing. aside Seg. And farwel Countrey, shed not a tear for me; I go to be dissolv'd in tears for thee. ACT. II. SCEN. I. Enter Ofriick the King, Theodrick, Theodwald, Eaufrid, Alfrid, E∣lelbert, 2. Lords. OSr. Let your dispatches instantly be sent Through all the Kingdom to incite the people (As many as are mine, or would be thought so) To expresse with me their joy, for the enjoying Of the so long desired happinesse, In this our beautious and magnificent Queen. 1. Lor. See that through all the Cities, Towns and Villages, With solemn Feasts, and publique sign of joy They celebrate a day for these glad Tydings. 2. Lor. Post every way, that the third day from this The general joy may sound and shine through all The Kingdom. Attend. That's with Bells and Bone∣fires. 1. & 2. Lor. Goe. Ex. Attendants. Kin. And now my Lords, I must re∣quire your care To set down a fit order for our journey Unto this Queen, to perfect my worlds blisse. I would not fail in the least Article Of state or decency in this Affair. Provide so that we may in all appear Worthy th' Atchievement of our fair am∣bition. And let our followers be chosen such Whose inward worth no lesse then out∣ward shew
May make us glorious in this expedition. Do speedily and effectually good my Lords, The time hasts on. 1. & 2. Lor. Our duty shall prevent it. King. Methinks the silent Picture seems to say, 'Tis fit I should anticipate a day, Ex. Lords. Rather then lose one minute from that light Whose very shadow is so Angel bright. Emb. But when your Highness shall behold, nay more Shall touch, nay more and nearer shall embrace, Nay more and nearer yet, enfold and handle, Nay more and nearest of all, enjoy The lively (that's too little) heavenly substance Of this poor imaginary, which is as short, As far inferiour to the life, As a weak star-light to the mid day Sun. King. O do not ravish me with expe∣ctation. This is a way to make each hour untill I shall enjoy my blisse, a tedious night; Each night a death: Yet can I not de∣sire To shift the Argument off our discourse. Did she appear so fair, so lovely? Emb. Sir, Suppose you see a glorious Firmament, Bedek'd with heavenly Stars; so shines her Court With Ladies might be thought of match∣lesse beauty, Striking meer humane sight with admi∣ration. Imagine now you see break through a Vail Amidst those Stars, though heavenly lesser beauties The bright Cynthia in her full of Lustre. So this no lesse to be compared Queen, Shines above beauty to an humane eye That is not mix'd with powerful Ma∣iesty. You may behold her your Divinity, My King may comprehend what can befit Me only to confesse, I do admire. King. O thou art mine. In such a Queen And such a Servant nev'r was King so bless'd. But are there in her Court (although in∣feriour To her more Excellent) such special Beauties, And in my Theodricks apprehension? You have made choice of one then? Emb. I have seen One so agreeable to my affection Above all the rest, I cannot but confesse I strove to be her Servant. King. Doubtlesse then She was a fair one. Theodrick, never fear. She is thine own, my self will be thy Spokesman If she be worthy of thee. Emb. For fair Vertue With all the graces which adorn the mind, In best opinion she's unparallel'd By any Subject, Lady, (I must ever Allow Supremacy unto the Queen) And for her Person, it appears in all Most answerable to her face. Of which here is Th' exactest Copy that I could get drawn, And without flattery by the Queens own Lymner. King. Pray let me see't. Indeed it is a sweet one. Did he that drew this of the Queen, draw that? Emb: With the same hand. King. But not with the same colours. Trust me they're much unlike, He wrongs the Queen And merits her displeasure even to death, T'advance a Servants beauty 'bove her own. Emb. What sayes your Majesty?
King. Keep off a little, You stand just in my light. And so he does, Twixt me and the prime beauty of the world. But I'l be even with him, and cause my Picturer To set this Crown upon this head, and then— Fie, what a fancie's this? He will per∣ceive me. But now I note this Forehead, and this Brow, This Eye, this Lip.— lets fall the other Emb. You have let fall the Queen. Sir. takes it up King. I cry her mercy. What a shame it is That I should fall in his discovery? Are Courts so fraught with fraud and flattery? And can a King that governs such pro∣fessors No whit dissemble to obscure his passi∣ons? I must, and thus begin to practice it. Theodrick, didst thou note my contem∣plation Over these Pictures? Emb. I could but perceive Your Highnesse viewing them well. And I have learn'd To make no search into my Soveraigns thoughts. King. Thou art ever modest. Thus it was Theodrick. (Protest it rap't me bove the pitch of Mortals) First to consider what an absolute beauty This Queen has in herself; but then to gather The circumstances, many such as this (As thou affirmst) inferiour lights to her, That shine about her, rendring her more glorious. Lights her above affection, to an height That claims her adoration. Then marvel not That now when this but in Effigy Was but plac'd by her. By which her Majesty So much the more appear'd, I could not hold This Figure of that all to be comman∣ding beauty When my high thoughts were fled up to her presence. Now take thy piece of craftsmanship again, Which trust me is a pritty one; whilst I Devote my service to this Deity. Emb. Sir, you have given me the Queens Picture. King. Ha! What a mistake was here? But thou art honest, And covetest but thy own; Take it Theodrick. Now tell me of what house er Parentage Your Mistrisse is. Emb. I told you first her Vertues, Her person next, and by this her beauty, Which you are pleas'd to deem not much amisse. King. 'Tis such Theodrick that had I not seen This so much above it (pardon my hy∣pocrisie) I should have envied any man but thee In such a choice. But speak her parentage. Emb. That's all her blemish. King. Is she of tainted blood? Emb. You search with Kingly wise∣dom. She is daughter To that hold obstinate Baron I enform'd you of, Whom the Queen in her just displeasure banish'd. King. Thy love to her may hereafter plead for him. But soft, I am not well. Emb. Heaven blesse the King. Who waits within there? King. Tarry, let me see That Picture once again. It wants ex∣ceedingly Of this in many things. Emb. I should want judgement
Not to grant that. King. Here it wants palpably The drooping of the brow; and here again The dulnesse of the Eye, which here shews deadly But for a little squint it has. Good Queen You look a squint. Then look you Sir, yours wants. You shall not hear me neither, cause I will not Spoil your conceit of it. Your Lady wants The furious sharpnesse of the nose, which here My Queen has very shrewly. And again, You han't the hanging of the nether lip, Which the best Phisiognomists do tell us Shews women apt to lust, and strong in∣continence. Phew, This is all too sweet for mortal sense, Here, take't again, and keep mine for me with it. Lay'em together, th'one may mend the tother. Emb. I have known women oft marry one another. Their Pictures may perhaps have greater vertue. King. I am not well, what kind of Changeling am I? A wild confusion rumbles in my brain, My thoughts are all at strife. Emb. How fares your Highnesse? King. Sick, sick, Theodrick. Emb. Retire Sir to your Couch. Enter 2. Lords. 1. 2. Lor. Where is my Lord the King. King. Here yet my Lords. Emb. The King's not well. 1. Lor. We have provided for your Highnesse journey, In such a sort as never King went forth. King. Whither, to Heaven my Lords? 2. Lor. Yes, to the Queen. Lovers count marriage Heaven before they wed, But afterwards I know what some have said. Oh this is your honey moon. Yes, yes, you shall to Heaven, your Hea∣ven as you call it, In such a royal manner. See the Order. King. Pray peace. Emb. You do not well to vex the King You see he's sick. 1. Lor. Sick? marry Heaven forbid. 2. Lor. Sick o'the Wife before he has her. Come, a very trothplight qualm, into your Chamber, And at we find you we'l our selves bestir. Emb. Who waits within there? call the Kings Physitians. Exeunt omnes. SCEN. II. A shout within, the Musick, sound the Bells. Enter 4. Clowns with tools. 1. AND what's the reason of all this merry glee? 2. The King, the King man must be married. 3. And must he have a Wife? 2. A Wife? a Queen man, and all the Wives in her Dominion Must be his Commonwealth, and under us. 4. O brave. 2. And we must son and daughter it upon their Nation. 4. That will be brave indeed. 1. O but where is Jeffrey, jolly Jeffrey now? the prick and praise, The very prick and praise, and prime Spark of our Parish, to set our Bonefires and our Mirth a blazing. 3. The Bells a ringing, and the Bowls a trowling, the Fidlers fumbling & Tumbling. O Jeffrey, where art thou Jeffrey? 2. He's at hand I warrant you, he went but to Church E'en now.
4. What, to pray at such a time as this? 2. No but to help to rear the Tennor, and will come Presently. 3. That's to be born withal. It is in∣deed a divelish Lopheavy Bell. I would the Church∣warden that Should have mended it when he robb'd the poor, were Hng'd in's place. 2. There said you well. The Curate could say almost as much When 'twas. But it makes no matter what he saies, I see Little amended. 3. Whoop, here comes Jeffrey sweating in these affairs. Ent. Jeffrey. Jeff. The great Bells of our Town, they tingle they tangle, They jingle they jangle, the Tenner of them goes merrily. 4. O Jeff ey, welcome Jeffrey. Jeff. And shall we have a Queen? All. So▪ they say Jeffrey. O the bravest Woman! Jeff. Take heed o'that, woman did you say? Take heed, I Give you warning. No man must know she is a woman But the King himself. But a brave Queen she is they say, And loves a man with all her heart. Where art O Queen? we'l make thee Such an holy day, as shall Justle all the working dayes out of our Almanack. It Shall be said that we will work no more till thy Seventh Son, O Queen, who must be born a Prophet, shall Foretel, the Age to come shall not have a true labourer Or honest workman in it. 1. So we may make a long holyday indeed. Jeff. Let work no more be thought on, we will revel it out Of remembrance, we will not cease our joy to sleep, for Fear we dream of work again. Down with your prophane Tools, and Implements of Husbandry, the very sight of 'em Dishonours our new holy day. 1. But Jeffrey, our Masters grudge to give us wood Enough to make a beaking Bonefire▪ Jeff. How? 2. They say 'tis waste. Jeff. Not wood to make a Bonefire? Your Sheeplocks, Flayles, Spades, Shovels, Rakes and Pitchforks, shall all be made a Bonefire. 2. And so we may be sure to make holy day till We get new ones. Jeff. The maids shall bring their Rocks, their Wheels and Reels, their Tubs, their Pales & Buttocks. 4. Buckets thou wouldst say. Jeff. Where was my mind? Their Buckets shall they bring, Wash∣bowls and Butter-churns, Their Buckingtubs, Baskets and Battle∣doors; And all be made a Bonefire for the Queen. 3. My mother will not let her house∣holdstuff go so. Jeff. We'l burn her for a witch then with all her trash, And her thatcht mansion too about her Ears, But we will shew our zeal unto the Queen In fire sufficient. All. 4. Ah good Boy. Jeff. Sfoot, if our Masters do rebel against us Now Majesty's on our side, and not give fewel, When we mean to give fire, as duty binds We'l have their Carts by th' arses, Har∣dles, Wheelbarrows, The Ploughs and Harrows, and the Whips;
Because the Beasts shall play too; only we'l spare Their Racks and Mangers. All that's made of wood Belonging to our work besides, shall perish, Shall perish, I have said it. Not the Politique Molecatchers staff shall scape the flame. Not low us wood? we'l drink up all the drink to the Queens health And burn the Hogsheads, Barrels, Kil∣derkins, Firkins and Rundlets, all to the wooden dish Shall smoak for't in our bonefire for the Queen. All. Good boy again. 1. But where shall we make this Houge and monstrious Bonefire? Jeff. Here, here, just here, in this very place, I come to mark The ground, here it shall blaze up to the Heavens, and We will roast our Town Bull at it, with a thousand Puddings in his belly. All. 4. Ah good Jeffrey still. Ieff. Nothing too dear to signifie our loves to the King and Queen, let us bestir us there∣fore, And enact this as a law amongst us, That He that does not gall his hands to day with Ringing, shall be hang'd up in the bell∣rope; And he that is not soundly liquor'd by night shall Be made fewel for our Bonefire; such dry Rascals Will burn better then Hereticks. And last of all, he that does not keep his wench Waking in the way that we wot of till to morrow milking time, shall either be Gelt, or else led through the Town by that which Shall be namelesse in a cleft stick. And so God save The Queen. 1. And the King to. Jeff. The King we make no doubt of, we have pray'd For him these seven years. All 4. A Jeffrey, a Jeffrey. Enter a Constable and Alfride. Const. Whither away my friends? Jeff. To make the bravest bonefire that ever blaz'd since Troy, or that which the Tyrant Emperor warm'd His hands at. Const. You must forbear. Jeff. We must forbear, what Hebrew's that? We understand not what must forbear means. Const. You must forbear to make your Bonefire. Jeff. Must? that word had nev'r been nam'd had all been Jeffrey; We must forbear to set our loves on fire Unto the King, Dost thou not feel thy self O man what e're thou art, becoming a Traytor? Knowst thou the words thou speakest against the King? Const. I know what I do speak, and what I am. 1. It is the Constable. Const. I know my Office too, by vertue whereof I charge you in the Kings name, lay by Your sports and pastimes, I'l lay you by the heels else. Will you Sir know a reason? the King is sick. Jeff. Then let us drink his health. Const. He is sick exceedingly. Jeff. Then let us drink exceedingly. Const. He's sick even unto death. Jeff. Then let us ring our Bells for that, and make a Funeral Bonefire. Const. I say no drinking at all, no Bells, nor no Bonefires, It is his Majesties command.
Jeff. I say his Majesties first word shall stand for Bells and Bonefires, Though we set the Town a fire, and ring the Bells backwards. Const. Ye will not be all hang'd will ye? see Here's a Gentleman and a Courtier, that so signifies his Majesties pleasure. Jeff. A Gentleman and a Courtier, where be they? I see but one. Alfr. Sir I am both. Jeff. What monsters are bred in Affri∣ca? I take you but For one at most; well, for the Gentle∣man that you Are, thus I salute you; Now for the Courtier that Is within you, I must wait upon it here; this posterior posture did I learn of a Spanniel whose name was Courtier. Now let me tell you Master Gentleman and Courtier, that we are Sorry that sicknesse should make our King and Master So fickle headed as to crosse our sports thus, that we Meant to have made him such an holy∣day as might Have prov'd more worth to him than a Wife and Twenty sicknesses besides: Yet can we not be so sorry for his sickness as that it Was his mishap to play mock holyday with us. Alsr. The King shall know your loves, and for your part Master Speaker. Jeff. Your Friend and Jeffrey. Alfr. Then Jeffrey be it, I'l promise you preferment, if You will up to Court with me. Jeff. Up to the Gallows shall I not? Alfr. My life for thine. And thou shalt not deny me, Here's Gold in earnest, take it. The Kings disease Is melancholy, and thou mayst do him more good Then a whole Colledge of Physitians. Jeff. He takes me for a fool, I'l make a venture on't, The best is, many a Fool has thriv'd at Court; and The worst is, I am not the first that has forsaken His Country. I'l along with you Sir, and if I rise By you, I shall quickly learn Courtship enough To forget to thank you: And for your parts my Old Friends, what need soever you may have of Me, you must be sure I'l be a stranger to you. All 4. Wilt thou forsake us Jeffrey? then who shall daunce The hobby horse at our next Revel rout? Jeff. The hobby horse of preferment gallops me from you; If you chance to see me in my rohes hereafter When I come to be the Fool Royal, you may admire my Garments, and whisper to your acquain∣tance very softly, That you knew me once, But on your Allegiance look Not that I should know you then. 1. Nay, we are not such Clowns but we have heard that Courtiers in favour will know no body. Jeff. 'Tis true, for when they are in disgrace the silliest Clown will not know them. Const. You were best look to your fast footing then when You are high in favour. Jeff. High in fooling thou wouldst say silly Constable; yet there's no Great danger. One fool may outstand six favourites. Alfr. Away then as thou art. Jeff. I Sir, I'l take no shift with me, I shall shift
The better when I come there. All 4. Well, farewel Jeffrey, thy like will nev'r come here. Jeff. Commend me to all the Lasses, and let not them, nor Do not you grieve for my departure, nor for The holyday that here is lost; instead of which, that You may haue a new one, I wish that one of you, even he That loves me best, as speedily as may be would deserve Hanging, that the rest may make holyday for him. Sic valete valetote. 1. Now the Dee'l brast crag of him. 2. He's a right Courtier already. 4. I'm glad he us'd us no better, If he had I should have cried out mine eyes for him. Exeunt omnes. SCEN. III. Enter Segebert, Anthynus. Seg. 'TWas a miraculus escape. Good Heaven Is with me still. I have not heard That any of these native Salvages, These home-bred monsters in humanity, These out-laws, these-detested Thieves and Robbers, Have enterpriz'd a villany like this, To set with such a violence on men Of our weak seeming, poor and needy Pilgrims, When I did offer them to shun their blows, All that we had even to our bare apparel Anth It seems their aym was at our blood, not means. And doubtlesse they were some that knew our persons Through our disguises, and persu'd us hither With an inveterate malice to destroy us In this wild Desart. Seg. Was it not enough Thou impious Queen▪ and more unna∣tural unna∣tural, To banish me unjustly? but thou must Pursue my life by treacherous cruelty? Art thou not hurt at all my Son? Anth. Not touch'd, To the least danger of one drop of blood Seg. They are three sturdy Knaves and strongly weapon'd. Anth Had they been forty Sir, while I was arm'd By your white Innccence and holy Prayers, Heavens justice lent me hands to beat them off. Yet give me leave dear Sir, to ask you now Why you have bent your Pilgrimage this way? Leading into a country of more danger Unto your life and safety, then your own Nerhtumberland, whose King cannot but rage In greater heat against you then the Queen, That so unjustly banish'd you; you may fall (Though you escape the danger of this Forrest) Into the reach of his revengeful fury. Seg▪ It was and is my purpose to appear In person to that King at my lifes price, Which I am no more fond of then my Country Is of my truth. And when I have made known Th' unfitness of the match, by the dis∣honour He'l run into if he proceed in it; If then he take my life, I am at home, Eternally at home. Anth. But made you none Acquainted that you meant to travel this way? Seg. None But my dear son Offa. Anth. Then sure the Queen Sent her Blood-hounds after you; I perceive
They could not be mere Thieves. Seg. Good Angels guard us; They have made head again in greater numbers. Enter Offa disguis'd and Outlaws. Anth. Take greater courage then. Off. Faint hearted slaves Must I give hire and do the talk my self? 1. Outl. 'Tis not amisse to help for expedition. All. Upon 'em all at once. They fight. Anthynus knock down 1. Outlaw. Offa wounds Segebert in the head, he sincks. Anthynus disarms Offa. Offa runs off, whilst Anthynus speaks. Anth. This sword thou never handlest more. Take you it and fresh cou∣rage Sir. Anth. Beats off the other and speaks on May you not cease your flight till you reach Hell, That bred ye villans; to pursue ye further Were to neglect a nearer duty. Dear honour'd Sir, look up; Father, how do you? Seg. Even almost well I hope. Anth. He means with death▪ Alas he's deeply wounded and bleeds much. But what do I in this? I have not tears Enough to wash these wounds, although some linnen To bind them up. But mearly to bewail him With looks and lamentations is as fruitlesse As here to leave him languishing to death, And run in pursuit of his enemies To work revenge, Neither of these bring ease. Mount up my thoughts to Heaven then for a blessing Upon my ready industry, and let each faculty Of mine as prompt to works and pray∣ers be. How is it now Sir? do I not bind it too hard? Pray Sir speak to me. Seg. Offa, oh son Offa! Anth. Offa is not here Sir, 'tis I, your son Anthynus. Why look you on that sword so? Seg. O son Offa! Anth. Pray Sir look on me, I fear his memory fails him. And as his mind was ever on Offa Before unfortunate me; so now he gives The merit that belongs (if any be) Due to the duty of a son in this From me to him. But envy be thou from me. Why look you on that sword, and not on me? 'Twas I that wonne it for you. Seg. O Anthynus! Anth. That's well said Sir, speak though but faintly to me, I had rather hear your groans then find you speechlesse, Better will come I hope. Seg. Help me to rise. Anth. That's comfortably spoken; so, well done Like a strong man again. Seg. O I am weak. Anth. Rest upon me, my strength, my all is yours. Aeneas that true Troian son, whose fame For piety ever crowns his name Had not a will (although my means be poor) Exceeding mine to answer nature more, Well said, that step became you, we shall on I see apace, give me your sword, it trou∣bles you. Seg. No, not this sword. Anth. That's the best sign of all. Keep it and hold it fast Sir, we will back A little to the Spring we came by, where I'l somewhat more accommodate your wounds. Heaven, which mens honest pains doth ever blesse, Will when we least can hope afford redresse. Exeunt.
1. Outl. Oh, oh, some help, oh. Enter an Hermit and Servant with a Basket. Herm. Hark, didst thou not hear a cry? Serv. Of nothing but My guts that cry within me Sir for meat. I hear no other cry, nor have not done. Outl. Oh. Serv. Almost these 5. years. Herm Peace thou belly-god, 'twas there again. Serv. It is a belly-divel rather, that has tormented me E're since I serv'd you under ground hereby. No man Above ground could have fasted like me. Herm. Hast thou not dayly food thou Caterpiller? Serv. Yes, such as Caterpillers eat; Blossomes and Buds, many green grow∣ing things, Such as you make your medicines of, and Roots, would I could get Some of the Caterpillers. A dish of Ca∣terpillers fryed, Let me see in what? in Usurers grease, if one Knew where to get it, might serve to feast an Emperour. But we live out oth' world by Prayer and Fasting. Herm. Thou sarest as I fare, feedest as ost as I. Serv But Sir, there's difference in our exercises. If I Could spend my time, whole dayes in prayer, as You do, this kind of fare or fasting Rather, would not be so bitter to me. Outl. Oh. Herm. Didst thou not hear it now? Serv. Yes, something like the croaking of a Frog me thought. If it Were one, I would wade up to the waste for't For my supper. Here, here Sir, here 'tis, here's more Work for you. Once a week we are com∣monly troubled Either to cure or bury one or other, thank the Outlaws, they make us work for no∣thing here, as if we dwelt Here for the purpose, nor do I know other indeed. Herm. Look up man, canst thou speak? Outl. O no. Serv. There's great hope of recovery, you hear he Sayes he cannot speak. Herm. Canst thou hold up thy hands, and lift up thine eyes? Serv. He does, he does; hang't he'l do well enough. Herm. Help up his body, then down into my Cave. Serv. And to morrow up with him again, and then down Into a grave. Better let him lie now Sir, You'l ne're do good on him I doubt; He looks So damnably as if the Divel were at my elbow For him. Herm. Peace knave, in charity I'l do my best. Heaven hitherto my labours well has bless'd. Serv. Nay, had I his weight in Veni∣son so neer kill'd, and might be allow'd to Eat it; I would ask no more flesh while I liv'd. Here enter Offa and the Outlaws assuring him they are dead. Enter Anthynus carrying Segebert in his Arms. Anth. Can no release be had? is this the place, That cursed piece of ground which Na∣ture meant Should be call'd Hell on Earth? where outrage reigns, Murder and cruelty beyond it; deep despair To a poor remnant of distressed life Of al reviving comforts, food, or medicine? Seg. Oh set me down. Anth. And must we needs be set By the malitious ignorance of Fortune
On this internal way? Seg. Patience good Son. Anth. Where ill abounds, and every good is wanting, Was't not enough that so much blood was spilt From this white reverend head, from which hath flow'd Counsels that have preserv'd the blood of Nations? And fitter now to wear a Diadem It self, then thus be stain'd with his own wrong. Had it not been enough to have left him so, Thou Tyrant Fortune, but to take away All means of Succour? no relief? no comfort? Seg. Good Son, be not impatient. Anth. And see, see, Accursed Fate! he bleeds a fresh again, As if his blood I now but wash'd away Cry'd for the rest to follow it. Seg. Indeed, Son, this impatience hurts thy self and me. Better let me bleed still (bleeding's an easie death) Then thou displease the awful power of Heaven, By chiding at the feign'd ones, good take heed. Anth. Me you have justly chidden, and I beg Pardon of Heaven and you, and now me∣thinks I am inspir'd unto a further duty Of seeking remedy. I'l leave no way un∣tried To find it, if I may. And though my absence Will sore perplex me; I will with your grief Leave you a while to forrage for relief. But first pray let me change a sword with you Sir; Not that I think yours better, but because I fear some▪ charm is in't, or secret ill Gainst you, you sigh so when you view it still Seg. Good Son, forbear't, and me unto my thoughts, Till thou returnst. Heavens & my blessing with thee. Anth. So strengthned I shall sure find remedy To raise you out of this calamity. Exit Anthynus. Seg. This sword Anthynus? no, shouldst rhou but know This sword as I do, it would raise thy Fury Unto an execution of that horror Would shake me in my grave: this sword Which now I cannot but with tears re∣member, Was once mine own. I gave it to thy Brother, (I will not call him so) but to my Son, (Why should I call him so?) but to Offa, And so I fear I name my murtherer. For when I gave it him, I charg'd him never To part with it; he firmly vow'd the same, And that whilst I or he should live, no man Should ever give it motion but himself. Wer't thou so greedy of my life, my Offa, To snatch it from me thus? when as the wounds Thy Parricidial hands has given me, Are not so bitter as the wronged thoughts, Though they are deep and overflow their btinks; I have two wounds within me that are deeper, Which have discover'd in my heart and bowels A trebbled Spring of deerer blood then this. One pricks me with compassion for thee, My good, my charitable, pious Son. All blessing due to sanctimonious vertue Be ever thy companion, till thou art crown'd Mongst Sons of men the pattern of true Piety. What foul mistrusts? puddles of jealousie Were lodg'd in this dark bosome against thee? And of affection what a pure stream did run By a false Current to my second Son? Who by thy truth appears not now thine own. Which makes my other wound, in that so long I cherish'd him by doing of thee wrong. Now from my heart issue two streams of blood, One thick and clotty, th' other clean Vetmilion. In the grosse blood I vent the wrong conceit
I swallow'd against thee my good Anthynus. And in the cleer I see Offa's falshood may In both my blood runs forth apace. O My thick blood Anthynu be forgiven by thee. And the clear cleanse my Offa's treachery Oh— sincks Enter Hermit and Servant. Herm. Didst thou not heat a groan? a dying groan? Serv. Not I Sir, I heard nothing. Herm. Hark, look about; I am sure I heard a groan Ser. Here Sir, here's something that per∣haps has groand. But it's out of hearing now. Herm. And so is pitty amongst men. Ay me▪ an old man Murthered! A seeming simple innocent old man, And yet he holds a sword. Serv. So, more work still. Whilst we are gathering Simples to cure one, Here's another John Simple laid in our way to bury. Herm. He is yet warm. Serv. I, but he has no breath, not so much I'l undertake as a Scolding wife that has been 9. dayes in the grave. Herm. Alas, he's gone indeed; What ruthless villains Could have done this on such an aged man, In this so harmlesse habit? Serv. Good master, let it warn you; though we have hitherto Pass'd by these man-Tygers, these wol∣vish Outlaws safely, early and late, as not Worth their malice. Yet pray Sir now since they Begin to kill men of this coat, and these years, let us Forsake this Salvage habitation, and live In the world of meat again. Herm. How ill are these white hairs bestain'd with red? Methinks I should have known this face. Nothing to wipe The blood off? come, help away with him. Serv. He's holp away, and made away enough already methinks. Herm. Why dost not lift? Serv. Sure they have blown their sins into him that kill'd him, He's so heavy, he's deadly heavy. Pray Sir let me Fetch my gtave instruments & your book and bestow him here. You will not bury him in your Cave I'm sure. Herm. I say I'l have him down; perhaps the wounded Man that's there may know him. Serv. I would I had but this Fellows weight in buttock Beef. Exeunt. Enter Anthynus. Anth. I come my Father, chide not now my stay; In which I was more tardy I confesse, Then e're I was in duty. I have brought you— Where are you Sir? Ha! this was sure the place, And this the very Oak at which I left him; I mark'd it carefully, and took due heed Even to the number of my steps in my Departure, how to make my back return, Nor was my tarriance such, that in that space He could recover strength to shift his ground. I wish it were so well with him. My Lord, My father, what a mist of doubts stand I Amaz'd in? and my unspeakable amaze∣ment Is such, that I begin to call my sight And memory in question, whither this place? Or whither he? or I? or any thing Be, or be not; good senses do not leave me, My search will be in vain if you forsake me. Father, my Lord! where are you? how? or where? Ecch. Here. Anth. That was well said, speak on. Ex. Now where? Ecch. Now here. Anth. within Anth. Now here? where is that here? Ecch. Here. Ent. Anth. Anth. I hear and follow, but I know not where.
Ecch. Here. Anth. At the same place again? If there be place, or I know any thing, How is my willingness in search delu∣ded? It is the Wood that rings with my com∣plaint, And mocking Eccho makes her merry with it. Curs'd be thy babling, and mayst thou become A sport for wanton boys in thy fond answers, Or stay, perhaps it was some gentle Spirit Hovering ith' Air, that saw his flight to Heaven, And would direct me thither after him. Good reason, leave me not, but give me leave A little to consider nearer home; Say his diviner part be taken up To those celestial joys, where blessed ones Find their inheritance of immortality. I cannot think his earthly properties So soon could find the passage to that height. His body would be here, poor martyr'd body, That though it yet did live, could not part hence Without the help of others legs & hands. And here haunt none, but such whose Cruelty Would tosse him into further misery. Wild Beasts, if here were any half so ra∣venous As those inhumane mankind monsters were, (That drew his blood and these unusual tears) Could not devour him all, some particle, Some remnant would be left to blesse a Son with. But here is none but that too sure a sign For me to know the place by, where I left him. Part of the blood I saw run ftom him. O Dear hallowed blood inspire me with this kisse To find the fountain whence this stream did flow. I will not eat, nor sleep until I know. No? canst thou tell me nothing? Then I'l take A Sample of the precious store was spilt, To keep me still in memory of the guilt: And of my vow▪ never to feed or rest, Until I find him here, or with the blest. Exit. ACT. III. Enter Theodwald, and meet Ethelswick. Theod. I have not known, nor read, nor heard since I Was of discretion to know any thing Worthy a mans capacity of the like. Eth. You are well met my Lord. And you as welcome to the Court my Lord, although a sad one. Eth. Came you now from the King my Lord. Theod. Even now. Eth. How left you him good my Lord? Theod. As the Physitians I fear must shortly do, not knowing what To say to him. Eth. Heaven blesse the King, is he So dangerously sick? Theod. He's sick enough To be pray'd for my Lord: Although I cannot properly call it A sickness: I am sure 'tis a disease Both to himself and all that come about him. I fear he's brain-crack'd, lunatick and Frantick, mad; And all the Doctors almost as mad as he, Because they cannot find the cause: something They guesse afflicts his mind, but of what nature It is, or how the strong conceit may grow They can by no means win or wrest from him. Such is the obstinacy of his disease. Eth. Where is Theodrick then, his bo∣some Friend, His special Favourite? He methinks might gain The knowledge of his inmost thoughts. Theod. 'Tis thought He put these wild tormenting thoughts into him. For which the King has banish'd him the Court And with a guard upon his person sent him
To live confin'd at his house. My self and all, The saithful body of the State have mov'd The King for his repeal again to favour. Even we that for these two years space have wish'd him For good State-reasons, favourlesse and headlesse, Have beg'd for his enlargement that the King Might vent his troubled thoughts into his Brest, And so find way to ease: but all in vain, He will not hear of him. Eth. You tell me wonders. But good my Lord, how takes the King his rest? Theod. Troth as mad mortals do; we cannot tell Whether he sleeps at all or not. Some∣times He seems to sleep, but then his troubled thoughts Expresse themselves in sighs, in suddain starts, In groans, and sometimes speech of od confus'd And indigested matter; then he leaps From off his bed, calls for his horse and Armour, Swords, Spears and Battelaxes. But anon Bids all be let alone; and calls for books, Shoffels Divinity and Poetry, Phylosophy & Historical together, sports, And throws all by. Then calls for merry Which e're they be presented, he forbids, With strong rebukes to all that spend their time In any exercise but contemplation In solitary places; then walks forth Into the Groves and Thickets, charging those That follow him (nor dare they disobey) To keep aloof at such proportion'd di∣stance As he unheard by all may vent his passi∣ons Unto the Air, the Woods, the Rocks, the Springs. And twice in these Retirements have we lost him In those obscure Meanders which his melancholy Has led him to; and when much industry And care had found him out, 'twas double trouble To wind him and his fancies home again Eth. It is most pitiful. Enter Physitian. Theod. Now, how does the King? Phys. Full now my Lord of a new fancy. He Is now becoming Pilgrim. Eth. A Pilgrim, why? Phys. I know not why, nor to what shrine, nor do I hold it fit to ask him; but to give Free way unto his fancy yet a while, In all to please and play with his infir∣mity. 'Tis our best way to cool Phrenetique humours Before we kill 'em Sir. His Pilgrimage shall not be far, though he pretends a long one. He has on his weeds already. And who associates him? Phys. Only my self, and his new fool he saies. Theo. Good, a fool and a Physitian. Phys A Physitian and a fool you would say. The Physitian ever Before the fool, my Lord. Theod. And why the fool before my Lord, I pray? Phys. Your Lordships pardon, we must have no Lord Along with us; though I was sent to enquire If you Lord Ethelswick were come to Court? Whom the King sent for. Exit Physitian. Theod. Sent the King for you, After your long retirement in the Country? Eth. He did indeed my Lord. Theod. There's something in't then That savours not of madnesse altogether. That having put by your Antagonist, The trouble of the Court, his favourite, He sends for you immediately upon't. Enter King, Jeffrey, Alfride and Edelbert. Here comes our Pilgrim King. King. Stand all apart. To be compleatly arm'd from head to foot, Cannot advance the spirit of a King Above the power of love, nor to be clad In poorest habit of humility Can mortify the least of the desires That love enflames man with. No out∣ward dresse Can change or make affection more or lesse. I have tried all the wayes I can to con∣quer
Or to humiliate my raging passion, Which still grows more predominant ore my reason. I find it in my self, and know my error, Though no means to correct it. I do know 'Tis fouly done to slight the Queen that loves me. And it was an act no lesse unprincely To cast into suspence my friendly servant For what transgression was't in him to love One fairer then my choice? before he knew My wavering inconstancy. I know Withal my punishment is just, how e're My sufferings make me wish it less severe. For my unjust removing of Theodrick, I lose all helpful counsel, all relief, That my oreburdend breaking heart cries out for. Into his brest I could unload my grief, Were it compos'd of ought but his abuse I must not, dare not trust him with this story, Lest for redresse I meet revenge. Who's there? All. My Lord the King. King. O you are welcome Ethelswick, I am now To trust you in a serious affair. Eth. My duty binds me to your High∣nesse service. Kisses the Kings hand. King. We will walk forth together Ethelswick. Let none presume to follow. Not a man Give the least motion this way on your lives. Jeff. not I, neam King? wilt thou not take me with thee? King. Pull the fool off me. Jeff. O but they shall not neam, 'tis more then they Can do. 2. Lor. No Sir, we'l try. King Again, I charge you all that none presume To follow us. Ex. King and Ethelswick. Jeff. All? wilt thou leave all thy fools behind thee neam? 1. Lor. All fools, Sir, shall be whipt. Jeff. And where will you find wise men to whip 'em all? We shall make whipping one another shortly. Trust me a trim Court-complement. I am advanc'd To high promotion, am I not? to wear long coats again, And feed on whipping cheer? but hark you Cousin Lord, do you reward fools at Court? 1. Lor. Yes fool, if they deserve it. Jeff. And is desert rewarded here too? 1. Lor. Yes. Jeff. Then 'tis desert gets whipping, and Fooling gets reward. I'l not forsake the Court for that yet, where I hope to Get enough to raise half my Country. 2. Lor. By what project I pray thee? Jeff By begging a monopoly, Cousin Lord. You know fools will Alwayes be begging, they are naturally enclin'd to it, Else none would be Courtiers. 4. Lor. And what is your monopoly? Jeff. I hope the King will give it me, if the Lord that Walk'd with him bring him in again as wise as He went out. 3. Lor. What is it thou wouldst beg? Jeff. 'Tis a monopoly of fools my Lords. That the King Would carry no fools with him but of my election, and By my allowance, and that when he comes Back into his own Country, he bring no new Ones from thence, but by the same Authority. 1. Lor. And what price or fee will you set upon a fools head For his admittance? Jeff. According to the degree, or estate, or quality of the fool, Cousin Lord. 2. Lor. This is a covetous and a poli∣tique fool. Jeff. Not so politique Cousin Lord, as a Statesman that paid his Head for his learning, nor so covetous as a Churchwarden May be, when I am dead and gone. But as I was A saying, I'l use my fools according to their quality Or breed. If he be a poor fool, I'l make him pay the more
For't. If he be rich, I may be beholding to him another way. If he be a fool natural and poorly born, he's Sure to pay enough for't. But if he have more breeding Then Capacity, and be a nobly discended fool, I'l use him The better for your sakes Cousin Lords, and the rather because I hope you will further my suit to the King. And so I'l wait his coming in at the back Stairs. Exit 3. Lor. This is a precious Fool. 1. Lor. The King (would his infirmity give leave) Would be delighted in him. 2. Lor. I am glad The King has chosen one yet to impart (I hope) his grief unto. 3. Lor. But is it true, The King sent for Lord Ethelswick to Court? 4. Lor. Now in his melancholy, and so presently On the removing of his lov'd Theodrick. 1. Lor. It is most true, in which we may observe A turn of State. Good Ethelswick was dear, Dearly belov'd indeed by our late King, And worthily deserv'd his royal Favour. But with his son, our soveraign Lord that is, Youthful Theodrick was prime man in grace, And quickly shouldred Ethelswick from Court. Theodrick's absence now resignes new place For Ethelswick to reassume the grace. Thus the Court-wheel goes round like Fortunes ball, One Statesman rising on anothers fall. Let's wait the coming of the King my Lord. 3. Lor. We are for the Woods to make a flight or two At the Phesant Edelberts. 4. Lor. Alfride agreed. Anthynus. Anth. To fast and watch is duty, and no Penance, When such affairs as mine are in pursuit. How dare I think of meat or sleep, which are Such hin drances to a devotion Whose least neglect would pull down Thunder on me; And to take sense of weariness were a sin Unpardonable. But to have lost 3. dayes And tedious nights in painful diligence, In such a search as this, for such a father; And now to lose the hope of finding him Is torment unexpressible. Where? which way Shall I make further inquisition? Yes, I will on to the Northumbrian Court, And make my griefs appear unto the King. My wandring steps have almost lead me now Unto his Court; where if I may find grace, Nay but humanity, I shall prevail To have these woods, the dens of barba∣rous Outlaws, In which I lost my Father, strictly search'd. Recorders Ha! do I hear or dream? is this a sound, Or is it but my fancy? 'tis the musick, The musick of the Spheres that do ap∣plaud My purpose of proceeding to the King. I'l on; but stay; how? what a strange benummednesse Assails and siezes my exteriour parts? And what a Chaos of confused thoughts Does my imagination labour with? Till all have wrought themselves into a lump Of heaviness, that falls upon mine eyes So ponderously that it bows down my head, Begins to curb the motion of my tongue, And lays such weight of dulness on my Senses, That my weak knees are doubling un∣der me. There is some charm upon me. Come thou forth Thou sacred Relique! suddainly dissolve it. I sleep with deathlesse; for if thus I fall, My vow falls on me, and smites me into Ruine. But who can stand against the power of Fate? Though we foreknow repentance comes too late
Enter six Saxon Kings ghosts crown'd, with Scepters in their hands, &c. They come one after another to Authynus; then fall into a dance; loud musick; after the dance, the first leads away the second, he the third, so all: the last takes up Anthynus, and leaves him standing upright. Anth. Am I among the dead? or in what Region Either of Earth or Air? Heaven? Hell? or whither? Or into what am I translated? Am I Alive, or dead, awake, asleep, a man, Or airy ghost? or did I see or dream? If now I be awake, and am Anthynus, That griev'd Anthynus who has lost a Then did I see in apparition The ghosts of our 6. last West Saxon Father, Kings, As each succeeded other now passed by me. Of which the last Kenwalcus our late King, And father to the Tyrannesse that ba∣nish'd Mine, seemed to take me up to his suc∣cession; It were more idle then a dream can be, For me awake to think it possible I should become a King, and of that land From which my father was exild; it must Be then a dream. As I have heard of men That sleeping stand, nay walk and talk as I do, At least as I suppose. Now if I sleep Not having seen my father, I have broke My vow; I'l rather think me dead; then why Was I not blest with my dead Fathers sight? Why was not he with King Kenwalcus now That living lov'd him so? O my wild thoughts! You are become a whirlwind in my brain Lifting me up to hurle me down again Falls. Enter to him Alfride, Edelbert, and two followers, as from Hawking. Alfr. Go, carry home yout Hawks; they are as good As er'e made flight. Edel. I would the King had seen (His melancholy set apart) our princely sport. Alfr. I hope my good Lord Ethelswick by this time Has tane the burden of his discontent (The cause of his strong malady) from his minde. Edel. I rather think the King has lost him too Among the bushes, as he did us last night Alfr. 'Tis a strange humour in a King; and as Unheard of a disease that works it in him To hide himself in by-Walks, Caves, and Thickets. Edel. We shall search hollow Trees, and Crows nests shortly For him, if these fits hold him. Alfr. Blesse us? look here, Is not this he? a witch could not guesse righter Then thou hast done. Old Ethelswick has lost him; And here's the King asleep. Edel. This is the habit, The Pilgrims weed he went in; has he not Ended his Pilgrimage here? is he not dead? Alfr. No, he is warm; and breathes like health it self. Edel. 'Tis so, my Lord, I vow he sleeps as if All the seven sleepers had tane up their lodging In his phantastick brain-pan. Alfr. He has not slept We know these four nights. Edel. Hear you, my Lord the King. I think he sleeps for them 4, and 4. more. I'l undertake a drum, or a whole kennel Of scolds cannot wake him. Alfr. 'Tis the better for us. Edel. I do conceive you; for we'l take him home, And have him put in bed before he wakes If it be possible. (up with him) And there When he has slept it out, he will perhaps Be cur'd, and give us answerable thanks: If not, and that he be offended for The breach of his command, in coming near him; He shall ne're know who did it. Alfr. Be it so. Edel. Away then, softly, softly, so so, softly. Exeunt with Anthynus asleep.
Enter King as though to bed, and Etheswick King. Now my good Ethelswick, I have told thee all, By which I find much ease, and hope to sleep: But not to take a thought unto my fancy By my soft dreams, but of my beauteous Mildred. Nor will I in sleep or waking think of any Other adventure, till I do attain The sight of her, and prithe Ethelswick Help me, and suddainly, in my device How to contrive a journey secretly Not with above one or two trusty ser∣vants To make this blisseful visit. Eth. There are wayes Enough considerable, by which your Highness May passe, and be receiv'd there undis∣covered. Seeming a private Gentleman, or a Pilgrim; But here will rise the difficulty, how The misse of you at home will be re∣ceiv'd By your Nobility and doubtful People; Who cannot long, not knowing where you are, But rage in high desire to see your Ma∣jesty. King. For that I'l give command be∣fore I go, That no affairs of State or otherwise, No not my diet nor Attendants Shall passe to me but by your hands; pretending For twenty dayes a studious privacy, To which your self shall only have ad∣mittance, And take for all that come my Answers, which Frame you as you think fit; and who shall dare To think me from my Closet or my Bed, When you avouch me there? As for example, we are now in private, Answer you all comers, I am busie, or asleep; see how they'l take it. One knocks. Eth. That tryal is soon made; there's one already; Who's there? what's your businesse? Theod. Within. My businesse is to wait upon the King; My Lord, you know me, I am Theodwald Eth. My Lord, the King is private, and desires to be so; And needs now no attendance but mine own. Theod. How fares his Majesty? Eth. Reasonable well. Theod. That's well, he was unreaso∣nable well to day. Good night my Lord; Let the King know I pray I gave attendance. You understand Court-service Is it be not ith' eye, 'tis half lost. Eth. Your service my Lord, though the King take it not in At the eye, shall have entrance at the next Door, the ear; I'l make it known to him. Good night. Exit Theodwald. King. You see how easily he's answerd now; So will the rest hereafter when they find It is my pleasure to be thus retir'd. Eth. Who are you? another knocks with∣in. Phys. One that must have entrance; the Physitian; One that brings the King a Preparative to sleep. Eth. What is't compos'd of Prayers and meditations? Phys. My books yield no such reading. Eth. Nor your Coat any such practice. Phys. I come not to be mock'd, but as you tender His Highnesse rest, let me approach him presently. Eth. Good Sir, the King's at rest al∣ready. Phys. Not asleep? Eth. Fast, fast, and welcome Mr. Doctor. Phys. My Lord, you'l let him know my care I hope. Eth. I'l wake him with it when he has slept enough. Phys. Believe't my Lord, it was my care that charm'd him. Eth. He had not slept this fortnight else I warrant. Phys. Pray let him know so much. Ex. Physitian. King. Ha, ha, they all desire to have their care consider'd, Although in real act they merit nothing.
Eth. How now? what sawcie Knave is that? Knock hard, Jeffrey within. Jeff. You are cosen'd Cousin Lord, it is the Fool, Cousin; How does my neam, the King? Eth. Go Fool, follow the Physitian, he can tell you. Jeff. I ask'd my Cousin Doctor already, and he saies, My neam King's asleep. Eth. And would not you be whipt to come to trouble him then? Jeff. No Cousin Lord, I come to sing him a lullaby Out of the dream of the Divel and Dives, shall Make him sleep till he wakes again, and't be this month. Eth. Away you Fool, I'l set you a going. Jeff. O Lord, O Cousin Lord, I cannot go for running. Eth. This will become a businesse. King. But Ethelswick, when I have declar'd my pleasure, As I'l appear, and publikely to morrow, To give command that none upon their lives Shall give you lesse respect in this behalf Then I my self might claim, it will be easie. Eth. Again? Knock▪ Eaufrid within. Eaufr. Where are you, my Lord E∣thelswick? Eth. Your pleasure my Lord Eaufrid. Eauf. May I not see the King? Eth. If you dare take my word, the King commands The contrary to all men but my self For this night; to morrow you may know His highness further pleasure. Eauf. May you enjoy This night the greatnesse of your Office; To morrow if I have a King, I'l see and speak with him. Eth. Not if he sleep my Lord. Eauf. You say he sleeps, Go to, sleep (quoth a!) yes, perhaps he sleeps, 'Tis with his Ancestors I fear. Eth. What shall I say my Lord? Eauf. I say, you do not well, my Lord, to keep Our duties back from's Majesty, that have As well been trusted—I will keep the rest: But 'tis not well. Eth. I say, that you do worse, Officiously to interrupt his rest. Eauf. I wish his rest as well as you, my Lord, Nay more: But I will keep the rest till morning, And so joy to the greatnesse of your Office. Exit. Eth. How thinks your Majesty of this? How will Such as he is be satisfied in your ab∣sence? Knock King. I'l school 'em all. Eth. Yet more? Alf. Edel. My Lord, my Lord. Eth. What would you have? Alf. Open the door, and quickly. Eth. I may not. Edel. But you must; 'tis for the King. King. How's that? Alf. Delay not, as you'l answer't; The King's here. King. Is the King there? what traytors voice is that? Let 'em appear; enter ha! who made you King-makers? Edel. God save the King, and blesse us all from witchcraft. Alf. We durst have sworn we had had him fast enough here. King. How? Edel. Fast asleep Sir, asleep Sir, look you here. King. Let's see your may-game. Alf. Look you my Lord, and judge. Edel. Or if your Majesty will know your self, (A lesson which a King should not dis∣dain To learn) look here, and read the diffe∣rence, If you can find it. King. Is he so like me to your ap∣prehension? Eth. I am amaz'd to see't; your own eyes, Sir, Cannot in likenesse answer each the other, More then this Face doth yours; his hands, his legs, All his dimensions bear the same pro∣portion
To outward seeming as your Royal Per∣son. Nature herself were she now to behold Her work on both of you, could scarce distinguish By an exterior view, a difference. Where did you find this sleeper? King. Peace, no more, ne're question that; Cupid has heard my prayers. Who saw you take him up? Edel. None but our servants, Whom we dismis'd in the same saith that we Were of our selves, that 'twas your Ma∣jesty; And as we passd the Court none saw our carriage, Which we brought thus obscur'd that none might take Notice of your infirmity. King. 'Twas well done; Be secret still; nay, I must charge you strongly; And if my power be not a spell sufficient To worke your secresie, I'l take your heads To mine own custody. Both. Sir. King. Nay, I must trust ye; harke you Ethelswick. Eth. I understand your course. King. Come, into our bed with him; gently, so: Nay Sir, you shall have Noble Kingly usage; Never had stranger entertainment like him. I'l give him all I have during his stay. Exchange my self with him, and be be∣holding To him besides for th' use I'l make of him. I'l tell you all within: Love, that has sent This blessing in my way, when I was in So great a streight (I cannot think enough on't) To bring new life unto my fainting hopes, If now I serve thee not with strength and skill, Remove me as a Rebel to thy will. Exeunt omnes. ACT. IV. SCEN. I. Enter Offa, 2. Outlaws. Offa. YOu are sure they both are dead? 1. Outl. Both dead and buried; The Mould is not more dead from which The gold was tane, which we attend for, Then are their corps. 2. Outl. Nor is the Mine so deep, As we laid them in grave; not out Of charity, but for our own security▪ That none might find or know them. Off. That was well; but are they dead indeed? 1. You saw the old one dead before your sword Fail'd you, and you gave ground. 2. When a mans sword is tane away, it fails him, And when he runs away, he gives ground in our Language. 1. Then we being two against one, we soon dispatched him. 2. Alas he was e'en spent before, you saw The worst of him. Off. But he's dead to y'are sure? 1. Dead? sblood, I have told you threescore times They are both dead; so is our fellow too, poor Rogue: He bid us take his share betwixt us, and drink it To the health of all the Furies in hell, to use Him the more kindly. Will you discharge us Sir? we have Waited for our hire, while we have lost another bargain Of blood worth two on't. Off. They are both dead you say? 2. Give us our money Sir, and find 'em you alive, we'l kill 'Em again for nothing; and you or any friend of yours into The bargain if you please. Off. Stay▪ let me think. 1. What's the matter? your conscience sure is crop-sick. Off. My conscience tells me 'twas a bloody businesse, and that
To pay the price of their dear blood were to Augment my sin. 2. Is't come to this?—draw. Off. Nay here's your money Gentle∣men, but you must stoop for't: I dare not look upon the giving of it. 1. If that be all, the sight of it shall never trouble you-oh. they sink. Off. Ha, ha, ha. You have made my conscience whole Again with laughing. Why took ye not your money with ye to Drink among the Furies? Ha, ha, ha. D'ye hear my friends? Pray stay, take your money; are you so Quickly out of hearing? What shallow Rogues were These till now? now they are deep enough, men of Profound understanding; this Gim∣crach I devis'd for Their entertainment; where you shall fast and welcome Gentlemen, till you have tried the con∣clusion, whether Famine Can break stone walls; I am sure they are thick enough To drown your cries, though they be lowder then the Voice of vengeance. So ends their Scene. Some conscience now Would ask me, why hast thou Dispatch'd thy Father and thy Brother thus? But mine informs me, I did very well. Your reason Sir, replies the scrupulous conscience? Mine roundly answers that my brother was Elder then I, and by right to inherit My Fathers fair possessions, of which I have so sweetly tasted. But your Father By a most dear and supernatural love Gave you the greater blessing; & in time Might have conferr'd all on you by your policy. To this again I answer, that my Father, Whose dotage meerly & not my deserts Made him so good to me, might in my absence Have idly grown as fond on tother side. For to speak truth, and not to wrong the dead, My brother was religious, pious, honest▪ And was endued with all these un∣known gifts Which holy men call vertues; which in the end If they be suffer'd to run on will find Double reward, they say. His could not be Found here, but in my losse, and by my Father. Now if they may be had ith' tother world, I am so far from being their hinderance, That I have sent them both the nighest way. Many good reasons more I could deliver, But that I am prevented. Enter Mildred, Edith. Ed. Ods my pity, Be comforted good Madam, can you think By casting down your selfe to raise them up From death again? what? you have yet a Brother May stead you for a Father, Husband, Friend, or what you will. Mild. Gentle Nurse, forbear me. Off. Go prate among the servants. Ed. I have a mind to watch you though a little. Off. Y'have heard the news, and mourn for't I perceive, Of the unfortunate ends of our dear Father, And our beloved brother. Mild. E'en drowned in griefe too Brother. Off. Troth I was Sunk over head and ears; but am ept out Of sorrows lake e'en dropping dry, as they say; And have done what I can to shake it off. And would now counsel thee, my beau∣teous Sister, To cleer those looks again, that only can Revive my drooping heart, we only are Left now to be each others comforter. I have made known my love to you. Mild. O my brother, That knowledge is a grief of no lesse horror, Then was the bloody news that pierc'd my heart.
Mention that love no more, nor call it love, Which is but foul desire. Off. Peace, hear but this, D'you think it is not love? would I de∣sire You in that neerest kind, if I not lov'd you? Mild. What? love a Sister so? are you a man? Off. Sure I do hope so, and that you shall find it. Mild. Can you unto your shame seek my dishonour? To damn us both, in that abhorred way Which by avoyding, man is best distin∣guish'd From the most brutish beasts. Off Peace again. Mild. I cannot, may not peace, nor suffer word Importing such a purpose pierce mine ears. Twice have I beaten back your mon∣strous lust, (Could I but call it lust, it were too much Though in a Monarch to my Virgin honour; But in you beastly Incest) and before I'l live in danger of one offer more, I'l die by mine own hand. Off. You shall not rob Me so of my revenge, if you deny me. And 'tis another argument of my love, If't please you to collect it, that you have liv'd Till now, still obstinate. But be you warn'd And take withal to your consideration Your provident Father, and your valiant Brother, (Whom you so priz'd above me) are not now To oversee or side you. Mild. He indeed Was a most vertuous Brother. Off. Therefore take This for your latest warning; This night to meet me in my full desires, In your as free embraces, or pale death. Go clear your eyes, and think on't; but be sure You think to do withal as I command you. I'l pitch thee headlong into Hell else. Come, I know thou wilt affect me; can there be A neerer or more requisite love indeed Then the sweet mixture of a Brother and Sister? Well said, there was a blushing smile, that gave me Thy full consent; O thou wilt ravish me. Mild. Pray, let me think a little. Off. Prithe do. Mild. H'as taught me to dissemble; Heaven that knows My thoughts are chaste and pure, will pardon me I hope, if to preserve my life and him From greater sin, I use a little of The art too too much practic'd among women, Of smooth hypocrisie. I know his heart is bloody; And he may be too suddain, if I win not Time on him, by some subtiler shift to wave His foul attempts, untill I get free Out of this gripe to use my liberty. Off. What saies my Sister now? Mild. My Lord and brother. Off. I marry, this begins well. Mild. That I love Your noble person, nay am taken with it, With more then sisterly affection, is A truth no way to be dissembled; you Already like a well read scholler find it, In Cupids love-letters my friend, my maiden blushes. Off. This has some sound in't. Mild. But when I consider, What scandal, or what too neer Affinity In noble blood, and the Nobility of our house, (Unfit to fall within the centre of the Law, Or the constructions of mens ruder manners) May cast upon us. Off. Stay my lovely Mildred; What? or whose eye, or thought, shall glance at us? Whilst we in safest privacy enjoy The blisse of mutual pleasure. Mild. It is yet Too intricate a doubt for me to find A resolution in. But my sweet Lord, (Oh that I could not call you Brother) then
I would be nearer to you then a Sister. So eager and so equal is my love With yours; if you please but to give me time, But one weeks liberty, to frame my self Obedient to your will in all, I now Will give you a faithful pledge to render The satisfaction you demand. Off. A week; what pledge? Mild. A loving kisse. Off. You could not name a better, Short of the further happinesse I covet. Give me't. Mild. But you shall swear by't that you will not A bridge my liberty, nor urge your suit Further these seven dayes. Off. By this kisse I swear. Mild. My patience never bought a kiss so dear. But keep your vow. Off. Well, well, I'l do my best. Mild. He's not yet perfect, you must strive my love, To curb your hot desires, as I do mine. I could my self dwell ever on your lips, Never outgo the circle of your arms. Could I but hope to be your wife. But O, What I have promis'd you, I must allow At the time limited; till then urge it not. For take my vow with yours, if you dare break it, I dare to kill my self; and by that time, If I not yield my self unto your will, My life is yours either to save or kill. Off. Go, th'art a noble wench, enjoy thy liberty. Enter Edith. Ed. I have enough, listning is good sometimes. Good Heaven! who would have thought it? stay, Let me not be too hasty. Off. Yet I fear, I shall hardly hold out a week; 'Tis a great while believe't in such a case As this, for one to forbear his own Sister, That has so good a mind to't. And per∣haps This may be cunning in her to delude me. Were not I better take her by surprise, In a soft sleep to night? sure I shall keep her From killing of her self, till I be satisfied. And then if she be weary of her life, I may be kind enough to help her out on't; Because she sayes she loves me. Out you Beldame, How in the name of Lucifer cam'st thou hither? Ed. O my good Lord, I do beseech your Honour, Forbear your fury; I have such a business. Off. To eavesdrop have you not? I am not safe, Unlesse I kill this Witch. Ed. My Lord, my Lord, You are the Lord that I do look to live by. And if I die my Lord, you lose the knowledge Of such a secret. Off. Pox upon your secret. Ed. 'Tis such a privity. Off. Hell take your privity. Ed. You will repent in Hell my Lord, if you or I Should leave the world before you know the thing That I can open to you; which when I have unfolded, Kill me if you please. I did but watch occasion To find you private to reveal it to you. Off. Will you be brief then? Ed. Thus it is my Lord, My Lord, your Father's dead. Off. And what of that? Ed So is your elder Brother. Off So they say forsooth. Ed. But are you sure th'are dead? Off. I fear this jade Has overheard me. Ed. For d'ye see my Lord, I would not in their life time have dis∣clos'd This hidden matter for a whole worlds good. And thus it is, your Father and your Brother Being dead, Heaven rest their souls. Off. Whats that to me? Ed. Nothing my Lord, but now comes that concerns you; Your Father and your Brother being gone, (Heaven rest their souls) there I begin. Off. You began there before, if that be the beginning,
Your for ever world without end We shall never come at it. Ed. Now that concerns you; You think you have a Sister. Off. Do I but think so? Ed. No truly my good Lord, you do but think so. Off. Is Mildred dead? has she de∣stroy'd herself? Now since she left me here, to spight my love. Ed. You hear me not say so, I saw her not Since I left both of you together here. Off. Unfold your riddle Sphinx, I'l dig it else Out of your rotten belly. What's your meaning? Ed. Mildred is not your Sister. Off. How? not my Sister? Ed. Not your own natural Sister. Off. Because she is unnatural; didst thou but know What a poor easie request she deny'd me Thou wouldst say she were unnatutal indeed. Ed. I mean, she was not born of the same mother, Nor got by the same father that you were. Off. Speak that again; make but that good, I'l Saint thee. Ed. My Lord, I can and will maintain it, I, Not only for some wrong she did me lately, Nor for the good my Lord that you may do me, Though all the estates your own when she's discarded; But to let truth appear, which has been long A burden, and an heavy burden, though I say't; And so will any woman say, 'tis to keep councel So many years together as I have done, I had much a doe to keep it in, I wis, In my good old Lords dayes. Lord how he lov'd her! But few men know their children, that's the truth on't; And let that go. Off I, quickly to the point. Ed. The point is this, I lov'd my old Lord well; Therefore was loth to grieve him; and I lov'd My good old Lady better; therefore I kept Her councel to this hour: You now are all That's left of'em; and whom should I love now But your sweet self my Lord? I'l tell you all: This Mildred, whom you so long call'd Sister, Was not your Fathers, nor your Mothers child; But in the absence of your Father, when Sixteen years since he was sent by the King Upon an embassie, your mother then with child, By sad mischance brought forth a still born babe; At the same time a Lady nobly born Whose husband was in Exile, brought forth this, This Lady Mildred. Off. Then she is nobly born? Ed. Yes, and by womans slight, of which this is Not first example, th' Infants were ex∣chang'd; Because your loving father might find joy In a fair daughter at his home-return. Off. Canst thou prove this? Ed. If in three dayes I do not Make it appear most plain to you, multi∣ply Your wrath upon me. Off. Do so; and dost hear? I'l never call old woman witch hereafter What e're I think. We may be married now, And Mildreds love may freely answer mine. We now may safely mix, and to't again, Strange strong events are labouring in my brain. Come you with me. Exeunt ambo. Enter Ethelswick, and Edelbert. Eth. What fury has possess'd 'em? all our art, And the Kings policy will be prevented, By the brain-giddiness of these wilful Lords. Edel. We have no way my Lord, but to give way Unto theit violent rage, & quit the Court. Eth. And since we can make good our place no longer, Post after our King Master, & leave them
With their new King at home here, that's as mad As they. Edel. And madder too; I cannot wonder More what he is, then at the fate that sent him. Enter Theodwald, Eausride, Guard, Physitian, 2. Attendants. Theod. My Lord, both in the King and States behalf, In which you may excuse us. Eauf. Sh't, sh't, let▪him take it How he or will or dare, we have agreed. The body of the Council have decreed it You must depart the Court. Eth. Must? Eauf. Must and shall, You and your trim confederate; you have had The rule here over your Ruler, till you have made him Wild, frantick, mad, and us too; God forgive me For saying so, almost as mad as he; I hope it is no treason. Edel. No, cause you said almost; But had you said you had been full as mad, You had pass'd a Subjects boldnesse. Eauf. Take 'em hence; Thrust 'em out oth' Court. Theod. Nay, without violence. Eth. Well my Lord, when we see the King in's wits, We'l tell him of our usage, that he may thank you. Eauf. In the mean time go travel on adventures, Whilst we do our indeavour to amend What you have marr'd by screwing the Kings brain Into the nick of Order once again. Put forth a bed, Anthynus on it bound See, see, my Lord, how they have kept him dark, Manacl'd and bound on's bed? was ever King Us'd thus? for pities sake unbind him quickly. Anth. What Fiends or Fairies are ye? Phys. Let his passion A little vent it self, e're you unbind him. Anth. What? new tormentors? or into what way Of further mischief do ye mean to throw me? Theod. We come to bring your High∣nesse comfort. Anth. Highnesse? Have you that mockery for me too? I told The rest that slav'd me with that attri∣bute, From whence I came, who, what I was, and all The story of my fathers wrongs, and mine (Too many ever to have been, but heaven Mark'd 'em out for us) and I told 'em too What I had undertane by Watching, Fasting, Prayers too (unfit to boast of) with the Industry I practic'd to have found my wounded Father. For which (as though I durst have faith in merits) They mock'd me with the title of a King, And bound me here as they thought to believe it. 'Tis a new way of punishment; and were due To one that thought his duty merito∣rious. But I will break these Gives, and with my teeth Tear off these manacles. Phys. O do not strive my Liege. Anth. Thy Liege, Dog-leech? are you at that garb too? I wish I had one finger loose to fillip out Thy brains and skill together for the Ratcatchers. Phys He thinks my skull's made but of urinal mettal. Theod Be patient Sir. Anth. Sir, yet may be endured. Eauf Have but a little patience, we'l unloose you. Anth. A grave perswasion to a man that's tied to't. Humb, humb, humb. Eauf. Beshrew their heards that us'd him thus to vex him. How do you like him Doctor? Theod. Did you mark His talk of wrongs, and of a wounded Father? And how he will not hear of being a King? Phys. I, all, all, I know all; such fan∣cies fall Naturally into this disease, which now
Is almost a wild Phrensie, that will sel∣dome Suffer the Patient think himself to be The person that he is; nor oftentimes the Creature, But some four-footed Beast, or feather'd Fowl: But could I fasten but a slumber on him, Which must be the first entrance to my work. Anth. Have you concluded yet your barbarous councel? If not, take my advice with ye: call the King, The King with whose authority you scorn me; Let him but hear (for you will never tell him) From my own lips how willingly I'l give My voice unto his marriage; and I'm sure He'l set me free; at least by death. Eauf. Alas, What King? what freedome would you have? You are our King, and shall command your freedom, And all our lives, would you but sleep a while. Anth. Sleep? make no doubt of that; look, I can sleep, With as much ease as one bound in a Cart, Driving to execution. But do you hear? My vow was not to sleep nor eat untill I had perform'd a work, which I shall never, Never accomplish, now my vow is bro∣ken. For they by witchcraft charm'd me into sleep, And tempted me with meat atunawares, Before my sleep-drown'd senses were collected; And put me on these unknown gar∣ments here, With an hayl Master; so betray'd me into This irksome folly, or this foolish thral∣dome. Theod. 'Twas a rash vow, and so well broke; you now Shall be releas'd: unbind him at my peril. These rigorous courses have done hurt upon him; We have provided otherwise to please you; For we have call'd Theodrick home again Your Favourite, whose absence was a grief to you; Nay more, because 'tis thought your lan∣guishing love Bred your distemper, we have taken care For hastning of your marriage; your fair Queen Is sent for, and at hand to ease your sor∣row. Anth. My Favourite, and my Queen! leave these abuses; My hands and feet are now at liberty Strikes and kicks. Theod. So is our duty, and if your Ma∣jesty Will tread cur due allegiance into dust, We are prepar'd to suffer. Anth. Would to heaven, I could unfold this mystery. Eauf. See my Lord, Theodrick is come. Ent. Theodrick. Theodr. Most gracious Sir, That I have suffred under your displea∣sure, In being barr'd your presence, which no lesse Then the all cheering Sun gave life to me, Was not so much my grief, as not to know What my transgression was; and let me now Implore your mercy so far as to name it; Which if I cannot cleer me of, I'l lose my life, and willingly. Anth. If I could think this serious, 'twere enough Almost to turn my sorrows into laugh∣ter. Theodr. O turn not from me royal Sir, t' augment Your Highnesse displeasure; but in case you will not Be pleas'd to name my trespasse, give me leave To speak what I suppose has troubled you, And caus'd me causelesly to be suspen∣ded. Enter Genius whispering him. Anth. I feel a secret instigation in me, I hope by some good Angel that inclines me, At last to yield a little to these men. What wouldst thou say? Theodr. My Lords, and all forbear The presence; never fear, all shall be well. Theodw. Heaven grant it. Eauf. Was not this my policy, To send for him? more, was it not my wit To fashion letters as with's own hand
To fetch the Queen? you'l see more at her coming. Exeunt all but The∣odrick, Anthy. Theodr. May't please you now but to review these Pictures. Anth. Good memory help me; this is of the Queen, The cruel Queen that banish'd my good Father; And this the lively Image of my Sister. Theodr. Now may it please your grace to recollect, How when I told you this was my fair Mistresse, Your passion first siez'd on you; and pardon Royal Sir, If I have since conjectured my transgres∣sion Was meerly this, that I lov'd one so fair, I dare not yet say fairer then your choice. But freely thus, to expiate my trespasse, As I resign the Picture, I give up All interest in her person, never more Beyond your free consent to see that Beauty. Anth. I have found all the error, and am taught By hidden inspiration to make use on't. Genius still whispers him. Give me fresh rayment, I'l take all upon me (Their Crown if they will give it) yet me thinks This is so like a dream—where else can be King Osriick all this while, that he comes not To throw me out of this usurped right? Strange and new thoughts possesse me. Gen. whispers Now I call To mind the vision that I had of being Call'd to the Throne of the west Saxons Kings. It must be by this Queen, whom how to love I cannot find. My Genius promps me, yes I hear it now, as by an Angel spoke. And that my vow was rashly made, well broke; I am confirm'd, & come she I am for her. puts on Hat, Feather, and Cloke) ex. Genius. Well said Theodrick; (Theodrick is his name?) How do I look Theodrick? Theodr. I can find But little change, which I allow to sick∣nesse. Anth. Well said, thou never flatterest. Enter Jeffrey winding an Horn. Jeff. News, neam King, news, news; News that will make thee well, beest thou never so sick. News that beest thou never so well, will make thee sick. News that will make thee mad, beest thou never so tame. News that beest thou never so mad, will make thee tame. Anth. What's thy news? Jeff. A wife, a wife, a wife can do all this. The Queen is come, and all my Cousin Lords Are gone to fetch her in in pompe: Oh ho, Knight me, oh Knight me quickly for my news. Theodr. Away you fool. Jeff. Away you Favourite. Hinder me not unlesse I prophesie, Kings, Fools and Favourites never shall agree. And many years after we are in our graves, Fools shall be Knights, and Favourites shall be—known From black Sheep, I prophesie. Oh ho, she comes, she comes; now neam King, Bear up stiff before and meet her. Here's a day, And a night towards indeed. Oh ho, the house Begins to reel already, and all our brains turn Round; oh ho. Enter Ushers bare, Kelriick and Elkwin, Theodwald and Eaufride, a Cardinal, the Queen, two Ladies bearing up her Train, Followers, the Queen Bertha kneels, An∣thynus as King takes her up; kisses her; they confer, the four Lords salute and con∣fer; Theodwald and Eaufride give their supposed Kings hand to the Cardinal. Kel∣riick and Elkwin give their Queens hand to the Cardinal; the Cardinal joyns their hands, Anthynus and Bertha kisse; all the Lords embrace; the Exeunt in state as before. Jeff. Oh what a night will here be? what a night will here be?
What a beast am I? that I have not at least half (Lasses with child now, A score of my wholesome Countrey That forty weeks hence the Queen might have her Choice of Nurses; there had been a thriving way to raise My fortunes indeed. Oh what a night will here be! Exit. ACT. V. SCEN. I. Enter Mildred, Offa. Mild. HElp, help, oh help. Off. Your cries will be in vain. 'Tis not in the power of any flesh but yours, To allay, or to prevent my heat of blood. Mild. O you diviner powers that or∣dain'd chastity To be a vertue, lend your strength to guard it. Off. Thy cries shall be as fruitless as thy life If thou offend'st me with 'em; hear but this Impertinently peevish maid, and tremble But to conceive a disobedient thought Against my will. Canst thou without my favour, Be better then a begger? Mild. Yet a begger Is better then a Whore. Off. How canst thou judge That knowst not what is either? let a wench That knows what's what, or has been both, maintain it; But this is from the purpose; I am so far From casting of thee off to be a begger, As I intend to make thee my rich equal, And not a Whore, but wife; you know your Nurse Has undertaken to find it lawful for us To marry; and canst thou with modesty Deny me present pleasure, that within these three dayes Shall confer honour on thee for thy life? Mild. Would you first spoil my honor to repair it? Off. 'Tis mine when I contract for't. Mild. Not before Our Covenant is pass'd; that is, the Priest Has joyn'd our hearts and hands. Off. By this account, A man backs not his Horse before he's paid for't; Nor puts his nose into a house before He buyes the Lease on't; leave your precise folly, Madam formality; force me not to force thee, Yield with that very breath thou now drawest in, Or it returns thy last. Enter Edith. Ed. My Lord, my Lord. Off. This Witch or Divel haunts me. Ed. O my Lord, I told you late a wonder; I bring now A miracle, a miracle. Off. What with a mischief? Ed. Your Brother is surviv'd from death again; My Lord Anthynus is come home and safe▪ The Heavens be prais'd. Mild. O grant that it be true. Off. Out Hag. Ed. Nay, run me in as far as you can if I lie; Up to the Hilts if I lie. Off. What canst thou mean by this? Ed. Nay, what he means I knew not, for he denies his name, Sayes he is not Anthynus, but a Northum∣brian Gentleman; And desires conference with my Lady Mildred From the fine Lord was here (what call you him?) The Kings great Favourite; But if I am I, If you are you, if any thing be any thing, It is Anthynus. Ex. Mildred. Ex. Edith. Off. Go you to your Chamber, And be not seen I charge you. Let him enter, But first send in my servants. I did mistrust he liv'd; O those false Villains, That fac'd me down they kill'd him, may they be A year a famishing. Have you tricks An∣thynus? How can he thinke, though he disguis'd his name Or Countrey, that we should not know his person? What should his aim or drift be? stay, perhaps He does suspect I was in the action
Against my fathers life and his, & thinks him dead, So steals upon me thus as his own ghost, To terrifie my conscience, shallow, shal∣low; But I'l so fit him; It is most evidently he. Enter Osriick, Alfride, four Servants, at the other door Arnod. Osr. My Lord, how e're Some of your servants are pleas'd to make themselves Merry with a pretended knowledge of me, I do presume your honour cannot know me. Off. From one so false never came clearer truth. Osr. What means your honor? Off. It is true, my honour Cannot, nay, dares not know thee for a Brother, Although mine eyes through tears of grief and anger, Discern the monster I have often call'd so. Osr. This is most strange. Off. Look that he come not near me; Perfidious Parricide, hast thou kill'd my Father? Destroy'd the life that gave thee life? and now Seek'st by surprize to take mine too? Osr. Pray hear me. Off. Upon him all at once, hew him in pieces; I'l bear you out in't; he has kill'd your Lord. Osr. Forbear your outrage. Alsr. Give us leave to speak. Off Villains, are they to be obey'd or I? Arn. My Lord, your judgement is too rash upon them. Fellows forbear, and forbear you my Lord, You shall not so heap blood upon your head; I lov'd my Lord your father, and do prize His blood and memory, as becomes a Servant Of the best rank: And if at most and worst My Lord Anthynus here stand guilty of His fathers death, you must not be his Judge, Nor we his Executioners. Off. Are you Become my master, you old Ruffian? Arn. No, Your Servant Sir, but subject to the Law; The Law that must determine this mans cause, Not you, nor we, what ever he deserves. And till he shall be censur'd by that law We'l find a Prison for him. Serv. I, to Prison with him. Osr. Will you but hear yet how you are mistaken? Arn. Pray heaven we be, as you may clear your self; That's all the harm we wish you; this must be Your course my Lord; would you heap blood upon you? Alsr. Let me but speak a word. Arn. As we go twenty. Off. Away with 'em. Exeunt. I could have lik'd the other shorter way Much better; but my knaves will have it thus, Yet not to wrong 'em, simple honesty May be in such sometimes as well as me. Exit. Enter Carpenter, Mason, Smith, in Divels habits; two dark Lanthorns, a Pickaxe and a Rope, with an Engine fastned to a Post, and a bunch of Picklocks. Mas. Prethee tread softly yet a little further, And we are safe. Smi. Hark, heard ye nothing? whist. Carp. I never knew Thieves so time∣rous as you are. Can we expect a booty without bold∣nesse? Besides, have we not shapes if we were spyed, Able to fright better Believers then My politick Lord oth' house here. Mas. Hark prethee. Carp. All's sure I warrant thee. Smi. I pray it prove so. Carp. Pray on I prethee; prayers be∣come this coat, Like swearing in a Surplisse; tush, they are all, All the whole house asleep, and I heard nothing As we pass'd through it, but usuall sleepy sounds, Puffing and blowing, snorting farting and such like.
Yes, I cry mercy, as we pass'd by the Butlers chamber, I heard his bed crackle shrewdly, and I doubt, The Dary-maid and he were jumbling of A Posset together. Come, now we are safely arriv'd at the Fountain of our hopes, the well of com∣fort. Smith, lay Down your Picklocks, they have done well their office in our passage hither. Mason, Advance your Pickaxe, whilst the Car∣penter squares out Our new work; now for the honour of Artificers; here, here, Here is the Trap-door, the mouth of the rich mine, which We'l make bold to open. And let men of our Occupations Learn the way that many grow rich by, and No body knows how they come by their wealth. That Is, when they make such concavities as these, for Rich men to hide their treasure in, that they Make also a privy way for themselves to come and Take a share on't. Mas. This covetous Lord by this time has laid in An unknown deal of wealth, I warrant you. Smi. But we'l not take away too much at once. Carp. No, we'l but piddle; we'l not take above A thousand pounds to night. opens So, I'l go down; And when I shake the rope, then crane me up again; give me one of The Lanthorns: So, so, so, let me down handsomely; I'l warrant you money, the Divel and all before day yet. Smi. Nay, if we get off clear but with a thousand pound Amongst us, it will serve for drinking Money till we come for more. Mas. This money will come luckily for a better purpose. I have three bastards at nurse and a fourth in the Paniers. The rope stirs; pull lustily, this pull for a Thousand pound. Outlaw comes up Smi. I fear 'tis light gold, methinks he does not weigh So heavy as he went down. Comrade, what hast thou Brought? what ail'st thou? canst not speak? I hope thou Wert not frighted. 1. Outl. O help! where am I? drawn from one hell into another? ha! Mas. Come, leave your fooling, what money have you? 1. Outl. Had I the price of Kingdoms I'd give all But for one bit of meat; but I have none. Smi. Slid, he would cosen us; how do you look when you lie? Oh me! Mas. What ailest thou? Smi. This is not he; it is a gastly spirit. 1. Outl. What? are you men? Mas. Yes, but we have play'd the Divels, till we have Got a spirit betwixt us. 1. Outl. If you be men, help me to food, a little food. Mas. What art thou that canst look thus Piepeckt, Crowtrod, or Sparrow-blasted? ha! 1. Outl O, I am pin'd with hunger. Mas Here, stay thy stomach; there's a crust I brought To stop the open mouth of the Mastive, if he had flown at us. Carp. O pull, pull away. Smi. There he is now I am sure. Carp. I shall be devour'd else. Mas. Whats the matter Fellow? Carp. Take his teeth out o' me, I can∣not tell you else. Pull up Carp. an Outl. hanging on him Mas. O Cannibal! wilt thou eat a Carpenter? 2. Outl. O meat, meat, if you be men. Mas. No, we are Divels; but here's another crust for thee What e're thou art; we have play'd the Thieves to Very good purpose. Carp. He has gnaw'd a piece of my Flank out with's teeth; And miss'd very narrowly certain mem∣bers of more moment,
They'd have gone down glib with him; now in the Divels name, what are ye? Smi. Until their crusts be done they cannot tell us. Mas. Come, I do suspect the subtilty of this cruel politick Lord; would we were well out on's house. No noise my Masters, and we'l bring you to meat enough; and then We'l hear your story, and tell our own; a word more Here, may cost all our lives. Smith. Take up your tools and lead the way. Enter Mildred and Edith. Smi. Come, softly, softly then. Mild. I will away this night. Mas. Peace, hark. Ed. But Madam. Mil. Had you the only Tongue of all perswasion, So much I prize my life, & honour more, I would not misse this opportunity For all that you could say. Smi. Are not these Sprites? Carp. No evil ones I'l warraut, they are so white; Hark a little more. Ed. To night he's troubled 'bout An∣thynus coming, So that he will not think of lust or wan∣tonnesse. Mild. That trouble keeps him waking; and I fear Will rather spur him forwards then withhold him. Smi. They talk methinks; but I cannot hear what For shaking. Carp. Take heed thou dost not jingle thy Picklocks,; slid, They'l ring up the house like a larum bell. Ed. Well, since you are so resolute, would we were out of the House once, if we be taken, 'tis not the price of A million of Maiden-heads, as the market goes, can save Our lives. Carp. Good, I have found what sprites they be. They Must needs be the wenches that I suspe∣cted were in The Butlers chamber, and made the stiff standing bedstead that I set up but last week, crack like a wicker chair. Ah Rogues! I heard ye. Ed. Oh me! we are undone and taken. Mas. I'm glad 'tis no worse. Carp. Peace, if you have a mind to scape out oth' house alive. Mild. Come Nurse, my fear is over, if they be Men, and bring us out oth' house, They cannot be so dangerous as he I scap'd. Carp. Did he so put thee to't, my little Bustlepate? what a stout blade's this Butler? Mil. These are good Fellows Nurse. Carp. Yes faith, and fear you nothing for all our divelish Outsides; if we scape out o' the house, you scape, and If we fail, our necks are sure to hang by't; and so On there afore once more in the name of darknesse. Off. If my attempt now fail, may my repulse Strike lust for ever out of countenance. Ent. Offa, light and Dagger. It is decreed she sleeps with me or death 1. Outl. S'death, it is he. 2. Outl. Let us fall to and beat him. Carp. As you can hope for meat again, or life, Look big, and use no words; and so glide by. Off. The night, the place, her fate, and my desire, Do all conspire unto my wish'd advan∣tage. And so I come coy Damosel. Hide the women under their habits, and so Exeunt all but Offa. Ha? how? why? where? who? or what can you or I be? They are all gone, and I am tottering left Upon an Earthquake; gentle, holla, holla, Set not too hard old Ops, thou'lt shake thy rider, Through thy chinky wrinkles into Lim∣bo. I shall sinke piecemeal if thou trot so hard. So, so, so, Holla, holla, gentle earth.
Open not here, not near that part of thee That has but now disgorg'd those fa∣mish'd ghosts, That with the Furies would have beck∣ned me Along to hell with'em; so, let me down, I must not follow yet, but sleep and think upon't. I will come time enough you need not fear. But first creep back to bed, as nothing were. Enter Osriick, Ethelswick, Edelred, Alfride. Osr. You have told me wonders, which have pierc'd my soul With horror and amazement; yet I must confesse, In all that I am like to suffer, heaven is just, Whilst wrath my wilfulnesse has pull'd upon me; Yet pardon, since thou gav'st me that affection That wandred with me in this oblique course, This unquoth way, with which I have not stray'd Further then love might lead an humane frailty. Eth. You do consider well, my Lord, and we Beseech you strive to counter-check these crosses Still with your Kingly reason. Osr. Yes, and fall upon our present businesse; there you find me Out of a spacious Kingdom of mine own, Shut in a narrow Prison; whilst the bro∣ther Of her, whose love I came to seek, has married The Queen I might have had; before I have seen His Sister; there was a quick expedition. Eth. My Lord, for that before you left the Court In your suppos'd distraction; the ore∣busie Lords Eaufride and Theodwald, out of strong conceit The sight of her would cure you, feign'd your letters Which fetch'd the Queen; then banish'd us the Court, Before we could take notice; we had been Strong Traitors else to let that match go forwards. Nor heard we of it until now the Post That brings the news oth' Kings and Queens approach Arriv'd here in the City. Osr. All think him then their King still? Eth. Yes, yes, and though he told us who he was; The overwise Lords imputed that to his madnesse. Osr. It seems he was not so mad, but he could take The Queen into my bed. Eth. Where she lik'd him so well That she now brings him home unto her own. Still thinking him your person. Osr. Whilst I lie here for his, Accus'd of Parricide; but I will not Reveal my self till trial. Ent. Mildred Now all my sufferings are turn'd into delightful recreations. Fairest of Virgins welcome; marvail not That at first sight I knew you, when my heart Wears the Impression of your Portrai∣ture; And all my intellectual faculties Bow to no other object but your beauty. Mild. O Sir, lay by this high dissimu∣lation; For though I find you now are not my brother. Osr. Lo ye, she knows I am not An∣thynus. Her vertue like the Sun will clear the mist Of error we were lost in. Mild. Not Anthynus? Yes, the bright Sun discovers not a truth More evident then that you are Anthynus Nor ever shin'd on man I lov'd so well, Or hop'd to marry, since you are not my brother. Osr. I understand not this. Mild. Indeed I came To tell you so, and could you clear your hand Of the foul stain of blood you are ac∣cus'd of, Were I sole monarchess of all this Island, I'd kneel to beg a brides place in your bed. Osr. If I can clear my self? Mild. Nay, mark me further; If you clear not your self, I'l not outlive you, To call to mind the man that I so lov'd Butcher'd his Father; though he w not mine,
I lov'd him as a father; oh good heaven! How good? how reverend a man was he? Osr. Weep not, but hear me; or hear me though you weep; I am not Anthynus. Mild. I may say as well, I do not love you. Osr. I never had an hand In blood of any man. Mild. Prove that, I am yours. Osr. Fetch me a Priest. Edel. I saw one i'th next room Drinking and singing catches with some Prisoners. Ed. Withhold your hands, Anthynus now again, Fair Lady, is your brother. Mild. Why did you mock me then? Ed. To save you from your brother Offa's lust, I feign'd that you were not his Sister; that In hope to marry you, he might forbear His divelish purpose. Mild. Now I am lost for ever, In being the Daughter of a murder'd Father, And made uncapable of you in marriage. Osr. Yet hear me, and be comforted. Mild. O me! Ed. Hark my Lord Anthynus. Osr. I do not know that name. Ed. Go to, go to; nor you do not re∣member How I behav'd my self upon the eating of Spurging Comfects, that your Brother Offa gave me, And laid the fault on you; pray Jove, I say, this murder Be no more his fault then yours. A shout within. Enter Keeper. Osr. Hark, the wide world abroad is fill'd with joy, And must we only be shut from it? now. Keep. My Lord Anthynus. Osr. Still must I be Anthynus? Keep. You are call'd unto your Trial. Osr. Who are my Judges? Keep. Those that are bribe-free I dare warrant 'em. It may perhaps go somewhat the harder with you; For nothing but white innocence can quit you, Pray heaven you hav't about you; even the King And Queen, the Queen and King I should have said, For she's our Soveraign, 'tis her Law must do it. Osr. What King do you mean then? Keep. King Osriick; you know nothing. Osr. Yes, I know him as well as he knows himself. Keep. Take heed Sir what you say. Osr. I fear him not, But am as good as he; now carry me for something. Mild. O pray take heed. Keep. How? Mild. Peace, he did not say so. Keep. Slid, he's as mad as his brother Offa. Osr. Is Offa mad? Keep. O quite besides himself, and talks the strangliest Of his fathers murder, your running away And the desire he has to hang his bro∣ther here; And then he is haunted with sprites too, they say; You will know all anon; will you go my Lord? Osr. Yes, will you be so kind as to see my Trial? Mild. Indeed I must not leave you. Keep. 'Tis a kinde part indeed, and may become A Sister; like the wife that would not leave Her husband till she saw him totter. Set the best foot forward, and the best face You can, my Lord, upon the businesse. Exeunt. Hoboys. Enter Theodwald and Eaufride, Kelrick and Elkwin, Theodrick, Anthynus and Bertha. Omn. Long live King Osriick and Queen Bertha. Anth. I joyn with ye in your wishes for the Queen; And wish well to King Osriick as a stranger.
Omn. How's this? Anth. But will no longer personate him; For now be it known to you that I am no Osriick; But he that warns you call me so no more. Bert. What means my love? Anth. Nay, Madam, 'tis most serious. Kelr. Elkw. Blesse us! Theodw. He's madder now then e're he was. Eauf. I am at my wits end too; if marriage Will not tame him, I know not what to say to't. Anth. I have told you truth, and your fair grace can witnesse How violently I was thrown upon the fortune, I thank those provident Lords, against my vow. Bert. I take it as the providence of Heaven; And from the Son of that most injur'd Father, Whom now in my joys strength I could shed tears for. I yield you are my head, and I your handmaid. She sets him down, and kneels; he takes her up. Eauf. So, so, a few nights trial has got her liking For ever fast enough; what notable old Cockscombs Have we been made? nay, made our selves indeed. Anth. Now further know, my Lords, I am Anthynus, The Son of that old honest Lord, 'gainst whom Your sulphurous malice kindled the Queens anger. Elkw. Who'l have an head now for an half penny? Kelr▪ And for tother two Tokens mine into the Bargain. Enter Keeper, with Osriick, Ethelswick, Edith, Alfride, Edelred, Guard. Keep. Make way there for the Prisoner. Eauf. See King Osriick. Theodw. I, this is our King indeed. Theodr. O let me wash your feet Sir with my tears. Osr. Thy trespasse is thine honour my Theodrick▪ And I must thank your care my Lords, as it deserves, Your over-reaching care to give my Dignity As much as in you lay unto another. And for your Letters counterfeit in my name, By which the Queen is mock'd into a marriage. Theodw. That was your policy, your wit, my Lord. Eauf. A shame on't. would I were hang'd, that I Might hear no more on't. Bert. Fair Sir, the Queen is pleas'd, and hopes you are In her that's so much fairer in your thoughts. Anth My Sister Mildred. Osr Yes, my noble Brother, She stands in fortune equal with your self, In being mine. Anth. But not great Sir, untill You are acquitted of my fathers murder. Osr. I am clear of that, as I am not An∣thynus. Anthynus is accus'd, not Osriick Sir, Your father is required at your hands. Bert. Ha! Arn. But his accuser reads another lesson Now Madam. Offa brought bound in a Chair. Off. Whither do you hurry me? If I must answer't, give me yet some time, To make provision of befitting Presents, To supply the hard hands of my stern Judges, Into a tender feeling of my cause: I know what Eacus loves, what Mines likes, And what will make grave Radamanthus run. Anth. He is distracted. Arn. Yes, and speaks hainous things Against himself, both of my Lords mur∣der, And an intended rare against his Sister. Anth. Incestuous monster! Off. Hark, how the Divel lies; I have no Sister. Ed. How he's possess'd Of that strnge error; I must satisfie you? That was meerly feign'd by me to save her honour
From his outragious lust. Arn. But here comes that Clears all at once. Welcome my honour'd Lords. Enter Segebert, Alberto. Jeff. Outlaw. Jeff. A boon, a boon, my gratious Liege. Arn Hold your peace fool. Seg. My Son Anthynus living? Osr. You are my Father in your Daughters right. Seg. My blessing on my Girle. Osr. But see Anthynus at a greater height. Anth. My Father. Bert. And my Father noble Sir. Your pardon, and for ever welcome. Seg. If this were real now, and not a Dream! Jeff. Come, leave your fooling, hear a wise man speak: Great King according unto thy behest With Knights adventurers I went in quest, Through the Woods and Forrests wild To scoure the Dens of Outlaws vild; Whence these old men, this Knave I bring Together with this Starveling; Whom I present not dead, but quick Unto thy grace King Osriick. Arn. Look this way fool, This is King Osriick man. Jeff. Whose fool am I then? Osr. Mine. Mild. And mine. Anth. Mine. Bert. And mine. Jeff. Whoop, hold a little, best let me be every bodies fool Round about the house. But amongst you all, let me not lose re∣ward; I must not fool for nought; the times are hard. Osr. Still the fool's covetous. Bert. I ow thee a just reward, for I proclaim'd To him that brought this man alive or dead A thousand crowns; but since thou art so fortunate To bring him home alive and well re∣cover'd Out of such danger— Jeff. I shall have nothing shall I? Bert. I'l double thy reward, give thee two thousand crows. Jeff. It is enough in conscience; who bids more? For till you are out-bidden, I'l be your fool. But can you tell whose Favourite you are then? Theodr. Where I was first, I'l ever wish to be. Osr. And I'l be thine Theodrick; for thou in this Hast above favour shewn me unto blisse. Seg. I have perform'd your Majesties command, Though not in sending, yet in bringing home My banish'd friend, Lord Alberto, the preserver Of my now happy life. Bert. It shall be to his honour; wel∣come Alberto. Outl. Oh what an heavenly smell of meat is here! Seg. All the unhappiness I now can see Is but an argument of tears for thee, In whom I'm justly punish'd. Anth. Take him hence From my grieved fathers sight. Seg. And pray let care Be had for his recovery; his senses may Bring a new soul into him, for which I pray. Off. What am I freed? Arn. Yes, yes, my Lord, all's well. Off. I knew my bribes would do it. Jeff. I'l off with him, for 'tis unknown to you What good a fool may on a mad man do. Ex. Arn. Offa, Jeffrey. Seg. This sword was evidence enough against him; But here's one of the Outlaws that con∣fess'd it;
For whom, since he is penitent, I beg pardon. Mild. The other two his fellows are both extant: For whom together with three theevish workmen That were strong instruments in my de∣livery, Let me beg mercy. Anth. I have heard of them that robb'd my brothers Jewel-house. 'Tis a day of grace, And we are taught by heavens abundant mercy Shewn upon us beyond our expectation, To imitate that goodnesse. Bert. I forgive All on my part. Osr. I pardon all on mine. Bert. And now right royal Sir, let me entreat For former love, to make our last com∣pleat, You will be pleas'd a month with us to stay In triumphs to commemorate this day. Osr. Next to my sum of happinesse my Bride, I should have sought that honour, royal Sister. Anth. Thus through tempestuous sighs and showres of tears Joy at the last more cheerfully appears. Exeunt. RIC. BROME Deus dedit his quoque Finem. FINIS.
