B5145 99871014 123412
VVHereas Sergeant Major Generall Brown hath desired me, that the passages of the late Treaty between him and the Lord Digby may be published; It is therefore my pleasure, that the said passages shall be Printed accordingly. Dated, 1. Febr. 1644. ESSEX. To all whom it may concern.
The Lord Digbies DESIGNE To Betray ABINGDON, Carryed on for divers VVeeks by an intercourse of Letters. Which are here published for the satis∣faction of all Men, BY Sergeant Major GenerallBrown. Together with the CIPHER which the Lord DIGBY sent him for that purpose. LONDON: Printed for Laurence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at the Signe of the Sugar-loaf at Temple-Bar. 1644.
To His Excellency Robert Earl of Essex, Lord Generall, &c. May it please your Excellency, THat intercourse between the Lo: Digby and my self (fed on their side with hope of prevailing, and on mine with hope of fortifying by the Defign we had upon each other) is happily (I blesse God) on our side, and with rage and fury on theirs, brought to a period. It hath been in the womb ever since the 14. of September, as soon as it was quick, I gave Your Excellency and the Committee of both Kingdoms notice of it, and ever since have (for fear of Abortion) born it with some difficulty the full time, and not miscarryed, till it grw so strong
and big, that it delivered it self. VVhen the Lord Digby savv it was born with an honest face, and nothing like the Brat which he hoped for, he presently would have made it away, by the poison of his last forged Letter, which is so full of malice, that I wonder he burst not with it, before he could have time to vent it: I do believe Spain and Italy where he hath grown, afford not a more dangerous Drug then this of his last Letter, wherein Athe∣istically and wickedly by his Forgery, he (as it were) defies the God of Heaven, and hates Truth perfectly. My Lord, were it not that I dare not conceal this mans impiety and cruelty, ex∣press'd in his last, I should be content for my own part, to conceal all his Flattery and Folly, express'd in his former Letters, But I am not my own, but the Kingdoms Servant; and therefore, though I be but a bad VVriter, I hold it my duty to give
those whom he calls my Masters (and I thank him for it) account of my VVords aswell as Actions, and I wish they could read thoughts too; it may be, when their blinded Party shall by this unworthy cariage of his, see him in his colours, they will at last pity, at least, if not rescue a Prince that makes use of such a wicked head, and subscribes to such a lying hand: And if Propositions from the Parliament thrive not, may know who is that Haman which blasts Mordecais petition: That Countenance which I have had from Your Excellency at all times, invites me, that leading example of faithfulnesse to Gods Cause and the Kingdomes safety, which shines in you, obliges me; & that dirt which is cast in some of these Letters by an impudent Clergyman upon your Name these added to that imediate cōmand your Excellency hath over me, force me to make these passages publique; and above others,
to crave Your Excellencies leave and ap∣probation to prefix this thankfull acknow∣ledgement: That as Your Excellency hath every where honored and served the Kingdom, so particularly, your influence on Abingdons necessities, hath kept warmth in us all; and for ever obliged me particularly to approve my self My Lord, Your Excellencies most humble Servant,Richard Brown.
The Lord Digbies Design to betray Abingdon. IT seems (by the Story) that when the Enemy had done what he could in the West, and was ready to return, It was fancied, That Abingdon, as weak as it was, might be made theirs again by Policy rather then Power, and my self won out of it by good words, sooner then warr'd out of it; And therefore, in September last, they made use of a spirituall Engine, one Mr. Bernard, sometimes a Preacher in London, now (as it appears) a great Clerk at Oxford; This man being my former acquaintance, by reason of some remote alliance, took opportunity, by a Trumpet, who came from thence about Exchange of Prisoners, to send me this Letter: NOble Sir, If my Name should be too light, yet for our Alliance sake, I am hold to represent to you a Request, which from you will for its own justice sake be granted, namely, to release (if priso∣ners) and to give safe Conduct, by way of Passe, to two Women, and a Childe of Mr. Doctor Dukesons, who are now in Abingdon, the one of the women is a Nurse, the other a Maid-servant. I am glad, for your own sake, and my respect also (who am grieved heartily, that we are not both of one side) that yo carry on the Party you deal in, with so much honoured candor and ingenuity. I hope God will one day reconcile all the Differences now on foot, that we may meet our friends as friends. I have had no heat, but pure consci∣ence in this contention, neither have I any ambition, then by the granting of this Request, as an addition of more to many former fa∣vours, to be acknowledged in the quality of Your most indeared and affectionate Kinsman and Brother to serve you.Nath: Bernard. Oxford, Sept. 14. 1644. Postscript. Sir, If you would grant safe Conduct to me, I would be glad to ksse your hands at Abingdon, that I may enquire of the welfare of ou Brothers and Sisters, &c. and to give you account how I was forced hither from home, and some other Passages. This I looked upon but slightly, giving him neither Passe nor Answer, finding it to be but the Language of a private, and (as I thought) obscure person, complementing with me (as far as a few Lines would go) for old acquaintance sake, and like a Divine bemoaning the Times; about a
Moneth he was quiet, and then came this second, seconded with a little more Flattery, in these words: SIr, When I wrote last unto you, I suppose I received no Answer, for the places sake whence it came; but to remove all doubt from you, when I came thither I was a prisoner, now I am removed out of it: May you be pleased to grant me a Passe to come to you; I have a Request to propose to you, which is for my safety and your Honour. And I will likewise preassure you, `tis no more then what hath been granted by my Lord of Essex and Sir William Waller both, nei∣ther of whom, you come behinde in valour, and I hope will not come short of them in Honourable Courtesie, I will not now name it, that I may not be prevented of kissing your hand, who am, for your never to bee forgotten courtesie when I last saw you at London, Your most obliged Servant,Nath: Bernard. Water-Eaton, Octob. 18. 1644. In this you see he perswades me to believe he had been a prisoner at Oxford, now set at liberty, and in another Town, from whence he dates, and again urgeth leave to come and see me, and ask a favour, which was only for his safety and my Honour to grant. Vpon this I acquainted some friends about me, with the Request, Con∣ditions, and Qualities of the man, and then sent a Passe, which brought him on our Lecture day: when he came I received him courteously; he de∣sired to Preach, but was denyed; he dined with me and some of my Officers, and at last, upon his going away, desired a word or two with me privatly, and then he falls upon the Errand (which it seems he was sent on) and wisheth me on their side, laying about him, and lavishing out his breath in paintings and flatteries at random. Now I found my good Cozen to be but the Ecclesiasticall Duck-cy, let flye from a higher Gamester, and forthwith I baited my hook as well as he his — Truly Mr. Bernard I pray for nothing more then a good Conscience; and if I thought my self in an Errour, I would not be long in leaving it. At this, the Gudgeon gaped, and I gave him line; he desires liberty to write to me, I gave it him (with a Protection of his Lady Lovelaces house at Water-Eaton from plunder and violence) and he jogg'd home jocundly to tell his Lord George how his Pill had wrought, and a few dayes after sent this to me:
NOble Sir, I am emboldned by your last great favour, and neces∣sitated by some losse, since that time you sent my Lady your Pro∣tection, not without some affright, given by some of Major Temples men, to our whole house, together with the approach (as we hear) of the Armies towards us, to desire your advice, whether the Prote∣ction you gave me will (in case the Armies come hither) keep my person free, or whither, notwithstanding that, I am in danger of being mistaken for, and used like an Enemy. The Answer whereto will yet further oblige Your most humble Servant, Nath: Bernard. Water-Eaton, Nov. 1. 1644. This Letter being occasioned, as he pretends, by some affrightments given from the great number of Parliament Souldiers who marched that way, is but a private one, and had an Answer answerable thus: SIR, The protection I sent by you to my Lady Lovelace, I pre∣sume will keep her and her family from all irregular Plunder, by any under my Command; but whether 'twill prove a security to her Ladyship, or your self from other Forces now here, or to come this way I know not, nor can I therein advise; I shall be willing to serve you in what I may: and be Your Friend and Servant, Rich. Browne. Abingdon, Nov. 1. 1644. All this while Mr. Bernard hath been scowring, screwing, and oyl∣ing his Engine; now he is resolved to charge and give fire: But his first charge for fear of breaking or recoyling, shall be only Powder and paper: Witnesse this which he let flye at me: SIR, Having received so many signall and obliging favours from you, and those, since the fate of the Kingdom hath (together with our own) made us to run contrary fortunes: I who abhorre nothing more then ingratitude, pitty nothing more then seduc'd vertue, and misplac'd Gallantry; have here as the onely way left me to testifie my thankfulnesse, so vindicated your reputation, that I beleeve your credit with us will be more pretious, then with them for whom you have hazarded all that is dear to man. For proof whereof, as I am able to produce evidence sufficient of neglect and secret scorn from some men, who owe the safety of their
evills to your valour: So, I am Commanded, to let you know,  you have with us friends that (as you are) will Honour you; but if you were otherwise, would be proud really to serve you: And that through our endeavours, you are so fairly reported to the highest. That you are desired—But i'le say no more till you answer one request; and that is, that you will promise not to betray those that Honour you, to scorn, my life to danger by discovering what my undertaking hath resolved to go on with, to preserve to you a good Conscience, a good name to future ages, and a securing with your Country and King, what God hath blest you with in this world with our friends. And I do again preassure, that by this I will engage you to no∣thing, but what Gods Word and a good Conscience and the Peace of this Kingdom do require of you: Besides what other Inducements I am to acquaint you with when you have assured me; that if through violent sway of contrary affection we should not satisfie each other; yet we shall neither through passion betray one another to scorn or danger, which is all at present I do desire, besides the continuance of the favour of safe accesse and recesse of my Messenger. I pray God blesse Your Honour with all that is good, and guide all our feet into the way of Peace. Sir, I shall ever be Your most humble Servant,Nath. Bernard. Water-Eaton, Nov. 4. 1644. Was not this pretty well for the first shoot, to ayme at the very joint, and make a division between friends? Some of those for whom you ha∣zarded all &c. Neglect you, scorn you &c. `Tis rarely begun Machi∣vell, as soon as we had received this (for I had the advice of some about me, as many as might be a full Testimony of my integrity; and yet not more then might warrant secrecy) Now we saw plainly a Plot of a Councell, and not the attempt of a single Priest only; and perceived other faces peeping behinde the Arras, waighting for the Cue to bring them out. A little before this, when their Forces were beaten at Newbery, we marched out and vexed them in their retreat; but now having relieved Dunnington, they quartered round about me; so that we all concluded upon this opportunity, by dallying and deluding, to retard their assault, ti we could get up our workes, and make out for assistance: And now w fall to our worke: He begins upon me with King, Conscience, Kingdom, Honour &c. All good Theames: I eccho back to him such of his own
ayings  would  then his own, as in this which I returned him, SIR, I give you  for the respect, I beleeve you ber him who shall ever labour  an Honourable Reputation and the way to it; I do assure you of safe accesse and recesse, being resolved to serve your desires in any thing agreeable to the Word of God and a good Conscience. Sir, be assured there is nothing I prize more then peace, nor any thing I beg more then to serve my King and Country whose I am: and Sir, Your Loving Friend and Servant, Rich. Brown. Abingdon, Nov. 5. 1644. By this my Friend thinkes verily that I have a mind to chaffer, and therefore down he pitches his pack, and brings out his small parcells of silken Rhetorick, fine and course complements, Scriptures woven at Ox∣ford, Posies for Prerogative, Ribands with Vive le Roy, and Lawn for Sleeves, which  hopes to wear himself, for by this next you will think he had his Congedeslier his black Box already, for converting me. He quotes the Kings, Excommunicates ipso facto (as he calls it) the Kingdoms, and Danes the Parliament, as confidently as if he had been Priest at Lambeth, and not Lecturer at Wooll-Church; witnesse this divine charitable composure. SIR, I am commanded to let you know that His Majesty cannot but wonder, that you who being recommended to him for many worthy parts and actions, declaring you no stranger to vertue and Noble qualities, as one no way aspersed with any infamous factions inclination in your self in times past, one whom he, nor his former Government hath ever wronged: He having never taken the Staffe of Lord Chamberlain from you, nor were you ever fined 1500. l. in the Star-Chamber, at the suit of Sir Thomas Reynolds, as the case is of Essex and Waller, (wherein yet he denies that either of them were wrong'd or injuryed) no Wife taken from you in his Fathers dayes, nor your Father beheaded in the dayes of Queen Elizabeth. That you who was never thought of so broken or low a fortune as some Scotish Reformers. That you who were so far from a Schis∣maticall spirit, that you have obliged Orthodox Divines (now his co∣sufferers) to bear you an Honourable Testimony.
That you to whom he never so much as in thought, intended other then good when occasion offer'd it self. That you whose moderation in other things hath witnessed, that you neither want valour nor cour∣tesie. That you should not onely joyn with, but lead on his Subjects armed against his Life, his Crown, and Kingdom, when he hath de∣clared with so much vehemency, and (to his knowledge) inward in∣tegrity and sincerity, his resolutions to perform all your desires con∣cerning the true Reformed Protestant Religion, and just Rights of Parliaments, the Liberty and property of his Subjects; when there is nothing left that may be desired by equall and just-dealing men; but he hath yielded to. That you should be one of them that will ne∣ver trust him, till by their meanes he be kill'd or made a Prisoner, or which is worse, such a slave as must never say (No) or [I will advise] to any thing he shall be required. He desires you to make the case your own, and to judge whether you could without defence suffer all that you have to be violently ta∣ken from you, &c. Or whether you could finde out a way that you would think, were it your case, more equall and just for you to go in. I am therfore in my way appointed to let you know, that that place Prov. 24.21. is part of that Word of God which shall one day judge the World, and doth (ipso facto) Excommunicate that Party which you are insnared with; That that place, 2 Tim. 3.5. expresly commands you to turn away from such, notwithstanding their form of Godli∣nesse: And that you are looked upon as Mordecai did on Esther, chap. 4. vers. 14. as one advanced for such an occasion as this, to restore the King to his Subjects, and his Subjects to their King. I should have come secretly to you, to have given you evidence of what I told by the last, concerning Injuries you suffer by your own side, and to have made Honourable and advantagious Propositions to you, both for your own and the Kingdoms good, with the way of assurance; But though your Letter did infinitely adde to you; Yet the newes of hanging some of ours at Abingdon hath stopt my Com∣mission, and somewhat daunted my resolution to the present. Onely I would pray you to furnish with a reasonable account in your de∣fence, Sir, your most faithfull Servant,Nath: Bernard. Nov. 8. 1644. Had it not been that we saw a direct necessity of whilng with him, This Letter (which they made bitter with those Ingredients to try how it would worke) had made me breake off with such an unsufferable Rab∣sheca, but on we went and I returned this:
SIR, Tis true, I never countenanc'd, but ever abhorr'd all Facti∣on, nor do or shall I side with any contemning lawfull authority, neither can I beleeve that revenge is the cause why the Lord Gene∣rall, or Sir William Waller are in Armes, I am assured they as my selfe have no other ends but the Kings and Kingdoms good, and am confi∣dent the Parliaments aymes are the same, and will appear so in the end, otherwise I should turne my sword against them, or any that should seke His Majesties life, or to imprison His person; I shall in nothing more willingly adventure mine, then in rescuing Him in both; shll chearfully hearken after all honourable and advantagi∣ous Propositions which may prove my own and the Kingdoms good. I deny that any of your party in Abingdon have been hang'd, nor shall any, except by Order of Parliament; I have alwayes given or∣der for christian usage of all prisoners with me, and wish you would do the like by ours. Sir, you have twice fill'd your Letters to me with Riddles, which till you make plain to my understanding I will say no more, I am, Sir, Your loving Friend and Servant,Rich. Brown. Abingdon, Novemb. 11. 1644. Postscript. Sir, I hold it unsafe for your self to come any more to me, your last being here was much distasted. I must desire the Reader to know, that now all my Letters went to His Majesties eye (as their Letters afterward tell me) and must necessari∣ly carry seeming answers to demands, and therefore my hardest taske was to compile innocent words, such as would carry double, with some seeming satisfaction, such as these: My design in hand: I hope to bring all to passe as I desire: Settle my affies at London: What I have un∣dertake, I will perform &c. All which are but new Anagrams of my old resolutions which I was much afraid they would finde out, and therefore tooke the advantage of working hard, and a day or two after, heard from him in these, NOble Sir, This is the last time I will trouble you with any ge∣neralls, which you are pleased to call Riddles; And since you thinke it not safe for my self to wait on you: I am commanded to entreat you would expresse your doubts and feares on one side, and your hopes and desires on th'other, viz. The motives whereupon you engaged so much worth as we finde in you in the present action; that if we can give you no satisfaction, we may suspect our selves to have gone amisse.
To this end I am further to beseech you to assure safe accesse and recesse to a discreet third person, that shall wait upon your Honor for those purposes which I have already intimated, whereby you shall perceive how much I have laboured to evidence that your favour have inviolably obliged Your most humble Servant,N. Bernard. Water-Eton, Nov. 15. 1644. Postscript. I have authority to tell you, and you shall speedily and exactly finde it made good to you, that there is no just or reasonable thing you can propose, in which you shall not be satisfied. Now he begins to leave off single selfing of it, and Wee's it by authori∣ty, asking me the lowest price of Abingdon and my self, and thus being a slave himself, he ventures to buy and sell Abingdon, and Conscience, and Faith, &c. Methought his-part was a pretty long one, but he tar∣ries two Scenes longer before any other enters, so I was faine to personate still as followes. SIR, My doubts and feares on one side, and my hopes on th'other, are various as the motives which first engaged me in this present Action, If there be any thing of Secrecy in our Letter discourses, I conceive it unsafe to admit a third man. I am glad you promise me to deale no longer in generalls, a thing desired, I shall conclude with your own words, That there is no just or reasonable thing you can propose, in which you shall not be satisfi∣ed, more I will not say at present but that I am Your humble Servant,Rich. Brown Abingdon, Nov. 16. 1644. My deniall of a third man which I conceived would make them sus∣pect me lesse, pretending the danger of it, (though my maine ayme was not to meddle in any thing but what was under their hands) made them confident, and bid a little higher, as in this: SIR, Since you have given me leave to deale with you in particu∣lars, I must begin with you upon this Foundation; That you do believe (or will be so just, as to shew reasons to the contrary) the sa∣tisfactions whereof shall make faith of the Professions and Protesta∣tions made by the King of his Resolutions to defend the true reform∣ed Protestant Religion established by Law, the Liberty and Property
of his Subjects and just Priviledges of PARLIAMENT. And then that you will be so far from opposing him in this, that you will, like a good Christian and a good Subject, assist him therein; And that you may know how good an opinion His Majesty hath of you, if he may know your resolution by me, you shall be left to your own election in what way you will serve Him for the present, either in Abingdon, or by finding some meanes to remove to London, or by imediatly comming over to Him, you best knowing which way He may receive most advantage by your service. And for your Recompence, you shall be a Barone, Have any other Testimony of His Majestes favour aud value of you, and any place of trust your self shall propose, and what other reward you shall desire within His Majesties power to grant. The truth is I finde (as I have before intimated) that though you are looked on here as a shrewd enemy, yet you are valued as one who carries himself most like a Gentleman, and who proceeds more civi∣ly then any of that party, although Sir William Waller told our Lord Generalls Lady when he sent Her home hither t' other day, having been his prisoner, she were best to go such a way about, least she fell into the hands of that Rogue Browne, who would use Her like a Clowne. You will pardon this intimation which proceeds from my respects of you, and to assure you that this proceeds not from some private heat only betwixt your honor and the Knight, but from the naturall in∣gratitude of that party, I have sent you here enclosed a Copy of the Lord Sayes Letter written with his own hand, whereby you may guesse at your future respects with them you now defend to your own, and the hurt of s all. I will trouble you no further at present then to assure you, there is one only third person privy to this, who hath full authority to under∣take for His Majesty, and who is Honorable and so honest that he will see all particulars performed, I am still Sir, Your most obliged Servant, N. Bernard. Nov. 19. 1644. Postscript Sir, if you desire it, I shall help you to other Letters written by the same Lords hand hereafter; requesting that they may be returned if it shall bee desired: Whilst I am writing, the Letter is for some other purposes, remanded to be conveyed to Banbury, but I assure you of thm, if you shall distrust me at present, though the want of them hath retarded the messenger two dayes.
I pray God make you ours, with— your will. I pray God keep you from being ours, against your will. This was done artificially, one while he stroakes me with promises from Oxford; presently he pricks me with wrongs done at London; but as th'one pleased me not, so th'other troubled me not: I conquered the flat∣tery of the one, and owned not the injury of th'other, But seeing now be quotes a third Honourable customer authorized by the King to cheapen me; I thought it good for our workes sake which more wanted time, to bid that man of Honour welcome into my warehouse too; and slighting Bernards offers, as being to little, sent him this. SIR, It will be needlesse to give any Reply to that foundation you begin with, which must necessarily be involved in the Issue of this our Treaty; nor as yet to pitch upon any particular way, wherei my service may be most advantagious; since they to whom I resign my self, may dispose of me to what shall be thought fit. And although I am not sway'd by mercenary respects; yet I look∣ed for a greater Argument of that Estimation you say I am in with you, then the proposed reward, which doth not equalize what I am: And that I urge nothing my self, you must attribute to that ne∣cessary discretion which ought to be in a businesse of so great con∣sequence. I shall proceed no further at present, then to desire immediate in∣tercourse, with that Honourable person you mentioned, that from him I may have more speciall grounds of assurance in that whereon I adventure so much. I am asham'd at the ingratitude and contempt you acquaint me withall, from them of whom I have deserved better: And desire for my more full satisfaction, you will send me the originall of those Letters you speak of, which may prove of singular advantage; and which I asure you, shall be returned by the same Messenger. I am Sir Your assured Friend and Servant,Rich. Brown. Abingdon, Nov. 22. 1644. My Lord Digby having now his properties all on, and himself ready to issue forth, makes Bernard write once more, desiring (what I was re∣solved not to yield to) Secrecy: That so in case he acted not well, and his part did not take; he might not be hist off; but go out like a mute in a maske: So saith this of the 25. of Novemb.
NOble Sir, My desire to expresse how dearly my engagements from you stick to me, I have done what I could to your advan∣tage on this side, whereon to live or dye o my Conscience is the only way to be (caereris paribus) safe Temporall and Eternally. To satisfie your desire of intercourse with that Honourable per∣son immediately, there wants nothing but your Answer to that re∣quest in plainer tearmes, which I made the 4. of Nov. Namely, whe∣ther we may be confident in case of non-satisfaction to either party, we may mutually trust one anothers silence, which is promised withall assurance upon our side; and such a promise from your word (to satis∣fie you how much we value your word) shall be sufficient; Which done, you shall receive both parts of your demands. For the Letters of the Lord Sayes, I could at present send but the enclosed, th'other being now at presse or lent out, which you shall have from me as soon as may be, I pray return this again by this bearer: The other of your desires we are upon the return to this ready to satisfie the very next day: I am Your most humble Servant,Nath. Bernard. Nov. 25. 1644. At this very time Prince Rupert and his forces came neer and fac'd us, and we (though then very weak) drew out a party, upon which he march∣ed away; and I took boldnesse from that in my Answer, to be peremptory and stand upon it, that I feared them not in these words. SIR, In seriously urging that point of Secrey, you do but seem seriously to question my discretion, since that my Life and Fortunes are engaged in the discovery, and you nor any other can run any considerable hazard. Besides that, it is unreasonable to expect from me, that promise which may so deeply ensnare me in case intentions on yuor side were lesse answerable to expressions; and in that particular, my Iealousie must be excused, since whilst you Treat with me in Letters, your Forces are advancing to sudden attempt of our Garrison which we prepare for as much as we fear little: I am resolved never by any demand, to make my self lyable to a refusall; what Propositions come from your pat, must be dispatch'd and confirmed with the highest security: By this you may understand my meaning. And so, whilst I am in the power of my own choice, I leave it to
yours, whether suddenly and fully to proceed, or immediate  break off: and so rest Your very Loving Friend and Servant,Rich. Brown. Abingdon, Nov. 25. 1644. Postscript, I have returned the enclosed which you sent for, which I thank you, and desire a sight of the rest, which shall be  faithfully restored. This oy cariage made the Gentleman come on, and my Lord  to the hazard, and now both at once, the Goshauke and the Kistrell, fly at me with great fiercenesse. Witnesse these: NOble Sir, I have at length sent you th'other part of your de∣sires, neither have my tendernesses; and with them some de∣layes, been without a design for the Honourable, and especially the safe conveyance of this Negociation: I have foreseen all things here that probably might be dangerous, before I would too far have en∣gaged you, that if there had been any appearance of ill, or unfaith∣fulnesse; I might he forewarn'd you escaped: But of this I hope more opportunely and more nearly. But now Sir, I dare safely engage my life, that the'nclosed con∣tains no more then what you may build upon; Neither would I have you stand upon any nice Punctilio of greater Honour at prese for I am promised (though you are not yet to be acquainted with  that you shall be denyed no just request, nor kept back from any Ho∣nour you can imagine your self capable of; But there must be a con∣sultation and provision against envy towards your self, and an opini∣on of neglect which others may take upon it. The King is infinitely taken with your Letters, and beleeves a great deale of worth in you, insomuch, that he professeth a greater minde to your self, then your Garrison, desiring rather to have you his own, then that; I hope you will help him to both, and in both, to his own. Sir, What hath been long in preparing, must be speedy in Execu∣tion, you have Examples to evidence delayes dangerous; that per∣son who speaks to you in the enclosed, hath prevented many forcible designes upon. Abingdon, and the often stages of them, will run him or your selfe into suspiton; I pray consider the wayes of gaining such Friends, and such a side as you will never repent just joyning o. I pray for your own Credits sake, withall, cause the Gray Gel∣ding
which was taken from Mr. Th Hth to be turned: He is in your Secretaries power: I am confident you were misinformed concerning the Horses imployment, upon any part against you; I shall take the Gentlemans word before any ordinary mans, or stran∣gers oath: I know that for the recovery of ten Horses, he could not be hired to a lye And he protests the Horse was never in any service at all. He received your Passe and I think Protection too; Let them be dearer with your Honour, then the satisfying their mindes that have him. I am Your most humble Servant,Nath. Bernard. Nov. 28. 1644. This should have been with you last night, but that I was out of Towne. The enclosed mentioned in the last, was from the Lord Digby, which speakes thus: SIR, Having had a sight of your severāll Letters to your worthy Kinsman concerning the late Negociation between you, I finde in them so much franknesse, so much reason, and so much of a Gentle∣man, that I should think my self aulty to all those, should I in any wise doubt your sincerity, or forbeare out of any further Scruples to own my part in what you have received from him. I shall not enter into any Argument with you to alter your judge∣ment from the Tenents of that party, to which you have formerly ad∣hered, since I conceive you too worthy a man to have proceeded thus far had not that conversion been already wrought. And therefore all that I shall apply my discourse to, shall be to give you the assurance (which you may rely upon) of His Majesties great sense and value of your disposition to his service, which I assure you is so much upon those handsome expressions which he hath seen of it in your Letters, that he doth not so much prize the gaineing of such a place as Abingdon, as such a person as you to his service and not so much a Recompence for the one, as encouragement to the other; I have full authority to assure you, That your declaring for him, and putting such of his Force into Abingdon as may secure you in it after such a Declaration: You shall receive His Majesties Commission for the Government of that place; For the Commnd (if you desire it) of a Brigade in His Majesties Army, and a Warrant to be a Baronet:
This for the present till I shall be more particular informed by , whether your inclinations may point at any other more proper testi∣mony of his Majesties favour. In the meane time, I shall only adde this, that for reasons well co∣cerning your safety in this Negociation (in which all proractio are dangerous) as His Majesties service: It is desired that there  be suddenly a small conclusion of this businesse, and if possible, by Sunday next: The particular wayes whereof, I shall expect direction in from you; And for my own particular, I shall desire you to re∣member that among all the imputations which His Majesties enemies have cast upon me, I have never been blasted with a faileing in my word or honor; And I pray be confident, I shall not begin with you, who over and above the usefullnesse which I promise my self of you in my Masters and the Kingdoms businesse, have begoten in me  very sincere desire of seeing you in a capacity for me to avow my self. Your affectionate Servant,George Digby. Oxford, Nov. 27. 1644. No sooner had I read my Lords, but forthwith I sent away to the Committee of both Kingdoms, with reasons why I deal thus, and must still, entreating help to be sent speedily, with directions how to carry on, and when to break of this delusion: In the Interim for feare of any Plot within the Town (which I had cause to suspect) I called in all whom I knew to be dangerous, to take the Covenant, those who denyed, I sent a∣way Prisoners, and warn'd in the whole Town the week following, who tooke it, but I writ backe this answer the next day after I had received theirs. SIR, I cannot but be apprehensive of your tendernesse to my self, and your discretion in all respects through the whole persuit of this affaire, which now deserves, that I ingeniously professe, there shall be no Punctilio (as you have wisely admonish't) put any de∣mur upon my present resolutions, for the truth is, I value not an Ho∣norable Tittle, in respect of a just Tittle to an Honorable reputation, and (which I hope ere long, freely and confidently to avouch) His Majesties favour. That our Negotiation hath been (as you intimate) a prevention to any forcible design against us I rejoyce, For when His Majesty shall peaceably possesse this Garrison, it will easily appear how much bloud by this means hath been preserved for more seasonable service: The
enclosed I commend to your trusty care, in expectation of the event, whereof I rest, Your loving friend & Servant,Rich. Brown. Abingdon, Nov. 28. 1644. MY Lord, I account it no small Honour, that any action of mine should receive from your Lordship so favourable an interpre∣tation; and shall alwayes esteem it my greatest happinesse, to be thought capable to do His Majesty service. What Expressions soever have fallen from me which your Lord∣ship may have taken notice of, I shall make good to the utmost of my power; And have received so full satisfaction from your Lordships assurance (as concerning the scope of your Letters) that there is now nothing wanting to an absolute conclusion between us, saving a speedy provision of my affairs at London, which will be immediatly taken or∣der for; so soon as I may adventure a trusty messenger thither, which I presume your Lordship will hold reasonable, and so I rest, Your honors most humble Servant,Rich. Brown. Who would thinke that can read any thing, that ever this wise and learned Lord and his Chaplin, who are such notable painters, themselves should be conened with painted Graps, and admire an empty counterfeit∣ed shape, as if there were something behinde it. I professe I expected they should finde me in my Answers to say (as I did) so many new nothings, and send me the next message by their Army: Yet they fall in love with those shaddows I sent them, and follow those shaddows with mighty earnestnesse, as in these. SIR, The expressions of your last Letter to my self, and your wor∣thy Kinsman, added to the former Characters which I have receiv∣ed of your worth, have raised such an assurance in me, that I am no more capable of the least distrust of you, and I shall not deceive you, to let you know, that His Majesty is possest with the same confidence, so that you are looked upon now, as one wholly devouted to His ser∣vice, and with so much consideration of your person and abilities, that we cannot but promise our selves yet greater advantages by them then those that are present in view. It is very just and reasonable, That you should provide in the best manner that the condition of affairs will allow, for what concerns
your fortune at London, and I hope you have not wholy neglected that all this while. But I must conjure you, that you will use all possible expedition in bringing our businesse to a finall conclusion, for it would be an ex∣tream grief to me, to be an occasion of misfortune to you; And you cannot be ignorant, how dangerous suspence is in things of th ∣ture, especially where prejudices and jealousies are once broken , as (by the Letter which was sent you, and by some discourses which to my knowledge the Committee let fall at their being here) it is m∣fest they are towards you: Besides that, the pressures of our Mili∣tary men here for some enterprize, either for the taking or blocking up of that place, are daily such as I suffer much by opposing them And it will be impossible for me to divert them long without ac∣quainting some with the true reason of my opposition, whom I am re∣solved not to trust with such a secret. Wherefore I do most earnestly desire you in your next, to assigne me (if you can possibly) a certain time, that I may procure some di∣version of our designes during that, and that you would also frank∣ly let me know what your sway and interest with your own men is likely to be upon that alteration; and what way it will necessary to assist you with His Majesties Forces, that they may be dispossed of ac∣cordingly. I shall not need to recommend to so discreet a person two Cati∣ons, the one to beware of admitting any new Forces into your Gar∣rison from the Parliament that my master your power: The other, to be sure to have some trusty person still by you, as in case you should discover any design within against you, may give instant notice  ther, with the way to rescue you; This is the last that I shall adven∣ture unto you barefac'd, therefore for future correspondency, I have sent you the enclosed Cipher which I hope I shall not longe make use of to disguise my being. Your very affectionate friend and Servant,George Digby. Oxford, Dec. 1. 1644.
His Lordships Cypher before mentioned.
Another Letter of M. Bernards which came at the same time with the former. Noble Sir. SInce you have now immediate Intercourse I shall need so much the lesse to trouble you, I am now commanded to lett you know that whereas we have certaine information that there are forces and pi∣sion comming to reinforce your Garrison, Iealousies fall heavy upon your unfained Freinds for what they have already done and an impos∣sibility to sustaine themselves without giving an account to Prince Ru∣prt, and some others of the present businesses, if they withold the Acts of Hostility any longer. Sir, I should not be my selfe if I should not ingage my selfe for your fidelity, you cannot imagine the advantages you will meet with in the Execution of the businesse you know, what acclamations popu∣lar, what favour from the King, what freinds and servants that all the Bells in London can never decry your Honour much lesse equall it: I shall greive at nothing more then at the prevention of all, which can∣not be without your great dishonor, of whom we all thinke good, and in whom we thinke is the Seat of most honorable & discreet thoughts, Sir I am Your Honors most humble Servant N. BERNARD. What rckoning is here without my ! By Lord is possest, and , a that must eds follow (though in manners it should goe before) the King  possest too, that I am for his service. Truly I am possest , but not in his Lodship sense, I am and ever was for his Majesties ser∣vice, onely now they dsire expedition: and to effect it. His Lorship  th Commissioners who mnt thher for peace (and thrfore not  to him) for scattering words as Iealous of mee and my actions, which is as true as the Letter which hee sends mee at last. I hope ths mn of  will consider him accordingy. But to shew his Confidence, behold a cip enclosed in his Letter which I must learne to conjure by. But not without the Parliaents  and therfore sent that up after the rest and top't his mouth the whilst  this empty Spoone—. And Bernardwi t his—
My Lord. YOur last  the first of December, came not to my hands till this afternoone which something  mee, And my answer, though it bring with it some Ru, yet I hope will not alter your Lordships favourable opinion, The truth is that last Saturday night there came to us 1500 Foote by order of the Comittee of both Kingdomes with provisions of victlls &c. which I admire at, since it could not be imagined but that ayd which I had before, of whom by their Order I gave account in a mster Role but the last weeke, were sufficiently able to defend this place. These additionall Forces being a commanded partie out of my Lord Generalls, my Lord of , and the City, (with whom I am not yet well acquainted) mst of necessity red the businesse: And herein your Lordships advice by the Ciphes you sent me will be requi∣site. The maine, concerning my owne affaires at London I doe hasten; nor shall any private interests take me off from my resolutions: I am, my Lord, Your Honours most humble Servant,Rich. Browne. Abingdon Decem. 4. 1644. The Major Generalls Letter in answer to the last from Bernard. THose jealousies you speak of, which arise amongst you since these new forces came to me, are but jealosies, and must out o that fi∣delitie you put in me be blown over by your policie, till an opportuni∣tie (which I wait for) sette all right. The truth is, there came last Saturday by order from above 1500 more foot and provisions to me, of which I have given account in the enclosed, and shall expect advice in. I should not be my selfe, if I should owne those applauses you talke of, as charmes that can move me: And I wonder that you (knowing me so well) should thinke them weightie. No, it is not popular ac∣clamation on the one side, or feare of any acts of hostilitie on the o∣ther, but onely the discharge of an honest and loyall conscience whch hath invited me into this course which I now run. And these for the present I assure you of faithfully I am. Your loving friend and Servant,Rich. Brown. Abindon Decem. 4. 1644.
THese Forces which I tll them of, were now come to me, and therefore I send tem Wod their number; and pretend they came unexpect, and I had no need of them, and now my affaires at London (which ex∣pression dd m Knights service) Were pretty wel setled: yet having  Directions when to break off I dandled them one on one knee, and the other on the other. But in their nex they begin to uspect, yet not by my Letters; but  scruples bubble up they know not why and ere resolved  to chme  Wha m all I am mde on. For this purpose my L hath hi, and Bernard his device: my Lord desires time and mnner to b told him, and desires  now to send him some blanke passes. Bernard be scars me with the knavery of the Messenger, how he opd my Leter, and what danger might insue, giving an hint by this, that now all would out, or might miscarry, if I did not dispatch Thus they write. The Lord Digbies Letter. Sir, I Have receaved Yours of the Fourth, unto which all the answer I can returne is, that I am glad of your Confidence that our Iealousies con∣cerning your remove from tha Government, (raised in us upon seve∣rall intelligences from London) are vaine, however I pray carry in me∣mory those cautions which I gave you in my last, and I shall be very glad to receive a more particular answere unto those Queries in it, con∣cerning the time and manner of Your performing your ingagements. In which (however delayes are apt to suggest suspitions) I protest I cannot intertaine the least, of your reality being founded according to your professions upon reason and loyalty, and a convinc'd and confirm'd sense of the Pious Intentions of Your Soveraigne towards the good of his people, Towards the happinesse of which in the set∣tlement of the miserable distrctions of the Kingdome, I know not any man hath more power to contribute then your selfe by this Action, And I reckon it as a singular good fortune to bee made an Instrument in it, and ir, Your very affectionate ServantGeorge Digbye Oxford this 6 of Dec. 1644. Postcript I may be destitute sometimes of meanes to convey unto you what may be fitt for you to know, And therefore you shall doe very well to favour me with a blanke passe or two, which upon my Credit shall not be made use of but to your selfe,
Bernard Letter at the same time. Sir, I Am to thanke you as well for your reprehensions as favouurs. And I must tell you, I kuow you too well to thinke you unworthy, but the messenger that brought this dayes message, was so bold as to break open my Letter for the Passe enclosed: And but that I have certain as∣surance, that no body but the Messenger and my selfe, (whom I have taken order to make sure for blabbing this good while) he might have done mischiefe to our undoing. I beseech you make use of the persons I send upon the present occasions, and know that I make no change but upon reason and good grounds. Sir, put a period to our expectations I beseech yo, and put us not to the paine to be doubted, not your selfe to the danger. He who loving∣ly invites you to your duty, will be able as well to repaire your losses as to honour your well deservings, besides the heavenly blessing and pro∣tection which will certanly out-doe your care to your content. An. Example wherof you may have (I thanke God Almighties providence Sir, Your most obliged Servant,N. Bernard. December 5. 1644. You see the  d their st, it was hrd passing and repassing from London, and I had yet no rules wha to doe, therefor still I hl up their Chnnes in a moe plausible answer, for feare hey should sinke themselves, and I not have the drowning of them; and once more closed with them in these expressins, taking no notice of my Lord desire of blanks at all. My Lord, YOurs of the last came to my hands this afternoone, which inti∣mate some grounds of Jealousies through some late intelligence of my removall from this Garrison, a thing which may not sinke in∣to my thought: for I cannot Imagine (much lesse do know of) any grounds to suspect my calling off, and the confidence I have of my selfe here assures me that it will not be easie for me to be snatcht hence. And as concerning your Lordships Querie, I must confesse these new forces are not a little troublesome, and do wholly take from mee the possibility of pointing, either at time, or manner, at present. But I do notwithstanding perceive, that in a short time I may gain ground upon all difficulties, and bring this affaire to a happy period. And of this your Lordship may be most assured that I shall consecrate what power or Capacity I have, whereby to promote the service of
my Soveraigne, and the good of his oppressed people. And to that end shall most gladly sacrifice both my selfe and fortunes, and remaine, my Lord Your Honors most humble ServantRichard Browne. Abingdon, Dec. 6. 1644. A Letter to Bernard at the same time. Sir, YOur knowledge of me shall still be for the better as shall ere long, (God willing) appeare, only my reprehensions as you call them, came not till now. That you should use a Messenger whose hand and tongue and heart should not bee wholly yours, especially in things of this nature troubles me not a little, and may make all miscarry. There∣fore above all be carefull to silence him a while, and ile promise you this accident (which may boade dangers) shall hasten my resolutions into a speedy, and I hope happy issue. And in the quickning me on through all oppositions, I shall make use of that good expression of yours, That my confidence is' that gracious Majesty which invited me to my duty will beare me out, and be able as well to repaire my losses, as to honour my well deser∣vings. Sir, my desired ends are followed with such a resolved heart, that you shall not need to write any more incitements, or make use of a Messenger, unlesse in things which my Lord shall thinke of mo∣ment, in which I shall expect to be acquainted, that so I may know the better how to act. Sir believe the integrity of Your loving friend,Rich. Browne. AbingdonDecem. 6. 1644. Exit Bernard, and he thinks with great applause, laving his Ma∣ster ad m hand to hand, who though h tels me every time of hi con∣fidence, yet had muh adoe to hold up his hopes; for from the sixth to the
fiftenth he walkes and breathes: and I would have wager'd my Game∣ster woud have struck no more; yet at last he ventures another spirt, and snds the old Messenger againe with this. SIR, HAving seene your desires in your last to your Kinseman, that hee would use no more incitements, as being unnecessary to a per∣son so well resolved in his Majesties service: And being for mine own part fuly perswaded of the realitie o your intententions, I have been unwilling to presse the prformance of your ingagements, so as to give you the least cause to susect want of confidence in mee. And therefore I have forborne this long to send to you, although I as∣sure you I am in danger of suffering much by the delay. But now I suppose after so long a forbearance, you cannot but thinke it reasonable (I being also commanded to doe it, that I desire of you a potive resolution, as to the time and manner of your per∣forming that, which as it imports so much good to the publike, so will give you assurance to a higher degree than hath yet been men∣tioned, both of his Majesties intentions to obliege you, and of my most reall desires to manifest my selfe, Your affectionate Servant,George Digby. Oxford. Decem. 15. 1644. I was glad to see my despairing Customr; who was gone out of sight, come backe againe, which he dth, and bis me the other crowne. The King will doe more for me then was yet promised &c. Bernard like a Chickin not of the right kinde, is cow'd out of the Pit. This Ccke of the Game still stas peking and billing, and by his last, I found might with a little streaking hold out about or two longer.
And beause I wuuld bring Bernard on againe, and necke them both together, I crumbled hm a few Barley cornes more, and sent these. My Lord. YOur Honour cannot conceive how much I am quickned by your Letter to the performance of that, which I am resolved to goe through with, if time and instruments were but once fit. I wish y letter to my Kinsman unwritten, rather then that it should speake any thing which might hinder your Lordships necessary influence unt it be accommodated to my minde. My Lord, I did begin by the silence of this last weeke to coniecture that His Maiestie (as I heare) having sent Propositions up tending to a Peace, might make you lesse to hasten this about Abbingdon, however I am the same which I exprest my selfe in my last to your Lordship, only your Honours owne words, that that which I am to performe imparts so much good to the Publike, may (being of so much moment) both excuse and beg a little more time. And for the mannner, the yet concealement of it for some few dayes will produce me more advantage, not onely in this of Abing∣don, but other places than you can yet imagine: And then I shall suddenly bring that to passe, which I am confident shall convince your Lordship that these delayes were necessarie. In the mean while if I may receive any thing of your Lordships pleasure which may command me, I am Your Honors humble Servant RICHARD BROVVNE. Abingdon Decem. 16. 1644.
Another Letter to Mr. Bernard at the same time. Sir, MY loving respects to you, &c. I have received another Letter from my Lord, and have returned this inclosed, which I hope may give satisfaction; one from your self should have been welcome; for I would not be mistaken, that I desired your forbearance altoge∣ther, but only to let you know, that both for my judgement and af∣fections I had satisfaction enough to carry me on, without any more of your Rhetorick, which yet I may not forget to thank you for. Sir, I desire my humble service may by your tongue as my hand be presented to his Lordship: for which, and other favours of yours, un∣till I see you, you must be contented to take thanks from the Pen of Sir, Your assured friend to serve you,Richard Browne. Abingdon Decemb. 16 1644. 12 at night. I could not with all this luring recover my learned Cousin, who smelt powder like a Wildegoose, and flies quite away; but his Lordship, in as much as he was better dieted, was longer breath'd. Next day he at me againe, telling me, this is the last time of asking, and I must now speak, or for ever hereafter hold my peace. You will finde he burnes dim and is in the scket by this sudden flashing. The Lord Digbies Letter. Sir, I have received your of yesterday, but truly lesse satisfaction with it then I expected, which (together with the accident lately hapned) hath put it out of my power to preserve in another that reliance upon your reality which I am apt to hve. For as I ever dl with much sincerity my selfe, so I am not sub∣ject to suspect others of the contrary. The accident lately hapned, is the taking and hanging of a Spie of yours, which hath raised suspiti∣ons of you beyond the power of my allaying, your actions only can do it now. In a word, if in return of this I may hear from you what and when you will do in plaine termes, all and more then hath been promised shall be performed. If not, I am clear from any misfortune that may
befall you, for which I shall be very sorry, as having great dispositions prepar'd in me, to be Your affectionate friend and servant,George Digby. OxfordWednesday 18 Decemb. 1644. Had it been possible, I would have reprieved him yet a little, till I could have had directions, but our works were now ready, and our men in some plight, and 'twas pitty he should dye a timely death. We concluded therefore to go to sentence, and to bring him to execution, which I did in this fatall answer, and the rather, because they had hang'd a poore woman whose blood lies upon them, a woman whom e never knew nor heard of. My Lord, YOur just diffidence hath broke the shell, and hatcht now at length my just defiance, and your designe, which with much adoe I have perswaded to the uppermost round, is now fit to be turn'd off. Is it possible that your Lordship (my Lord Digby) should think his oyle so artificially mixt with his inke as not to betray its flattery, or that it could catch like Birdlime? Alas my Lord, perswading your selfe thus, you declare to the world, that 'twas honour and courtship that was the prevailing argument to fetch your Lordship out of that honorable House where once you sate, but it shall never lure a meaner man out of Abington. My Lord, let this Letter be the Cipher to all my former; reade them over againe, and see whether they do not all breath, both in word and sense, loyalty to his Majesty, and yet full resolution to go through with what I have undertaken; and for the designe which I mention so much, I thank yours which first gave life to it, it is perfected my Lord, it is perfected, and you may come when you will. The designe was to play with you at your own game, till our works (which once were not so strong as you have now made them, though at the weakest should have been lined with our lives) were strengthned and accommodated with men and provisions, which I thank God now they are, and therefore I do acquit your Lordship of all misfortune that may befall me. Oh my Lord, be more tender of the Kings honours and favours then thus to hang them out as Colours to invite treachery and disloy∣alty to come after them; I blesse God I have in this whole action been carefull to avoide tampering with his Majesty in things of this
nature: and for that often practised plot of yours, and that Iesuited kinsman of mine, to sow jealousies between those who imploy me and my actions (which shall dare to look the world in the face) leave it my Lord leave it, 'tis thread-bare and rotten: and in confidence that I have now written what your Lordship looks for; in which if you have not full satisfaction, but shall scruple at any thing, if your Lordship shall please to send once more, I doe assure your Honour, your Messenger shall come and returne safe; for who knows but that your Lordship (in whom there is so much ingenuity) may not onely now reade me right in my intentions, but also hereafter give me thanks for my reality. I am my Lord Your honours most humble servantRichard Browne. Abington 19 Decemb. 1644. Postscript. My Lord you have hang'd (as you say) a Spie of mine whom I know not; but that you may be ballanc'd in this also, this very mor∣ning I will cause to be hang'd one of yours, condemned by our Coun∣cell of war six weeks since, according to an Ordinance of Parliament, resolving never to be out done by you either in civility or Iustice. I expected that after this doome read to him, the offender should have made his confession, wrung his hands, praid good people to forgive him, begg'd the benefit of his book, warn'd others to take heed by his example, &c. But behold he raves and talkes idely, and fomes at mouth such frothy forgeries and poore lies, as argue he had no memory left in him. I ap∣peale to all his friends who shall reade these two last (yet one is more like a Gentlemans hen the other) what they think of his Lordship, whether he be a Christian or no. They be these, Sir, I Shall make use of the liberty which you allow me to send to you once more, I professe I am very sorry to finde my wishes and my hopes of your returning to your duty and loialty in such a usefull manner to the publike as you might have done, deceived, but my confidence I assure you, you have not abused, for I seldome ground it but upon great probability of the persons integrity with whom I deale; a foundation which I could not well look for, from a person that had already forfeited his allegiance: and you must excuse me from belie∣ving, that what you have done now proceeds from any firmenesse to
your owne principles in that which you your selfe think honest, (how erroneously soever) but rather from some new and greater corruption of interest on that side, then what was proposed unto you on this, whereof I make no doubt but the world will be a right Iudge, when by the publishing what hath passed between us, it shall appear how industriously and how mercenarily you long courted your own cor∣ruption before I ever provoked you to it, and offer'd to you those re∣wards which I did, as to a prostituted, not solicited person, who hence forwards must necessarily be infamous of all sides; on this, both sr treason and treachery; on th'other, for having with solemne re∣nuntiations of what you now seem to think honest, so long acted a part whereunto no man can be tempted, without infamy, so far as you went uninvited, unlesse upon a sincere alteration of judgement, which no provocation can make me so uncharitable, as not to wish still most heartily to you and all your party, and then I shall againe subscribe my selfe Your friend to serve you George Digby. Oxon this of Decemb. 1644. The Lord Digbies last Letter. Worthy Colonell Browne, IN the first place I must extreamly lament the unlucky burning (by chance) of the Cipher, wherein all my former Letters, but only those which were meant sor your well-serv'd masters supervizing, were written; whereby I am constrained to venture these mysteries without a vaile, which I should not have done, but that the necessity of this instant time presseth it; and that I am as confident as I can be of any thing, that this will come safe to your hands. In the next place, I must chide you for hazarding in your Cousin Bernards packet that other paper of yours, which was so little meant for his sight. But your Letter of defiance which I read out to him, made him so mad, that he observed not my Cleanly Conveyance away of the Treasure within it. For truly I cannot give any other name to that which conteined so admirable contrivance and dispo∣sition of the principall Scene of our Act. You know my opinion from the beginning, that I valued Abington but as a sleight part of those services (which if your reputation and
trust with your masters could bee by any act upheld) his Majesy might expect from a person of your dexterity and interests; and therefore I willingly consented to the designe of seeming to make those with whom you were to improve the confidence of you, privy to all our Negotiations with me, though with the inconvenience of making the Surrender of Abington somewhat more difficult, and lesse seasonable by the delay. But I must confesse to you, with an unfained pleasure, to be so ex∣celd, that it was beyond my skill to finde out such a way (as that which you resolve on, by blowing up so artificially your Magazine) to make Abington the Kings upon such Conditions, as mght let you march away unsuspected and unblemisht in your power, to doe his Majesty those greater services aymed at by you. I will enlarge no further, then to assure you, that the time and houre upon the blazing signe given, shall be punctually observed ac∣cording to your agreement, with our incomparable Engineer Beck∣man, whose escape so artificially and so unsuspectedly, as to your having any hand in it hath succeeded even to a Miracle. In case there should aise any difficulty unforeseene in the course proposed, and that there should need a nearer approach of our Forces, either for assault or surprize, direct your pleasure to Beckman, by the conveyance agreed on by you, and it shall be punctually executed; for there is no roome for distrust when there are such Hostages given; of which take it upon my word, the one (your friend) shall be a kindely used as in your owne house, and the other as safely kept for you as in your owne coffers. I must not conclude without admiring your incomparable Letter of defiance, which as if it were to prevent the scornes being first put upon me at London, I have in great rage caused to be printed here with my Eloquent Answer, which I send you here inclosed, to be pre∣sented (with moderate insulting) unto your masters, to whom certainly the world could not have furnished you with a pleasanter endearment then to have fooled my Lord Digby, who can expect no lesse, if this businesse be cleanly gone through with, then to see you one of their Generals, especially now the rest are displaced by their last Vote. Farewell. I have that faith in what I hope for of you, which hath seldome deceived Your Friend entirely George Digby. Postscript. Since the writing of this, I have a small Agent come in from Abing∣ton, who assures me, that he saw you march out since noone to Reading, which I doe not believe; but yet for more security I have sent thither the last night to meet you, a duplicate of this, and of the inclosed, by a very safe messenger, with one of the blank Pastes you gave me. I fogot to tell you my opinion, that Reading is a fier place for you to march unto upon your Composition then Alisbury, and lies apter for his Majesties service.
The last of these (as all hellish machinations doe) belies it selfe, as a very ordinary Readers eye will finde. The scope of it is to possesse the world, that I had appointed him time and manner of betraying Abington, notwithstanding my Letter of defiance; I knew God would blesse me with an opportunity which would seriously sooner or later by action confute it, and in the interim, laughing at his miserable shifts to heale himselfe and wound me, I shut up with him merrily, and returned this, which left him speechlesse. My Lord, YOu are so farre from winning by playing an aftergame, that you will not save your owne stake (which you ayme at) by it, for standers by see you doe it very poorely, and dare not throw out your dice. I finde you are swel'd, and the poyson you vent is worse then Spiders; but your web is so thin, that the Readers will guesse by the ridiculousnesse of your Plot, that it was the Kings Iester, not his Se∣cretary, that contrived it, and yet by the wickednesse of it, will again conclude, that the Divell works journey work to my Lord Digby. Sir, my Magazine is safe, and will be when your dishonourable underground dealings shall bee blown up; within these few dayes you may expect a Blaze, but it must be of this machination of Ox∣fords, wherein your Honour shall goe for the Faux and the Garnet, (I finde you can personate them both) against the Kingdom; and at such a time as now when you feared his Majesty (who I know hath
found you out) should conclude a peace with his people, which you dare not pray for (I thank God I doe daily) nay would ravell in the fist knitting. You tl me your Cipher is burnt, it was of your owne writing my Lord I suppose; I am sorry your Lordships hand should be burnt, it is a scurvy brand and ominous. But feare not, your friends at London will send your Honour a copy of it in print. You say Bernard saw not your cleanly conveyance; I am glad they take your Lordship for a Iugler in Oxon, they have done in Lon∣don a long time; but being your Familiar, I much wonder he should not know your tricks. I am sorry your Honour should be his Majesties Hocus Pocus, and have the knack of cleanly conveyance. Now the world may see which way the King was conveyed from London, the jewels beyond Sea, the Irish Rebels brought over; which way so many overtures of peace have appeared and vanished, surely by my Lord Digbies trick of cleanly conveyance. Play above board, my Lord, that is fittest for a Councell Table. My Lord, I tax you now for your incomparable base Beckmans escape, I verily think he got away by one of your Lordships tricks of cleanly conveyance. You upbraid me much with my Masters, my Lord they will answer for themselves, and it is unworthily done to scoffe at them whom your Master and mine calls his Parliament againe whether you will or no; and to them I referre you, who are fit to judge of such language. If I were a Prostitute, my Lord, as you call me, why did your Honour act the Pimp, and offer me a reward with such sollicitations so frequently, so hotly, so long a while? Let the world judge of your wooings, which since they faile, I look now your force should venture upon a rape. My Lord, you say at Oxford, that Londoners can preach (which is more then we can say of you againe, the rest therefore shall bee wholsome exhortation.) Doe not destroy a Noble mans soule, pity your selfe, though not the Kingdome, and let the feare of God bee in you to expell forgeries, even for your owne (if not yours) for his Majesties sake and honour, who hath taken you so neare to him∣selfe; for if you counterfeit hands and seales of Subjects, it will be historied that you were not chast to his. For my selfe, you see my Lord, this Plot of yours is so farre from molesting my thoughts, that it makes them merry; for I serve a God and a Cause which shall
make them so in death; yet I hope to live to see more and more  wise caught in their own craftinesse. I am, my Lord, Your Honours most humble Servant,Richard Browne. Abington Dec. 20, 1644. Since this Conclusion, they sent a party of 200 to fortifie a house of Mr Speakers two or three miles from us; as soone as I had notice, I sent out some of ours, who took, the house upon Composition, and there unexpectedly we found Beckman their Swedish Engineer, who being my prisoner before, made  escape perfidiously, and is now used according to his desert, and by this Providence that part of my Lords Letter which concerns my suffering him to goe away, is seriously answered. And now since that, our beating them off when they came to storme us, and hanging all their Irish I took, by Gods blessing choaks the other part of slander concerning my selfe. Let God, (whose mercies faile not to deliver from the heads of the Poli∣tique, and defend from the hands of the Powerfull, those that trust in him) have the glory of all. FINIS.
