B5366 R3241 13672641 101178
BATTERING RAMS AGAINST NEW ROME: CONTAINING A FARTHER DISCOVERY OF The Grand Hypocrisie OF THE LEADERS and TEACHERS Of the PEOPLE Called QUAKERS. TOGETHER WITH A Publick Challenge to meet G. Fox, G. Whitehead, W. Penn, and S. Cater, to prove Matters of Fact. To which are Added Some QUERIES propounded to their PROTESTANT HEARERS, Who are not of G. F's PARTY. By FRANCIS BUGG. I have laid a Snare for thee, and thou art taken, O BABYLON, and thou wast not aware: Thou art found, and also caught, because thou hast striven against the LORD. Put your selves in Array against BABYLON round about: All ye that bend the Bow, shoot at her, spare no Arrows. The LORD hath open'd his Ar∣mory, and hath brought forth the Weapons of his Indignation; for this is the Work of the LORD GOD of Hosts. Jer. 50.14, 24, 25. LICENSED, Decemb. 3. 1690. LONDON, Printed for Joh. Gwillim, Book-seller, in Bishops-gate∣street, over against the Great James, Jan. 12. 1690/1.
BATTERING RAMS AGAINST NEW ROME, &c. The INTRODUCTION. Friendly Reader, I Thought long since, that my self and others had writ sufficiently against the Errours of the Teachers and Leaders of this People, and that I should be no farther concerned with them; but having seen their Answer to a Letter lately sent to them, wherein they pretend sincerely to deny the Guilt of Hypocrisie, wherewith they, in the said Letter, are charged; and I being sensible that many un∣acquainted with their Wiles, and subtile way of Writing, may be ready to believe them what they say themselves to be; I thought it my Duty to make good the said Charge, and farther to unmask them, that so they may appear what they really are; and to shew them in their true and proper Colours, to the intent they may no longer deceive the Simple. And in the Discharge thereof I shall say, as Geo. Whitehead says in his Epistle to his Book styled Judgment fixed, &c. I neither consult Events, nor fear Effects; but leave all to GOD. It is not my present purpose to meddle much with the Frame and Method of their Church Government, their General Councils, their Zeal for their Ʋnwritten Tra∣ditions above the Scriptures, or the Mischief of their Impositions amongst their own People; that not being, at this time, so immediately under my Consideration; and also having, by my Book, De Christiana Libertate, &c. printed 1682. treated largely thereof, wherein their said Errours are fully detected, &c. Neither shall I much concern my self with their Laws, or Edicts, they made at their Yearly Meeting, or General Council, held at London, May 1675. subscribed by W. Penn, Geo. Whitehead, Steph. Crisp, and others; whereby they strictly re∣quire their Hearers neither to Forsake, Decline, nor Remove their Meetings, like Worlely, Fearful, and Politick Professors; and yet they themselves refused to stand in a like suffering Capacity with them: Insomuch as that, in the Loss of Thir∣teen Thousand five Hundred Fifty and odd Pounds, by Fines and Distresses, their Ministers, where Strangers, never lost Fifty Pounds; as at large is set forth in my Book entituled, The Painted Harlot both stripp'd and whipp'd, &c. and that entituled, Reason against Railing, &c. both printed 1683. whereby their Ʋsur∣pation, Dominion, and Lordship over the Consciences of their Hearers, was suffi∣ciently manifested; together with their illegal and arbitrary Proceedings in their
Courts of Judicature, or Quarterly Meetings about Meum and Tuum All which are largely handled in the said two Books, to which I refer the Reader for farther Satisfaction. Neither shall I here give a distinct and particular Account of their several Or∣ders for Marriage, set forth by Geo. Fox, and his Party; viz. Sometimes they might marry at the Market Cross, sometimes at a General Meeting, sometimes in private, where Twelve or more were assembled, as their Freedom was; and lastly, they came to this, That none were either permitted or suffered to marry, unless the Parties published their Intensions before two Meetings of Men, and two Meetings of Women, they being distinct and apart, each from other; and all this by the Order of Geo. Fox, &c. who pretended his Commission from Divine Revelation; as set forth in De Chr. Lib. p. 33. I say, as to their several Orders, and their Cen∣sures thereupon, they are particularly examined, and set forth, in my Book, Inno∣cency vindicated, and Envy rebuked, &c. printed 1684. Neither shall I here give a particular Account, how I came to be of their Society; how I came to see and perceive their Errours, and leave them; and how I came to be satisifed in the Lawfulness of my going to the publick Worship: all which are trea∣ted on in my Book entituled, The Quakers detected, and their Errours confuted, &c. printed 1686. to which, for farther Satisfaction, I refer the Reader. Thus have I traced them step by step, and followed them in all their Turnings and Windings, Year after Year; shewing the Vanity of their Pretences to Infallibili∣ty, and that Ʋnchangeableness which they pretend to, above all other People. And what I have thus writ, I have offered to prove, and that on the penalty of an Hun∣dred Pounds, but could never get them out of their Holes, and Dens, and Lurk∣ing Places, (as G. F. formerly said to others.) But now, at last, in their Answer to the Letter before mentioned, they pretend a Willingness to meet the Author of the said Letter, and Looking-Glass, and that they are ready to come forth, as if in∣deed, they would shew themselves Men of some Conscience; viz. own what they write, and prove what they say to be true; as every honest Man ought to do, and more especially they, who pretend that they are Conscientiously concern'd, and that a Necessity from the LORD is upon them, and that they write for the Glory of GOD, and moved thereto by His Eternal Spirit, and the like high Pretences. But, alas! 'tis quite otherwise; for they are so guilty of the Things charged against them, and of writing so many Lyes, and scandalous Defamations, under a pretence of the Spi∣rit's Motion; and so conscious to themselves thereof, that, I am persuaded, all that we can say or do, in order to bring them out of their Holes, and Dens, and Lur∣king Places, is in vain, otherwise than that thereby they will more and more disco∣ver their own Guilt, and deep Hypocrisie; which to manifest, and make appear, I shall produce Ten Instances to the Consideration of the judicious Readers. And thus much by way of Introduction. Novemb. 5. 1690. Franc. Bugg.
The I. Instance of their Hypocrisie. Letter to the Quakers. One While for, Another While against Fighting, &c. The Quakers Answer. This Charge is false, and unjustly stated.— And if any have written what the old Army might, or should have done; this we may charitably suppose, was Ad Homi∣nem, upon Their own Pretensions, &c. Reply. MAY you charitably suppose so? I confess, How little Charity soever you have for others, yet I have always observed you to have a great Stock for your selves: But let me a little examine this Charity of yours, and see upon what Bottom it stands. You say, you have declared against Fighting; and that the Kingdom of Christ doth not allow His Servants to fight; and that you do not look upon it lawful for Christians, in this Gospel-Dispen∣sation, to fight with a Carnal Weapon, in any Case whatsoever. But as for the Encouragement you have given others to fight, you do that Ad Hominem, Upon their own Pretensions, viz. Oliver Cromwell, his Army, and Officers, preten∣ding it lawful to fight, therefore, and thereupon you encourage them to fight; saying, O. C. Thou shouldst have invited all Nations upon Earth, that are against Popery, to come in, and join with thee against Popery; for thou hast had Authority: Stand to it, lose it not, nor abuse it, nor let any other take thy Crown. — Let thy Soldiers go forth with a free, willing Heart, that thou mayest rock Nations as a Cradle, &c. Counsel and Advice rejected, p. 36, 37. Geo. Fox. Also see Geo. Roff's Book, entituled The Righteousness of GOD, &c. p. 11. a few Words to O. C. To thee, Oliver Cromwel, thus saith the LORD, I have chosen thee amongst the Thousands of the Nations, to execute My Wrath upon My Enemies, and gave them to thy Sword, with which I fought for the Zeal of My own Name; and gave thee the Enemies of My own Seed, to be a Curse, and a Re∣proach for ever; and made thee an Instrument against them. — And many have I cut down by My Sword in thy Hand, that My Wrath might be executed upon them to the utmost. Geo. Roff. What! Could you thus write, and thus encourage O. C. his Army, and Officers, to fight, and that from the Word of the LORD, and at the same time believe it to be unlawful for Christians to fight with a Carnal Weapon in any Case whatsoever? O gross Hypocrisie! What! Does the Word of the LORD contradict the Kingdom of Christ? Are they divided? You say, the Kingdom of Christ doth not allow His Servants to fight, and you believe it utterly unlawful for Christians to fight, yet you say to O. C. Let thy Sol∣diers go forth with a free, willing Heart, that thou mayest rock Nations as a Cradle. Again you say, Thus saith the Lord, I have chosen thee, [O. C.] amongst the Thousands of the Nations, to execute My Wrath upon My Enemies, and gave them to thy Sword, with which I fought for the Zeal of My own Name, &c.
Also in another Letter of Geo. Fox's, to O. C. it is thus said, O Oliver! hadst thou been faithful, and thunder'd down Deceit, the Hollanders had been thy Subjects and Tributaries, and Germany had given up to do thy Will, and the Spa∣niard had quiver'd like a dry Leaf,— the King of France should have bowed un∣der thee his Neck; the Pope should have withered, as in Winter; the Turk, in all his Fatness, should have smoak'd. Thou shouldst not have stood trifling about small things, but minded the Work of the LORD: As He began with thee at first, sober Men, and true Hearts took part with thee: Oh! take heed, and do not slight such, lest thou weaken thy self; and not disown such as the LORD hath owned: Thy Dread is not yet all gone, nor thy Amazement. Arise, and come forth; for hadst thou been faithful, thou shouldst have crumbled Nations to Dust, &c. Geo. Fox. With much more to the same purpose. I say, What! Do you thus write, thus encourage, and thus stir up and rouse your then dear Friend O. C. his Army, and Officers, to that which you believe to be utterly unlawful? Here is Deceit with a witness: What! Did sober Men, and true Hearts take part with O. C. and you advised him not to slight such, nor discourage them from fighting; and yet you say, the Kingdom of Christ doth not allow of Fighting, and you believe it unlawful to fight as aforesaid? Here is Hocos Pocos indeed, and such Legerdemain as I am sure your serious Geo. Whitehead, as he would be esteemed, never found in W. Rogers's Writings; yea, such Legerdemain, as few Conjurers have the face to venture upon. Here you have exceeded the whole Four Hundred of Ahab's False Prophets, 1 King. 22. for they prophesied falsly, in saying to the King, Go up to Ramoth Gilead, and prosper; for the LORD will deliver it into thy Hands, &c. yet all this while they did not believe it utterly unlawful for the Jews to fight. In short, You either believe it lawful to fight, or you do Not: If you do Not, then did you greatly dissemble with your then dear Friend, and noble Champion, as you elsewhere call him: If you Did, then have you played the Hypocrites with your People, and that greatly too, for many Years, in tel∣ling them 'tis not lawful to fight; and yet, at the same time, believe it law∣ful, and encourage sober Men, and true Hearts to fight, and that from the Word of the LORD. Surely I need go no farther to prove you guilty of as manifest Hypocrisie, as the World can produce. But, for a Salvo, you now tell us, you gave this Advice Ad Hominem, Upon their own Pretensions; not that you either believed or thought it lawful to fight. But then you should have been plain and sincere with O. C. &c. and said, We indeed stir you up to fight, advise and counsel you to fight, If, after this, their Hearers will go to Gaol, before they will pay two Pence towards Drums and Colours, or pay the Trained Soldiers their Wages, I pity their wilful Blindness and Ignorance. and that from the Word of the LORD, &c. But withal, mark well what we have to say; we do all this upon your own Pre∣tensions: You pretend it lawful to fight, and there∣upon we thus encourage you; for, to be plain with you, we believe it utterly unlawful for you to fight
at all with a Carnal Weapon; for the Kingdom of Christ doth not allow of it, but utterly forbids Fighting in any Case whatever. Oh! Blush, and be ashamed, ye Hypocrites! Yea, be confounded for ever, ye gross Dissemblers! What! Did you give this Advice, and this Counsel, and that from the Word of the LORD, to such a Practice, and such a Work, as you knew was not lawful? So take it which way you will, and it car∣ries two Faces: For if Fighting in any Case be unlawful, as you seem some∣times to believe, (and to be sure you have made your Disciples so to believe it, as that they are not only for the Doctrine of Non-Resistance, but also for your Doctrine of Non-Assistance,) then you ought not to have advised others to Fighting. Again, If you believe it is lawful to fight, then, if you would be Constant, as you would be thought to be, why do not you advise King William to invite all Nations upon Earth that are against Popery, to come and join with him against Popery, that he may rock Ireland and France as a Cradle? But you say, you gave that Advice to O. C. upon his own Pretensions; not that you believed it lawful. I answer, King William also pretends it lawful: And since you then play'd the Hypocrite, why not now? And so ad infinitum. The II. Instance of their Hypocrisie. Letter to the Quakers. One While against, Another While for Kingly Government. The Quakers Answer. The First Part of this Charge is false. Reply. FOR a full Reply to this their Answer, I refer the Reader to the Quakers unmask'd, &c. But so much thereof as may shew that the Charge is not false, unless they be lately amended, (which if they be, they ought to retract and condemn their former Wri∣tings, But if so, then they would appear fallible Men, and, as such, be mistaken, and do some things whereof they ought to repent. But this they cannot admit of, for it would spoil the fashion of their Infallibility, and marr the Beauty of their Perfe∣ction.) I shall recite out of a Paper writ to the Presbyterians, by Geo. Fox, a little before the Re∣storation, so much as shall justifie the Charge against them, &c. See pag. 1. To all you that desire an Earthly King in England,— who profess your selves Christians, whether Presbyterians or others:— Do not the Priests, Presbyterians, and others, cry for an Earthly King? And is not this the same Nature the Jews were in? And do not they, in this, crucifie Jesus? In another Paper of his, pag. 15. The Word of the LORD GOD to you who are called Presbyterians.— You are wholly in Darkness, given up to it;— and such would have a King to reign;— for there is that Nature that would have an Earthly King to reign, in which Nature lodgeth the Murtherer, said your chief Prophet. Geo. Fox.
Thus have I given a short hint, that you were once against Kingly Go∣vernment; being loth to mention over much, in hopes, as to that, you are somewhat amended, for you soon turn'd with the Times; which shews your Inconstancy, and that you are no more infallible than others; (which is the main Reason why I mention it.) And for Example, see your Declaration you gave forth, soon after the Restoration of King Charles II. saying, We do de∣clare that we do love, own, and honour the King, and the present Government. Again, in another Book, you say to the King, If thou take some speedy Course for the repealing and making void those cruel Laws,— haply thou mayest be as Mo∣ses, to stand in the Gap betwixt GOD and thy People, &c. Visitation to the King, pag. 7. Again, in the Trial of Geo. Fox, 1664. pag. 8, 10. he saith, (the Oath of Allegiance being tender'd him,) viz. If I could take any Oath at all, upon any Occasion, I should take this Oath; for I honour all Men, much more the King, &c. Now Geo. Fox, Geo. Whitehead, &c. Where is the Constancy you boast of? What is become of your Unchangeableness, who one Year say, and the next Year unsay; for this to day, and for that to morrow; facing about like the Weather-cock, as in the Case fore-mentioned? And yet it is a common Maxim with you, that if any write against you, they write against Truth; and if any see your Hypocrisie, and leave and forsake you, that they are gone from Truth; and that if any come to you, and join with you, they then pre∣sently are reputed to own Truth, &c. I will conclude this Second Instance with the Words of W. Penn, the Paren∣thesis excepted, to Mr. Doelittle, Mr. Manton, Mr. Baxter, and Eighteen more, both Presbyterians and Independants, in his Book entituled, A just Rebuke to Twenty one Divines, pag. 25. I could set out this part of your Story to the Life, but at this time shall forbear; n do I delight in this: But since I must needs men∣tion (your Hypocrisie, and your base Temporizing,) can I do it more candidly, than in your own Words; I wish there had been no need for it. The III. Instance of their Hypocrisie. Letter to the Quakers. One While against, Another while for Popery, &c. The Quakers Answer. This is false, &c. Reply. FAlse! How can you say it is false, and not blush? Were you not against Popery, when you wrote, and said, as followeth, viz. To all you, called Papists; to your whole Body, and Head at Rome, the Word of the LORD reacheth: Thus assuredly saith the LORD, My Controversie is against you; and My Vengeance, and Wrath, and Fury shall for ever, World without End, be upon you: And though you pardon one another, yet will not I pardon any One of you. And, says W. Penn, in his Caveat against Popery: Let the Papist first recant his voluminous Errours; but above all, let us have good Testimony of his hearty Sorrow for that Sea of Blood shed in England, France, Holland, Ireland, Spain, Italy,
Savoy, Switzerland, and Germany, of many Thousands of poor Protestants, that for pure Conscience could not conform, &c. and to this purpose in many other Books. But these Two Passages are enough to shew that you were once against Popery; and that since you have been as much for the Papists: See your Book, Entituled, A Defence of the D. of Buck. &c. 1685. in Reply to a Church of Eng. Man; who answered the said Book: And your Book, called, A Reply to the Answer of the Man of no Name, to the D. of Buck, &c. p. 22, 23. Also another, call'd A Persuasive to Moderation, submitted to the late King, 1686. And another of your Books, called, Good Advice to the Church of England, &c. Another, Advice to the Protestant Dissenters: shewing it, their Interest to repeal the Tests. By all which said Books, and divers others, spread up and down the Nation in the late King James's Reign, were the Papists vin∣dicated; and contrary to your former Writings, said to be loyal in Eng∣land and Holland; charging the Protestants with being the Cause of Burning poor Joan of Kent, a famous Woman; and that Merely, as you said, for Re∣ligion; and by that Example Taught the Romanists, &c. A few more Instances I may recite, (and so refer the Reader to the Looking-Glass for the Quakers, &c. viz. The Church of England-Man. Where the said Books are more largely reci∣ted,) viz. I cannot admire his Wisdom, Manners, or Justice, in his Reflexions upon the Roman Catholicks, after the Assurance of so great an One of that Communion, has given him and his Friends of their Security and Protection; — for the late occasion he takes; let him be just, and he will find the Excluders almost every Sunday at their Parish-Churches: And if three quarters of them were to pray for their Lives, it may be they could better read their Clergy viz. Their Neck-Verse., than say their Prayers without the publick Liturgy. One thing I must say, the Roman Catholicks have been Loyal in England and Holland. It happens now that GOD and Caesar are both of a Mind; which perhaps does not always fall out, at least about the point in hand. Edward VI. by Archbishop Cranmer was Compelled to sign a Warrant to Burn poor Ioan of Kent, a famous Woman, but counted an Enthusiast; thus even Protestants began with Brood for Mere Religion, and Taught the Romanists in succeeding times how to deal with them. Come on, ye infallible Doctors, Is not this for, and in favour of the Pa∣pists and Popery; and to the purpose against the Protestants; and at such a juncture too, whenas the Protestant Cause lay a bleeding? And notwith∣standing your former writings against Popery when Protestants flourished; yet in the Reign of K. J. II. at that season, how did your Books and Papers in favour of the Popish Interest, fly about, Book after Book, Letter after Letter, Address upon Address; with Publick Prayers for K. J. II? See the Looking-Glass, &c. Which discover your profound Politicks: And also the Letter to the Quakers, &c. Which justly and seasonably reproves your then Extravagance, and your late Silence.
The IV. Instance of their Hypocrisie. Letter to the Quckers. Why do you not pray for, and address your selves to King William and Queen Mary, as heartily, and as publickly as you did to King James II? The Quakers Answer. This is false; though for some Reasons we have not been for∣ward to sound a Trumpet of our Gratitude, &c. Reply. ARE you not ashamed to say 'tis false? When did you ever pray for, and Address your selves to K. W. and Q. M. as publickly as you did to the late K. J. II? And is it not as commendable a thing to sound a Trumpet of the Fame and Noble Acts of a Protestant Prince, who has ventured his Life, and all that is, or can be dear to him in this World, in de∣fence of our Religion, Laws, and Liberties, as it was to sound a Trumpet from England to Scotland, and from Scotland to England, and through each Kingdom, of his Fame, who, upon his own Principles, could not so much as give Liberty to Protestants; though in Policy he did: And because you say, it is false; I may recite part of your Addresses and Prayers for K. J. II. (and do you make it appear when you did the like, and as publickly for K. W. and Q M.) viz. We pray GOD to bless the King, viz [King J. II.] his Royal Femily, and People, with Grace and Peace; and that after a long and pros∣perous Reign here, he may receive a better Crown amongst the Blessed; which is the Pre yer of, &c. London, April 1687. Again, We cannot but with grateful Hearts both admire and acknowledge the Provi∣dence of GOD, that made the King's retiring into our Countrey, [i. e. Scotland, 1679.] give a happy turn to his Affairs, to the defeating and disappointing the De∣figns of his Enemies:—We do justly conceive our selves obliged by a special Tie, to praise GOD for His Goodness, in carrying the King through, and over all his Troubles; since by the same Providence, and at the same time, by which the LORD began in that more observable manner, to evidence His Care of him; He made him the happy Instrument to deliver us from our Troubles; so that the prosperity of his Affairs, and our peaceable fruition of the exercise of our Consciences, beareth the same Date, &c. June 1687. But now in your Answer to the Letter, you say, Good Kings and Govern∣ments you never opposed; though you liked not bad ones: Pray how shall we know which you account good Kings, and good Governments, but by your Words and Carriage towards them, and by your publick Acknowledgments of the Be∣nefits you receive by them? But your Hypocrisie is manifest: And I may say to you, as you once said to the Paesbyterians, and others, in your Book stiled, Truth's Character of Professors, viz. Your-own Character. &c. And know assu∣redly, that if you come to be dealt withal, as you have dealt with others; then shall those things which you have done to the Innocent become your Burthen.—And as you have sought to make others ridiculous; even so shall you become contemptible in the eyes of those, which you by your Flatteries have fawned upon, &c.
The V. Instance of their Hypoctisie. Letter to the Quakers. And then you branded the Presbyterians, and others, with Fighting Principles, &c. The Quakers Answer. His unjust Reflections about the Presbyterians. Reply. TO reflect on you about the Presbyterians was not unjust, neither did the Author of the said Letter do you any Wrong in that mat∣ter; for I well remember the Sale of that Book, and the Juncture of Time in which it was exposed; even when the great Talk was of a Protestant Plot. 'Tis true, your Book had, by the Title of it, the Face of a Lamb, viz. Plain and peaceable Advice to the Presbyterians; but in pag. 1. you say, that Their Principle was, to fight for their Religion, and to promote their pretended Religion by the power of the Sword; and that their Ministers always laboured to perswade them to it, &c. Again, see your Answer to John Faldo, in your Book, Quakerism a new Nick-name, &c. printed, 1673. pag. 109. And why poor Nonconformists, af∣ter all their preach'd up Battels, Spoils, Plunders, Sacrileges, Decimations, &c. Again, pag. 119. These are true Gospel-Ministers, whose Gospel is Peace on Earth, and Good Will towards Men; and Not Garments rolled in the Blood of Rings, and Princes, and Rulers, and People: No worldly Armies, Battels, and Vi∣ctories; Trophies, Spoils, Sequestrations, Decimations, and the like Blood-thirsty and Tyrannical Projects, in which John Faldoe and his poor Nonconforming Mi∣nisters have had their Hands almost over Head and Ears, till they had well nigh lost their Ears and Heads too, &c. And for more of this nature, see your Book styled The Way cast up, pag. 52, 53, 54, 23. All which considered, and com∣pared with your Advice to Oliver Cromwell, his Army, and Officers, render you both perfidious and treacherous; inasmuch as you, with them, were en∣gaged in the same Cause and Quarrel, and stood in as much need of an Act of Oblivion as they. The VI. Instance of their Hypocrisie. 'Tis a shame for any Bookseller to promote [i. e. The Quakers Answer. their Books,] without discovering the Author  that to get a Farthing, or an Halfpeny by any such lying Libels, they should thus sell or expose the Reputation of their honest Neighbours to Reproach and Infamy. Reply. I Cannot but take notice of this Passage, and how the Author of it resembles Cuthbert Tonstal, once Bishop of London; as may be seen in my Book, De Christiana Libertate, pag. 203, to pag. 206. where I have at large set forth what Enemies the then Papists were to the Printing, and to the Spreaders and Promoters of such Books as the Protestants writ against them,
and their Errours; discovering their Hypocrisies, and holy Cheats; and wherein Geo. Whitehead, and his Brethren, follow their Steps directly. And as one Instance thereof, I have at large recited your Excommunication of J. Bernard, Merchant, for disposing of William Rogers his Book, entituled, The Christian Quaker distinguished from the Apostate and Innovator, in five Parts, &c. And, for a tuller Discovery of the Teachers and Leaders of the Quakers re∣sembling their elder Brethren the Papists, I have also therein shewed, that Benjamin Clark, their Bookseller, might sell Ballads, Play-Books, Papist-Books, Gipsie-Books, yea, Ba—Books, and yet not be excommunica∣ted, &c. And many other things I have therein recited, to shew how their Carriage to William Rogers, my self, and others, bear the same Complexion with the Popish Bishops to the then Protestants; which is too large here to insert, &c. And Geo. Whitehead, &c. Do you think to affright the London Booksellers? No, no; they do not fear your Excommunication, they are not terrified at your Censures; for they know (or may do, at least) that there are none like you for exposing the Reputation of your honest Neighbours to Shame and Infa∣my; as your Books, Judgment fixed, &c. and S. Cater's Narrative, &c. do sufficiently demonstrate, as well as divers others of your malicious Books, and lying Pamphlets; insomuch as that some of you have been ashamed to own your own Writings. And for full Discovery thereof, I refer the Rea∣der to my Book before mentioned, &c. The VII. Instance of their Hypocrtsie. IN your Book, Judas and the Jews, &c. you say, None need to give us Dis∣cerning, or Judgment: Christ hath furnished us already, and doth on All Oc∣casions, &c. And in Geo. Fox his Book, The great Mystery, &c. pag. 89. you say, that The Quakers have a Spirit given to them, beyond all the Fore-fathers; and they can discern who are Saints, who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speaking ever a Word, &c. Now this is either True or False: You are either thus qualified with this infallible Judgment, or you are not. If True, How comes it to pass that you have printed, Geo. Smith is a well meaning Man: That he hath lived a blameless Conversation from his Youth: That ever since he has been convinced, which is thirteen or fourteen Years, he hath lived uprightly, according to his Mea∣sure? And why have you vindicated Tho. Rudyard, and reserred the Readers to your Brother Robert Sandiland's Book? I say, If you be thus qualified with such Discerning, as to know who are Saints, and who are Devils, and who Apostates, without speaking a Word, and that at all Times too, and on all Occasions; I say, if it be thus, what grand Hypocrites are you to canonise such as these for Saints; saying, they are well-meaning Men, walk upright∣ly thirteen or fourteen Years together; and yet at the same time know, upon
this your infallible Principle, that there is not a Word true in all you write of them? But if False, and that you are not thus qualified, but as fallible, and as subject to be mistaken, as other Men, Which is manifest, or else you would not make Saints of Geo. Smith, Rob. Sandiland, Tho. Rudyard, John Tysoe; and say they are well meaning Men, have walked uprightly thirteen or fourteen Years to∣gether, &c. unless you be ar∣rant Cheats indeed. then what Hypocrites are you, thus to pretend to be endued with such an infallible Judgment, at all Times, and on All Occasions, as to know who are Saints, and who are Devils, &c. and not a Word of Truth in all your Pretences? O gross Dissem∣blers! yea, Impostors! and such a Generation of self-conceited Pharisees, as no Age before this ever produced. However, thus much may be learned from hence, that you exactly re∣semble your infallible Sister, who will saint any, let them be never so noto∣riously wicked, if they do but some notable meritorious Work for Holy Church, some notable Project, though it be as grand a Cheat as ever was; when, at the same time, such as oppose her, and write against her, and dis∣cover her Errours, she will slander, abuse, yea, call them Devils, and at last persecute them them to death: And 'tis only in the last that she exceeds you; and of that there can be no Trial, since you never yet had Power: And GOD grant you never may have Power put into your Hands; for you that are thus deceitful, thus treacherous, thus infamously slanderous, as your said two Books, Judgment fixed, &c. and S. Cater's Narrative, &c. declare you to be; Sainting Geo. Smith, Tho. Rudyard, Rob. Sandiland, John Tysoe, and the rest of your Tools, that act for you, and do your Drudgery, how wicked soever they be: And such as oppose you, and cannot submit themselves to your Ty∣ranny; them you call Beasts, Dogs, Wolves, Enemies of all Righteous∣ness, Children of the Devil, yea, Devils Incarnate. And that your Disti∣ples may believe it, and take all you say for Truth, you tell them, If their Hearers believe their Pretensions, then they are leavened with the Leaven of the Pharisees indeed. that you are endued with infal∣lible Judgment, and can tell who are Saints, and who are Devils, without speaking ever a Word. O dreadful Hypocrisie! The VIII. Instance of their Hypocrisie. THE next Thing that I shall observe, wherein you deceive your People, is, your Pretence to preach and suffer, record Marriages, and other publick Offices, freely, without Money, Gifts, or Rewards: And by reason of this fair Pretence, how have you not only deceived the Simple, but also taken Occasion thereby to vilifie, and so speak Contemptuously of all other publick Preachers? First, The National, for taking Tythes, and other Dues, as a setled Maintenance by Law established; which is not so burthen∣some as you are to many of your Hearers. And Fext, The Presbyterians
and Independents See G. F's Epistle to your Book entituled, The Divini∣ty of Christ, &c., whom you bespatter about their Bason and Platter, wherein perhaps their Hearers put their free Contribution for their Mini∣sters, as a necessary Subsistence for them, accor∣ding to their Ability, and their Ministers Necessity. And all this while, va∣lue your selves upon your free Preaching, free Suffering, free Writing, and free Recording; when, at the same time, you know 'tis common for all these Church-Officers amongst you to take Money; Which I have long since, of∣fered to prove to your Faces. Some Ten Pounds at a time, some Three Pounds at a time, some Fifty Pounds per Annum; As set forth in the Painted Harlot, p. 47. printed, 1682. and reprinted in the Quakers detected, &c. p. 23. printed, 1686. some Thirty Pounds for writing five or six Sheets, to teach Children in the Ways of GOD, as you pre∣tend, and Twelve Pence for writing of Marriage-Certificates, being ten or twelve Lines, &c. And Geo. Fox himself, who before he was a Preacher, was but a poor Jour∣ney-man Shoe-maker with George Gee of Manchester, had no less than Twelve or Thirteen Hundred Pounds, as William Rogers relates in his Christian Qua∣ker distinguished, &c. Part V. pag. 48, 49. and by Geo. Fox never denied, that I have heard of: Yea, and S. C. and many others that I can name, who have by Preaching, risen to great Fortune, &c. Object. But some may object, That when they have charged some of your Preachers and Hearers with your Taking Money, they have denied it. Answ. Deny! That is very common with you; at least, say they, as sta∣ted: But produce your Books of Accounts touching these Matters, and I will make appear much more than I have said; and yet so cunning are you, that such as contribute, do not know it. This is a Mystery, I confess; but you know, thus it is. And your Way is, when Cash grows low, to issue out (I do not say a Proclamation, but) a General Epistle for the Service of such as you pretend; (but being rightly and truly interpreted, your own Service;) for as Money is said to be the Sinews of War, so your Experience tells you, 'tis a great Encouragement to your Preachers and Parasites. And this Gene∣ral Epistle, thus sent through England and Wales; and when this general Col∣lection is made for the Service of Truth, as you speak, and as your Hearers believe, 'tis then transmitted to London; where Geo. Fox, and a few of his Party, dispose of it as they see meet: And no doubt but much, if not most of it, is given to such as are for carrying on your Designs; but no Account returned to the Donors and Givers of this Money; which, if there was, and that you did not exclaim against all other Preachers, who should have any thing to do or say against this your Method, though indeed it is a cunning one? But your grand Hypocrisie stands chiefly in this, That you take Mo∣ney, Gifts, and Rewards, for Preaching, Teaching, Writing, and Suffering; and at the same time pretend to do all these things freely, without Money, and without Price. Herein stands your Deceit.
Object. Perhaps some may object, and say; Surely, if these free Gospellers do take Money, some others have taken notice of it as well as you; and at one time or other, some of themselves will disclose their Secrets. Answ. Yes: And as an Instance thereof, I shall recite William Rogers against them; who, in his Second Scourge for Geo. Whitehead, pag. 3, 4, 5. shews great part of their Intrigues; for which Tho. Ellwood makes an Apology for his Brethren taking Money for Preaching, &c. See 1st W. R. If any ask what City sits as Queen Within her Circuit, since 'tis plainly seen She's high and proud: Meaning your Yearly, and Se∣cond Day Mee∣tings in London; and taking them∣selves to be Christ's only Church, &c. Proud London is the place That sits as Queen, where Pride seems no Disgrace. And yet when she Rome's Sister is but call'd, She winces like touch'd Horses that are gall'd. Confusion her attends, next follows Woe; For thus she whirls, but GOD knows where she'll go. Who, when they wanted Money to proceed, The Church her Cash then did supply her Need; And therefore, when her Cash was empty'd, she Crav'd Money, for to serve the Ministry. At length her Papers, like to Briefs, did cry For Monyn, Moner, for the Ministry. And when that Practice was dislik'd by some, She seem'd like one whose Downfall's near to come. This Church will fall, her Load will be her Guile, If you, O Flock, keep Purse strings fast a while: When that Spring fails, by her you'll not be priz'd; Ʋsurpers then o'er you you'll see despis'd. And Woes may long attend such Pranting Preachers, As for Preferment turn'd deceitful Teachers: Fox is term'd Head, yet Whitehead steer'd the Course, Till both were scorn'd, and they grew worse and worse. Thus the Reader may perceive that I am not alone in this Discovery; and that W. Rogers, my self, and others, have for some Years very well under∣stood their Walking contrary to their Pretences, and have sufficiently with∣stood them, sometimes to their Faces, and at other times publickly by Wri∣ting; offering to prove the Truth of what we have asserted. The next thing I have to mention, is Thomas Ellwood's Apology for his Brethren Hire∣lings taking Money for Preaching; by which we may know what Herd His own Word to Will Rogers, &c. he belongs to: For Will. Rogers had so scourged Geo. Whitehead, with such deep Lashes of plain Truth, as that his Pen was not able to defend him from that grand Hypocrisie wherewith Will. Rogers justly charged him, and his Fra∣ternity.
And thereupon this conceited Scribe, and proud Pharisee, Tho. Ell∣wood, to rescue the decaying Reputation of his two Peers, G. F. and G. W. came in to their Assistance, and in Verse makes an Apology for his Brethren taking Money for Preaching; confessing what I have often charged them with, and knew them guilty of. Not that I reckon Ministers guilty of a Criminal Offence in taking Money, or other things, for and towards their Mainte∣nance, of such as they preach unto; but I mean guilty, in that they always pretended to Preach, Teach, Write, Suffer, and Record things freely; but yet, contrary to all these their Pretensions, have all along taken Money for the same. Whereby it plainly appears, that all their Pretensions were but to cast a Mist before their Hearers, and blind their Proselites; for W. Rogers's Scourge hath whipped out the Matter, and made them speak the Truth. I say, This I call their Guilt, to pretend one thing, and act contrary to it, though, like some sullen and stiff-necked Boys, they would not tell the Truth, until W. R. by his Scourge of small Cords, was forced to whip it out of them. And now all is come out; yea, Tho. Ellwood hath in that point told the Truth, as Fools and Children will sometimes do, when they are soundly whipped to it by a good Scourge, and skilful Chastiser, as W. R. hath proved himself to be. Pray, now hear what Tho. Ellwood says in his Book, Rogero Mastix, &c. But that Christ's Ministers should be supply'd Here is a Confession that their Ministers are sup∣plied. Then, it seems, they do not go a Warfare at their own Charge, as you to your Hearers have pretended, &c. With Necessaries by the Church, (his Bride,) Is such a known and certain Truth as none Perhaps hath e'er oppos'd but thou Yes, you have frequent∣ly denied that Ministers should have Money to supply their Necessities; calling them Hirelings, and Followers of Baalam for Reward, &c. alone.—l. 18. That 'tis the Churches Duty to supply The needful Wants of all her Ministry.— And Truth it is, too plain to be deny'd, Christ's Church should for Christ's Ministers provide. What carp'st thou at then, William? would thy Muse Plead that St. Paul did not this Priv'lege use?— No; St. Paul did use that Privilege; 'tis you that pretended not to use it, nor no such Reward should be found amongst you; for, said you, FREELY we have received, and FREELY we give; until William Rogers had whipped you with his Scourge, and forced you to speak a little Truth, which is scarce enough with you, &c. That what was lacking to him, privately, No; the Apostle did not pretend to be against necessary Supplies, so he needed not be ashamed, and so take the Believers Benevolence privately: For 'tis you who pretend to take no Money for Preaching, that take it privately; yea, even so privately, that the very Donors do not know that you take Money for Preaching. Thus, Jesuite-like, have you blinded your People, &c. The Macedonian Brethren did supply. Thus it appears th' Apostle did partake Of that Provision which the Church did make.—p. 19. Christ's Ministers to furnish, and their Need Supply, when they want Moneys to proceed— Then it seems, you confess you supply them with Money to proceed; but it is to whom, and when G. F. G. W. &c. think it fit and expedient.
Pretend thou canst not, that the Stock is given To such as have no need No! What need was there to send S. Cater Ten Pounds, when he was fined Twenty Pounds for preach∣ing at Phakenham in Norfolk, since he neither paid the Fine, nor his Goods sold, nor did not lose Ten Shillings by the said Meeting? Nay, if he had suffered the loss of that Fine, which he did not; yet, he be∣ing a Man worth some Hundreds of Pounds, he would not have had any need of that Ten Pounds you sent him; part of it perhaps given by Men not worth Twenty Shillings. But he was a currant Man for your purpose, and one that would preach up G. F's Orders, and exclaim against the publick Ministry, &c. And hereupon you thought he deserved a piece of Money, and so sent him Ten Pounds; which Gift was designed to be given him privately, as you would seem to suggest the Apostles received the Supply they had from the Churches privately, which is false; for Paul was so far from that, that he said plainly, that he robbed, viz. took of other Churches, &c. But as private as this Ten Pound was given, it came to be known; and that is the thing which disturbed the poor Man, the discovery of it hath vexed him and his Brethren, more than ever it did him good; for he always pretended to be against Taking Money for Preaching, when alas, I have offered to prove that, and several other Summs. thereof; but even — Thy Flurt at Richardson for taking Pay For what, as Clerk, he writes, doth much bewray Thy Folly and Injustice. Is't not fit, Who works for others, should be pay'd for it; And that by them who him to work desire? The Labourer is worthy of his Hire. So, now you begin to say, the Labourer is worthy of his Hire: Sure you will forbear to call others Hirelings, now you have Hirelings amongst your selves; for as you have preten∣ded to preach, teach, and suffer freely, so you have pretended to write as Clerk freely: See my Book, Innocency vindicated, and Envy rebuked, &c. pag. 3. where I have quoted Geo. Fox's Order for Marriage, and other things; where he thus speaks, AND THAT NOTHING BE RECORDED FOR MONEY IN THESE THINGS, BUT FREELY, A FREE PEOPLE, AND IN LOVE SERVE ONE ANOTHER, &c. And for my part, I was Clerk to the Isle of Ely Monthly and Quarterly Meetings, about sixteen or eighten Years; and to the nearest of them I rid fourteen Miles, and to the farthest eighteen Miles Monthly, and I never took a Penny of Money, and indeed thought you had meant as you spake; but now all is come out, and 'tis time for your Hearers to look about them, since their Money is given to such as Sam Cater, who is a rich Man, and a great Trader. All which manifests your deep Hypocrisie. p. 21. The IX. Instance of their hypocrisie. THE next Proof of your Hypocrisie, that I shall mention, is, First, Your decrying all Learning; and next, Your assuming to your selves such Learning as you never had, nor do at all understand: The first Instance of these, is that remarkable Book, viz. George Fox's, Printed 1659. Entituled, A Primer for the Doctors and Scholars of Europe, &c. Behold how contemp∣tuously there he speaks both of Learning, and the Learned; wherein is con∣tained 2434 Queries, proposed to the Doctors and Scholars of Europe, but more particularly to the two English Universities; which are such idle, im∣pertinent, and unnecessary Queries, that his Design could be nothing else, but to bring both Learning, and the Learned into Contempt, and to magni∣fie his own Parts and Abilities; as that Geo. Fox, who but a little before sate upon is Shoemakers Seat, working Journey-work at Manchester, for his Ma∣ster
Geo. Gee, who could hardly write his Name, or read a Chapter without spelling; and that he of a sudden should be such a profound Scholar, as to propose 2434 Queries to all the Doctors and Scholars of Europe, and cha∣lenge them out into the Field, bids them come out of their Holes and Dens; bids them draw their Weapons; for the little Davids were risen, who had the Bas, the Slings, and the Stones, &c. I say, for him thus to chalenge all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe, at this rate, must needs design to render himself a Man of wonderful Parts to the Ignorant, and such as believed him to be led and guided by an infallible Spirit, as that he could discern who are Saints, and who are Devils, and that without speaking ever a As he said in his Book En∣tituled, The Great Mystery, pag 89. word: But had he proposed this multitude of Queries to all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe, Africa, and America; I suppose they could not have answered them; which put me in mind of an old Proverb, That one Fool may ask more Questions than an hundred Wise and Learned Men can answer. And if Geo. Fox, &c. will not now come out, and make good his own Queries, and shew his Learning, and meet me and others at a convenient place, to clear himself of these, and many other things I have against him; it will appear that he is guilty; and that he hath not the power he pretends to, and that he dares not come into the Field, and draw his Weapon, if he have any. And what a shame is this, for such an able Doctor, yea, such a profound Scholar, as once he thought himself able to deal with all the Do∣ctors and Scholars in Europe; and that after all this Brag, and monstrous Boast, dare not now come forth, dare not now shew his Head; but hip and skip up and down, hide himself in Holes, Dens, and Lurking Places; surely this will greatly redound to his Dis-repute and Infamy, in the eyes of all sorts of intelligent Persons; and will tend to his great Abasement, Shame, and Confusion of Face. For if he will come forth of his Den, and meet me; I offer to make it ap∣pear, That of the 2434 Queries he has propos'd in the said Primer to all the Doctors and Scholars in Europe, that he cannot answer 200 of them himself; which is such a piece of Hypocrisie as can scarce meet with a Parallel. Next, That you assume to your selves such Learning as you never had, nor do at all understand; I shall prove from another Book put forth by Geo. Fox, your great Doctor; Intituled, A Battledoor for Teachers, and Pro∣fessors to learn Plural and Singular, &c. For if I prove these things upon your Head-man, your principal Projector; and by you owned to be led by an in∣fallible Spirit, that cannot err, I prove it against you all; until you disown these his vain Boasts, and dissembling Pretences, by which he hath deceived Multitudes, and through which he hath so highly exalted himself: But to proceed; This Geo. Fox, who a little before ask'd what a Genitive Case was; what a Vowel was; what a Verb was; what an Adverb was; what a Noun was; and what a Pronoun was; in this Battledoor, set his Hand, and affixed his Name
to six several foreign Languages, (of which, he is not Master of one;) that it might go for current that he was inspired with the Gift of I do remember, that for 20 years together it was gene∣rally believed by many of us, that Geo. Fox had 24 Languages given him by di∣vine Inspiration in one night; nay, I lately spake with one, still eminent amongst them, who said he ever believ'd it, un∣til the sate Divisions; so that it was time to discover these Juggles; or else we should have had in a little time a heap of feigned Miracles, and perhaps out-done the Papists Legend. Tongues, (for that he had any other Reason, I cannot understand;) which was such a piece of Presumption, as no Age can paral∣lel. The Languages to which his Name in the said Battledoor is affixed, are, the Latin, the Italian, the Greek, the Hebrew, the Chaldee, the Syriack; and if upon examination, he be found ignorant of the Grounds and Rules of these Languages, as he certainly is, it will appear that he never was the Author of that Learned Piece: And if so; how have that People been cheated and deceived, who believed that Geo. For was led by an infallible Spirit; that he (as they pretend,) had been so endued with Discerning and Judgment; and that On all Occasions; (as this of writing the Battledoor, was one Occasion;) as that none need to give him discerning into Tongues, or Languages: But that what his Name was to, must needs be his own; I say, when they come to see that Geo. For, who for many years has gone for a learned Antiquary, a pro∣found Projector, a notable Queriest, to be manifested to be ignorant of these Languages, and not the Author of the Battledoor, ignorant of the Que∣ries, and not able to answer 200 of the 2434; when they come to see that all along he hath used these Tricks and Projects, only for a Name, and to raise himself into Greatness and Splendor; when they come to see that he is thus deceitful, and thereby manifested to be led by a fallible, deluding Spirit, What will they say? Nay, What can they say? Nay, What Excuse can they make for themselves, who thus have suffered themselves to be cheated, delu∣ded, and deceived by these his Pretences, in that they have not all this while examined things, but taken all on Trust, believe implicitly, as the Church [i. e. G. F. G. Whitehead, and a few like them,] believe? Oh shameful Hypocrisie! If this be on examination found in G. Fox, their Head; what are the inferiour Sort? That a Man who is no Scholar, should offer to en∣title himself Author of a Learned Piece, as that, whoever writ it must be knowing in six Foreign Languages, is such a Piece of Impudence, as I want Words to set forth. Well, To the Primer again: And that the Reader may observe the Au∣thor's Design, in proposing these Queries, could be nothing else, but to bring the Learned, and Learning it self into contempt; as I have already shewed; and to raise his own Fame, and Fortune by such Shams and Tricks; I will re∣cite a few of them, as they lie compact together; lest they should say I man∣gle them into Bits and Scraps, and so spoil the Sense, &c, which indeed is utterly impossible to do; for they are all Nonsense: And my way to shew them to be Nonsense, is to take them entire, as they Ile folded together, viz.
What is a Participle? and what is it in it self; and by whom come; and out of what Ground? And, why are these Declined? and why is the Word called Decli∣ned? who was the first Rise and Author of it; and by whom it came? And, why is the Word called Adverb? and what is an Adverb? the word it self; and who was its rise? And, why do you call the Word Conjunction? and who was its rise? And, why the Word Preposition; and who was its rise? And, who was the Au∣thor of the Word Interjection? And what are these two words in themselves? and whether or no these are not come up by the Art of Men, and Invention? Behold these Learned Queries! And let W. P. and all Learned Rabbies a∣mongst the Quakers, answer them if they can: for I profess ingenuously, I cannot tell who was the first Author of these Words, and a Thousand more, which are Queried; nor who spake them first; nor by whom they first came, no more than I can tell who spake the Word [Of] first: and who was its Rise; and who was the Author of the Word [To,] and many others of our English Words; which to know, is as unnecessary, as it is ridiculous to Que∣ry, &c. But if G. Fx had asked me, Who taught me to understand what a Genitive Case, an Adverb, a Conjunction, and an Interjection means? I could have told him, it was my Unkle Thomas Holeman; but to tell him who spake these Words first, and who was the Author of all these Words, and by whom they came, and what Ground they came out of, yea, and who was the Father that begat them, and the Mother that bare them; as Geo. Fox else∣where hath it; I profess, I cannot tell; neither do I understand his Riddles, they are so dark, so mysterious, and so full of Nonsense. Well, Reader, Take a few more of these Queries, and still as they lie en∣tire, by all means, lest they say I spoil the Sense, and wrong the Author, &c. when, alas! they are as great Nonsense as I can possibly make them, if I should take them all to pieces, viz. What is the Word Vowel in it self? And what was the Word As if it was not what it Now is, viz. A Vowel. Vowel? And what is the Word Diphthong? and who was the Author of these? and where are they called by any such Names in Scripture? So, who was the Author of these Names? and who gave them? And what are these Names in themselves, and of themselves? And came they not from the Art of Men, yea, or nay? Thus, Reader, I have given thee a Hint, a Taste, or Relish of Geo. Fox's Queries to the Doctors and Scholars of Europe; by which thou maist see how learnedly George Fox Catechizes them. I shall now only add a few of them, as they lie scattered up and down the said Primer, &c. and so leave him in his Thicket of Brambles, or confused Nonsense. What is a Major? What is a Minor? What is Extraction? What is Geome∣try? What is a Point? What is an Angle? What is a Plain Angle? What is an Obtuse Angle? What is an Acute Angle? What is Wolf-Madness? What is Dog Madness? What is Badger-Madness? &c. Having given this additional Hint of these mad, distracted or distracting Queries, I shall only add a few of his Manly Expressions, in his Chalenge to
to the Doctors, to come out of their Holes and Dens; to the end, That he, and the rest may come forth, and draw their Weapons, and shew their Cunning, when they see how they are chalenged, as they chalenged others, &c. See these Pages in the said Primer; pag. 4, 19, 21, 30, 36, 41, 55. Where are these Words, viz. These Queries are to call them out into the Field; — Let them come out now to little Children.—Little Davids are risen; who have the Bags, and the Sings, and the Srones; — Ye that profess your selves to be Wise, and Learned Men, and Scholars, and are Novices, and Fools; answer me:—Draw out your Weapon, if you have any, and answer me these things; come out of your Holes; do not Hip nor Skip from them: Answer every word in particular;—for you have Tongue enough sometimes; let us see now if it can wagg. These are your Words to the Scholars, &c. Now, if when you are call'd into the Field your selves, and to come out of your Dens, we shall see whe∣ther you can draw your Weapon; whether you have the Bags, the Sling, and Stones, you, like Goliah, boast of; and whether he and you can so wagg your Tongue, as to clear you from this Ninth Instance of Hypocrisie, with which he and you stand charged. The X. Instance of their Hypocrisie. THis I know for a certain Truth, that when they write the most notori∣ous Lies, and scandalous Defamations against such as they account their Adversaries; (and like the false Prophets of old, cry Peace to the wicked, and justifie the ungodly, who put into their Mouths:) yet this they have the impudence to father upon the Spirit of the holy and just GOD: Witness Geo. Whitehead's Book, Stil'd, Judgment fix'd, &c. And S. Cater's Narra∣tive, &c. And therefore, that I may not be like you, in saying, and not prove what I say to be true, I do hereby chalenge George Fox, Geo. Whitehead, William Pen, and Sam. Cater, to meet me any day next March, (giving me a Month's Notice,) at any Publick House in Bishop-Stortford, (being about the half-way from my Habitation;) where I offer to prove the Truth of what you deny, according to the Terms proposed in the foresaid Letter to the Qua∣kers, &c. Now therefore, if your Cause be good, you Notable Champions, come forth; you that have chalenged all the Doctors, Scholars, and Professors in Europe; come out of your Holes, and Dens, and Lurking-Places, and meet me: If you have the Bags, and the Slings, and the Stones you boast of; come forth of your Holes, and Dens, and Lurking-Places, yea, come into the Field, and draw your Weapons, if you have any worth the drawing; you know you have Tongue enough sometimes; come, let us see if it can wagg; and whether you be able with all your Stones, and Bags, and Slings, and Wea∣pons (you so much boast of,) to clear your selves from the guilt of Hypo∣crisie: For,
The Day is come, O Babylon! that thou must be tried; and thy Mask must be taken off, thou Painted-Harlot; Thou hast long deceived the Nations by thy fine out-side Deckings, and Pharisaical Attire; but thy Fruit makes thee manifest; and by that we know thee to be the Harlot, and not the Spouse of Christ, nor true Bride: Men do not gather Figs of Thorns, nor Grapes of Thistles. Mildenhall, Novemb. 5th. 1690. Francis Bugg. Here follow Twenty four Queries propounded to your Protestant Hearers; who have begun to throw off the Yoak, which Geo. Fox, G. W. &c. have for many Years laden you with: And first, a few Words to you by way of Exhortation. FRIENDS, IT was Christ's frequent Counsel to his Disciples, to beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees; which, said he, is Hypocrisie: I know no one thing that He took more care to preserve his Disciples from, than that of Hypocrisie; with which the Pharisees were very apt to leaven their Proselytes: No doubt but much of their Doctrine was sound; or else Christ would not have said, They sate in Moses's Seat: Therefore whatsoever (said he) they bid you do, that observe, and do: But (mark) do not after their Works; for they say, and do not. That is to say, they spake some sound Truths, they carried it fair to their Proselytes, they were very precise in washing the Cup and Platter, in an Outside Righteousness, to be seen of Men; but inwardly they were rotten, inwardly they were proud, and disdained others, who, in GOD's Esteem, stood justified rather than they. And how far your Teachers are guilty of deep Hypocrisie, I have in part discovered, and doubt not but to make it yet more evident if they will meet me; which if they refuse, being four such Champions, as they doubtless, account themselves, then I will appeal to you, whether it be not a Token of their Guilt: I mean, such of you as still retain the Protestant Principles, and are not of G. Fox his Party. Query 1. Whether it was not great Hypocrisie in Geo. Fox, to stir up, counsel, and encourage Oliver Cromwell, his Officers, and Army, to fight with carnal Weapons; when, at the same time he did believe it utterly unlawful for a Christian Man so to do? Answer. Query 2. Whether it was not great Hypocrisie in Geo. Fox, and others, to vilifie, bespatter, and expose the Presbyterians, Independents, &c. as being of fighting Principles, and dangerous to the Government, in K. C. II's time;
thereby rendring them obnoxious to Sufferings, whenas they themselves, by their Advice, Counsel, and Encouragement to Oliver Cromwel, &c. (and that from the Word of the LORD:) were equally concerned in the same Cause and Quarrel? Query 3. Do you believe that Arch-bishop Cranmer compelled Edward VI. to sign a Warrant to Burn poor Joan of Kent, for Were Religion-sake; and that by this their Practice they Taught the Roman Catholicks the way of Perse∣cution? Answer. Query 4. If not; Then, Whether or no such of your Leaders, as have so writ, have not given away the Cause of Protestantism what in them lie; and abetted, vindicated, and asserted the Popish Cause; charging the Protestants with the original guilt of Persecution? Answer. Query 5. Whether Geo. Whitehead's calling the Doctrine of Doctor Robert Barns, who suffered Martyrdom for the Cause of Christ, Corrupt Doctrine; tending to practical Ran∣terism it self; yea, sordid Ranterism See p 259. of G, W's Judg∣ment fix'd, &c, against the 222, 223 Pages of my Book, De Chr. Lib. &c. Which are the Words of Dr. Barns. See the 298 Page in his Book, en∣tiluled, Mens Constitutions not grounded on Scripture, bind not the Conscience, &c. verbatim,, &c. be not a sign that he is Popishly affected? &c. And whether G. W. do not herein appear like his Bro∣ther Deceased, viz Bloody Bonner? Who fre∣quently charged the Martyrs with such Doctrine; as I could shew, were it pertinent: I say, in this do they not resemble each other, as if they were Twins? Query 6. Whether it be not as commendable to Address King William and Queen Mary, who are by all Men acknowledged true Protestants, as it was to Address the late King, who acknowledged himself a Roman Catho∣lick? Query 7. Whether it be not as lawful for Book-sellers to sell Protestant-Books; even such as discover the Hypocrisie of the Teachers and Leaders of Geo. Fox, and his Party, as for Benj. Clark (their Book-seller,) to sell Play-Books, Ballads, Papist-Books, Gypsy-Books, yea, and Ba—Books? Answer. Query 8. Whether it be not great Hypocrisie to pretend to Preach, Teach, Suffer, Write, and Record Marriages, and other things freely, and under colour thereof condemn all other Churches and Societies, as Hirelings, Lovers of filthy Lucre, Followers of Balaam for Reward, &c. and yet at the same time, take Money, Gifts, and Rewards themselves, for doing the same things, &c? Answer. Query 9. Whether it was not great Hypocrisie in Geo. Fox, &c. to write Queries to all Doctors and Scholars in Europe; and yet when Queries are pro∣pounded to them, they will not answer? If they tell you, they are as ready to Answer Queries, as to ask; then let them Answer my 15 Queries propo∣sed in De Christ. Lib. p. 72, to p. 78. p. 154, to p. 163. and in Paint. Harlot, p. 40, 41. if they can.
Query 10. Whether it be not great Deceit for Men to write a Book, and pretend a Concern of Conscience; that they do it for GOD's Glory, and as moved thereunto by the Eternal Spirit; and yet, to write such abominable Lies, Slanders, and scandalous Defamations, as that they dare not, or are ashamed to own their said Books? Query 11. Whether it was not great Presumption in Geo. Fox, and a Badge of intolerable Pride, to put forth a Book with 2434 Queries in it; when he himself cannot answer the odd 34 of them? Query 12. Whether it was not great Impudene in Geo. Fox, in his Bat∣tledoor, to set his Hand, and affix his Name to six or more Foreign Languages; as, Latine, Greek, Hebrew, Italian, Chaldee, Syriack, &c. and yet understand not one of them? Query 13. Whether it was not great Hypocrisie for Geo. Whitehead, Ste∣phen Crisp, William Penn, &c. to make a Law or Edict at their General Meeting at London, May 75. That their Hearers should constantly meet, and not Decline, Forsake, nor Remove their Meetings, like Worldly, Fearful, and Politick Professors; and yet themselves refused to stand in a like suffering capacity, relating to Sufferings with them? Answer. Query 14. Whether it be not great Hypocrisie in Geo. Fox, and his Par∣ty, to say, That GOD respects neither Time, Place, nor Persons; and there∣upon pretend, That for Conscience-sake they cannot give respect to their Superiours, by putting off their Hats; when at the same time they them∣selves compel their Apprentices to stand bare∣headed before them This Piece of Hypocrisie I testified against more than Fifteen Years since, by a Let∣ter to the then Yearly Meeting; which was before S. Cater and I had any Controversie; See my Book, Entituled, Innocency Vindicated, and Envy rebuked, &c. p. 8.: nay in their very Shops, as if it were the Presence-Chamber. Query 15. Did not Christ, when he Taught his Disciples to pray, Mat. 6.9. say, After this manner, therefore Pray ye; Our Father, &c.—And for∣give us our Sins, as we also forgive them that trespass against us. Now such as do not pray after this manner, are they not manifest Transgressors of this Precept of our LORD Jesus Christ, and found in the steps of the proud Pharisee, who thinks himself so righteous, as that he need neither make con∣fession of his Sins, nor ask forgiveness for Christ Jesus sake, in whose Name alone is Remission of Sins? Query 16. If you grant, that a neglect, or Re∣fusal of performing this part of Christian Duty, be a sign of a Pharisaical Pride See my Book, Entituled, The Quakers detected, &c. p. 12, 13, 14. Where I have en∣larged upon this their grand Errour. To what I have writ in that Book, let the Reader observe W. Tindal, who says in his Works, entituled The Exposition of the 6th Chapter of Matthew, pag. 222, 223. Because he knoweth that our Nature is so weak, (and in∣clinable to Sin,) therefore he teacheth us, daily to repent,— and daily to ask GOD Forgiveness: Seeing He comman∣deth us to ask, we may be bold so to do, and to believe He will FORGIVE us: No Man therefore needeth to despair. I hope they will not rail on this blessed Martyr, W. Tindal, (who suffered in the Flames,) as Geo. Whitehead did of the Doctrine of Dr. Rob. Barns; who called it corrupt Doctrine, tending to Ranterism; yea, sordid Ranterism.; then I do far∣ther Query, What is the Reason that Geo. Fox, Geo. Whitehead, and the rest of their Preachers, in their publick Prayers in your Assembly, do not pray after the manner that Christ hath prescribed; though not in the very Form of Words; yet after
His Precept; so, as to confess their Sins to GOD, and ask Forgiveness for Christ's sake; which they do not. Query 17. Seeing Edward Burroughs, in his Epistle writ at Dublin, To the Camp of the LORD in England, p. 2. [This is to go amongst Friends, printed 1656.] says, You who are called Quakers,—above all the Families of the Earth: The Tabernacle of GOD is with you, and his Dwelling Place is among you, And only among you is God known, &c. Now if so, that GOD be known Only by you, then the Query is, Whether all that be called Quakers, know the LORD? And whether none but the Quakers know the Lord? Answer to this, &c. The Answer to this Question will resolve, Whether Geo. Fox, who said, in his Book The Great Mystery, &c. and Solomon Eccles his Af∣firmation, in The Quaker's Challenge, pag. 6. that you, and you Only, are GOD's People. I say, whether you all be (as John Field, one of your Prea∣chers, says you are) of One Mind and Judgment, in this, and all other Matters? Query 18. Whether there did not a strong Delusion enter many about the Year 1659. As that Geo. Fox was inspired with the Gift of Tongues; and whether the recited Battledoor and Primer was not the Reason of that Opi∣nion; and if it come to be made appear (as that it will, if he will meet at the place aforesaid) that he is ignorant of the principal things contained in the said Books, then whether it will not appear as great a Juggle, Trick, and Sham, to raise his Name and Fame, as ever was used by Mahomet, or amongst the Papists about their feigned Miracles? Query 19. Since they have told us by their Book, Judas and the Jews, pag. 41. viz. Our faithful Chronicles of the bloody Tragedies of that professing Genera∣tion will tell future Ages other things, &c. What is the reason they do not bring out this their holy Chronicle they so much boast of? Or do they intend to fol∣low the Steps of the Papists, and bring it forth when every Man is dead that remember those Transactions; and that then it may pass for an holy Cheat, or like one of their feigned Miracles? &c. Query 20. Whether do you believe the Teachers and Preachers amongst you be so qualified as they pretend in their Book, Judas and the Jews, pag. 58. viz. We need none to give us Discerning or Judgment; Christ hath furnished us already, and doth on all Occasions: And as Geo. Fox pretends, in his Book styled The Mystery of the great Whore, &c. pag. 89. where he says, They can discern who are Saints, who are Deuils, and who are Apostates, with∣out speaking ever a Word? &c. I say, if you think them so qualified, then bid them shew in which of them three States are Geo. Smith, Tho. Rudyard,
Rob. Sandiland, and John Tysoe, since none need to give them Discerning or Judgment, for that they, at all Times, and on all Occasions, are so plentiful∣ly endued, as to know who are Devils, who are Saints, and who are Apo∣states, &c. And if they fail in their Judgment, and chance to call an Apo∣state a Saint, I hope you will then begin to see they are got a good Stride to Rome, by their feigned Miracles, and pretended Infallibility. Query 21. Geo. Fox says, in his Book, The great Mystery, &c. The Work of the Ministers of the Gospel was not to reflect upon Persons.— And this Reflect∣ing upon Persons was never the way to beget to GOD— is a Mark of a False Prophet, &c. Now if this be true, what do you think of George Whitehead, who in his Letter to me, printed in his Judgment fixed, &c. calls me ten or twelve times Informer, when the Name was so odious at that time, that, in some parts of the Kingdom, he that was known to be an Informer, could hardly pass without danger of his Life; and yet this meek, serious, and sin∣cere Geo. Whitehead, as sometimes he pretends to be, had the Impudence thus to call me, and expose me in print, through the Nation; besides abundance of other bad Names, as Wolf, Dog, Beast, Child of the Devil, Enemy of all Righteousness, and the like. I say, besides these, and many more, yet Informer was the frequent Epithet he gave me in almost every Page, on pur∣pose to inculcate and leaven the People, and yet at the same time knew that I was no such manner of Person, but had suffered more by Informers For besides more than three Years Imprisonment for Mee∣tings, Isuffered the loss or three Ten Pound Fines for the Non∣ability of Geo. Thorowgood, at Ely, in the Isle of Ely; for which they took near Fifty Pounds worth of Goods. And a Ten Pound Fine for the Nonability of Ja. Webb: And a Fine of Twty Pounds for William Benet having a Meeting at my House; besides six or eight small Ten Shilling Fines: For all which I made no Complaint. But indeed, when a Fifteen Pound Fine came on me for Sam. Cater, through his not telling his Name and Habitation, I was not willing to pay that; and I am glad I was not so tame as to be Priest-ridden by S. Cater. And for this matter I refer the Reader to my Book entituled, The painted Harlot both stripp'd and whipp'd, pag. 39. nay, the whole Book, &c. than any one, if not all that had wrote against me had done. I say, if Geo. Fox his Judgment in the place aforesaid be of Credit, then I can prove G. W. as false a Propet as Muggle∣ton ever was; and, I am satisfied, a Man full of Ma∣lice and Revenge, or else he could never have writ so wrongfully of me and others, as he hath done. Query 22. Whether, in your Opinion, a Man may not go to the publick Worship established by Law, and yet be a Christian, and in the state of Sal∣vation? I ask you this Question, who, I hope, do not think Salvation en∣tail'd only to you under the Denomination of Quakers, as your Leaders have declared. Query 23. Whether the treacherous Practice of Geo. Whitehead, Sam. Ca∣ter, &c. did not resemble the Practice of Thomas Becket, that Popish Pre∣late, in King Henry the Second's Time, upon that Popish Principle of not keeping Faith with Hereticks, compared with their Practice in not keep∣ing that Covenant and Agreement they both made and recorded in their
Quarterly Book, at Hadenham in the Isle of Ely, the 1st of December, 1680. as at large is recited in my Book, Painted Harlot, &c. pag. 51, to 64. And then tell me, Query 24. Whether you do not believe that they, in the Breach of that their Covenant, did not run parallel with the said T. Becket; and thereby de∣clare to all the World, that even so early they did espouse that grand, trea∣cherous, Popish Principle of not keeping Faith with such as they account Hereticks? Novemb. 25. 1690. Fra. Bugg. Put your selves in Array against BABILON round about: All ye that bend the Bow, shoot at her, spare no Arrows. The LORD hath opened His ARMORY, and hath brought forth the Weapons of his Indignation; for this is the Work of the LORD GOD of Hosts.
A POSTSCRIPT TO New Rome. 1. ROME'S SISTER thou art rightly styl'd, And with her may compare: The Innocent thou hast beguil'd, Under Pretences fair. 2. Hypocrisie in thee is found, Thy Leaven is not good: Thy deep Deceit, thy Wit profound, In which thy Confidence stood, 3. Is now come forth to open View, That all may plainly see Thy Art, thy Craft; and well perceive Thy deep Hypocrisie. 4. How proud, like to the Pharisee, Thy Countenance appear: And how like to the Romish See, Thou dost thy Fabrick rear? 5. Thy Errours, which but few did see, Are now become thy Crime; And loaded therewith thou shalt be, And that from Time to Time: 6. A Crime from which thou can'st not, With all thy Subtilty, Clear thy self; 'tis such a Blot That on thy Face doth lie,
7. As ROME, thy SISTER, never had, At thy Age, charged on her; Nor any Crimes half so bad, At twice thy Age, upon her: 8. Though she at length, as Age grew on, Through her vile Imposition, Abhorr'd became, and grew a Scorn To ev'ry Christian Nation. 9. And dost thou think for to escape, With thy UNWRIT TRADITIONS, The Stroaks which Protestants do make Against thy Superstitions? 10. Against thy Errours, and thy Pride; Against thy Hypocrisies: Against thy Turning with the Tide, And other Enormities? 11. No, no, I say; as thou art found Treading the Papists Path, True Protestants will thy Pride wound, As Luther, and others, hath 12. Thy Elder SISTER's Tripple Crown; Whose Pride doth not exceed The Pride of thee, which doth abound, Exceeding her indeed. 13. Wherefore, ye skilful Archers bold, Come forth, and bend the Bow: Let none escape, as hath been told Of Babel, High nor Low. 14. But do to her as she t'others have, As a just Recompence: She hath been proud, against the LORD, And used Violence. Jer. 50.2. Fra. Bugg.
The Author being informed of G. Fox's Death, writ this in Answer; and desired it might be here inserted. Dear Sir, YOurs of the 15th. instant, I received; wherein, you tell me Geo. Fox is dead, and that my Book is not yet finished; and that you would know my Mind about it, &c. In Answer to which, I say, that Pope Adrian is dead, Pope Leo is dead, Pope Gregory is dead, and abundance more of other Popes are dead; What then? Did Luther, Frith, Barns, Tyndal, and the Protestant Party let fall their Testimonies because the Popes were dead? No such Matter: Popery is Popery still, and Error is Error still; and in like manner so it will be with this New Rome; for though George Fox be dead, yet Geo. Whitehead, his Successor, is alive, and as cun∣ning, as crafty, and as politick in erecting their New Church-Go∣vernment, and imposing upon those, who for Conscience sake could not submit to it, as ever Geo. Fox was; and therefore as much rea∣son now to manifest his, and their Errors, Innovations, and grand Hypocrisies as ever. And that it may farther appear, that there is just Cause for that Zeal that hath been raised up in several others, as well as in my self, against G. F. and the Leaders of this People, I shall cite some Passages writ by Three of his Preachers; (in which he was too much ado∣red and idolized, and no doubt will be so now he is dead.) First, That of Josiah Coal, in a Letter from Barbadoes. Dear G. Fox, who art the Father of many Nations; whose Life hath reached through us thy Children even to the Isles afar off, to the be∣getting many again to a lively Hope; for which Generations to come shall call thee Blessed; whose Being and Habitation is in the Power of the Highest, in which thou rules and governs in Righteousness, and thy Kingdom is established in Peace, and the increase thereof is with∣out end. Next, That of S. Eccles Quakers Chalenge. p. 6., who writ of G. F. these Words, (which were not fit to be said of any Mortal;) viz, A Prophet indeed;—It was said of Christ, That He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and
the World knew him not; SO it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said he was not; but thou shalt feel this Prophet one day as heavy as a Milstone upon thee: and though the World knows him not, yet he is known. And next, that of John Audland, in a Letter of his to G. F. from the West of England. Dear, and precious one, in whom my Life is bound up; and my strength in thee stands; by thy Breathings I am nou∣rished; by thee my strength is renewed; Blessed art thou for ever∣more; and blessed are all they that enjoy thee; Life and Strength comes from thee, Holy One.—Daily do I find thy Presence with me, which doth exceedingly preserve me; for I cannot reign but in thy Presence and Power. Pray for me, that I may stand in thy Dread for evermore. — Pray for us all, that in thy Power we may abide for evermore: I am thine, begotten, and nourished by thee, and in thy Power am I preserved. Glory unto thee, Holy One, for ever. These, and many other Idolatrous, if not Blasphemous Names and Titles, have been given and attributed to G. F. See Tho. Crisp's first Part of Babel's Builders, &c, p. 7. and his 5th Part, p. 16. And W. Roger's 5th par. Christ. Qua∣ker, &c. p. 77. And Painted Harlot, &c. Preface, p. 6. And The Quakers Ʋnmask'd, p. 15. The Spirit of the Hat, &c, p. 27, 28. And, Tyranny and Hypocrisie, &c. p. 19. which I never heard that ever he disown'd, or testified against; but instead thereof, was a great Countenancer and Encourager of such Elatterers, and a great Boaster of his own State, &c. And therefore it lies now upon his Successor and Successors, to justifie, excuse, or condemn these Errors, and others, in my Book set forth. And seeing G. F. is dead, I do hereby chalenge Stephen Crisp to meet me (with the rest before-mentioned, p. 19.) since Geo. Whitehead hath a mind he should be his Partner, (which is more than Rob. and S. Duncon would have desi∣red (if they had heen alive,) for Reasons they knew;) so let it be hastned: What I writ, I writ when he was living; and now he is gone, there are enough to Answer for him, and themselves, if they be able. January 18; 1690/1 Sir, I am yours in Sincerity, Fra. Bugg. FINIS.
ERRATA. Pag. 12. l. 28. for such read Truth. p. 15. l. last, for is read his. p. 17. l. last, for lle read lie. p. 18. l. 1. for come read it came. p. 22. l. 9. for Impudene, read Impudence. Advertisements of Books sold by J. Gwillim, in Bishopsgate-street, over against the Great James, Bookseller. 1. THE Painted Harlot both stripp'd and whipp'd, &c. By Fra. Bugg. 2. Reason against Rayling, and Truth against Falshood; being a Conclusive Postscript to be annexed to the Book entituled The pain∣ted Harlot, &c. By Fra. Bugg. 3. Innocency Vindicated, and Envy Rebuked; being a brief An∣swer to Geo. Whitehead, and John Tysoe, &c. By Fra. Bugg. 4. The Quakers detected, their Errours confuted, and their Hypo∣crisie discovered, &c. By Fra. Bugg. 5. Battering Rams against New Rome, &c. By Fra. Bugg. All five in Quarto; with other Books wrote by divers Authors on the same Subject, bound together, as well as sold severally, &c. De Christiana Libertate; or Liberty of Conscience upon its true and proper Grounds, Asserted and Vindicated, and the Mischiefs of Imposition amongst the People called Quakers made manifest. In two Parts: The First— by a nameless, yet an approved Author. The Second— by Fra. Bugg. In Octavo, Bound. The Quakers unmask'd, [i.e. Geo. Fox, and his Party,] Their Double Dealing, and False-heartedness discovered, &c. Folio. A Looking-Glass for the Quakers, in two Columns; wherein they may in part see themselves, and may be seen by others. In Folio.
