B5541 13116836 97755
I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also: OR, A DISCOVRSE Touching PRAYER. From 1 Cor. 14. 15. Wherein is briefly discovered, 1. VVhat PRAYER is. 2. What it is to pray with the Spirit. 3. What it is to pray with the Spirit, and with the Understanding also. By JOHN BUNYAN. The Second Edition. But, we know not what we should pray for as we ought; onely the Spirit helpeth our infirmities, Rom. 8. 26. London, Printed for the Author, 1663.
I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. PRAYER is an Ordinance of God, and that to be used both in Publick and Private; yea, such an Ordinance, as brings those that have the Spirit of Supplica∣tion, into great familiarity with God; and is also so prevalent an action, that it getteth of God, both for the person that prayeth, and for them that are prayed for, great things. It is the open∣er of the heart of God, and a means by which the soul, though empty, is filled. By Prayer the Christian can open his heart to God as to a Friend, and ob∣tain fresh testimony of God's Friend∣ship to him. I might spend many words in distinguishing between publick and private Prayer; as also between that
in the Heart, and that with the vocal Voice: Something also might be spo∣ken to distinguish between the Gifts and Graces of Prayer; but eschewing this method, my business shall be at this time, only to shew you the very heart of Prayer, without which all your lifting up, both of hands, and eyes, and voices, will be to no purpose at all. I will pray with the Spirit. The method that I shall go in at this time, shall be, First, To shew you what true Prayer is. Secondly, To shew you what it is to pray with the Spirit. Thirdly, What it is to pray with the Spirit, and Understanding also. And so, fourthly, to make some short Use and Application of what shall be spoken. I. What Prayer is. For the first, What Prayer is. Prayer is a sincere, sensible, affecti∣onate pouring out of the heart or soul
to God through Christ, in the strength and assistance of the holy Spirit, for such things as God hath promised, or, ac∣cording to the Word, for the good of the Church, with submission, in Faith, to the Will of God. In this Description are these seven things. 1. It is a sincere, 2. A sensible, 3. An affectionate pouring out of the soul to God through Christ, 4. By the strength or assistance of the Spirit, 5. For such things as God hath pro∣mised, or, according to his Word, 6. For the good of the Church, 7. With submission in Faith to the Will of God. For the First of these, It is a sincere pouring out of the soul to God. Sincerity is such a Grace as runs through all the Graces of God in us, and through all the actings of a Chri∣stian, and hath the sway in them too, or else their actings are not any thing
regarded of God, and so of & in Prayer, of which particularly David speaketh, when he mentioneth Prayer, Psal. 66. 17, 18. I cryed unto the Lord with my mouth, & he was extolled with my tongue. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my prayer, Psal. 17. 1, 2, 3, 4. Part of the exercise of Prayer is sincerity, without which God looks not upon it as Prayer in a good sense: Then shall you seek me and find me, when you shall search for me with your whole heart, Jer. 29. 12, 13. The want of this made the Lord re∣ject their prayers in Hos. 7. 14. where he saith, They have not cryed unto me with their heart (that is, in sincerity) when they howled upon their beds. But for a pretence, for a shew in hypocrisie, to be seen of men, and applauded for the same, they pray. Sincerity was that which Christ com∣mended in Nathaniel, when he was un∣der the fig-tree; Behold an Israelite in∣deed, in whom there is no guile. Proba∣bly this good man was pouring out of
his soul to God in Prayer under the fig∣tree, and that in a sincere and unfained spirit before the Lord. The Prayer that hath this in it, as one of the principal ingredients, is the Prayer that God looks at. Thus, the Prayer of the Up∣right is his delight, Prov. 15. 8. And why must Sincerity be one of the essentials of Prayer which is accepted of God, but because sincerity carries the soul in all simplicity to open its heart to God, and to tell him the case plain∣ly without equivocation; to condemn it self plainly without dissembling; to cry to God heartily without comple∣menting. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoning himself thus: Thou hast cha∣stized me, and I was chastized, as a bullock unaccustommed to the yoak, Jer. 31. 18. Sincerity is the same in a corner alone as it is before the face of all the world. It knows not how to wear two vizards, one for an appearance before men, and another for a short snatch in a corner; but it must have God, and be with him in the duty of Prayer. It is not a lip∣labour
that it doth regard, for it is the heart that God looks at, and that which sincerity looks at, and that which Prayer comes from, if it be that Prayer which is accompanied with sincerity. Secondly, It is a sincere and sensible pouring out of the heart or soul. It is not, as many take it to be, even a few babling, prating, complementory ex∣pressions, but a sensible feeling there is in the heart. Prayer hath in it a sen∣sibleness of divers things: Sometimes sence of sin, sometimes of mercy re∣ceived, sometimes of the readiness of God to give mercy, &c. First, a sence of the want of mercy, by reason of the danger of sin. The soul, I say, feels, and from feeling, sighs, groans, and breaks at the heart. For right Prayer bubleth out of the heart when it is over-pressed with grief and bitterness, as blood is forced out of the flesh, by reason of some heavy burthen that lyeth upon it, 1 Sam. 1. 10. David roars, cryes, weeps, faints at the heart, fails at the eyes, loseth
his moisture, &c. Psal. 69. 3. & 38. 8, 9, 10. Hezekiah mourns like a dove, Isa. 38. 14. Ephraim bemoans himself, Jer. 31. 18. Peter weeps bitterly, Mat. 26. 57. Christ hath (Heb. 5. 7.) strong cryings and tears; and all this from a sence of the justice of God, the guilt of sin, the pains of Hell and destruction. The sorrows of Death compassed me about, the pains of Hell got hold upon me, and I found trouble and sorrow. Then cryed I unto the Lord, Psal. 116. 3, 4. And in another place, Psal. 77. 2. My sore ran in the night. Again, Psal. 38. 6. I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all the day long. In all these instances, and in hundreds more that might be named, you may see, that Prayer carrieth it in a sensible feeling disposition, and that first from a sence of sin. 2dly, Sometimes there is a sweet sence of mercy received; encouraging, comforting, strengthening, enlivening, enlightening mercy, &c. Thus David pours out his soul to bless and praise, and admire the great God
for his loving kindness to such poor vile wretches. Psal. 103. 1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me bless his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who healeth all thy diseases, and crowneth thee with loving kindness and tender mercies; who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who satisfieth thy mouth with good things, so that thy youth is renewed as the Eagles. And thus is the Prayer of Saints some∣times turned into praise and thanks∣giving, and yet are Prayers still. This is a Mystery, God's people pray with their praises, as it is written, Phil. 4. 6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing by Prayer, with supplication and thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. A sensible thanksgiving for mercies received, is a mighty Prayer in the sight of God; it prevails with him unspeakably. 3dly, In Prayer, there is sometimes in the soul, a sence of Mercy to be re∣ceived. This again sets the soul all on
a flame. Thou, O Lord God, (saith Da∣vid, 2 Sam. 7. 27.) hast revealed unto thy Servant, saying, I will build thee an house; therefore hath thy Servant found in his heart to pray unto thee. This provoked Jacob, David, Daniel, with others, even a sence of Mercies to be received, as you may see, Gen. 32. 9, 10, 11, 12. Dan. 9. 2, 3, 4. which caused them, not by fits and starts, nor yet in a foolish frothy way to babble over a few words written in a paper; but mightily, fervently, and continu∣ally, to groan out their conditions be∣fore the Lord, as being sensible; sen∣sible, I say, of their wants, their misery, and the willingness of God to shew mercy. A good sence of sin, and the wrath of God, with some en∣couragement from God to come unto him, is a better Common Prayer-Book, than that which is taken out of the Pa∣pistical See Mr. Fox his citation of the Mass, in the last Volumn of the Book of Martyrs. Mass-Book;
being the Scraps and Fragments of the devices of some Popes, some Friars, and I wot not what. 3. Prayer is a sincere, sensible, and an affectionate pouring out of the soul to God. O the heat, strength, life, vi∣gor, and affection that is in right Pray∣er. As the heart panteth after the Water∣brooks, so longeth my soul after thee, O God, Psal. 42. 1. I have longed for thy Precepts; I have longed after thy Salva∣tion, Psal. 119. 40. My soul longeth, yea, fainteth for the Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh cryeth out for the living God, Psal. 84. 2. My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy Judge∣ments at all times, Psal. 119. 20. Mark ye here, My soul longeth, it longeth, it longeth, &c. Oh what affection is here discovered in Prayer! The like you have in Daniel, Dan. 9. 19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do; defer not for thy Names sake, O my God. Every sylla∣ble carrieth a mighty vehemency in it.
This is called the fervent, or the working Prayer, by James, Jam. 5. And so again, Luke 22. 44. And being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly; or had his affections more and more drawn out after God for his helping hand. Oh how wide are the most of men with their Prayers, from this Prayer, that is Prayer in God's account. Alas, the greatest part of men make no con∣science at all of the duty; and as for them that do, it is to be feared, that many of them are very great strangers to a sencere, sensible, and affectionate pouring out their hearts or souls to God; but even content themselves with a lit∣tle lip-labour, & bodily exercise, mum∣bling over a few imaginary Prayers. When the Affections are indeed en∣gaged in Prayer, then, then the whole man is engaged, and that in such sort, that the soul will spend it self to no∣thing, as it were, rather than it will go without that good desired, even com∣munion and solace with Christ. And hence it is, that the Saints have spent
their strengths, and lost their lives, ra∣ther than go without the blessing, Psal. 69. 3. Psal. 38. 9, 10. Gen. 32. 24, 25, 26. All this is too too evident by the ig∣norance, prophaness, and spirit of en∣vy, that reigns in the hearts of those men that are so hot for the Forms, and not the Power of prayer: Scarce one of forty among them, know what it is to be born again, to have communion with the Father through the Son; to feel the power of Grace sanctifying their hearts: but for all their prayers, they still live cursed, drunken, whorish, and abomi∣nable Lives, full of Malice, Envy, De∣ceit, Persecuting of the dear Children of God. Oh what a dreadful after-clap is coming upon them! which all their hypocritical assembling themselves to∣gether, with all their prayers, shall ne∣ver be able to help them against, or shel∣ter them from. Again, It is a pouring out of the Heart or Soul: There is in Prayer, an unbo∣soming of a man's self, an opening of the Heart to God, an affectionate pour∣ing
out of the Soul in requests, sighs, and groans. All my desires are before thee (saith David, Psal. 38. 9.) my groan∣ings are not hid from thee. And again, My soul thirsteth for God, even for the li∣ving God: When shall I come and appear before God? When I remember these things, I pour out my soul in me, Psal. 42. 2, 3. Mark; I pour out my Soul: It is an Expression signifying, that in Pray∣er, there goeth the very life and whole strength to God. As in another place, Psal. 62. 8. Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your hearts before him. This is the Prayer to which the Promise is made, for the delivering of a poor Creature out of captivity and thraldom. If from thence thou shalt seek the Lord, thou shalt find him, if thou seekest him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, Deut. 4. 29. Again, It is a pouring out of the heart or soul to God. This sheweth also the Excellency of the Spirit of prayer: it is the great God to which it retires; When shall I come and appear before God?
And it argueth, that the Soul that thus prayeth indeed, sees an emptiness in all things under heaven; That in God alone there is rest and satisfaction for the Soul. Now she that is a Widow, and desolate, trusteth in God, 1 Tim. 5. 5. So saith David, In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion; deliver me in thy Righteousness, and cause me to escape; incline thine ear to me, and save me: be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may continually resort: For thou art my rock and my fortress; deliver me, O God, out of the hand of the unrigh∣teous and cruel man: For thou art my hope, O Lord my God, thou art my trust from my mouth. Many in a wording way, speak of God, but right Prayer makes God his hope, stay, and all. Right Prayer sees nothing substantial, & worth the looking after, but God: And that (as I said before) it doth in a sincere, sensible, and affectionate way. Again, It is a sincere, sensible, affe∣ctionate pouring out of the heart, or soul to God, through Christ. This,
through Christ, must needs be added, or else it is to be questioned, whether it be Prayer, though in appearance it be ne∣ver so eminent, or eloquent. Christ is the way through whom the Soul hath admittance to God, John 14. 6. and without whom, it is impossible that so much, as one desire, should come into the eares of the Lord of Sabbath. If you ask any thing in my Name, whatso∣ever you ask the Father in my Name, I will do it, Joh. 14. 13, 14. This was Da∣niels way in praying for the People of God; he did it in the Name of Christ, Now therefore, O our God, hear the pray∣er of thy servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lords sake, Dan. 9. 17. And so David, for thy Names sake, (that is, for thy Christs sake) pardon mine iniquity, for it is great, Psal. 25. 11. But now, it is not every one that maketh mention of Christ's Name in prayer, that doth indeed and in truth effectually pray to God in the Name of Christ, or through him. This coming
to God through Christ, is the hardest part that is found in Prayer: A man may more easily be sensible of his works, I, and sincerely too desire mer∣cy, and yet not be able to come to God by Christ. That man that comes to God by Christ, he must first have the knowledge of him: For he that comes to God, must believe that he is, Heb. 11. 6. And so he that comes to God through Christ, must be enabled to know Christ. Lord (saith Moses, Exod. 33. 11.) shew me thy Way, that I may know thee. This Christ, none but the Father can reveale, Mat. 11. 27. Mat. 16. 16. And to come through Christ, is for the soul to be enabledo God, to shroud it self under the shadow of the Lord Jesus, as a man shroudeth himself under a thing for safeguard. Hence it is that David so often terms Christ his shield, buckler, tower, fortress, rock of defence, &c. Psal. 18. 2. Psal. 27. 1. Psal. 28. 1. not only because by him he overcame his enemies, but because through him he found favour with God
the Father. And so he saith to Abra∣ham, Gen. 15. 1. Fear not, I am thy shield, &c. The man then that comes to God through Christ, must have faith by which he puts on Christ, and in him appears before God. Now he that hath Faith, is born of God (John 3. 5. 7.) born again, and so become one of the Sons of God (John 1. 12.) by virtue of which he is joyned to Christ, and made a mem∣ber of him, Ephes. 5. 30. And there∣fore, Secondly, He, as a member of Christ, comes to God, I say, as a mem∣ber of him, so that God looks on that man as part of Christ, part of his Bo∣dy, flesh and bones, united to him by election, conversion, illumination, the Spirit being conveyed into the heart of that poor man by God; so that now he comes to God in Christ's merits, in his blood, righteousness, victory, interces∣sion, and so stands before him; being accepted in his beloved, Ephes. 1. 6. And because this poor creature is thus a member of the Lord Jesus, and un∣der
this consideration, hath admittance to come to God: therefore, by vertue of this union, also, is the holy Sprit, conveyed into him, whereby he is able to pour out himself (to wit) his soul before God, with his audience. And this leads me to the next, or fourth par∣ticular. 4. Prayer is a sincere, sensible, affe∣ctionate pouring out of the heart or soul to God through Christ, by the strength or assistance of the Spirit. For these things do so depend one upon another, that it is impossible that it should be Prayer without there be a joynt concurrence of them: for though it be never so famous, yet without these things, it is only such Prayer as is re∣jected of God. For without a sincere, sensible, affectionate pouring out of the heart to God, it is but lip-labour; and if it be not through Christ, it falleth far short of ever sounding well in the ears of God. So also, if it be not in the strength and assistance of the Spirit, it is but like the Sons of Aaron, offering
with strange fire, Levit. 10. 1, 2. But I shall speak more to this under the se∣cond head; and therefore in the mean time, That which is not petitioned through the teaching and assistance of the Spirit, it is not possible that it should be according to the will of God, Rom. 8. 26, 27. But to proceed. 5. Prayer is a sincere, sensible, affe∣ctionate pouring out of the heart or soul to God, through Christ, in the strength and assistance of the Spirit, for such things as God hath promised, &c. Mat. 6. 6, 7, 8. Prayer it is, when it is within the compass of God's word; and it is blasphemy, or at best, vain bab∣ling, when the Petition is beside the Book. David therefore still in his prayer, kept his eye on the Word of God. My soul, saith he, cleaveth to the dust; quicken me according to thy word, Psal. 119. 25, 28. And again, Psal. 119. 41, 42, 58, 65, 74, 81, 82, 107, 147, 154, 169, 170. My soul melteth for heaviness; strengthen me
according to thy Word. And, Remember thy word unto thy servant, on which thou hast caused me to hope. And indeed, the holy Ghost doth not immediately quick∣en and stir up the heart of the Christian without, but by, with, and through the word, by bringing that to the heart, and by opening of that whereby the man is provoked to go to the Lord, and to tell him, how it is with him; and also to argue, and supplicate, according to the Word. Thus it was with Daniel, that mighty Prophet of the Lord. He understand∣ing by Books, that the Captivity of the Children of Israel was hard at an end; Then according unto that word, he ma∣keth his prayer to God. I Daniel, (saith he, Dan. 9. 2, 3.) un∣derstood by Books, (viz. the Writings of Jeremiah) the number of the years where∣of the Word of the Lord came to Jeremi∣ah, that he would accomplish seventy years in the desolation of Jerusalem. And I set my face to the Lord God, to seek by pray∣er and supplication, with fasting, and sack∣cloth
and ashes. So that, I say, as the Spirit is the helper and the governour of the Soul, when it prayeth according to the Will of God; so it guideth by and according to the Word of God, and his Promise. Hence it is that our Lord Jesus Christ himself did make a stop, al∣though his Life lay at stake for it. I could now pray to my Father, & he should give me more than twelve legions of Angels; but how then must the Scripture be fulfilled, that thus it must be? Mat. 26. 53, 54. As who should say, were there but a word for it in the Scripture, I should soon be out of the hands of mine enemies, I should be helpt by Angels; but the Scripture will not warrant this kind of praying, for that saith otherwise: It is a praying then according to the word & promise. The Spirit by the Word must direct, as well in the manner, as in the matter of Prayer. I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also. But there is no understanding without the Word; For if they reject the Word of the Lord, what wisdom is in them? Jer. 8. 9.
6. For the good of the Church. This clause reacheth in whatsoever tendeth either to the honour of God, Christ's advancement, or his Peoples benefit. For God, and Christ, and his People, are so linked together, that if the Good of one be prayed for, to wit, the Church, the glory of God, and advancement of Christ must needs be included. For as Christ is in the Father, so the Saints are in Christ, John 17. 23. And he that toucheth the Saints, toucheth the Ap∣ple of God's Eye, Deut. 32. 10. Psal. 17. 8. Zach. 2. 8. And therefore pray for the Peace of Jerusalem, and you pray for all that is required of you, Psal. 122. 6. Psal. 51. 8. Isa. 62. 6, 7. For Jerusa∣lem will never be in perfect peace, un∣til she be in Heaven; and there is no∣thing that Christ doth more desire, than to have her there. That also is the place, that God through Christ hath gi∣ven to her. He then that prayeth for the peace and good of Sion, or the Church, doth ask that in prayer which Christ hath purchased with his Blood;
and also, that which the Father hath gi∣ven to him as the price thereof. Now he that prayeth for this, must pray for abundance of Grace for the Church, for help against all its temptations, that God would let nothing be too hard for it, and that all things might work together for its good; that God would keep them blameless and harm∣less, the Sons of God, to his glory, in the midst of a crooked and per∣verse Nation. And this is the sub∣stance of Christ's own Prayer in the seventeenth of John. And all Paul's Prayers did run that way, as one of his Prayers do eminently shew, in Ephes. 1. 16, to the 21. and Chap. 3. ver. 14, to the 19th. with Col. 1. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And Phil. 1. 9, 10, 11. he saith, And this I pray, that your love may a∣bound yet more and more in all knowledge, and in all judgement; that ye may ap∣prove things that are excellent; that you may be sincere, and without offence until the day of Christ. Being filled with the fruits of Righteousness which are by Je∣sus
Christ, to the glory and praise of God. But a short Prayer you see, and yet full of good desires for the Church, from the beginning to the end: That it may stand and go on, and that in the most excellent frame of spirit, even without blame, sincere, and without offence, until the day of Christ, let its temptations or persecutions be what they will. And because, as I said, Pray∣er doth submit to the will of God, and say, Thy Will be done, as Christ hath taught us, Matth. 6. 10. therefore the People of the Lord in humility are to lay themselves and their prayers, and all that they have, at the foot of their God, to be disposed of by him as he in his heavenly wisdom seeth best; Yet not doubting but God will answer the desire of his People, that way that shall be most for their advantage, and his glory. When the Saints therefore do pray with submission to the Will of God, it doth not argue that they are to doubt or question Gods love and kind∣ness to them. But because they at all
times are not so wise, but that some∣times Satan may get that advantage of them, as to tempt them to pray for that, which if they had it, would neither prove to God's glory, nor his Peoples good: 1 John 5. 14, 15. Yet this is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his Will, he hear∣eth us: And if we know that he heareth us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the Petition that we ask of him; that is, we asking in the Spirit of grace and supplication. For, as I said before, that Petition that is not put up in and through the Spirit, it is not to be an∣swered, because it is beside the Will of God. For the Spirit only knoweth that, and so consequently knoweth how to pray according to that Will of God. For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of a man that is in him? even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. But more of this hereafter. Thus you see, first, what Prayer is. Now to proceed.
II. I will pray with the Spirit. Now to pray with the Spirit; for that's the praying man, and none else, so as to be accepted of God: It is for a man (as aforesaid) sincerely and sen∣sibly, with affection to come to God through Christ, &c. which sincere, sen∣sible, and affectionate coming, must be by the working of God's Spirit. There is no man, nor Church in the world, that can come to God in Prayer but by the assistance of the holy Spirit; For (Eph. 2. 18.) through Christ we all have access by one Spirit unto the Father. Wherefore Paul saith, We know not what we should pray for as we ought; but the Spirit it self maketh intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. And he that searcheth the heart, knoweth the meaning of the Spirit, because he ma∣keth intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. And because there is in this Scripture so full a discovery of the Spirit of Prayer, and of mans in∣ability
to pray without it; therefore I shall in a few words comment upon it. Rom. 15. 16. For we.] Consider first the person speaking, even Paul, and in his person all the Apostles. We Apo∣stles, we extraordinary Officers, the wise Master-builders, that have some of us been caught up into Paradise, 1 Cor. 3. 10. 2 Cor. 12. 4. We know not what we should pray for. Surely there is no man but will con∣fess, that Paul and his Companions were as able to have done any work for God, as any Pope or proud Prelate in the Church of Rome, and could as well have made a See Mr. Fox's Acts and Monu∣ments. Vo∣lumn 2. Common-Prayer-Book, as those who at first com∣posed this; as being not a whit behind them, either in grace or gifts. For we know not what we should pray for.] We know not the Matter of the things for which we should pray, nei∣ther the Object to whom we pray, nor
the Medium by, or through whom we pray; none of these things know we, but by the help and assistance of the Spirit, Mat. 11. 27. 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11. Should we pray for Communion with God through Christ; should we pray for Faith, for Justification by Grace, and a truly sanctified heart? None of these things know we. For, As no man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of a man that is in him; even so the things of God knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 11. But here (alas!) the Apostles speak of in∣ward and spiritual things, which the world knows not, Isa. 29. 11. Again, As they know not the Mat∣ter, &c. of Prayer, without the help of the Spirit, so neither know they the Manner thereof without the same; and therefore he addeth, We know not what we should pray for as we ought; but, the Spirit helpeth our infirmities, with sighs and groans which cannot be uttered. Mark here, they could not so well and so fully come off in the manner of per∣forming
this duty, as these in our dayes think they can. The Apostles when they were at the best, yea, when the holy Ghost assisted them, yet then they were fain to come off with sighs and groans; falling short of expressing their mind, but with sighs and groans, which cannot be uttered. But here now, the wise men of our dayes are so well skill'd, as that they have both the Manner and Matter of their Prayers at their fingers ends; setting such a Prayer for such a day, and that twenty years before it comes. One for Christmass, another for Easter, and six dayes after that. They have also bounded how many syllables must be said in every one of them at their publick Exercises. For each Saints day also, they have them ready for the ge∣nerations yet unborn to say. They can tell you also, when you shall kneel, when you should stand, when you should abide in your seats, when you should go up into the Chancel, and what you should do when you come
there. All which the Apostles came short of, as not being able to compose so profound a manner. And that for this reason included in this Scripture, because the fear of God tyed them to pray as they ought. For we know not what we should pray for as we ought.] Mark this, As we ought. For the not thinking of this word, or at least, the not understanding it, in the spirit and truth of it, hath occasioned these men to devise, as Je∣roboam did (1 King. 12. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33.) another way of Wor∣ship, both for matter and manner, than is revealed in the Word of God. But saith Paul, We must pray as we ought; and this we cannot do by all the art, skill, cunning and device of Men or Angels. For we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit; nay further, it must be the Spirit it self that helpeth our infirmities; not the Spirit and man's lusts. What man of his own brain may imagine and devise, is one thing; and what they are com∣manded
and ought to do, is another. Many ask and have not, because they ask amiss, Jam. 4. 3. and so are never the nearer the injoying of those things they petition for. It is not to pray at ran∣dom, that will put off God, or cause him to answer. While Prayer is making, God is searching the heart, to see from what root and spirit it doth arise. And he that searcheth the heart, knoweth (that is, approveth only) the meaning of the Spirit, because he maketh intercession for the Saints according to the will of God, 1 John 5. 14. For in that which is ac∣cording to his Will only he heareth us, and in nothing else. And it is the Spirit only that can teach us so to ask; it onely being able to search out all things, even the deep things of God. Without which Spirit, though we had a thousand Common-Prayer-Books, yet we know not what we should pray for as we ought, being accompanied with those infirmities that make us abso∣lutely uncapable of such a work. Which
infirmities, although it is a hard thing to name them all, yet some of them are these that follow. First, Without the Spirit, man is so infirm, that he cannot with all other means whatsoever, be enabled to think one right saving thought of God, of Christ, or of his blessed things; and therefore he saith of the wicked, God is not in all their thoughts, Psal. 10. 4. Un∣less it be that they imagine him altoge∣ther such a one as themselves, Psal. 50. 20. For every imagination of the thought of their heart, is only evil, and that con∣tinually, Gen. 6. 5. Gen. 8. 21. They then, not being able to con∣ceive aright of God to whom they pray, of Christ through whom they pray, nor of the things for which they pray, as is before shewed, how shall they be able to address themselves to God, without the Spirit help this infir∣mity? Peradventure you will say, By the help of the Common-Prayer-Book: but, that cannot do it unless it can open
the eyes, and reveal to the soul all these things before touched. Which, that it cannot, it is evident; because that is the work of the Spirit only: The Spirit it self is the revealer of these things to poor souls, and that which doth give us to understand them; wherefore, Christ tells his Disciples, when he promised to send the Spirit, the Comforter, He shall take of mine, and shew unto you; as if he had said, I know you are naturally dark and ig∣norant, as to the understanding any of my things; though ye try this course and the other, yet your ignorance will still remain; the vail is spread over your heart, and there is none can take away the same, nor give you spiritual understanding, but the Spirit. The Common-Prayer-Book will not do it, neither can any man expect that it should be instrumental that way, it be∣ing none of God's Ordinances; but a thing since the Scriptures were writ∣ten, patched together, one piece at one time, and another at another; a meer
mane invention and institution, which God is so far from owning of, that he expresly forbids it, with any other such like, and that by manyfold sayings in his most holy and blessed Word. See Mark 7. vers. 7, 8. and Col. 2. vers. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Deut. 12. 30, 31, 32. Prov. 30. 6. Deut. 4. 2. Rev. 22. 18. For right prayer, must aswell in the outward part of it, in the outward expression, as in the inward intention, come from what the soul doth appre∣hend in the Light of the Spirit; other∣wise it is condemned as vain and an a∣bomination; (Mark 7.) because the heart and tongue do not go along joynt∣ly in the same, Prov. 21. 9. Isa. 29. 13. neither indeed can they, unless the Spi∣rit help our infirmities. And this Da∣vid knew full well, which did make him cry, Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise, Psal. 51. 10, 11. I suppose, there is none can imagine, but that David could speak, and express himself as well as others, nay, as any
in our generation, as is clearly manife∣sted by his word, and his works. Ne∣vertheless, when this good man, this Prophet, comes into God's Worship, then the Lord must help, or he can do nothing; Lord open thou my lips, and then my mouth shall shew forth thy praise. He could not speak one right word, ex∣cept the Spirit it self gave utterance: For we know not what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self helpeth our infirmities. But Secondly, It must be a praying with the Spirit, that is the effectual praying; because, without that, as men are senceless, so hypocritical, cold, and unseemly in their prayers; and so, they with their prayers, are both rendred a∣bominable to God, Mat. 23. 14. Mark 12. 40. It is not the excellency of the voice, nor the seeming affection, and earnestness of him that prayeth, that is any thing regarded of God without it, Luke 18. 11, 12. Isa. 58. 2, 3. For man, as man, is so full of all manner of wick∣edness, that as he cannot keep a word,
or thought, so much less a piece of prayer clean, and acceptable to God through Christ. And for this cause, the Phari∣sees, with their prayers, were rejected. No question, but they were excellently able to express themselves in words, and also for length of time too they were very notable; but they had not the Spirit of Jesus Christ to help them, and therefore they did what they did with their infirmities or weaknesses on∣ly, and so fell short of a sincere, sensi∣ble, affectionate pouring out of their souls to God through the strength of the Spirit. That is the prayer that goeth to Heaven, that is sent thither in the strength of the Spirit. For, Thirdly, Nothing but the Spirit can shew a man clearly his misery by na∣ture, and so put a man into a posture of prayer. Talk is but talk, as we use to say, and so it is but mouth-worship, if there be not a sence of misery, and that effectually too. O the cursed hypocrisie that is in most hearts, and that accompanieth many
thousands of praying men, that would be so looked upon in this day, and all for want of a sence of their misery! But now the Spirit, that will sweetly shew the soul its misery, where it is, and what is like to become of it; also the intolerableness of that condition: For it is the Spirit that doth effectually convince of sin and misery, without the Lord Jesus, John 16. 7, 8, 9. and so puts the soul into a sweet, serious, sen∣sible, affectionate way of praying to God according to his Word. Fourthly, If men did see their sins, yet without the help of the Spirit, they would not pray: For they would run away from God, with Cain and Judas, and utterly despair of mercy, were it not for the Spirit. When a man is indeed sensible of his sin, and God's curse, then it is an hard thing to perswade him to pray; For saith his heart, There is no hope, It is in vain to seek God, Jer. 2. 25. Jer. 18. 12. I am so vile, so wretched, and so cursed a creature, that I shall never be regarded. Now here
comes the Spirit, and stayeth the soul, helpeth it to hold up its face to God, by letting into the heart some small sence of mercy, to encourage it to go to God; and hence it is called the Com∣forter, John 14. 26. Fifthly, It must be in, or with the Spirit; For without that, no man can know how he should come to God the right way. Men may easily say, they come to God in his Son: but it is the hardest thing of a thousand to come to God aright and in his own way, without the Spirit. It is the Spirit that searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 12. It is the Spirit that must shew us the way of coming to God, and also what there is in God that makes him desireable. I beseech thee (saith Moses) shew me thy way, that I may know thee, Exod. 33. 13. And Joh. 16. 14. He shall take of mine, and shall shew it unto you. Sixthly, Because without the Spirit, though a man did see his misery, and al∣so the way to come to God; yet he
would never be able to claim a share in either God, Christ, or Mercy, with Gods approbation. O how great a task is it, for a poor soul that comes sensible of sin, and the wrath of God, to say in Faith, but this one word, Father! I tell you, how ever hypocrites think, yet the Christian, that is so indeed, finds all the difficulty in this very thing, it cannot say, God is its Father. Oh! saith he, I dare not call him Fa∣ther; and hence it is, that the Spirit must be sent into the hearts of Gods people for this very thing, to cry, Fa∣ther, Gal. 4. 6. it being too great a work for any man to do knowingly, and be∣lievingly, without it. When I say, knowingly, I mean, knowing what it is to be a Child of God, and to be born again. And when I say, believingly, I mean, for the soul to believe, and that from good experience, that the work of Grace is wrought in him: this is the right calling of God Father; and not as many do, to say in a babling way, the Lords Prayer (so called) by heart, as it
lyeth in the words of the Book. No, here is the life of Prayer, when in, or with the Spirit, a man being made sen∣sible of sin, and how to come to the Lord for mercy; he comes, I say, in the strength of the Spirit, and cryeth, Father. ☞ That one word spoken in Faith, is better than a thousand prayers, as men call them, written and read, in a formal, cold, luke-warm way. Oh how far short are those people of being sensible of this, who count it enough to teach themselves and chil∣dren, to say the Lords Prayer, the Creed, with other sayings; when as Gods knows they are senceless of them∣selves, their misery, or what it is to be brought to God through Christ! Ah poor souls! study your misery, and cry to God to shew you your con∣fused blindness and ignorance, be∣fore you be to rife in calling God your Father, or learning your children ei∣ther so to say. And know, that to say, God is your Father, in a way of pray∣er,
or conference, without an experi∣ment of the work of grace on your souls, it is to say, you are Jews, and are not, and so to lie. You say, Our Father, God saith you blaspheme. You say, you are Jews, that is, true Christians: God saith, you lie. Behold I will make them of the Syna∣gogue of Satan, which say, they are Jews, and are not, but do lie. And I know the blasphemy of them that say, they are Jews, and are not, but are the Synagogue of Sa∣tan, Rev. 3. 9. Rev. 2. 9. And so much the greater the sin is, by how much the more the sinner boasts it with a pretended sanctity, as the Jews did to Christ, in John 8. 41, to 45. which made Christ even in plain terms to tell them their doom, for all their hypocri∣tical pretences. And yet forsooth, every cursed whoremaster, thief and drunkard, swearer, and perjured per∣son, they that have not only been such in times past, but are even so still; these, I say, by some must be counted the only honest men, and all because,
with their blasphemous throats and hy∣pocritical hearts, they will come to Church and say, Our Father. Nay fur∣ther, these men, though every time they say to God, our Father, do most abominably blaspheme, yet they must be compelled thus to do. And because others that are of more sober Princi∣ples, scruple the truth of such vain Tra∣ditions; therefore they must be looked upon to be the only Enemies of God and the Nation, Isa. 53. 10. when as it is their own cursed Superstition, that doth set the great God against them, and cause him to count them for his enemies. And yet, just like to Bonner, that blood-red Persecutor, they com∣mend (I say) these wretches, although never so vile (if they close in with their Traditions) to be good Church∣men, the honest subjects; while God's People are (as it hath alwayes been, Ezra 4. 12, to 16.) looked upon to be a turbulent, seditious, and factious people. Therefore give me leave a little to
reason with thee, thou poor, blind, ig∣norant Sot; It may be, thy great prayer is to say, Our Father which art in Hea∣ven, &c. Dost thou know the meaning of the very first words of this Prayer? Canst thou indeed, with the rest of the Saints, cry, Our Father? Art thou tru∣ly born again? hast thou received the Spirit of Adoption? dost thou see thy self in Christ? and canst thou come to God as a Member of him? Or, art thou ignorant of these things, and yet darest say, Our Father? Is not the De∣vil thy Father, (John 8. 44.) and dost thou not do the deeds of the flesh? and yet darest thou say to God, Our Father? Nay, art thou not a desperate Perse∣cutor of the Children of God? hast thou not cursed them in thy heart many a time? And yet, dost thou out of thy blasphemous throat suffer these words to come, even, Our Father? He is their Father, whom thou hatest and persecutest. But as the Devil presented himself amongst the Sons or God, Job 1. when
they were to present themselves before the Father, even our Father; so is it now: because the Saints are comman∣ded to say, Our Father; therefore all the blind ignorant rabble in the world, they must also use the same words, Our Father. Secondly, And dost thou indeed say, Hallowed be thy Name, with thy heart? Dost thou study by all honest and law∣ful wayes, to advance the Name, Ho∣liness and Majesty of God? Doth thy heart and conversation agree with this passage? Dost thou strive to imitate Christ in all the works of Righteous∣ness, which God doth command of thee, and prompt thee forwards to? It is so, if thou beest one that canst truly with God's allowance cry, Our Father. Or, is it not the least of thy thoughts all the day? and dost thou not clear∣ly make it appear that thou art a cursed Hypocrite, by condemning that with thy daily practice, which thou pre∣tendest in thy praying with thy dis∣sembling tongue?
Thirdly, Wouldest thou have the Kingdom of God come indeed, and also his Will to be done in Earth as it is in Heaven? Nay, notwithstanding, thou, according to the form, sayest, Thy Kingdom come; yet, would it not make thee ready to run mad, to hear the Trumpet sound, to see the Dead arise, and thy self just now to go and appear before God, to reckon for all the deeds thou hast done in the Body? Nay, are not the very thoughts of it al∣together displeasing to thee? And if God's VVill should be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, must it not be thy ruine? There is never a Rebel in Heaven▪ against God; and if he should so deal on Earth, must he not whirle thee down to Hell? And so of the rest of the Petiti∣ons. Ah! how sadly would even those men look, and with what terror would they walk up and down the world, if they did but know the lying and blas∣pheming
that proceedeth out of their mouth, even in their most pretended sanctity? The Lord awaken you, and learn your poor souls, in all humility, to take heed, that you be not rash and unad∣vised with your heart, and much more with your mouth; when you appear before God (as the wise man saith) Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing; especially to call God Father, without some blessed experience when thou comest before God. But I pass this. Seventhly, It must be a praying with the Spirit if it be accepted; because, there is nothing but the Spirit can lift up the soul or heart to God in Prayer. The preparation of the heart in man, and the answer of the tongue is from the Lord, Prov. 16. 1. That is, In every work for God (and especially in Prayer) if the heart run with the tongue, it must be prepared by the Spirit of God. Indeed the tongue is very apt (of it
self) to run without either Fear or VVisdom. But when it is the answer of the heart, and that such an heart as is prepared by the Spirit of God; then it speaketh so as God commands and doth desire. They are mighty words of David, where he saith, That he lifteth his heart and his soul to God, Psal. 25. 1. It is a great work for any man with∣out the strength of the Spirit; and therefore I conceive that this is one of the great reasons why the Spirit of God is called a Spirit of Supplication, Zech. 12. 11. because it is that which helpeth the heart when it supplicates indeed, to do it. And therefore saith Paul, Ephes. 6. 18.—Praying with all Prayer and Sup∣plication in the Spirit. And so in my Text, I will pray with the Spirit. Prayer, without the heart be in it, is like a sound without life; and a heart, without it be lifted up of the Spirit, will never pray to God. Eighthly, As the heart must be lift∣ed
up by the Spirit if it pray aright; so also it must be held up by the Spirit when it is up, if it continue to pray a∣right. I do not know what, or how, it is with others hearts, whether they be lifted up by the Spirit of God, and so continued, or no: But this I am sure of; First, That it is impossible that all the Prayer-Books that men have made in the world, should lift up or prepare the heart; that is the work of the great God himself. And in the Second place, I am sure, that they are as far from keeping it up, when it is up. And indeed, here is the life of Pray∣er, to have the heart kept with God in the duty. Exod. 17. 12. It was a great matter for Moses to keep his hands lifted up to God in Prayer; but how much more then to keep the heart in it! The want of this is that which God complains of, Ezek. 33. That they draw
nigh to him with their mouth, and honour him with their lips, but their hearts were far from him, (but chiefly) they that walk after the Commandments and Tra∣ditions of men: as the scope of Matth. 15. 8, 9. doth testifie. And verily, may I but speak my own Experience, and from that tell you the difficulty of Praying to God as I ought; it is enough to make your poor, blind, carnal men, to entertain strange thoughts of me. For, as for my heart, when I go to pray, I find it so loth to go to God, and when it is with him, so loth to stay with him, that many times I am forced in my Prayers; first, to beg of God that he would take mine heart, and set it on himself in Christ, and when it is there, that he would keep it there (Psal. 86. 11.) Nay, many times I know not what to pray for, I am so blind, nor how to pray I am so ignorant; onely (blessed be Grace) the Spirit helps our infirmities. Oh the starting-holes that the heart hath in the time of Prayer! none
knows how many by-wayes the heart hath, and back-lains, to slip away from the presence of God. How much pride also, if enabled with expressions? how much hypocrisie, if before others? And how little conscience is there made of Prayer between God and the Soul in secret, unless the Spirit of Supplication be there to help? VVhen the Spirit gets into the heart then there is Prayer indeed, and not till then. Ninthly, The soul that doth rightly pray, it must be in and with the help and strength of the Spirit; because it is impossible that a man should ex∣press himself in Prayer without it: when I say it is impossible for a man to express himself in prayer without it, I mean that it is impossible that the heart in a sincere and sensible, affecti∣onate way, should pour out it self be∣fore God, with those groans and sighs that come from a truly praying heart, without the assistance of the Spirit. It is not the mouth that is the main thing
to be looked at in Prayer, but whether the heart be so full of affection and earnestness in Prayer with God, that it is impossible to express their sence and desire. For then a man desires in∣deed, when his desires are so strong, many and mighty, that all the words, tears and groans that can come from the heart, cannot utter them. The Spi∣rit helpeth our infirmities, and maketh intercession for us with sighs and groans that cannot be uttered. That is but poor prayer, which is only discovered in so many words. A man that truly prayes one Prayer, shall after that never be able to expresse with his mouth or pen, the unutterable desires, sence, affection and longing, that went to God in that Prayer. The best Prayers have often more groans than words; and those words that it hath, are but a lean and shal∣low representation of the heart, life, and spirit of that Prayer. You do not find any words of Prayer that we reade of, come out of the mouth of Moses,
when he was going out of Egypt, and was followed by Pharoah, Exod. 14. 15. and yet he made Heaven ring a∣gain with his cry: But it was the un∣expressible, and unsearchable groans, and cryings of his soul, in and with the Spirit. God is the God of Spirits, Numb. 16. 22. and his eyes look further than the ourside of any duty whatsoever, 1 Sam. 16. 7. I doubt this is but little thought on by the most of them that would be looked upon as a praying people. The nearer a man comes in any work that God commands him, to the doing of it according to his will; so much the more hard and difficult it is. And the reason is, because man, as man, is not able to do it. But Prayer (as aforesaid) is not on∣ly a duty, but one of the most eminent duties; and therefore so much the more difficult. Therefore Paul knew what he said, when he said, I will pray with the Spirit. He knew well, it was
not what others writ or said, that could make him a praying person; nothing lesse than the Spirit could do it. Tenthly, It must be with the Spi∣rit, or else, as there will be a failing in the act it self, so there will be a failing, yea a fainting in the prosecu∣tion of the work. Prayer is an Ordi∣nance of God, that must continue with a soul so long as it is on this side glo∣ry. But as I said before, it is not pos∣sible for a man to get up his heart to God in Prayer; so it is as difficult to keep it there, without the assistance of the Spirit. And if so, then for a man to conti∣nue from time to time in Prayer with God, it must of necessity be with the Spirit. Christ tells us, That men ought al∣wayes to pray, and not to faint, Luke 18. 1, 2. And again tells us, that this is one definition of an Hypocrite, That either he will not continue in Prayer, or else, if he do, it will not be in the power,
(Job 27. 10.) that is, in the Spirit of Prayer, but in the Form, for a pre∣tence only, Mat. 23. 14. It is the easiest thing of an hundred, to fall from the Power to the Form; but it is the hardest thing of many, to keep in the Life, Spirit and Power of any one duty, especially Prayer: That is such a work, that a man without the help of the Spirit cannot so much as pray once; much less, continue with∣out it in a sweet praying frame, and in praying, so to pray, as to have his Prayers to ascend into the ears of the Lord God of Sabbaoth. Jacob did not only begin, but held it; I will not let thee go, unless thou bless me, Gen. 32. So did the rest of the Godly, Hos. 12. 4. But this could not be without the Spirit of Prayer. It is through the Spirit that we have access to the Father, Ephes. 2. 18. That same is a remarkable place in Jude, when he stirreth up the Saints by the Judgement of God upon the
Wicked, to stand fast, and continue or hold out in the Faith of the Gospel, as one excellent means thereto, without which he knew they would never be able to do it. Saith he, Build up your selves in your most holy Faith, praying in the holy Ghost, Jude 20. As if he had said, Brethren, as eternal Life is laid up for the persons that hold out only, so you can∣not hold out, unless you continue praying in the Spirit. The great cheat that the Devil and Antichrist deludes the World withal, it is to make them continue in the form of any Duty, the Form of Preaching, of Hearing, of Praying, &c. These are they that have a Form of Godliness, but deny the Power; from such turn away, 2 Tim. 3. 5.
Here followeth the Third Thing; to wit, What it is to pray with the Spirit, and with understanding. And now to the next thing, What it is to pray with the Spirit, and to pray with the Understanding also. For the A∣postle put a clear distinction between praying with the Spirit, and praying with the Spirit and Understanding. Therefore when he saith, he will pray with the Spi∣rit, he addeth, and I will pray with the Understanding [also.] This distinction was occasioned through the Corinthians not observing, that it was their duty to do what they did to the Edification of themselves, and others too; whereas they did it for their own commenda∣tions. So I judge. For many of them having extraordinary gifts, as to speak with divers tongues, &c. therefore they
were more for those mighty gifts, than they were for the edifying of their Bre∣thren; which was the cause that Paul wrote this Chapter to them, to let them understand, that though extra∣ordinary gifts were excellent, yet, to do what they did to the edification of the Church, was more excellent. For (saith the Apostle) if I will pray in an unknown tongue, my spirit prayeth, but my understanding (and also the under∣standing of others) is unfruitful. There∣fore, I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. 4, 5, - 12, 13, 14, 15, &c. reade the scope of the whole Chapter. It is expedient then that the Under∣standing should be occupied in Prayer, as well as the heart and mouth; I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with the Understanding also. That which is done with Understanding, is done more effectually, sensibly and heartily, (as I shall further shew anon) than that which is done without it. Which made the Apostle pray for the Colossians, That
God would fill them with the knowledge of his Will, in all wisdom, and spiritual un∣derstanding, Col. 1. 9. And for the Ephesians, That God would give unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation in the knowledge of him, Ephes. 1. 17. And so for the Philippians, That God would make them abound in knowledge, and in all judgment, Phil. 1. 9. A suitable understanding is good in every thing a man undertakes, either Civil or Spiritual; and therefore it must be desired by all them that would be a Praying people. In my speaking to this, I shall shew you what it is to pray with Under∣standing. Understanding is to be taken both for speaking in our mother-tongue; and al∣so experimentally. I shall pass the first, and treat only on the second. For the making of right Prayers, it is to be required that there should be a good or spiritual understanding in all them who pray to God.
First, To pray with Understanding, is to pray as being instructed by the Spirit, in the understanding of the want of those things which the soul is to pray for. Though a man be in never so much need of pardon of sin, and deliverance from wrath to come, yet if he under∣stand not this, he will either not desire them at all, or else be so cold and luke∣warm in his desires after them, that God will even loath their frame of spi∣rit in asking for them. Thus it was with the Church of the Laodiceans, they wanted knowledge or spiritual under∣standing; They knew not that they were poor, wretched, blind and naked: The cause whereof, made them, and all their services, so loathsome to Christ, that he threatens to spue them out of his mouth, Rev. 3. 17. Men without understanding, may say the same words in prayer as others do, but if there be an understanding in the one, and none in the other; there is, Oh there is a mighty difference in speaking the very same words! The
one speaking it from a spiritual under∣standing of those things, that he in words desires; and the other words it only, and there is all. Secondly, Spiritual understanding, Espieth in the heart of God, a readiness and willingness to give those things to the soul, that it stands in need of. David by this could guess at the very thoughts of God towards him, Psal. 40. 5. And thus it was with the woman of Canaan (Mat. 15. 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.) she did by Faith and a right Understanding, discern (beyond all the rough carriage of Christ) tender∣ness and willingness in his heart to save, which caused her to be vehement and earnest, yea, restless, until she did enjoy the mercy she stood in need of. An understanding of the willingness that is in the heart of God to save sin∣ners, there is nothing will press the soul more to seek after God, and to cry for pardon, than it. If a man should
see a Pearle, worth an hundred pounds, lye in a ditch, yet, if he understood not the value of it, he would lightly pass it by; but if he once get the know∣ledge of it, he would venture up to the neck for it. So it is with souls concerning the things of God; If a man once get an understanding of the worth of them, then his heart, nay, the very strength of his soul runs after them, and he will never leave crying till he have them. The two blind men in the Gospel, because they did certainly know that Jesus who was going by them, was both able & willing to heal such infirmities as they were afflicted with, therefore they cryed, and the more they were re∣buked, the more they cryed, Mat. 20. 29, 30, 31. Thirdly, The understanding being spiritually enlightned, hereby there is the way (as aforesaid) discovered, through which the soul should come unto God; which gives great encouragement un∣to it.
It is else with a poor soul, as with one who hath a work to do, and if it be not done, the danger is great; if it be done, so is the advantage: but he knows not how to begin, nor how to proceed, and so through discouragement, lets all alone, and runs the hazard. Fourthly, The enlightened Under∣standing, sees largeness enough in the Promises to encourage it to pray, which still adds to it strength to strength. As when men promise such and such things to all that will come for them, it is great encouragement to those that know what promises are made, to come and ask for them. Fifthly, The Understanding being enlightned, way is made for the soul to come to God with suitable arguments. Sometimes in a way of expostulati∣on, as Jacob, Gen. 32. 9. Sometimes in way of supplication; yet not in a ver∣bal way only, but even from the heart there is forced by the Spirit, through the understanding, such effectual Argu∣ments, as moveth the heart of God.
When Ephraim gets a right Under∣standing of his own unseemly car∣riages towards the Lord, then he be∣gins to bemoan himself, Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. and in bemoaning of himself, he useth such Arguments with the Lord, that it affects his heart, draws out for∣giveness, and makes Ephraim pleasant in his eyes, through Jesus Christ our Lord. I have surely heard Ephraim be∣moaning himself thus (saith God) Thou hast chastised me, and I was chastised; as a bullock unaccustomed to the yoak: turn thou me, and I shall be turned; for thou art the Lord my God. Surely after I was turned, I repented, and after I was instru∣cted (or had a right understanding of my self) I smote upon my thigh. I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. These be Ephraim's complaints and bemoanings of himself; at which the Lord breaks forth into these heart-mel∣ting expressions, saying, Is Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a plea∣sant Chlld? For since I spake unto him,
I do earnestly remember him still; there∣fore my bowels are troubled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, saith the Lord. Thus you see, that as it is required to pray with the Spirit, so it is to pray with the Understanding also. And to illustrate what hath been spoken by a similitude; Set the case there should come two a begging to your door, the one is a poor, lame, wounded, and almost star∣ved creature; the other is a healthful lusty person. These two use the same words in their begging, the one saith he is al∣most starved, so doth the other; but yet the man that is indeed the poor, lame, or maimed person, he speaks with more sence, feeling and understan∣ding of the misery that is mentioned in their begging, than the other can do; and it is discovered more by his affe∣ctionate speaking, his bemoaning him∣self: His pain and poverty makes him speak more in a spirit of lamentation
than the other, and he shall be pittied sooner than the other, by all those that have the least dram of natural affection or pitty. Just thus it is with God. There are some who out of custome and formality, go and pray; there are others, who go in the bitterness of their spirit: The one he prayes out of bare notion, and naked knowledge; the other hath his words forced from him by the anguish of his soul. Surely, that is the man that God will look at, even him that is of a humble and con∣trite spirit, and that trembleth at his word, Isa. 66. 2. Sixthly, An Understanding well en∣lightened, is of admirable use also, both as to the matter and manner of Pray∣er. He that hath his understanding well exercised, to discern between good and evil, and in it placed a sence, either of the misery of man, or the mercy of God; that soul hath no need of the Writings of other men, to teach him
by Forms of Prayer: For as he that feels the pain, needs not to be learned to cry, Oh! Even so he that hath his Understanding opened by the Spirit, needs not so to be taught of other mens prayers, as that he cannot pray without them: the present sence, feeling, and pressure that lyeth upon his spirit, pro∣vokes him to groan out his requests un∣to the Lord. When David had the pains of hell catching hold on him, and the sorrows of hell compassing him about, he need∣ed not a Bishop in a Surplice, to learn him to say, O Lord I beseech thee deli∣ver my soul, Psal. 116. 3, 4. Or to look into a Book, to teach him in a Form to pour out his heart before God. It is the nature of the heart of sick men, in their pain and sickness, to vent it self for ease, by dolorous groans and complaints to them that stand by. Thus it was with David, in Psal. 38. to the 12. vers. And thus, Blessed be the Lord, it is with them that are indu∣ed with the Grace of God.
Seventhly, It is necessary that there be an enlightened Understanding, to the end that the soul be kept in a conti∣nuation of the duty of Prayer. The People of God are not ignorant how many wiles, tricks, and temptati∣ons the Devil hath to make a poor soul, who is truly willing to have the Lord Jesus Christ, and that upon Christ's terms too; I say, to tempt that soul to be weary of seeking the face of God, and to think that God is not willing to have mercy on such a one as him. I, saith Satan, thou mayest pray indeed, but thou shalt not prevail. Thou seest thine heart is hard, cold, dull and dead, thou dost not pray with the Spirit, thou dost not pray in good earnest, thy thoughts are running after other things, when thou pretendest to pray to God. Away hypocrite, go no further, it is but in vain to strive any longer. Here now, if the soul be not well informed in its understanding, it will presently cry out, The Lord hath for∣saken me, and my God hath forgotten me,
Isa. 45. 27. Whereas the soul rightly informed and enlightned, saith, Well, I will seek the Lord, and wait; I will not leave off, though the Lord keep silence, and speak not one word of comfort, Isa. 49. 14. He loved Jacob dearly, and yet he made him wrestle before he had the blessing, Gen. 32. 25, 26, 27. Seeming delayes in God are no to∣kens of his displeasure; he may hide his face from his dearest Saints, Isa. 8. 17. He loves to keep his People praying, and to find them ever knocking at the gate of Heaven: It may be, sayes the soul, the Lord tries me, or he loves to hear me groan out my condition be∣fore him. The woman of Canaan would not take seeming denyals for real ones; she knew the Lord was gracious, Luke 18. 1, to 6. And the Lord will a∣venge his People, though he bear long with them. The Lord hath waited lon∣ger upon me, than I have waited on him▪ And thus it was with David, I
waited patiently, saith he: That is, It was long before the Lord answered me, though at the last he enclined his ear unto me, and heard my cry, Psal. 40. 1. And the most excellent remedy for this, is an understanding well inform∣ed and enlightened. Alas, how many poor souls are there in the world, that truly fear the Lord; who, because they are not well inform∣ed in their understanding, are oft rea∣dy to give up all for lost, upon almost every trick and temptation of Satan! The Lord pitty them, and help them to pray with the Spirit, and with the Un∣derstanding also. Much of mine own experience could I here discover; when I have been in my fits of agonies of spirit, I have been strongly perswaded to leave off, and to seek the Lord no longer; but being made to understand, what great sinners the Lord hath had mercy upon; and how large his Promises were still to sinners; and that it was not the whole, but the sick, not the righteous, but the
sinner, not the full, but the empty, that he extended his Grace and Mercy un∣to. This made me, through the assistance of his holy Spirit, to cleave to him, to hang upon him, and yet to cry, though for the present he made no answer; and the Lord help all his poor tempted and afflicted People to do the like, and to continue, though it be long, according to the saying of the Prophet, Hab. 2. 3. And to help them (to that end) to pray not by the inventions of men, and their stinted Forms, but with the Spi∣rit, and with the Understanding al∣so. And now to answer a Query or two, and so to pass on to the next thing. Query 1. But what would you have us poor crea∣tures to do, that cannot tell how to pray; the Lord knows, I know not either how to pray, or what to pray for?
Answer. Poor heart! Thou canst not (thou complainest) pray. Canst thou see thy misery? Hath God shewed thee that thou art by nature under the Curse of his Law? If so, do not mistake, I know thou dost groan, and that most bitterly. I am perswaded, thou canst scarcely be found doing any thing in thy calling, but Prayer breaks from thy heart, Rom. 8. 28. Have not thy groans gone up to Heaven from every corner of thy house? I know 'tis thus; and so also, doth thine own sorrowful heart witness thy tears, thy forgetfulness of thy calling, &c? Is not thy heart so full of desires after the things of another World, that ma∣ny times thou dost even forget the things of this World? Prethee reade this Scripture, Job 23. 12. Query 2. Yea, but when I go into secret, and in∣tend
to pour out my soul before God, I can scarce say any thing at all. Answer. Ah sweet soul! It is not thy words, that God so much regards, as that he will not mind thee, except thou comest before him with some eloquent Orati∣on. His eye is on the brokenness of thine heart, and that it is, that makes the very bowels of the Lord run over, A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise, Psal. 51. 17. 2. The stopping of thy words may arise from over much trouble in thy heart. David was so troubled some∣times, that he could not speak, Psal. 77. 3, 4. But this may comfort all such sor∣rowful hearts as thou art, that though thou canst not through the anguish of thy spirit speak much, yet the holy Spi∣rit stirs up in thine heart groans and sighs, so much the more vehement; when the mouth is hindred, yet the Spi∣rit is not.
Moses, as aforesaid, made Heaven ring again with his Prayers, when (that we read of) not one word come out of his mouth. But. 3. If thou wouldst more fully ex∣press thy self before the Lord; study, First, Thy filthy Estate. Secondly, Gods Promises. Thirdly, The Heart of Christ. Which thou mayest know or dis∣cern; 1. By his condescention and blood∣shed. 2. By the mercy he hath extended to great sinners formerly; and plead thine own vileness by way of bemoan∣ing, Christs blood by way of expostula∣tion; and in thy prayers, let the mercy that he hath extended to other great sinners, together with his rich promi∣ses of grace, be much upon thy heart. Yet let me counsel thee. 1. Take heed that thou content not thy self with words. 2. That thou do not think that God looks only at them neither. But.
3. However, whether thy words be few or many, let thine heart go with them; And then shalt thou seek him, and find him, when thou shalt seek him with thy whole heart, Jer. 29. 13. Object. 1. But though you have seemed to speak against any other way of praying but by the Spirit, yet here you your self can give di∣rection how to pray. Answ. We ought to prompt one another for∣ward to Prayer, though we ought not to make for each other Forms of Pray∣er. To exhort to pray with Christian di∣rection is one thing, and to make stin∣ted Formes for the tying up of the Spi∣rit of God to them, is another thing. The Apostle gives them no form to pray withal, yet directs to Prayer, Ephes. 6. 18. Rom. 15. 30, 31, 32.
Let no man therefore conclude, that because we may with allowance give instructions and directions to pray; that therefore it is lawful to make for each other Forms of Prayer. Object. 2. But if we do not use Forms of Prayer, how shall we teach our Children to pray? Answ. My judgement is, that men go the wrong way to learn their Children to pray, in going about so soon to learn them any set company of words, as is the common use of poor creatures to do. For to me it seems to be a better way for people betimes to tell their Chil∣dren what cursed creatures they are, and how they are under the wrath of God by reason of original and actual sin: also to tell them the nature of God's wrath, and the duration of the
misery; which if they conscientiously do, they would sooner learn their Chil∣dren to pray than they do. The way that men learn to pray, it is by conviction for sin; and this is the way to make our sweet babes do so too. But the other way, namely, to be busie in learning Children forms of prayer, before they know any thing else, it is the next way to make them cursed hy∣pocrites, and to puff them up with pride. Learn therefore your Children to know their wretched state, and con∣dition; tell them of hell fire, and their sins, of damnation, and salvati∣on: the way to escape the one, and to enjoy the other (if you know it your selves) and this will make tears run down your sweet babes eyes, and hear∣ty groans flow from their hearts; and then also you may tell them to whom they should pray, and through whom they should pray; you may tell them also of Gods promises, and his former grace extended to sinners, according to the word.
Ah! poor sweet babes, the Lord open their eyes, and make them holy Christians. Saith David, Come ye Chil∣dren, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord, Psalm 34. 11. He doth not say, I will nuzle you up in a form of Prayer; but, I will teach you the fear of the Lord; Which is to see their sad states by nature, and to be instructed in the Truth of the Gospel, which doth through the Spi∣rit beget Prayer in every one that in Truth learns it: And the more you learn them this, the more will their hearts run out to God in Prayer. God did never account Paul a pray∣ing man, until he was a convinced and converted man, Acts 9. 11. no more will it be with any else. Object. 3. But we find that the Disciples desired that Christ would teach them to pray, as John also taught his Disciples; and,
that thereupon he taught them that form, called the Lord's Prayer. Answ. First, To be taught by Christ, is that which not only they, but we de∣sire; and seeing he is not here in his person to teach us, the Lord teach us by his Word and Spirit; for the Spirit is it which he hath said he would send to supply in his room when he went away, as it is, John 14. 16. and 16. 7. Secondly, As to that called a Form, I cannot think that Christ intended it as a stinted Form of Prayer. First, Because he himself layeth it down diversly, as is to be seen, if you compare Matth. 6. with Luke 11. Whereas, if he intended it as a set∣form, it must not have been so laid down: for a set-form is so many words and no more. Secondly, VVe do not find that the Apostles did ever observe it as such,
neither did they admonish others so to do: Search all their Epistles: Yet surely they, both for knowledge to discern, and faithfulness to practise, were as eminent as any He ever since in the World which would impose it. But in a word; Christ by those words, Our Father, &c. doth in∣struct his People what Rules they should observe in their Prayers to God. 1. That they should pray in Faith. 2. To God in the Heavens. 3. For such things as are according to his Will, &c. Pray thus; or, after this manner. Object. 4. But Christ bids, Pray for the Spi∣rit: This implieth, that men without the Spirit, may notwithstanding pray, and be heard: See Luke 11. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Answ. 1. The speech of Christ there is directed to his own, vers. 1. 2. Christ his telling of them, that God would give his holy Spirit to them that ask him, is to be understood of giving more of the holy Spirit; For still they are the Disciples spoken to, which had a measure of the Spirit al∣ready; for he saith, When ye pray, say, Our Father, ver. 2. I say unto you, vers. 8. And, I say unto you, vers. 9. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good things to your children, how much more shall your heavenly Fa∣ther give the holy Spirit to them that ask him? Christians ought to pray for the Spi∣rit, that is, for more of it, though God hath endued them with it already. Quest. Then would you have none pray, but those that know they are the Disciples of Christ?
Answ. Yes. 1. Let every soul that would be saved, pour out it self to God, al∣though it cannot, through temptati∣on, conclude it self a Child of God. And, 2. I know if the Grace of God be in thee, it will be as natural to thee to groan out thy condition, as it is for a sucking Childe to cry for the breast. Prayer is one of the first things that discovereth a man to be a Chri∣stian, Acts 9. 12. But yet if it be right, it is such Prayer as followeth. First, To desire God in Christ, for Himself, for his Holiness, Love, Wis∣dom and Glory. For right Prayer, as it runs onely to God through Christ, so it centers in him▪ and in him a∣lone; Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none in Earth that I de∣sire (long for, or seek after) besides thee, Psal. 73. 25.
Secondly, That the soul might en∣joy continual Communion with him, both here and hereafter. I shall be sa∣tisfied, when I awake, with thine Image, or in thy likeness, Psal. 17. 15. For in thee we groan earnestly, &c. 2 Cor. 5. 2. Thirdly, Right Prayer is accompa∣nied with a continual labour after that which is prayed for. My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning, Psal. 130. 6. I will arise now, and seek him whom my soul loveth, Cant. 3. 2. For mark, I beseech you, there is two things that provoke to Prayer: One is, a detestation to sin, and the things of this life; The other is, a longing desire after Communion with God, in an holy and undefiled state and inheritance. Compare but this one thing with most of the Prayers that are made by men, and you shall finde them but mock-prayers, and the breathings of an abominable spirit; for even the
most of men, either not pray at all, or else only endeavour to mock God and the world by so doing: for, do but compare their prayer, and the course of their lives together, and you may easily see that the thing included in their prayer is the least looked after by their lives. Oh sad Hypocrites! Thus have I briefly shewed you, 1. VVhat Prayer is. 2. What it is to pray with the Spirit. 3. VVhat it is to pray with the Spirit, and with the Understand∣ing also. I shall now speak a word or two of Application, and so conclude, with, 1. A word of Information. 2. A word of Encouragement. 3. A word of Rebuke.
USE I. A Word of Information. For the first, to inform you, That as Prayer is the duty of every one of the Children of God, and carried on by the Spirit of Christ in the soul: So every one that doth but offer to take upon him to pray to the Lord, had need be very wary, and go about that work especially, with the Dread of God, as well as with hopes of the Mercy of God through Jesus Christ. Prayer is an Ordinance of God, in which a man draws very near to God; and therefore it calleth for so much the more of the assistance of the Grace of God, to help a soul to pray, as be∣comes one that is in the presence of him. It is a shame for a man to behave himself irreverently before a King but a sin to do so before God. And a
a King (if wise) is not pleased with an Oration made up with unseemly words and gestures; So God takes no pleasure in the sacrifice of fools, Eccles. 5. 1, 4. It is not long discourses, nor elo∣quent tongues, that are the things which are pleasing in the ears of the Lord; but a humble, broken and contrite heart, (Psal. 51. 17. Isa. 57. 15.) that is sweet in the nostrils of the heavenly Majesty. Therefore for information, know, that there are these Five Things that are obstructions to Prayer, and even make void the requests of the crea∣ture. First. When men regard iniquity in their hearts, at the time of their Prayers before God. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear my Pray∣er, Psal. 66. 18. For the preventing of temptation, that by the misunder∣standing of this, may seize thy heart; when there is a secret love to that
very thing, which thou with thy dis∣sembling lips dost ask for strength a∣gainst. For this is the wickedness of man's heart, that it will even love, and hold fast that, which with the mouth it prayeth against; and of this sort are they, that honour God with their mouth, but their heart is far from him, Ezek. 33. 31. O how ugly would it be in our eyes, if we should see a beggar ask an alms, with intention to throw it to the dogs! Or, that should say with one breath, Pray you bestow this upon me; and with the next, I beseech you give it me not. And yet thus it is with these kind of persons; with their mouth they say, Thy Will be done; and with their hearts nothing less. With their mouth say▪ Hallowed be thy Name; and with their hearts and lives, they de∣light to dishonour him all the day long. These be the prayers that become sin, Psal. 109. 7. and though they put them up often, yet the Lord
will never answer them, 2 Sam. 22. 42. Secondly. When men pray for a shew to be heard, and thought some body in Reli∣gion, and the like. These prayers also fall far short of God's approbation, and are never like to be answered, in reference unto eter∣nal life. There are two sorts of men that pray to this end. 1. Your Trencher-Chaplains, that thrust themselves into great mens Fa∣milies, pretending the Worship of God, when in truth the great busi∣ness is their own Bellies: which were notably painted out by Ahab's Pro∣phets, 1 King. 18. 19. and also Ne∣buchadnezzars wise men, Dan. 2. who though they pretended great devoti∣on, yet their lusts and their bellies were the great things aimed at by them in all their pieces of devotion. 2. Them also that seek repute and applause for their eloquent terms, and
seek more to tickle the ears and heads of their hearers, than any thing else. These be they that pray to be heard and seen of men, and have all their reward already, Mat. 6. 5. These persons are discovered thus. 1. They eye only their Auditory in their expressions. 2. They look for Commendations when they have done. 3. Their hearts either rise or fall according to their praise or enlarge∣ment. 4. The length of their Prayer pleaseth them; and that it might be long, they will vainly repeat things over and o¦ver, Matth. 6. 7. They study for en¦largements, but look not from what heart they come. They look for re¦turns, but it is the windy applause o men; and therefore they love not to be in a chamber, but among company and if at any time conscience thrust them into their closet, yet hypocris
will cause them to be heard in the streets; and when their mouthes have done going, their prayers are ended; for they wait not to hearken what the Lord will say, Psal. 85. 8. Thirdly. A third sort of prayer that will not be accepted of God, it is, When ei∣ther they pray for wrong things; or, if for right things, yet, that the thing prayed for, might be spent upon their lusts, and laid out to wrong ends: Some have not, because they ask not, saith James; and others ask and have not, be∣cause they ask amiss, that they may con∣sume it upon their lusts, James 4. 2, 3, 4. Ends contrary to God's Will, is a great Argument with God to frustrate the Petitions presented before him. Hence it is, that so many pray for this and that, and yet receive it not; God answereth them onely with silence, they have their words for their labour, and that is all.
Object. But God heareth some persons, though their hearts be not right with him, as he did Israel, in giving Quails, Psal. 106. 14. though they spent them upon their lusts. Answer. If he doth, it is in Judgment, not in Mercy: He gave them their desire indeed, but they had better have been without it, for he sent leanness into their souls, Psal. 106. 15. Wo be to that man that God answereth thus. Fourthly. Another sort of prayers there are that are not answered, and those are such as are made by men, and presented to God in their own persons only, with∣out their appearing in the Lord Jesus.
For, though God hath appointed Pray∣er, and promised to hear the Prayer of the creature, yet not the prayer of any creature that comes not in Christ. If you ask any thing in My Name, &c. John 14. 13. And, Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 3. 17. If you ask any thing in my Name, I will do it, Joh. 14. 14. Though you be never so devout, zealous, earnest and constant in prayer, yet, it is in Christ only that you must be heard and accepted. But alas, the most of men know not what it is to come to him in the Name of the Lord Jesus, which is the reason they either ive wicked, pray wicked, and also ie wicked. Or else, 2. That they attain to nothing else but what a meer natural man may at∣ain unto, as to be exact in word and eed betwixt man and man, and only with the righteousness of the Law, to ppear before God.
Fifthly. The last thing that hindreth Prayer, is, The Form of it without the Power. It is an easie thing for men to be very hot for such things, as Forms of Prayer, as they are written in a Book, but yet they are altogether forgetful to enquire with themselves, whether they have the Spirit and Power of Prayer. These men they are like a painted man, and their Prayers are like a false voice; they in person appear as Hypocrites, and their Prayers are an Abomination, Prov. 28. 9. VVhen they say they have been pouring out their souls to God, he saith, they have been howling like dogs, Hos. 7. 14. VVhen therefore thou intendest, or art minded to pray to the Lord of Hea∣ven and Earth, consider these follow∣ing Particulars. 1. Consider seriously what thou wantest; do not as many, who in thei words onely beat the air, and ask fo such things as indeed they do not de
sire, nor see that they stand in need thereof. 2. When thou seest what thou wantest, keep to that, and take heed thou pray sensibly. Object. But I have a sence of nothing; Then, by your Argument, I must not pray at all. Answer. First, If thou findest thy self sens∣less in some sad measure, yet thou canst not complain of that senslesness, but by being sensible. There is a sense of senslesness, ac∣cording to thy sense then, that thou hast of the need of any thing, so pray, (Luke 8. 9.) and if thou art sensible of thy senslesness, pray the Lord to make thee sensible of what-ever thou findest thine heart sensless of. This was the usual practice of the holy men of God; Lord make me to know mine
end, saith David, Psal. 39. 4. Lord, open to us this Parable, said the Disci∣ples, Luke 8. 9. And to this is annexed the Promise, Call upon me, and I will hear thee, and shew thee great and mighty things that thou knowest not, Jer. 33. 3. that thou art not sensible of. But, Secondly, Take heed that thine heart go to God as well as thy mouth; let not thy mouth go any further than thou strivest to draw thine heart along with it. David would lift his heart and soul to the Lord, and good reason: for so far as a man's mouth goeth along without his heart, so far it is but lip∣labour only; and though God calleth for, and accepteth the calves of the lips, yet the lips, without the heart, argueth not only senslesness, but our being without sense of our senslesness; and therefore if thou hast a mind to enlarge in Prayer before God, see that it be with thy heart. Thirdly, Take heed of affecting ex∣pressions, and so to please thy self with
the use of them, that thou forget not the Life of Prayer. I shall conclude this Use with a Caution or two. First, Take heed thou do not throw off Prayer, through sudden perswasions that thou hast not the Spirit, neither prayest thereby. It is the great work of the Devil to do his best, or rather worst, against the best prayers. He will flatter your false dissembling hypocrites, and feed them with a thousand fancies of well-doing, when their very duties of Prayer, and all other, stink in the nostrils of God; When he standeth at a poor Joshua's hand to resist him, (Isa. 66. 5. Zech. 3. 1.) that is, to perswade him, that neither his person nor performances are ac∣cepted of God. Take heed therefore of such false conclusions and groundless discourage∣ments; And though such perswasi∣ons do come in upon thy spirit, be so
far from being discouraged by them, that thou use them to put thee upon further sincerity and restlesness of spi∣rit in thy approaching to God. Secondly As such sudden temptati∣ons should not stop thee from Prayer and pouring out thy soul to God; so neither should thine own hearts corruption hinder thee. It may be thou mayest find in thee all those things before-mentioned, and that they will be endeavouring to put forth themselves in thy praying to him: thy business then is to judge them, to pray against them, and to lay thy self so much the more at the foot of God, in a sence of thy own viseness, and rather make an argument from thy vileness and corruption of heart, to plead with God for justifying and sanctifying grace, than an argu¦ment of discouragement and dispair. David went this way; O Lord, saith he, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great, Psal. 25.
USE II. A Word of Encouragement. Secondly, To speak a word by way of Encouragement (to the poor temp∣ted and cast-down soul) to pray to God through Christ. Though all Prayer that is accepted of God in reference to eternal life must be in the Spirit, for that onely maketh intercession for us according to the Will of God, Rom. 8. 27. Yet, because many poor souls may have the holy Spirit working on them, and stirring of them to groan unto the Lord for mercy, though through un∣belief they do not, nor for the present cannot believe that they are the Peo∣ple of God, such as he delights in; yet forasmuch as the truth of Grace may be in them, therefore I shall, to encourage them, lay down further these few particulars. 1. That Scripture in Luke 11. 8. is very encouraging to any poor soul that
doth hunger after Christ Jesus. In the 5th, 6th, and 7th verses, he speaketh a parable of a man that went to his friend to borrow three loaves, who, because he was in bed, denied him, yet for his importunity-sake he did arise and give him; clearly signifying, that though poor souls through the weak∣ness of their faith cannot see that they are the friends of God, yet they should never leave asking, seeking, and knocking at God's door for mercy, Mat. 7. 7, 8. Mark, saith Christ, I say unto you, Although he will not arise and give him, because he is his friend, yet because of his importunity (or restless desires) he will arise and give him as many as he need∣eth. Poor heart! thou cryest out that God will not regard thee, thou dos¦not find that thou art a friend to him but rather an enemy in thine heart by wicked works, Col. 1. 21. and thou ar as though thou didst hear the Lord say¦ing to thee, Trouble me not, I cannot
give unto thee; as he in the parable; Yet I say, continue knocking, crying, moaning and bewailing thy self: I tell thee, though he will not arise and give thee, because thou art his friend; yet be∣cause of thy importunity he will arise and give thee as many as thou needest. The same in effect you have disco∣vered, Luke 18. in the parable of the unjust Judge, and the poor Widow; her importunity prevailed with him. And verily, mine own experience tells me, that there is nothing that doth more prevail with God, than im∣portunity. Is it not so with you in respect of your beggars that come to your door? though you have no heart to give them any thing at their first asking, yet, if they follow you, bemoaning them∣selves, and will take no nay without an alms, you will give them; for their continual begging overcometh you. Are there bowels in you that are wicked, and will they be wrought up∣on by an importuning beggar? Go
thou and do the like, Luke 11. 11. It is a prevailing motive, and that by good experience; He will arise and give thee as many as thou needest. 2. Another Encouragement for a poor trembling convinced soul, is, To consider the place, throne, or seat, on which the great God hath placed him∣self to hear the petitions and prayers of poor creatures; and that is a Throne of Grace, Heb. 4. 16. The Mercy-Seat, Exod. 25. 22. Which signifieth, that in the dayes of the Gospel God hath taken up his Seat, his abiding-place, in mercy and forgiveness; and from thence he doth intend to hear the sin∣ner, and to commune with him, as he saith, Exod. 25. 22. (speaking before of the Mercy-Seat) And there will I meet with thee. Mark; It is upon the Mercy-Seat; There will I meet with thee, and there will I commune with thee, from above the Mercy-seat. Poor souls! they are very apt to entertain strange thoughts of God, and his carriage towards them, and sud∣denly
to conclude, that God will have no regard unto them; when yet he is upon the Mercy-Seat, and hath taken up his place on purpose there, to the end he may hear and regard the pray∣ers of poor creatures. If he had said, I will commune with thee from my Throne of Judge∣ment; then indeed you might have trembled and fled from the face of the great and glorious Majesty. But when he saith, he will hear and commune with souls upon the Throne of Grace, or from the Mercy-Seat; this should encourage thee, and cause thee to hope, nay to come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that thou mayest obtain mer∣cy, and find Grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16. 3. There is yet another Encou∣ragement to continue in Prayer with God, and that is this. As there is a Mercy-Seat, from whence God is willing to commune with poor sinners; so there is also by this Mercy-seat, Jesus Christ who con∣tinually
besprinkleth it with his blood. Hence it is called, The Blood of sprinkling, Heb. 12. 14. When the High Priest under the Law was to go into the Holiest, where the Mercy-seat was, he might not go in without blood, Heb. 9. 7. Qu. Why so? Answ. Because, though God was upon the Mercy-Seat, yet he was per∣fectly just as well as merciful. The Blood was to stop Justice from running out upon the persons con∣cerned in the Intercession of the High Priest, as in Levit. 16. 13, 14, 15, 16. To signifie, that all thine un∣worthiness that thou fearest, should not hinder thee from coming to God in Christ, for mercy. ☞ Thou cryest out, that thou art vile, and therefore God will not re∣gard thy Prayers. 'Tis true, if thou delight in thy vileness, and come to God out of a meer pretence. But if from a sence of thy vileness thou dost pour out thy heart to God, desiring to
be saved from the guilt, and cleansed from the filth, with all thy heart; fear not, thy vileness will not cause the Lord to stop his ear from hearing of thee. The value of the blood of Christ which is sprinkled upon the Mercy∣seat, stops the course of Justice, and opens a flood-gate for the mercy of the Lord to be extended unto thee. Thou hast therefore, as aforesaid, boldness to enter into the Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus, that hath made a new and living way for thee, thou shalt not dye, Heb. 10. 19, 20. Besides, Jesus is there, not only to sprinkle the Mercy-seat with his blood; but he speaks, and his blood speaks; he hath audience, and his blood hath au∣dience; Insomuch, that God saith, when he doth but see the blood, he will pass over you, and the plague shall not be upon you, &c. Exod. 12. 13. I shall not detain you any longer. Be sober and humble; Go to the Fa∣ther
in the name of the Son, and tell him your case, in the assistance of the Spirit, and you will then feel the be∣nefit of praying with the Spirit, and with Understanding also. USE III. A Word of reproof. This speaks sadly to you who never pray at all. I will pray, saith the Apostle, and so saith the heart of them that are Christians. Thou then art not a Christian that art not a praying person. The promise is, That every one that is righteous shall pray, Psal. 32. 6. Thou then art a wicked wretch that prayest not. Jacob got the name of Israel by wrest∣ling with God, Gen. 32. And all his Children bare that name with him, Gal. 6. But the People that forget prayer,
that call not on the name of the Lord, they have prayer made for them, but it is such as this, Pour out thy fury upon the heathen, O Lord, and upon the people that call not upon thy name, Jer. 10. 25. How likest thou this, O thou that art so far off from pouring out thine heart before God, that thou goest to bed like a dog, and risest like an hog, or a sot, and forgettest to call upon God? What wilt thou do when thou shalt be damned in Hell, because thou couldst not find in thine heart to ask for Hea∣ven? Who will grieve for thy sorrow, that didst not count mercy worth asking for? I tell thee, the ravens, the dogs, &c. shall rise up in judgement against thee, for they will according to their kind, make signs, and a noise for some∣thing to refresh them when they want it; but thou hast not the heart to ask for Heaven, though thou must eter∣nally perish in Hell, if thou hast it not.
2. This rebukes you that make it your business to slight, mock at, and undervalue the Spirit, and praying by that. What will you do, when God shall come to reckon for these things? You count it high Treason to speak but a word against the King. Nay, you tremble at the thoughts of it; and yet in the mean time you will blas∣pheme the Spirit of the Lord. Is God indeed to be dallied with, and will the end be pleasant unto you? Did God send his holy Spirit into the hearts of his People to that end, that you should taunt at it? is this to serve God? And doth this demon∣strate the Reformation of your Church? Nay, is it not the mark of implacable Reprobates? O fearful! can you not be content to be damned for your sins against the Law, but you must sin against the Holy Ghost?
Must the holy, harmless, and unde∣filed Spirit of Grace; the nature of God, the promise of Christ, the com∣forter of his Children; that without which, no man can do any service ac∣ceptable to the Father; Must this, I say, be the burthen of your Song, to taunt, deride, and mock at? If God sent Corah and his company headlong to hell, for speaking against Moses and Aaron, Numb. 16. do you that mock at the Spirit of Christ, think to escape unpunished? Heb. 10. 29. Did you never reade what God did to Ananias and Saphira, for telling but one lye against it? Acts 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Also to Simon Magus, for but un∣dervaluing of it, Acts 8. 18, 19, 20, 21. And will thy sin be a virtue, or go unrewarded with vengeance, that makest it thy business to rage against, and oppose its Office, Service, and Help, that it giveth unto the Children of God?
It is a fearful thing to do despite un∣to the Spirit of Grace: compare Mat. 12. 31. with Mark 3. 30. 3. As this is the doom of those who do openly blaspheme the holy Ghost, in a way of disdain and reproach to its office and service: So also it is sad for you, who resist this Spirit of Prayer, by a Form of man's inventing. A ve∣ry juggle of the Devil, that the Tra∣ditions of men should be of better esteem, and more to be owned, than the Spirit of Prayer. What is this less than that accursed Abomination of Jeroboam, which kept many from going to Jerusalem, the place and way of God's Appointment to worship, 1 Kings 12. 26, &c. And by that means brought such displeasure from God upon them, as to this day is not appeased? One would think that God's Judge∣ments of old upon the Hypocrites of that day, should make them that have heard of such things, take heed and fear to do so.
Yet the Doctors of our day are so far from taking of warning by the punish∣ment of others, that they do most des∣perately rush into the same transgressi∣on (viz.) To set up an Institution of man, neither commanded nor com∣mended of God: and whosoever will not obey herein, they must be driven either out of the Land, or the World. Hath God required these things at you hands? If he hath, shew us where. If not (as I am sure he hath not) Then what cursed presumption is it in any, Pope, Bishop, or other, to command that in the Worship of God which he hath not required? Nay, further: It is not that part only of the Form, which is several Texts of Scripture, that we are com∣manded to say; but even all must be confessed as the Divine Worship of God, notwithstanding those absurdi∣ties contained therein, which because they are at large discovered by others, I omit the rehearsal of them.
Again, Though a man be willing to live never so peaceably; yet because he cannot for Conscience sake own that, for one of the most eminent parts of God's Worship, which he never commanded: therefore must that man be looked upon as factious, seditious, erroneous, heretical; a disparagement to the Church, a seducer of the peo∣ple, and what not? Lord, what will be the fruit of these things! when for the Doctrine of God there is imposed (that is more than taught) the Traditi∣ons of men? Thus is the Spirit of Prayer disown∣ed, and the Form imposed; the Spi∣rit debased, and the Form extolled: they that pray with the Spirit, though never so humble and holy, counted Phanaticks; and they that pray with the Form, though with that only, coun∣ted the Vertuous. And how will the fa∣vourites of such a practice, answer that Scripture, which commandeth, that the Church should turn away from such as have a Form of Goaliness, but deny
the Power thereof? 2 Tim. 3. 5. And if I should say, That men that do these things aforesaid, do advance a Form of Prayer of other mens making, above the Spirit of Prayer, it would not take long time to prove it. For, he that advanceth the Book of Common-Prayer, above the Spirit of Prayer, he doth advance a Form of mens making above it. But this do all those who banish, or desire to banish them that pray with the Spirit of Prayer, while they hug and imbrace them that pray by that Form onely, and that because they do it. Therefore they love and advance the Form of their own, or others in∣venting, before the Spirit of Prayer, which is God's special and gracious Appointment. If you desire the clearing of the Minor, look into the Goals in England, and into the Alehouses of the same:
and I believe, you will find those that plead for the Spirit of Prayer in the Goal, and them that look after the Form of mens Inventions only, in the Alehouse. It is evident also, by the silencing of God's dear Ministers, though ne∣ver so powerfully enabled by the Spi∣rit of Prayer; if they, in conscience, cannot admit of that Form of Common-Prayer. If this be not an exalting the Com∣mon-Prayer-Book above either praying by the Spirit, or preaching the Word, I have taken my mark amiss. It is not pleasant for me to dwell on this; the Lord in mercy turn the hearts of the people to seek more af∣ter the Spirit of Prayer; and in the strength of that, to pour out their souls before the Lord. Only let me say, It is a sad sign, that that, which is one of the most eminent parts of the pretended Wor∣ship of God, is Antichristian; when it hath nothing but Tradition of men,
and the strength of Persecution to up∣hold, or plead for it. The Conclusion. I shall conclude this Discourse with this Word of Advice to all Gods People. I. BElieve, that as sure as you are in the Way of God, you must meet with Temp∣tations. II. The first day therefore that thou dost enter into Christ his Congregation, look for them.
III. When they do come, beg of God to carry thee through them. IV. Be jealous of thine own heart, that it deceive thee not in thy Evidences for Heaven, nor in thy walking with God in this world. V. Take heed of the flatteries of false Brethren. VI. Keep in the Life and Pow∣er of Truth. VII. Look most at the things which are not seen.
VIII. Take heed of little sins. IX. Keep the Promise warm upon thy heart. X. Renew thy acts of Faith in the Blood of Christ. XI. Consider the Work of thy Generation. XII. Count to run with the foremost therein. Grace be with thee. THE END.
