C2521 08602384 41438
THE KING HIS MAIESTIES Most Gracious SPEECH, Made to the Lord Maior, the Recorder, and the rest of the Al∣dermen of this Honourable and renowned City of London, upon Thursday, November the 25, 1641. And his Message to the Lords, concerning the Trayned bands, with Theirs, and the House of Commons Petition to His Majesty. And His Royall Answer by the Earle of Warwicke, and the Earle of Bristow. With the Examination of divers of the Irish, lately apprehended as suspitious Persons. And Orders from the High Court of Parliament, concerning the suppressing of Papists. As also, another Order for the recalling of the Trayned bands, to their daily Attendance, as formerly, Nov, 27, 1641. London, Printed for W. R. 1641.
FIVE MOTIONS Moved Jn the House of PEERS, FIrst, for the removeing of Papists from the Court. 2. For taking them quite off of all places of Command whatsoever, in their severall Counties: as Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Indges of Lyer, and Terminer, and Iustices of the Peace, &c. 3. For confining them to the severall places of their a∣bode, and within five miles thereof. 4. To restraine them from London, and from within-ten miles of the Court, wheresoever. 5. For taking away from them Licences, formerly granted, and to restraine the Grant of them for time to come; according to severall Propositions, sent up to their Lordships, by the House of Commons.
THE EXAMINATION OF Divers Irish apprehended as suspitious persons. THE House of Commons being informed of some Irish people lately come over; which were held to be suspitious persons, who lodged at one Mr. Rosses in Rosemary Lane: wher∣upon order was given for the serch of the said house, and the bringing of such Irish, as should be there found in the house: to the end they might be exa∣mined what account they could give for their re∣paire hither. And notice was given to the house of eight Irish men, and three women that were taken, and brought thither by vertue of their warrant; whereupon Order was given for their safe custody, and a Committee was appointed to meet in the Inner-Chamber of the Court of Wards, and to examine them: Then the Irish being thither brought before them, were examined what occasions they had hero in London, and whether they brought, received, or sent away Letters into Ireland, since their arrivall: but they were found to repaire hither onely for Necessities sake. And one of them in his Examination being de∣manded
of what Religion he was, answered, a Prote∣stant: and being asked how long he had beene so, an∣swered, three weekes: and being further demanded how he came so lately to be converted, having bin a Papist all his life-time before: he answered, that he was taken one night in the watch, and they converted him, which caused a smiling. After their Examination, it was ordered, that they should be sent unto the Gate-house. But after their Report, being delivered into the House by the Committee: upon consideration thereof, they gave order for their discharge. And it was likewise ordered, that their Host, Cap∣taine English, an Irish-man: upon Information, that he had bin lately in Spaine, should be brought before the same Committee to be examined: who when hee came, did answer very crosly; and being asked what Country-man he was, said, his name was English, and the like Answers he made to other Questions; for which peremptorinesse, he was turned over to the Lord chiefe Justice to bee further examined, with specification, that good baile should be taken for his forth-comming.
THE Kings Maiesties Speech to the Lord Major, Recorder, and Aldermen of LONDON. HIS Majesty expressed his gracious acce∣ptance of their Loyaltie, and Obedience, and that he was throughly possessed by that Dayes Action, of the Truth of their Affection towards him, as became good Subjects: and though he had heretofore doubted thereof; yet now finding to the contrary, hereafter they should find Him to beare in mind their loves: and promised them to governe, according to the Lawes of the Land; and especially, he would have great care for the maintai∣ning of the true Protestant Religion: according to the purity it was established by his late famous pre∣decessors, Queene Elizabeth, and his Royall Father King James And for that part of London-Derrie, which had not long since bin given to him by Law, Hee would most freely confirme, and settle it on them againe; so soone as the present jars, and rebellion in Ireland is quieted. And for what other requests they had made to him, he would have them in mind, and sa∣tisfie them therein, with all conveniencie.
HIS Majesties Message, to the Lords House, by the Lord-Keeper. His Majesty was expected at the Lords House on Friday last; and great preparation was made for his comming; but be∣cause he came not, it pleased his Majesty to send a Mes∣sage by the Lord-Keeper, as followeth. THat his Majesty thought it fitting, that the Trayned bands should be discharged, having long attended on both houses: not onely in respect that it was a great burden unto them, but also that he hoped, that there was no cause of dan∣ger, which might require their attendance any lon∣ger. When the Lords had received this Message, they sent word thereof to the House of Commons. The Answer of the House of Commons. The House of Commons returned a Message to the Lords, desiring them to joine with them in petitio∣ning to his Majesty, that they might be continued for some few dayes longer, till the affaires of the House were better setled. The Lords joyned with them, and sent to his Majesty to Hampton Court, to move him therein. They who carryed the Message to the King, were the Earle of Warwicke, and the Earle of Bristow.
His Maiesties Answer, THe Lords brought this Answer from His Majesty, that he was pleased that the Trayned Bands should be con∣tinued for foure or five dayes longer; till such time as the House of Commons had delivered up their Reasons, for longer continuance of them: and that on Tuesday next, he would be there himselfe, and then receive them. Die Saturni. Novemb. 27. 1641. An Order for the recalling of the Trayned Bands to their daily Attendance againe. To the Captaines of the Court of Guard. THis is to require and command your Attendance, as formerly, till further Order shall be by his Maiesty, and the House taken therein. FINIS.
