C3329 15613221 104125
C R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION For Discovery and Apprehension of several Traiterous Conspirators herein named. CHARLES R. WHereas George Rumford of Durham, Robert Davers, alias Danvers, Colonel Thomas Wogan, John Ma∣son, lately escaped out of the Tower of York, William Leving late escaped out of the Tower of Lon∣don, Edward Cary, alias Carew, lately escaped out of the hands of one of Our Messengers, Roger Jones and Nathaniel Strange, being persons ingaged in the late Horrid and Treasonable Conspiracy in the Northern and other parts of this Our Kingdom, and being conscious of their own guilt, have fled or withdrawn themselves from Iustice, and do privately lurk and obscure in places un∣known, whereby they cannot be apprehended and brought to a legal Tryal for their Offences: We therefore have thought fit (by and with the Advice of Our Privy Council) to publish the same to all Our loving Subjects, not doubting of their care and forwardness in their appre∣hension. And We do by this Our Proclamation Command and Declare, That all and every the persons before named, within Fourteen days after the publication hereof, personally appear and render themselves to some of Our Privy Council, or of the Iustices of Peace, or Sheriffs of Our Counties of England and Wales, under pain of being proceeded against as guilty of High Treason according to Law. And We do hereby Require and Command, as well all and singular Our Iudges, Iustices of Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bayliffs, Constables and headbo∣roughs, as also all the Officers and Ministers of Our Ports, and other Our Subjects whatsoever within Our Realms of England, Scotland, Ireland, or Dominion of Wales, and all other Our Dominions and Territories, to be diligent in enquiring and searching for the said persons in all places whatsoever, as well within Liberties as with∣out: whom, or any of them, if they shall happen to take, Our further Will and Pleasure is, That they cause them so apprehended, to be safely carried before the next Iustice of the Peace to the place where he or they shall be Arrested, whom We do hereby straitly Command to Commit them to Prison, and presently inform Vs, or some of Our Privy council of their said Apprehension. And We do hereby straitly Charge and forbid all Our loving Sub∣jects, of what degree or quality soever, That they do not presume to Entertain or Harbour any of the persons afore∣said, but that they use their utmost endeavours to Apprehend them. And we do hereby Declare and Publish, That if any person or persons after this Our Proclamation published, shall directly or indirectly Conceal, Harbour, Keep, Retain or Maintain the said persons, or any of them, or shall Contrive or Connive at any means whereby they or any of them may escape from being Taken or Arrested, or shall not use their best endeavours for their Apprehension, as well by giving due Advertisement to Our Officers, as by all other good means, We will (as there is just cause) proceed against them that shall so neglect this Our Commandment, with all severity, according to Iustice and their demerits. Given at our court at Whitehall, the Seven and twentieth day of July 1664. in the Sixteenth year of our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1664.
