C3573 15584102 103936
C2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the King. A PROCLAMATION Requiring the Members of both Houses of Parliament to give their Attendance upon the Fifteenth day of January next. CHARLES R. WHereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty by His Royal Proclama∣tion of the Six and twentieth day of October last, did give Notice, That He intended an Adjournment of both Houses of Parliament, from the Third day of December instant (being the day prefixed for their Assembly) until the Fourth day of April next; And whereas His Majesty upon the said Third day of December, did by Message severally to each House of Parliament, Signifie, That (for divers Weighty Considerations) His Majesty did think fit to meét the said Houses sooner than the said Fourth day of April; And that therefore His Pleasure was, That the said Houses of Parlia∣ment should be severally Adjourned until the Fifteénth day of January next; To which time both Houses were Adjourned accordingly. Of all which His Majesty is graciously pleased that all persons concerned should have timely notice, and doth therefore hereby Publish and make known the same. And His Majesty being desirous (in respect of several Important Matters intended to be Debated and Considered) to have on the said Fifteénth day of January, a full Assembly of the Members of both Houses of Parliament, hath (with the Advice of His Privy Council) thought fit to Require, and doth hereby Require and Command all and every the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of this Realm, and the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of Commons, to give their Attendance at Westminster on the said Fifteénth day of January next. And His Majesty doth expect a ready Conformity to this His Royal Will and Pleasure. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the 7th day of December 1677. In the Nine and twentieth year of Our Reign. God save the King. LONDON, Printed by John Bill, Christopher Barker, Thomas Newcomb, and Henry Hills, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1677.
