C4558 11935895 51178
A True, and Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE FOUR CHIEFEST PLANTATIONS OF THE English in America. TO WIT, Of VIRGINIA. NEW-ENGLAND. BERMVDVS. BARBADOS. With the temperature of the Air: The nature of the Soil: The Rivers, Mountains, Beasts, Fowls, Birds, Fishes, Trees, Plants, Fruits, &c. AS ALSO, Of the Natives of Virginia, and New-England, their Religion, Customs, Fishing, Huntings, &c. COLLECTED By Samuel Clarke, sometimes Pastor in Saint Bennet-Fink, London. LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, Thomas Passenger, William Cadman, William Whitwood, Thomas Sawbridge, and William Birch. 1670.
THE DESCRIPTION OF VIRGINIA, AND THE PLANTATION OF THE ENGLISH. The temperature of the Air; the nature of the Soile, the Rivers, Mountains, Beasts, Fowls, Birds, Fishes, Trees, Plants, Fruits, &c. As also of the Natives, their Religion, Customs, Fishings, Huntings, Trea∣chery, &c. ANNO Christi, 1584. Sr. Walter Rawleigh obtained of Queen Elizabeth of glorious memory, a Patent for discovering, and Peopling of unknown Countries, not actually posses∣sed by any Christian Prince, Dated March 25. and in the 26th. year of her Reign: In prosecution whereof April 27th. he set forth two Barks under the Command of Mr. Philip Amadas, and Mr. Arther Barlow, which arrived on that part of America, which that Virgin Queen named Virginia: and thereof in
her Majesties name there took possession July 13. And having taken a view of, and liking the Country; and having had conference, and some trad∣ing with the Savages, observing about fourteen sorts of sweet smelling timber Trees, and many other commodities; bringing with them two of the Savages, they returned home in September following. Anno Christi, 1585. Sr. Richard Greenvile was sent by Sr. Walter Rawleigh with a Fleet of seven Sail, which Landed in the Isle of St. John de Porto Rico. May 12. and there fortified themselves, and built a Pi∣nace. The Spaniards promised to furnish them with Victuals, but did not: whereupon, they took two Spanish Frigots. In Hispaniola they had friendly greetings, and some trade with the Spaniards; from whence they came to an Anchor at Wokocon, whereby the unskilfullness of the Master, their Admiral strook on ground and sunk: July 25. They re∣turned for England, and by the way they took a Spanish Ship of Three hundred Tun, richly laden. In Virginia they left a Colony under the Goverment of Mr. Ralph Lane and others, besides an hundred men. The Governour wrote from his new Fort in Virginia, that if they had Kine, and Horses in a reasonable proportion, no Country in Christendom was to be compared to it. They discovered from Roanoack to the Chesipians above one hundred and thirty miles, and to Chawanock North-West, as far. In the beginning of June 1586. the Natives conspired against the English, for which, the chiefest of them lost his head: and Sr. Francis Drake coming thither after he had Sacked diverse of the Spa∣nish Towns, took the Colony with  his Victorious Fleet, and brought them into England. The same year Sr. Walter Rawleigh  sent a Ship of an hundred Tun with Provisions for the Colony, which arrived at Hatorask pre∣sently after they were come away wherefore having sought them in vain, she returned with her provisions  England: About a fortnight after her departure, Sr. Kichard Greenvile, General of Virginia, with three Ships arrived there, and neither hearing of the Ship, nor the Colony which he had left there the year before; after long search in vain, he left fifteen men to keep possession of the Country in the Isle of Roanoack, furnished for two years, and so returned, by the way spoiling some Towns of the Azores, and taking diverse Spaniards. Anno Christi, 1587. Sr. Walter Rawleigh (notwithstanding former dis∣couragements) sent another Colony of One hundred and fifty Persons under the Government of Mr. John White, with twelve Assistants, to which he gave a Charter, and incorporated them by the name of Gover∣nors and Assistance of the City of Rawleigh in Virginia. These arrived July 22. at Hatorask, where they went ashore to seek the fifteen men left there the year before, intending to plant at Chesopiok: But they were informed by a Native called Manteo, that the Savages had secretly slain some of them, and the other were fled they knew not whither. This Manteo was afterwards Baptized, and by Sr. Walter Rawleigh was made Lieutenant of Roanock. Here also Mrs. Dare the Governours Daughter was delivered of a Daughter, that was Baptized by the name of Virginia. Aug. the 27. they departed and returned into England.
The Commodities that are in Virginia. Oak of an excellent grain;Trees, straight, tall, and long, Elme, Beech, Birch, very tall and great, of whose Bark the Natives make their Canows; Nut-Hasil, Hasil, Alder, Cherry-Tree, Maple, Eive, Spruce, Aspe, Fir in great abundance and many other Fruits, Trees which the English knew not. From the Firrs issues much Turpentine, and Tar, and Pitch. Eagles,Fowles Hearn, Shaws, Cranes, large Ducks and Mallard, Geese, Swans, Wigeon, Sharks, Crows, Ravens, Kites, Sea-Mews, Pidgeons, Turtle-Doves, Turkies, and many other Fowles and Birds unknown; Hawks of diverse kinds. Deer Red and Follow,Beasts Bears, Wolves, Beavers, Otters, Hares, Conies, Martens, Sables, Hogs, Porcupins, Polecats, Cats wild and great, Dogs, whereof some like Foxes, Elks, and some Lyons, Squirrils of three sorts, some flying Squirils, Hares, &c. Whales,Fishes Porpoises, Seales, Cod very large, Haddocks, Herring, Plaise, Thornback, Rack-Fish, Lobsters, Crabs, Mussels, Wilks, Cony-Fish, Lump-Fish, Whitings, Salmonds in great plenty. Tobacco,Plants, Fruits, and Herbs, Vines, Strawberries, Rasberries, Goosberries, Hartleberries, Corants, Roses, Pease, Angellica, Ground-nuts. The Wood that is most common is Oak, and Walnut, many of their Oak are so tall and strait, that they will bear Thirty inches square of good Timber for Twenty yards long: there are two or three several kinds of them: There are, also two or three kinds of Walnuts, there are Cyprus Trees, some of which are neer three fathom about the Root, very strait and fifty, sixty, yea eighty foot without a branch. There are also some Mulberry Trees, and Chesnut Trees, whose fruit equalizeth the best in France, or Italy; they have Plums of three sorts, Cherries, Vines, Gassa∣fras Trees. Virginia lies in the Latitude of 43. Degrees and 20. Minutes,Virginia's Situation. North. Anno Christ, 1606. King James (of happy memory) granted a Pattent to sundry Persons to Plant along the Coast of Virginia, where they pleased between 34. Degrees and 45. of Northerly Latitude, in the main Land, and the Islands thereunto adjoyning within a hundred miles of the Coast thereof. In pursuance whereof, there were some Ships sent the same year to begin a Plantation in the more Southerly part of Virginia. Virginia is a Country in America that lies between the Degrees of 34. and 44. of North Latitude.Their Sum¦mers and Winters. On the East its bounded with the grear Ocean. On the South with Florida. On the North with Nova Francia. But for the West the limits are unknown. The Plantation which was begun in the year 1606. was under the Degree of 37. 38. and 39. where the tempreture of the air, after they were well seasoned, agreed well with the constitutions of the English. They sound the Summer as hot as in Spain: the Winter as cold as in France or England: The heat of Sum∣mer is in June, July, and August, but commonly a cool Briefs asswages the vehemency of the heat: The chiefest Winter is in half-December, January, February, and half March.
The Winds are variable, which yet purifie the air, as doth the Thunder and Lightning, which sometimes is very terrible. Sometimes there are great droughts, and othersometimes great raines, yet the European Fruits planted there prospered well. There is but one entrance by Sea into the Country, and that is at the mouth of a very goodly Bay, which is about eighteen or twenty miles wide. The Cape of the South side is called Cape Henry: the Land there is white sand, and along the shore are great plenty of Pines, and Firrs The North Cape is called Cape-Charles: The Isles before it are called Smiths Isles. The Country is full of large and pleasant navigable Rivers. In it are Mountains, Hills, Plains, Valleys, Rivers, and Brooks; this Bay lieth North and South, in which the water flowes near two hundred miles, and hath a Channel for One hundred and forty miles, of depth between seven and fifteen fathom: the breadth makes ten or fourteen miles. North∣ward from the Bay the Land is Mountanous, from which fall some Brooks, which after make five Navigable Rivers: the entrance of these Rivers into the Bay being within twenty or fifteen miles one of another. The Mountains are of divers natures, some of Stone for Millstones, some of Marble, &c. and many pieces of Chrystal are brought down from them by the raines. The Soil generally is lusty and rich, being generally of a black sandy mould: In some places a fat slimy clay: In other places gravel. The Countrey generally hath such pleasant plain Hills, and fertile Valleys, one prettily crossing another, and watered so conveniently with sweet Brooks, and chrystal Streams as if Artists had devised them. By the Rivers are many Marshes, some of 20, 30, 100. yea 200 Acres, some more, some less. On the West side of the Bay, and neerest to its mouth, is the River called Powhatan, according to the name of a principal Countrey that lies upon it: the mouth of it is near three miles in breadth: Its Navigable One hundred and fifty miles as the Channel goes: In the farthest place which the English discovered, are Falls, Rocks, and Shoales which hinder any farther Navigation. In a Peninsula on the North side of this River, the English first planted, in a place which they called James Town. As our men passed up one of their Rivers, there came to them some called Sasquesahanocks with Skins, Bows, Arrows, Targets, Beads, Swords, and Tobacco-pipes for Presents. They were great and well proportio∣ned men, so to the English they seemed like Giants; with much ado they were restrained from adoring their discoverers. Their Language well seeming their proportion, sounding from them as it were a great voice in a Vault: their attire was the skins of Bears, and Wolves. One had a Wolves-head hanging in a Chain for a Jewel: his Tobacco-pipe was three quarters of a yard long, prettily carved with a Bird, a Bear, a Dear, being at the great end sufficient to beat out a mans brains: their Bows, Arrows, and Clubs are suitable to their proportions. One of the biggest of them had the calf of his Legg measured, which was three quarters of a yard about, and all the rest of his limbs answera∣ble thereto. His Arrows were five quarters long, headed with Flints, formed like a heart, an inch broad, and an inch and an half long, which
he wore in a Wolves Skin at his back:The Na∣tives de∣scribed. In one hand a Bow, and in the other a Club. The Natives of Virgina have generally black hair, but few of them have Beards. The men have half their heads shaven, the hair of the o∣ther half long: The Women are their Barbers, who with two Shells grate away the hair of what fashion they please. The Womens hair is cut in many fashions according to their eyes, but ever some part of it is long. They are very strong, of able bodies and nimble: they can lie in the Woods under a Tree by the fire in the coldest Weather, and a∣mongst the Grass and Weeds in Summer: They are inconstant, crafty, timerous, quick of apprehension, and very ingenious. They are very covetous of Copper, Beads, and such trash. They are soon angry, and so malicious, that they seldom forget an injury. They seldom steal one from another, lest their Connivers should reveal it. Their Women are careful to avoid suspition of dishonesty without the leave of their Husbands. Each House-keeper knows his own Lands, and Gardens, and most live of their own labour. They are sometimes covered with the Skins of wild Beasts,Their Ap∣parel. which in Winter are dressed with the Hair inward, but in Summer without. The better sort use large Mantles of Dear-skins, some Embroidered with white Beads, some with Copper, and others are painted. But the com∣mon sort have scarce wherewith to cover their nakedness, but with Grass or Leaves. Some have Mantles made of Turkey Feathers, so hand∣somly wrought, and Woven with Thred, that nothing could be discern∣ed but Feathers. These were exceeding neat and warm. The Women are co∣vered about their middles with a Skin, and much ashamed to be seen bare. They adorn themselves with Copper and Painting; They Have, their Leggs, Hands, Breasts, and Faces cunningly wrought with divers Works, as Beasts, Serpents, &c. artificially wrought in their flesh with spots. In each Ear commonly they have three holes, whereat they hang Chains, Bracelets, or Copper. Some of their men wear in those holes a small green, and yellow coloured Snake, near half a yard long, which crawling and wrapping her self about his neck, oftentimes familiarly kisses his lips: Others wear a dead Rat tied by the tail. Some on their heads wear the wing of a Bird, or some large Feathers with the tail of a Rattle-Snake. Many have the skin of a Hawk, or some strange Fowl, stuffed with the Wings stretched abroad. Others a piece of Copper; And some the hand of an enemy dried. Their heads and shoulders are paint∣ed red, with a certain Powder mixed with Oyl, which they hold in Sum∣mer to preserve them from heat, and in Winter from cold. He is most gallant that is most monstrous to behold.Habitati∣ons and Houses. Their habitations are mostly by the Rivers, or not far from some fresh Spring. Their houses are built like our Arbours, of small Sprigs bow∣ed and tied together, and so close covered with Mats, or the bark of Trees, that notwithstanding Wind, Rain, or Weather, they are as warm as Stoves, but smoky, though they leave a hole on the top right over the Fire.
Their Lodging is by the Fire side on little Hurdles made of Reeds,Their Lodging and Beds. and covered with a Mat. On these round about the house they lie, heads and points, one by another, covered with Mats or Skins, and some stark naked: Of these they are from six to twenty in an house. Their houses are in the mid'd of their Fields or Gardens, which are plots of ground: From twenty to one hundred, or two hundred of these houses stand some∣thing near together. Men,Their child-birth and chil∣dren. Women, and Children have their several names according to the phansie of their Parents. Their Women are easily delivered of child, yet they love their children very dearly; and to make them har∣dy, in the coldest Mornings they wash them in the Rivers, and by Painting and Ointments they so tan their skins, that after a year or two no Weather will hurt them. The Men spend their time in Fishing,Women laborious and men idle. Hunting, Wars, and such man∣ly Exercises, scorning to be seen about any Womanly Exercise, which makes the Women very painful, and the men oft very idle; The women and children do all the work; they make Mats, Baskets, Pots, Morters; they pound their Corn, make their Bread, prepare their victuals, plant and gather their Corn, bear all kinds of burdens, &c. Their Fire they kindle by chafing a dry pointed stick in a hole of little square piece of Wood, which taking fire, will kindle Moss, Leaves, and such dry things. In March and April is their Fishing time,Their se∣veral Di∣ets. wherein they live on Fish, Turkies, and Squerrils. In May and June they plant their Fields, and then they live most upon Acrons, Walnuts and Fish: Some upon Crabs, Oisters, land Tortoises, Strawberries, Mulberries, &c. In June, July, and August, they feed upon the roots of Tocknough, Berries, Fish, and green Wheat; and their bodies alter with their Diet, as those of Deer, and wild beasts do: And accordingly they are Fat or Lean, Strong or Weak. They use much their Bows and Arrows in Fishing,Their Bows and Arrows. Hunting, and the Wars. They bring their Bows to the form of ours, by scraping them with a Shell: Their Arrows are made of strait young Sprigs, which they head with bone, two or three inches long: With these they shoot at Squirils. Other Arrows they have made of Reeds, pieced with Wood, and headed with Christals or Flint, &c. For Knives they have the splin∣ters of a Reed, wherewith they cut the Feathers of their Arrows into form: With these Knives they will joynt a Deer, or any other Beast, shape their Shooes, Buskings, Mantles, &c. To make the notch of their Arrows, they have the Tooth of a Bever set in a stick, with which they grate it by degrees. Their Arrow heads they quickly make with a little bone, which they ever wear at their bracer, of a splint of stone or glass, in form of a Heart which they glew to their Arrows; their Glew they make of the Sinews of Deer, and the tops of Deer Horns which will not dissolve in cold water. In their Wars they use round Targets made of the Bark of Trees,Their weapons in War. and Swords of Wood, or the Horn of a Deer put through a piece of Wood, in the form of a Pickax.
Their Fishing is much in Boats,The Fish∣ing Boats, and furni∣ture. which they make of one Tree, by burn∣ing, and scraping with Stones and Shels till they have made it in the form of a Trough. Some of them are a Ell deep, and fourty and fifty foot long, and will bear from ten to fourty men, according to their big∣ness: For Oars they use paddles and sticks, with which they will Row faster than our Barges. The Women use to spin the Bark of Trees, Deer Sinews, or a kind of Grass called Pemmenaud, of which they make a ve∣ry good thred, which serves for many uses about their houses, Apparel, Fishing-nets, Lines for Angles: Their hooks are either a bone grated in the form of a hooked Pin, or of the splinter of a Bone tied to the cleft of a little stick, and with the end of the Line they tie on the bait. They also use long Arrows tied to a Line, with which they shoot at Fishes in the River, or Darts which they throw at them. They take extream pains in their Huntings and Fishings,Their Huntings. whereunto they are enured from their Child-hood: And by their continual rang∣ings about, they know all the places and Advantages most frequented with Deer, Beasts, Fishes, Fowls, Rooks, Bemes. At their Huntings they leave their Habitations, and in several companies go to the most Desert places with their Families towards the Mountains, or heads of Rivers where there is plenty of Game. It's a marvel how they can pass these Deserts of three or four dayes journey over, without missing their way. The Women bear their Hunting Houses after them with Corn, A∣crons, Mortars, and Bagg and Baggage which they use. When they come to the place of Exercise, every man endeavours to shew his best Dexteri∣ty; for hereby they get their Wives. They will shoot level about fourty yards, near the Mark, and one hundred and twenty is their best at Ran∣dom. When they have found the Deer, they environ them with Fires, and betwixt the Fires they place themselves; and some take their stand in the mid'st. The Deer being frighted with the Fires, and their voices they chase them so long within that Circle, that oftimes they kill six, eight, ten, or fifteen at a hunting. Sometimes also when they find them in a point of Land, they force them into a River, where with their Boats they kill them. When they have shot a Dear by Land, they follow him like Blood-hounds, by the blood and stain, and oftimes so take him. Hares, Partridges, Turkies, or Eggs, fat or lean, young or old, they devour all they can come by. When they intend Wars,Their Wars. the Werowances Corks, consult with their Priests and Connivers, and Ancient Alleys, and Friend: They have Cap∣tains over every Nation, which are lusty young men. They rarely make Wars for Lands or Goods, but for Women and Children, Before the bat∣tel they paint and disguise themselves in the fiercest manner they can de∣vise: Either Army hath his General, they take their stands a Musquet shot one from another: Rank themselves fifteen a breast, and so place themselves, that the Rear can shoot as well as the Front. Then from either part a Messenger is sent with these conditions, That whosoever is vanquished, upon their submission within two dayes after, shall live; but their Wives and Children shall be prize for the Conquerors; upon the re∣turn of the Messengers, they approach in their Order. On each Flank
is a Serjeant, and in the Reer a Lieutenant, all duly keeping their pla∣ces; yet leaping and singing as they go. Upon the first flight of their Arrows they give an horrible shout; and when their Arrows are spent, they joyn together, charging and retiring, each rank seconding the for∣mer: As they get advantage, they catch their Enemy by the hair of his head, and then down he goes, and with his Wooden Sword he beats out his brains, &c. Their Musick is a thick Cane on which they Pipe as on a Recorder.Their Mu∣sick. For their Wars they have a great deep Platter of Wood, which they co∣ver with a skin, upon which they beat as upon a Drum; of these they have Base, Tenor, Countertenor, Mean, and Trebble. If any great per∣son come to the Habitation of a Werowanee, they spread a Mat for him to sit upon, setting themselves just opposite to him; then all the com∣pany with a tunable voice of shouting, bid him welcome. Then some of the chiefest make an Oration to him, which they do with such vehemen∣cy that they sweat till they drop again. Such victuals as they have they spend freely upon him; and where his Lodging is prepared, they set a wo∣man finely painted with Red to be his bedfellow. Their trading with the English is for Copper, Beads, &c.Their tra∣ding. for which they give Skins, Fowl, Fish, Flesh, Mais, &c. They have a Religion amongst them:Their Re∣ligion. All things that were able to hurt them beyond their prevention, they adore with Divine Worship: As fire, water, thunder, lightning; The great Guns of the English, Muskets, Horses, &c. But their chief God is the Devil whom they call Oke, and serve him more for fear than love. In their Temples they have his image in an ilfavoured shape, and adorned with Chains, Copper, and Beads, and covered with a skin. By him is commonly the Sepulchres of their Kings: Their bodies are first bowelled, then dried upon Hurdles; About their neck, and most of their joynts they hang Bracelets, Chains of Copper, Pearl, and then they wrap them up in white Skins, and roule them in Mats for their Winding-sheets, laying them orderly in their Tombs, which are Arches made of Mats: the rest of their Wealth they set at their feet in Baskets. For their ordinary Burials they dig a deep hole in the Earth,Their Se∣pulchers, and Buri∣als. and the Corps being wrapped in Skins, and Mats, with their Jewels, they lay them upon sticks in the ground; and then covet them with Earth. The Burial being ended,Their mournings: the Women having their faces painted with black, sit twenty four hours in their houses mourning and lamenting by turns, with such yellings and howlings as may express their great sorrow. In the Woods they have some great houses filled with the Images of their Kings and Devils, and Tombs of their predecessors, which they count so holy, that none but their Priests, and Kings dare come into them. They have a chief Priest,The Priests Attire. differenced from the inferiour by the Orna∣ments of his head, which are twelve, sixteen, or more Snake-skins stuf∣fed with Moss, the Skins of Weesels and other Vermin; all which they tye by the Tails, so as the Tails meet on the top of their head like a Tas∣sel, about which a Crown of Feathers; the Skins hang down about him, and almost cover his face. The Priests faces are painted as ugly as
they can devise, and they carry Rattles in their hands. Their Devotion is most in Songs, which the chief Priests begins, and the rest follow. Their Solemn Meetings are upon great distress of want, fear of Enemies, times of Triumph, and of gathering their Fruits; at which time all both men, women and children meet together. The people are very Barbarous,Their Ci∣vil Go∣vernment. yet have they Government amongst them, and their Governours are well obeyed by their subjects. The form of their Government is Monarchical. One of their Chief Rulers is called Powhatan from the place of his Habitation: Some part of the Countrey came to him by Inheritance, the rest by Conquest. In se∣veral parts of his Dominion he hath Houses built like Arbors, some thirty or fourty yards long; and in each house provision for his entertainment according to the times. About the Kings person is ordinarily attending a Guard of fourty or fifty of his tallest men: every night upon the four quarters of his House stand four Sentinels, and every half hour, one from the Corps dugard doth hollow, unto which each of the Sentinels doth answer; If any fail, he is extreamly beaten. One House he hath wherein he keepeth his treasure of Skins, Cop∣per, Pearl, and Beads, which he stores up against his burial; none comes to this House but the Priest. At the four corners stand as Sentinels four Images of a Dragon, a Bear, a Leopard, and Giant-like man, all ilfavou∣redly made according to their best workmanship. Their King hath as many women as he will,The Kings Women and atten∣dants. whereof, when he lies on his bed, one sitteth at his Head, and another at his Feet: But when he sits, one sits on his Right Hand, another on his Left. When he is wea∣ry of any of them he bestows them upon those that deserves best at his Hands. When he Dines or Sups, one of his Women, before and after Meat, brings him Water in a Wooden platter to wash his Hands. Ano∣ther waits with a bunch of Feathers to wipe upon instead of a Towel, and the Feathers were dried again. His Kingdom descends not to his Sons, but first to his brethren, and after their decease to his sisters, and to the heirs of his eldest sister. They have no letters whereby to write or read;Their Go∣verment by Cu∣stoms. the only Law whereby he Rules is Custome; or else his Will is his Law which must be obeyed. His inferiour Kings whom they call Werowances, are tied to Rule by Cu∣stomes, yet have they power of Life and Death: they all know their se∣veral Lands, and Habitations, and Limit, to Fish, Fowl, and Hunt in: but they hold all of their great King, to whom they pay tribute of Skins, Beads, Copper, Pearl, Deer, Turkies, wild Beasts, and Corn; with great fear and adoration they all obey him. At his feet they present whatsoever he commands; at his frown their greatest spirit will tremble: Offen∣ders he causeth to be broyled to death; or their brains to be beaten out; their ordinary correction is to beat them with Cudgels, for which yet they will never cry nor complain. Anno Christi 1611. the L. de La Ware upon his return from Virginia,Of the Plantation of the English. gave this account of it. That the number of men which he left there was above two hundred, the most in health, and provided of ten moneths victuals in the Store house, besides other quantities of Corn, and shew much friendship.
For the securing of the Colony he built three Fronts: two of them being seated near Point Comfort, had adjoyning to them a large circuit of ground, open, and fit for Corn. The third Fort was at the Falls, up∣on an Island environed with Corn ground. The Country is wonderful fertile and rich: The English Cattel were much encreased, and did thrive excellent well. The kine in a hard Winter when the ground was cover∣ed with Snow, lived (with one anothers help) upon the Grass which they found, and prospered well; the Swine encreased much. That year Captain Argoll went with his Ship up Pembroke River, where he met with the King of Pastancy, and procured of him and his Sub∣jects Eleven hundred bushes of Corn, besides three hundred for his own Company, with which he returned to James's Town, and delivered it into the Store. Then did he return and discover Pembroke River to the head of it, which was about Sixty five Leagues within Land, and Navigable for any Ship: then marching into the Country, he found great store of Beasts as big as Kine,Elks of which, they killed two, and found them to be good and wholesom meat, and yet easie to be killed being but heavy, and slow Creatures. He found also a Mine and a strange kind of Earth, which the Indian used for Physick, and it cures the pain of the Belly: He found also a Water issuing out of the Earth which tast∣ed like Allom water; it was good and wholsom: He found an Earth like a Gum, white and clear; and another red, like Terra Sigillata: an other white, and so light, that being cast into water, it swims. Their Dear have usually three or four Fawns at a time,Fruitful∣ness of the Deer. none under two: and our English Goates in Virginia oft times bring forth three; and mostly two young ones,Their Beasts and Fowles▪ so fruitful is the Country: they have Beavers, Otters, Foxes, Racoons, (as good meat as a Lamb) Hares, wild Catts with rich Furrs; Musk-Rats, &c. wild Pidgeons in Winter number∣less, the flocks of them will be three or four hours together flying over, so thick that they obscure the very Light; Turkies far bigger than ours that will run as fast as a Gray-hound, Buzzards, Snites, Partridges, Owles, Swans, Geese, Brants, Droeis, Shell-Drakes, Teal, Widgeon, Curlews, Puits, Black-birds, Hedg-Sparrows, Oxeies, Wood-peckers, and in Winter flocks of Parakitoes. Their Rivers are plentifully stored with Fish:Their Fish. as Sturgeon, Porpass, Base, Carp, Shad, Herring, Eele, Cat-Fish, Pearch, Trout, Flat-Fish, Sheeps-head, Drummers, Jarsishes, Craifishes, Crabs, Oisters, &c. At one hale they have caught as much Sturgeon, Base, and other great Fish as hath loaded a Frigot.Their Fruits. They have without Art, Grapes, Mulberries, Mari∣cocks like a Lemmon, whose blossome may admit comparison with our most pleasant and beautiful Flowers, and the fruit is exceeding delight∣ful to the tast. Many goodly Groves of Chincomen-Trees, that have husks like a Chesnut, and are good meat either raw or boiled. Chesnuts great store, and Walnuts plenty of three sorts; Filberts, Crabs smaller but sowrer than ours. Anno Christi, 1613. Mr. Alex. Whitaker, who was Minister to the Co∣lony, writing to a Friend in London, gives this account of the Natives. They acknowledg (saith he) that there is a great good God, but know
him not, having the eyes of their understandings yet blinded; wherefore they serve the Devil for fear, after a most base manner, sacrificing som∣time their own children to him: His Image they paint upon one side of a Toad-stool, much like to a deformed Monster: Their Priests are no other, but such as our English Witches are. They live naked in body, as if the shame of their sin deserved no covering: they esteem it a virtue to lie, deceive, and steal, as their Master the Devil teacheth them. The Natives are not so simple as some have conceited:The quali∣ties of the Natives. For they are of Body strong, lusty, and very nimble; they are a very understanding Generation, quick of apprehension, sudden in their dispatches, subtile in their dealings, exquisite in their inventions, and industrious in their labour. The World hath no better marks-men with their Bows, and Arrows than they be: they will kill Birds flying, Fishes swimming, and Beasts running: They shoot with marvellous strength, for they shot one of our English, being unarmed, quite through the Body, and nailed both his Armes to his Body with one Arrow. Their service to their God is answerable to their lives, being performed with great fear and at∣tention, and many strange dumb shews are used in it, stretching forth their limbs, and straining their bodies exceedingly. They stand in great awe of their Priests which are a Generation of Vipers,Their Priests. even of Satans own brood. The manner of their life is much like that of the Popish Hermites: For they live alone in the Woods, in Houses sequestred from the common course of men; neither is any man suffer∣ed to come into their House for to speak with them but when the Priest calls them. He takes no care for his Victuals, for all necessaries of bread, water, &c. are brought to a place near to his House, and are there left which he fetches at his pleasure. If they would have Rain, or have lost any thing, they have recourse to him, who Conjures for them, and ma∣ny times he prevaileth. If they be sick, he is their Physitian: if they be wounded, he sucks them. At his command they make War and Peace neither do they any thing of moment without him.Their Go¦vernment. They have an evil Government amongst them, a rude kind of Common-wealth, and rough Government, wherein they both honour, and obey their Kings, Parents, and Governours: they observe the limits of their own Possessi∣ons. Murther is rarely heard off: Adultery, and other gross offences are severely punished. The whole Continent of Virginia situated within the Degrees of 34. and 47. is a place beautified by God with all the Ornaments of Nature,The Coun∣trey de∣scribed. and enriched with his earthly Treasures. That part of it which the English chiefly possess, begins at the Bay of Chesapheac, and stretching it self in Northerly Latitude to the Degrees of 39. 40. and is interlined with seven most goodly Rivers, the least wherof is equal to our Thames: and all these Rivers are so nearly joyned, as that there is not very much di∣stance of ground between either of them, and those several pieces of Land betwixt them are every where watered with many veins, and creeks, which sundry wayes do cross the Land, and make it almost Na∣vigable from one River to another, the commodity whereof is very great to the Planters, in respect of the speedy and easie Transportation
of Goods from one River to another. The River Powhatan ebbs and flowes One hundred and forty miles into the Main; at the mouth where∣of are the two Forts of Henry and Charles. Forty two miles upward is the first and Mother Town of the English seated, called James Town: and seventy miles beyond that upward, is the Town of Henerico built. Ten mile beyond this is a place called the Falls, because the River hath there a great descent, falling down between many Mineral Rocks which be there. Twelve miles beyond these Falls is a Chrystal Rock with which the Indians use to head most of their Arrows. The higher ground in Virginia is much like to the mould of France, being clay and Sand mixed together at the top, but digging any depth, its red Clay full of glistering spangles. As for Iron, Steel, Antimony, and Terra Sigillata, they are very frequent. The air of the Country, espe∣cially about Henerico, and upwards, is very temperate, and agrees well with our English bodies. The extremity of Summer is not hot as in Spain, nor the cold in Winter so sharp as ours in England. The Spring and Har∣vest are the two longest seasons, and very pleasant. The Summer and Winter are both but short. The Winter for the most part is dry and fair; but the Summer ofttimes watered with great and sudden showers of Rain, whereby the cold of Winter is warmed, and the heat of Summer is cooled. Amongst the Beasts in Virginia,Strange Beasts. there are two kinds most strange. One of them is the Female Possowne, which hath a bag under her belly, out of which she will let forth her young ones, and take them in again at her pleasure. The other is the flying Squerril, which, by the help of certain broad flaps of Skin, growing on each side of her fore-legs, will fly from one Tree to another at twenty or thirty paces distance, and more if she have the benefit of a little puff of Wind. The English Kine, Goats, Hoggs, &c. prosper very well. They have Hawkes of several sorts,Their Hawks and other Fowl. and amongst them Auspreis, Fish∣ing Hawkes, and Cormorants. In the Winter they have great store of Cranes, Herons, Pidgeons, Patridges, and Black-birds. The Rivers and Creeks are over-spread with Swans, Geese, Brants, Divers, and those o∣ther named before. The Woods have many kinds of Rare and delight∣ful Birds. The Rivers abound with Fish,Birds and Fish. both small and great, as Pike, Carp, Eele, Perches of six several sorts, &c. The Sea-fish come into their Rivers in March, and continue till the end of September. Frst come in great Skuls of Herrings: Then big Shads, and Rock-fish follow them. Then Trouts, Base, Flounders, and other dainty Fishes come in before the other be gone. Then come in multitudes of great Sturgeons, and divers others. Some five miles about Henerico by land,Bermudas City. but by water fourteen miles. Sr. Tho. Dale, Anno Christi 1611. began to build a City, called the New Bermoodas, situated very commodiously, whereunto he laid out, and an∣nexed to be belonging to that Corporation for ever: many miles of Wood-lands, and Champion, which he divided into several Hundreds. As the Upper and the Nether Hundreds Roch-Dale Hundreds, Wests-Sherley Hundred, and Diggs his Hundred.
Anno Christi 1614. Pacahuntas,Powha∣tans Daughter converted baptized and mar∣ried. the beloved Daughter of the great King Powhatan, having been carefully instructed in the Christian Religi∣on, by the care of Sr. Tho. Dale, and having made some good progress therein, renounced publickly her Countrey Idolatry, and openly con∣fessed her Christian Faith, and desiring it, was baptized by the name of Rebecca, and was afterwards married to one Mr. Rolph an English Gentle∣man of good repute, her Father and friends giving their approbation to it, and her Vncle gave her to him in the Church. Anno Christi 1616. Sr. Tho. Dale returning into England,She comes into Eng∣land. there came over with him Mr. Rolfe, with Rebecca, his Convert and Consort, and Tomocomo, one of Powhatans Counsellors; Mr. Rolfs Wife Rebecca, though she carried her self very civilly and lovingly to her Husband, yet did she behave her self as the Daughter of a King, and was accordingly respect∣ed by divers persons of Honour here in England, in their hopeful zeal by her means to advance Christianity in these Countries. As she was with her Husband returning into Virginia, at Gravesend she fell sick, and came to her end and Grave, having given great demonstration of her Christian Faith and Hope. The English in Virginia Anno Christi 1620. were divided into several Burroughs,Her death. each man having his share of Land duly set out for him, to hold and enjoy to him and his Heirs for ever. The publick Lands also for the Company were set out by themselves; the Governours share by it self; the Colledges by it self, and for each particular Burrough; the Ministers Gleab also was set out and bounded, their being 200. l. per annum allowed to each Minister for each Town. They are all Govern∣ed according to the laudable Form of Justice used in England. The Go∣vernour is so restrained by a Counsel joyned with him, that he cannot wrong any man, who may not have any speedy remedy. In the years 1619. and 1620. there were 9. or ten ships sent to Virginia,Vrginia di∣vided. wherein were 1261. persons; most of them being for publick uses, As to plant the Governours Land, 80. persons; Tenants for the Companies Land 130. Tenants for the Colledge Land, 100. Tenants for the Ministers Gleab-Lands 50. Young Maids to make Wives for so many of the Plan∣ters 90. Boyes for Apprentices 100. Servants for the publick, 50. Some were imployed to bring up thirty of the Infidels children in true Religion and Civility. The Commodities which the Planters were directed to apply them∣selves to,How Go∣verned: were Iron; for the making whereof, 130 men were sent over to set up Iron work; Proof having been made of the excellency of that Iron. Cordage:Persons sent over. For which (beside Hemp) order was given for the planting of Silk-grass (naturally growing in those Parts) in great abundance, which makes the best Cordage, and Linnen in the World.Commodi∣ties, their Iron, Pot, and Sope ashes Pitch and Tar. Of this eve∣ry Housholder was bound to set 100. Plants; and the Governour him∣self set five thousand. Pot-ashes, and Soap-ashes; Pitch and Tar. for the making whereof, di∣vers Polanders were sent over. Timber of all sorts,Timber. with Masts, Planks, and Boords for provision of
Shipping, &c. there being not so good Timber for all uses in any Countrey whatsoever; and for the help in these works, provision was sent of Men and Materials for the setting up of sundry Saw-mills. Silk:Silk. For which the Countrey is exceeding proper, having an innu∣merable of the best Mulberry-trees, and some Silk-worms naturally found upon them, producing excellent Silk, and to further this work, many seeds of the best Silk-worms were sent over. Vines;Vines. Whereof the Countrey naturally yields great store, and of sun∣dry sorts▪ which by good culture might be brought to excellent perfecti∣on: for effecting whereof divers Skilful Vegneroons were sent, with store also from hence of Vine Plants of the best sort. Salt:Salt. Which work were ordered to be set up in great plenty, not only to serve the Colony, but to promote the great Fishings upon those Coasts. Divers persons of publick spirits gave much to the furtherance of this Plantation.Gifts to the Plan∣tation. Two unknown persons gave Plate and other necessaries for the furnishing of two Communion Tables. Mis. Mary Robinson gave 200. l. towards the building of a Church in Virginia. An unknown per∣son sent the Treasurer 550. l. in gold for the bringing up of some of the Infidels children in the knowledge of God, and true Religion, and in fit Trades whereby they might live honestly in the World. Mr. Nicholas Ferrar by Will gave 300. l. to the Colledge in Virginia, to be paid when there should be ten of the Infidels children placed in it. And in the mean time 24. l. per annum to be distributed unto three discreet and god∣ly men in the Colony, which should bring up three of the Infidels chil∣dren in the Christian Religion, and in some good course to live by. An other unknown person gave 10. l. to advance the plantation. Anno Christi 1620.Persons sent over. the Right honourable Henry E. of Southampton was made Treasurer; from which time to the year 1624. there were 24. Ships sent to Virginia: And there were divers persons set for the making of Beads, wherewith to trade with the Natives, and for making of Glass of all sorts: And 55. young Maids were sent to make Wives for the Planters. Also a Magazine of all necessaries was sent for the Colony, to the value of 2000. l. besides Goods, sent by private persons great store. Twenty five persons were sent to build Boats, Pinnaces, and ships for the use of the Colony in the Fishing Trade, and for further discovery. The Plants of Cotten Wool Trees prosper well, and so did Indigo Seeds, Oranges, Lemons, Sugar Canes, Cassary, Pines, Plantanes, Potatoes, and sundry other Indian Fruits. Some of the English East-India Company gave seventy pound,Gifts to promote the Plan∣tation. eight shillings sixpence, towards the building of a Free Schoole in Virginia, to be called the East-India School. Another unknown person added to it the sum of thirty pound. And another sent in Gold twenty five pound. Another unknown person gave thirty pound; for which there was to be allowed fourty shillings a year for ever, for a Sermon Preached be∣fore the Virginia Company. Another gave a rich Bible, and a great Church Bible, and other Books to be sent to Virginia, and an ex∣act Map of America. The Books were valued at ten pound. Mr.
Tho. Bargrave, a Minister in Virginia, when he died, left for the use of the Colledge his Library worth one hundred Marks. Anno Christi 1621. The treacherous Natives, notwithstanding all the Courtesies and kind Usage by the English to them, most Perfi∣diously, and Treacherously murthered above three hundred of them, and would have done the like to all the rest, but that God (through his infinite Goodness and Mercy) moved the heart of one of them, who was Converted to Christianity, to Discover the same a few hours before it was put in Execution, the like Massacres have been since.
A DESCRIPTION OF THE BERMUDAS, OR Sommers Islands: THE FIRST DISCOVERY, AND PLANTATION of it by the ENGLISH. The Temperature of the Aier; The Nature of the Soil, Trees, Plants, Fruits, Hearbs, Fishes, Fowls, and other Commodities thereof. THese Islands were first Discovered by one Bermudas, from whence they received that name; and afterwards from Sr. George Sommers an English-man, they were called Som∣mers Islands. They lie in the Western Ocean, and in that part of the World commonly called America, and vul∣garly the West-Indies. Their Latitude, or Elevation is 32. Degrees, 25. Minutes, which is almost the same with the Madaeraes. They are environed round about with Rocks, which North-ward, and
Westward, and Southward extend far, by reason whereof they are very strong, there being only three places whereby Ships can come into them, which places also are well fortified. But within there is room to enter∣tain a great Fleet: In most places the Rocks appear at a low water, and are not much covered at an high water, for it Ebbs and Flows there not above five Foot. The Shoar for the most part is a Rock,The na∣ture of its soil. so hardned by the Sun, Wind, and Sea, that its not apt to be worn by the Waves, whose violence also is broken by the Rocks before they come at the Shoar. The mould is of diverse colours, neither Clay nor Sand but betwixt both: The red which resembleth Clay is worst: The white resembing Sand, and blackish is good: the brown betwixt them both is best. Under the Mould two or three foot deep, is a kind of white substance which they call Rock: the Trees usually fasten their roots in it, and draw their nourishment from it; neither indeed is it Rock or Stone, nor so hard, though for the most part harder than Chalk; not so white, but like a Pumice, and Spongy, easily receiving and retaining much water; and in some places Clay is found under it: The hardest kind of it (which is commonly under the red ground) is not so spongy, nor retains much water, but lies in the ground like Quarries, as it were thick slates, one upon another. Most of their fresh water (whereof they have good store) comes out of the Sea, drayning through the sand, or thorow the aforesaid substance which they call the Rock, and leaving its saltness behind it, in the passage becometh fresh. Somtimes they dig Wells of fresh water within four or five paces of the Sea-side: and usually they Ebb and Flow as the Sea doth. The Air is most commonly clear,The tem∣perature of the air. very temperate, moist, with a mo∣derate heat, very healthful, and apt for the Generation, and nourishing of all things: so that there is scarce any thing that is transported from England thither, but it yields a far greater encrease: and if it be any liv∣ing thing, it becomes fatter and better liking then in England: By which means the Countrey was so replenished with Hens and Turkeys, within the space of three or four years not being looked after, many of them forsook the Houses, and became wild and so encreased abundantly. the like encrease there was of Hogs and other Cattle according to their kinds. There seems to be a continual Spring, which is the cause that some few things come not to that maturity and perfection as were requisite. And though the Trees do shed their leaves, yet are they always full of green. Their Corn is the same which is used in most parts of the West-Indies:Its fertili∣ty. to wit, Maiz which, to such as are used to it, is more hearty and nourish∣ing than our English Wheat, and yields a far greater encrease, as some∣times a pound of one or two graines: Of this Corn, and divers other things without either plowing or diging the ground, they have two Harvests every year: For they set about March which they gather in July: and again in August which is ripe in December. And little slips of
Fig-Trees, and Vines do usually bear fruit within a year after they are planted, sometimes in half a year: the like fertility they have in other things. There is scarce at any time to be perceived either Frost or Snow,Their Summers, and Win∣ters. nor any extream heat, for there is alwayes some wind stirring which clears and cools the Air: Their Summers and Winters observe the same times with ours, but their longest dayes and nights are shorter than ours in England by almost two hours and an half: as also their shortest dayes and nights are as much longer then ours: For their longest dayes are about four∣teen hours, and their shortest ten. When its noon with us, its morning with them, and when its about five a Clock in the evening with us, its noon with them; so that while the Sun declines with us it rises with them, as also it doth in Virginia, its apt to Thunder and Lighten all the year long, and oft times more terrible than in England, yet never any are hurt by it. There is no Venemous Creature in this Country:No veno∣mous Crea∣ture there. the yellow Spider which is there making her Webb as it were of Silk, and bringing forth her young of Eggs, like little drops of quick-silver, neither is it percei∣ved to be Venemous, yet there is a plant that climbs Trees like our Ivy, the leafe like that of a Vine, that is somewhat venomous, but of no great force. There is great store and variety of Fish,Fish and so good as these parts of the World afford not the like, which being mostly unknown to the English, they gave them such names as best liked them: As Rock-Fish, Groops, Porgie-Fish, Hog-Fish, Angle-Fish, Cavallies, Yellow-tailes, Spanish-Makerels, Mullets, Bream, Cony-Fish, Morrayes, Sting-Rays, Flying-Fish,Fowl &c. The like they did by the Fowl, as Cohoos, Sand∣birds, Hearns, Duck, Teal, Pemblicoes, Castle-Boobies, Hawks, &c. At the first Plantation of this Country by the English it was all over grown with Woods,Trees and Plants. and Plants of several kinds; and to such as were unknown to them they gave such names as best pleased themselves: such as were known retained their old names; as Cedars, Palmitoes, Black-wood, White-wood, Yellow-wood, Mulberry-trees, Stopper, trees, Lawrel, Olive-trees, Mangrowes, Pepper-trees, Yellow-berry-weed, Red-weed, &c. These and many others they found of Natures Plant∣ing: But since they have Inhabited it, there have been brought, as well from the Indies as from other parts of the World, sundry other Plants, as Vines of several kinds, Sugar-canes, Fig-trees, Apple-trees, Oranges, Lemons, Pomgranates, Plantanes, Pines, Parsnips, Raddishes, Artichocks, Pottatoes, Cassavie, Indico, &c. In so much that its now become like a spacious Garden, or Orchyard of many pleasant, and profitable things. There are many Tortoises,Tortoises or Turtles described. which they call Turtles: they are in the shape of their bodies like Crab-Fishes, and have four fins, they are as big as three or four men can carry, the upper part of them in covered with a great shell, weighing about half a hundred weight, the flesh that cleaves to the inside of it being roasted against the fire, is almost like the
marrow of Beef, excellent good; but the shell of it self harder than horn: She hath also a shell on her belly, but not so hard as the other, for when its boiled it becomes soft like the gristles of Beef, and is good meat: These live in the Sea, spending the Spring, and Summer time about these Islands, but where they spend the rest of the year is not known; they are like to Fowl in respect of the smallness and shape of their heads, and necks, which are wrinkled like a Turkey, but white, and not so sharp bil'd; they breed their young of Eggs which they lay, in their Flesh they resemble beasts, for it eats like Veal, but more hard and sollid: They alwayes feed upon grass growing at the bottom of the water, neither can they abide any longer under the water then they hold their breath, which the old ones will do long, but the young ones being chased to and fro cannot continue two minutes without coming up to breath. Shortly after their coming to those Islands the Male and Female cou∣ple, which they call Cooting, this they continue about three dayes toge∣ther, during which time they will scarce separate though a Boat come to them, nor hardly when, they are smitten. Not long after, the she Turtle comes up by night upon some sandy Bay, and further up than the water uses to flow, where she digs a hole with her Fin upon the sand about two foot deep, and coming up several nights there layes her Eggs, about half a bushel (which are about the bigness of a Hens Egge, but as round as a ball) and each time covers them with sand very cu∣riously, so that a man can hardly find the place: These Eggs in time are hatched by the heat of the Sun, and so creep out of the Earth, the Dam coming no more at them. They are no bigger than a mans hand at first, which some Fish will devour: they grow slowly and seem to live long; they will sleep on the top of the water, and used to sleep on the Land till the Countrey was Inhabited. They will live also out of the water about three weeks, and that without meat, but then they mourn, and pine away. Being turned upon their backs when they are on the Land, they cannot without help, or some disadvantage reco∣ver themselves; by which means, when they come a shore to lay their Eggs, they are easily taken; as also they are when they are Cooting. Otherwise they are taken mostly by night, by making a great Light in a Boat to which they will resort, so that a man standing ready, with a staff in his hand wherein is a sharp Iron, four square with a line fastned to it, This Iron he strikes into the upper shell of the Turtle where it sticks fast, and after she hath tired her self a while with swimming about, she is easily taken: the head being cut off they will live twenty four hours, so that if you cut the flesh with a knife, or touch it, it will tremble, and shrink away; there is no meat that will keep longer, either fresh or salt. There is a Fruit called a prickled Pear,The prickl Pear. growing in such places as are scarce fit for any thing else, namely, upon Rocks and Cliffs, and common∣ly by the Sea-side, as if the Salt water did something help to the gene∣rating and nourishing of them: The Tree grows certain years before it bears Fruit, and then it continues bearing very many years, having almost
all the year long fruit upon it. Though it be called a Tree it hath scarce any body or branches, but consisteth in a manner wholly of leaves and fruit soft and brittle; many of these Pears grow upon and about a leaf without any stalk at all, and having some prickles about the top; being opened the juyce is of a crimson colour, and they are full of seeds with∣in. There are gray and white Hearns,Fowls and Birds. gray and green Plovers, wild Ducks and Mallards, Coots, Redshanks, Sea-widgeons, Gray-Bitterns, Cormo∣rants; many smal Birds like Sparrows and Robbins, Wood-peckers, Crows, Falcons, Jerfalcons, Hobbies, &c. The Cohow, is so called from his voice, a night bird, being all day hid in the Rocks. The Egge-Bird which comes constantly in the beginning of May, when they begin to lay Eggs almost as big as Hens, and continue laying till Midsummer, and are very tame, their young are excellent meat, their Eggs are white, and the Cohows, speckled like a Turkeys Egg, as big as Hens. The Tro∣pick Bird hath his name from the place where he is most seen. The Pemblico is seldom seen by day, and by her crying foretells Tem∣pests. For Plants.Plants. The poison Weed, in shape like our Ivy, with the touch of it causeth Redness, and itching, but after a while pass away of themselves, without farther hurt. The Red Weed is a tall Plant, whose stalk is co∣vered with Red Rind. The Root steeped, or a little of the Juice drank alone, is a strong vomit, and effectual against Distempers of the sto∣mach. There is a kind of Woodbind near the Sea, that runs up about Trees likk a Vine: The Fruit is somewhat like a Bean, but flatter, which eaten, purges strongly, yet without harm: There is another small Tree that causeth Costiveness. There is also a Plant like a Bramble, that bears a long yellow Fruit with a hard snell, and within is a hard Berry which purges gently. Red Pepper is a Fruit like our Barberries, which bruised with the teeth sets all the Mouth on a heat, for the time violent, but swallowed whole have the same operation with pepper. The Sea-Feather is a Plant growing on the Rock in the bottom of the Sea, in form of a Vine-leaf, but far larger, with veines of a palish Red, interlaced, and weaved each into the other. There are also store of Indian Pompeons, the water Melon, and the Musk-Mellon, the most delicate Pineapple, Papawes, &c. Ambergriece is many times found up∣on the shoar. The most troublesome things in these Islands are the Winds,Things offensive. especi∣ally in the Spring and Autumn. The Hurricanes have sometimes done much hurt: Muskito's are very troublesome: There is a certain Bugg which creeping into Chests, by their illsented Dung defile all, besides their eating. There are Pismires or Ants in the Summer times so trouble∣some that they are forced to dry their Figgs upon high Frames, anointing their feet with Tar which stops their passage. Worms in the Earth are destructive to their Corn, and Tobacco, causing them much labour eve∣ry morning to destroy them, which else would derstoy all. There have bee large Lizards which are now destroyed by Cats. Spiders are large by of beautiful colours, as if adorned with Silver, Gold, and Pearl.
Their Webs in Summer woven from tree to tree are perfect raw silk, both in substance and colour, and so strong, that Birds bigger than Black∣birds are snared in their Nets. Of these Bermudus Islands there are many,Their number & bigness. some say five hundred, if we call all them Islands that lye by themselves compassed with the Sea, of which some are larger and others less, they lye all in the Figure of a Crescent, within the circuit of six or seven Leagues at most; the greatest of them is about sixteen miles in length from the East North-East, to the West South-West, standing in thirty two Degrees and twen∣ty Minutes. About these Islands are seen many Whales,Whale-fight. attended with the Sword-Fish and the Thresher. The Sword-Fish with his sharp and needle-like Fin pricking him into the belly when he would dive and sink into the Sea, and when he starts up from his Wounds, the Thresher with his Club Fins beats him down again. Here is also a kind of Web-footed Fowl,Strange Birds. of the bigness of our green Plovers, which all Summer are not seen, but in the darkest nights of November and December (for in the night only they feed) would come abroad, making a strange hollow and harsh howling; their colour is in∣clining to russet, with white bellies, and the long feathers of their wings are russet and white, they breed in those of the Islands that are farthest in the Sea, and there in the ground they have their burrows, like Conies. Of these, the English at their first coming, with a lighted bough have taken three hundred in an hour. Afterwards they found out this devise to take them, by standing on the Rocks or Sand by the Sea-side, they would hollow, laugh, and make the strangest noise that possibly they could, with which noise these birds would come flocking to the place, and settle upon the very Armes and Head of him that so cryed, still creeping nearer and answering that noise themselves, by which means our men would weigh them in their hands, and those that weighed heaviest and were best they took, the other they let go, and thus they have taken twenty dozen of the best of them in two hours space; they are fat and plump like a Partridge, and very well relished. In January they gat great store of their Eggs which are as big and as well relished as our Hen Eggs;Rat-plague These they call Sea-Owles, because of their hooting, they have crooked Bills and will bite shrewdly. Not long after the English had planted in this Island, which was about the year 1620. it pleased God to send a great Plague upon them by rea∣son of a few Rats that came in a Meal Ship, which though at first few in number, yet within the space of two years they multiplyed so ex∣ceedingly, that they did not only fill those places where they first land∣ed, but swimming from place to place they spread themselves all over the Country, insomuch, as there was no Island though severed by the Sea from all others, and many miles distant from the place where they first began, but was pestred with them; they had their nests almost in every Tree, and in all places had their Burrows in the ground, like Co∣nies to harbour in: they spared not the Fruits of either Plants or Trees,
nay, nor the Plants themselves, but eat all up. When the Planters had set their Corn, they would come by troops the night following, or as soon as it spict, dig it up again and eat it. If by diligent watching any of it escaped till it came to easing, it would very hardly scape them: yea, it was a difficult matter when they had it in their Houses to save it from them, for they became noysom even to the persons of Men. They used all diligence for the destroying of them, nourishing ma∣ny Catts, wild and tame; they used Ratsbane, and many set the Woods on fire, so that the fire ran half a mile or more before it was extinguish∣ed. Every man in the Country was enjoyned to set twelve Traps, and some voluntarily set neer an hundred, which they visited twice or thrice in a night. yea, they trained up their Dogs to hunt them, wherein they grew so expert, that a good Dog in two or three hours space would kill rty or fifty Rats. Other means they also used, yet nothing would prevail, finding them still to encrease upon them. This was a cause of great distress to the Planters; for by this means they were kept destitute of bread for a year or two, so as when they had it afterwards again, they were so weaned from it, that they would easily forget or neglect to eat it with their meat. By this means they were so destitute of food that many died, and the rest became very fee∣ble and weak, whereof some being so, would not, and others could not stir abroad to seek relief, but dyed in their Houses. And such as did go abroad were subject through weakness to be suddenly surprized with a disease called the Feages, wherein they had neither pain, nor sensible sickness, but as it were the highest degree of weakness, depriving them of power and ability to execute any bodily exercise, as working, walk∣ing, &c. Being thus taken, if any body was present that could mini∣ster to them any relief, they would strait wayes recover, otherwise they died there. About this time there came to these Islands a company of Ravens which continued with them all the time of this mortality and then departed from them. Never any being seen there before or since: But it pleased God at length, that the extremity of their distress began to abate, partly by supplies sent them out of England, and partly by some rest and ease that they got thereby. Yet the Rats continued for some time after, notwithstanding all the devises and industry that they used to destroy them. But suddenly it pleased God, (by what means was not known) so to take them away, that the wild Catts and Dogs that lived upon them were famished, and many of them leaving the Woods came down to the Houses, and to such places where they used to gar∣bish their Fish, and so became tame. Here are many wild Palm-Trees growing,Palm Trees. in fashion, leaves and bran∣ches resembling the true Palme: The Tree is high and strait, sappy, and spungious, having no branches but in the uppermost part of it, and in the top grow leaves about the head of it: (the most inmost part whereof they call the Palmeto, and it is the heart and pith of the
Tree, so white and thin as that it will pill off pleats, as smooth and de∣licate as white Sattin, into twenty folds in which a man may write, as in Paper) where they spread and fall downwards about the Tree like an over-blown Rose: The leaves are as broad as an Italian Vmbrello, under one of which a man may well shelter his whole Body from rain, for being stiff and smooth, the rain easily slides off. The Pal∣mito, or soft top roasted, tastes like a fried Melon, and being sod, it eates like a Cabbage, but is far less offensive to the Stomach. From under the broken Rocks they take forth Cray-Fishes oft times greater than any of our English Lobsters. They have also aboundance of Crabs,Shel-Fish. Oisters, and Wilks; at one draught they have taken small and great about a Thousand Fishes,Other Fish as Pilchards, Breams, Mullets, Rock-Fish, &c. Every Cave and Creek be∣ing furnished with aboundance of them, which lie there sucking in the water which falls from the high Hills mingled with the juyce of the Palms and Cedars, and such other sweet woods, whereby they become both fat and wholsome. There are Sparrows fat and plenty; Robbins of diverse colours green and yellow, &c. Many of the Turtles before mentioned,Birds. be of a mighty bigness, insomuch as one of them will suffice Seventy, or eighty men at a meal, especially, if she be a she Turtle, which will have five hundred Eggs in her, being as many as fifty or sixty men can eat at a meal, they are very good and wholesome meat. There are Mulberry Trees, Olive Trees, Cedars of colour red, and very sweet, which bear a kind of berry that is very pleasant to eat. The top of the Palmito Tree is in season, and good all the year, if you take but an Hatchet and cut it, or an Augur and bore it, it yields a very pleasant Liquor, much like to our sweet wines: it bears like∣wise a berry in the bigness of a Prune, and in taste much like it. Anno Christi 1609. Sr. Thomas Gates, and Sr. George Sommers, as they were going to Virginia suffered Shipwrack at these Islands, where they continued till May, 1610. in which time they built there a Ship and a Pinace of Cedar, in which they departed to Virginia, leaving only two men behind them: and shortly after some of them came back to the Sommer Islands, where Sr. George Sommers dying, his men (contrary to his last charge given unto them) went for England, leaving behind them three men who stayed vo∣luntarily, who shortly after found in Sommerset Island a very great Treasure of Ambergreece valued at nine or ten thousand pounds Sterling. The discovery of these Islands being made known in England to the Virginia Company by these men that returned, they sold it to One hundred and twenty Persons of the same Company, who ob∣tained a Charter from His Majesty: and in April 1612. sent thither a Ship called the Plough, with about Eighty men and women in it, who arrived there in safety in July, where they found the three men that had voluntarily stayed there before as you heard. These men
had Planted Corn,More Planters sent over. great store of Wheat, Beans, Tobacco, and Melons, with many other good things for the use of man: Besides they had wrought upon Timber, in squaring and sawing Cedar Trees &c. They were no sooner come within a League of the Land but a com∣pany of Fish met them, and never left them till they came to an An∣chor within the Haven, of which with Hooks and Lines they took more than their whole Company was able to eat. Two dayes after they went out with their Net and Boat, and if they would have loaded two Boates they might have done it, which also they might have daily, there was such plenty of them. The day after they went to the Bird Islands, where with their hands they took up as many Birds as they pleased, they were so tame. They took up three for every Boy and Girl, and four for every Man. Then sent they out some for wild Hogs, who brought home some, that did eat as well as our English Mutton. Anno Christi, 1612.Of Gover∣nours. Mr. R. Moor was sent over thither Governour for three years, who spent the greatest part of his time in fortifying the Country, and training the people to Martial Exercises. He built nine or ten Forts, and planted Ordnances upon them. To him succeeded Captain Tucker, Anno Christi 1616. who spent his three years in Hus∣banding the Country, Planting, and nourishing all such things as were fit either for Trade, or for the sustentation, and use of the Inhabitants. He also added to the Fortifications, and made some inclosures. The The Country also was then divided, wherein every Adventurer had his share allotted to him, whereupon the Planters built them substantial Houses, cleared their ground, and Planted all things necessary, so that in a short time the Country began to approach near unto that happiness wherein it now floweth.
Nevv-England Described, AND THE PLANTATION THEREOF BY THE ENGLISH Of the Beasts, Fowles, Birds, Fishes, Trees, Plants, Fruits, &c. Of the Natives, of their Religion, Customs, Fish∣ings, Huntings, &c. THE place whereon the English have setled their Colonies is judged either to be an Island surrounded on the North with the great River Canada, and on the South with Hud∣sons River, or a Peninsula, these two Rivers over lapping one another, having their rise from two great Lakes which are not far distant each from other. Massechusets Bay lyeth under the Degree of 42. and 43. bearing South-West from the Lands-end of Old England; at the bottom of which Bay are scituated most of the English Plantations. The Bay is both safe, spacious, and deep; free from such cockling Seas as run upon the Coasts of Ireland, and in the Channels of England: without stiff run∣ning Currents, Rocks, Shelves, Bars, or Quicksands.
When you have sailed two or three Leagues towards the bottom, you may see the two Capes bidding you welcome. These Capes thrust themselves out into the Sea in form of a Crescent, or half Moon, the sur∣rounding Shoar being high, and shewing many white Cliffs, with diverse intermixtures of low-sand, out of which, diverse Rivers empty them∣selves into the Sea, with many openings, wherein is good Harbouring for Ships of any burthen: The Harbours are New-Plimouth, Cape Anu, Salem, and Marvil-Head, all which afford good ground for Anchorage, being Land-lockt from Wind, and Seas. The chief and usual Harbour is the still Bay of Massechusets, which is also aboard the Plantations: its a safe and pleasant Harbour within, having but one secure entrance, and that no broader than for three Ships to enter abreast, but within there is Anchorage for five hun∣dred Ships. This Harbour is made by many Islands, whose high Clifts shoulder out the boisterous Seas, yet may easily deceive the unskilful Pilot, pre∣senting many fair openings, and broad sownds, whose Waters are too shallow for ships, though Navigable for Boats, and small Pinnases. The entrance into the great Haven is called Nantscot, which is two Leagues from Boston. From hence they may sail to the River of Wessaguscus, Naponset, Charles River, and Mistick River, on all which are seated many towns. Here also they may have fresh supplies of Wood and wa∣ter from the adjacent Islands, with good Timber to repair their Wea∣ther-beaten Ships: As also Masts, or Yards, there being store of such Trees as are useful for the purpose. The places which are inhabited by the English, are the best ground, and sweetest Climate in all those parts, bearing the name of New England, the Air agreeing well with our English bodies, being High Land and a sharp Air, and though they border upon the Sea-Coast, yet are they seldom obscured with Mists, or unwholesome Foggs, or cold Weather from the Sea, which lies East, and South from the Land. And in the extremity of Winter, the North-East, and South-winds comming from the Sea, pro∣duce warm weather, and bringing in the Seas, loosen the frozen Bayes, carrying away the Ice with their Tides: Melting the Snow, and thaw∣ing the ground: Only the North-west Winds coming over the Land, cause extream cold weather, accompanied with deep Snows, and bitter Frosts, so that in two or three dayes the Rivers will bear Man or Horse. But these Winds seldom blow above three dayes together, after which the Weather is more tollerable. And though the cold be sometimes great, yet is there good store of wood for housing and fires, which makes the Winter less tedious: And this very cold Weather lasts but eight or ten weeks, beginning with December, and ending about the tenth of Fe∣bruary. Neither doth the piercing colds of Winter produce so many ill effects, as the raw Winters here with us in England. But these hard Winters are commonly the forerunners of a pleasant Spring, and fertile Summer, being judged also to make much for the health of our English bodies. The Summers are hotter than here with us, because of their more Southerly Latitude, yet are they tollerable,
being oft cooled with fresh Winds. The Summers are commonly hot and dry, there being seldom any Rain, yet are the Harvests good, the Indian Corn requiring more heat than wet to ripen it: And for the Eng∣lish corn, the nightly Dews refresh it, till it grows up to shade its Roots with its own substance from the parching Sun. The times of most Rain are in April, and about Michaelmas. The early Spring and long Summers make the Autumns and Winters to be but short. In the Springs when the Grass begins to put forth, it grows apace, so that, whereas it was black by reason of Winters blasts, in a fort∣nights space there will be grass a foot high. New England being nearer the Aequinoctial than Old England; the days and nights be more equally divided. In Summer the dayes be two hours shorter, and in Winter two hours longer than with us. Virginia having no Winter to speak of, but extream hot Summers, hath dried up much English blood; and by the pestiferous Diseases, hath swept away many lusty persons, changing their complexions, not into swarthiness, but into Paleness; which comes not from any want of food, the Soil being fertile, and pleasant, and they having plenty of Corn, and Cattel, but rather from the Climate, which indeed is found to be too Hot for our English Constitutions, which New England is not. In New England Men and Women keep their natural Complexions, in so much as Seamen wonder when they arive in those parts, to see their Countrey men look so Fresh and Ruddy; neither are they much troub∣led with Inflammations, or such Diseases as are increased by too much heat. The two chief Messengers of Death, are Feavours, and Callentures; but they are easily cured if taken in time, and as easily prevented, if men take care of their bodies. As for our common Diseases they be Stran∣gers in New England. Few ever have the small Pox, Measels, Green-sick∣ness, Headach, Stone, Consumption, &c. yea many that have carried Coughs and Consumptions thither, have been perfectly cured of them. There are as sweet, lusty Children born there, as in any other Nation, and more double births than with us here: The Women likewise recover more speedily, and gather strength after child-birth sooner than in Old England. The Soil for the general is a warm kind of Earth, there being little cold spewing Land, no Moorish Fens, nor Quagmires: The lowest Grounds be the Marshes, which are ovrflown by the Spring-Tides: They are Rich Ground, and yield plenty of Hay, which feeds their Cattel as well as the best Upland Hay with us: And yet they have plenty of Upland Hay also, which grows commonly between the Marshes and the Woods: And in many places where the Trees grow thin, they get good Hay al∣so. And near the Plantations there are many Meddows never overflow∣ed, and free from all Wood, where they have as much Grass as can be turned over with a Sithe, and as high as a mans middle, and some high∣er, so that a good Workman will Mow three Loads in a day. Indeed this Grass is courser than with us, yet is it not sower, but the Cattel eat, and thrive very well with it: and are generally larger, and give more Milk than with us, and bring forth young as well, and are freer from di∣seases than the Cattel here.
There is so much Hay Ground in the Country, that none need fear want, though their Cattel should encrease to thousands, there being some thousands of Acres that were yet never medled with; and the more their Grass is Mowed, the thicker it grows; and where Cattel use to graze, in the Woods, the Ground is much improved, growing more gras∣sy, and less full of Weeds; and there is such plenty of Grass in the Woods, that the Beasts need not Fodder till December; at which time men be∣gin to house their milch beasts and Calves. In the Upland Grounds the Soil varies, in some places Clay, in others Gravel, and some are of a Red Sand, all which are covered with a black Mould, usually a foot or little less deep. The English Manure their ground with Fish, whereof they have such plenty, that they know not how otherwise to dispose of them, yet the Indians being too lazy to catch Fish, plant Corn eight or ten years in one place, without any such help, where they have yet a good Crop. Such is the rankness of the ground, that it must be Planted the first year with Indian Corn, before it will be fit for English Seed. The ground in some places is of a soft mould, in others so tough and hard, that five Yoke of Oxen can scarce plow it, but after the first breaking up, it is so easie, that one Yoak of Oxen and an Horse may plow it. Our English Corn prospers well, especially Rye, Oats, and Barly. The ground affords very good Kitchin Gardens, for Turnips, Parsnips, Carrots, Radishes, Pumpions, Muskmellons, Squashes, Cucumbers, Oni∣ons, and all other English Roots and Hearbs prospers as well there as with us, and usually are larger and fairer. There are store of Herbs both for Meat and Medicine, not only in Gardens, but in Woods, as sweet Marjoram, Purslane, Sorrel, Penniroyal, Saxifrage, Bayes, &c. Also Straw∣berries in abundance, very large, some being two inches about. There be also Goosberries, Bilberries, Rasberries, Treackleberries, Hurtleber∣ries, Currants, which being dried in the Sun, are not much inferiour to those we have from Zant. There is also Hemp and Flax, some that grows naturally, and some that is Planted by the English, and Rape-seed. There is Iron, Stone, and plenty of other stones both rough and smooth, plenty of Slate to cover houses, and Clay whereof they make Tiles and Bricks, and probably other Minerals. The Country is excellently watered, and there are store of Springs which yield sweet water that is fatter than ours, and of a more jetty co∣lour and they that drink it, are as healthy, and lusty as those that drink Beer. None hitherto have been constrained to digg deep for this Water, or to fetch it far, or to fetch it from several places; the same water ser∣ving for washing, brewing, and all other uses. There be also several spa∣cious Ponds in many places, out of which run many pleasant and sweet streams both Winter and Summer, at which the Cattel quench their thirst, and upon which may be built Water-Mills for necessary uses. There is also great store of Wood, not only for Fewel, but for the building of Ships, Houses, and Mills. The Timber grows strait and tall, some Trees being twenty, and others thirty foot high before they spread forth their branches. They are not very thick, yet many of them are
are sufficient to make Mill-posts; some being three foot and a half in the Diameter. Neither do they grow so close, but that in many places a man man may ride a hunting amongst them. There is no underwood but in swamps, and wet low grounds, in which are Osiers, Hazels, and such like. Of these Swamps, some are ten, some twenty, some thirty miles. For the Indians use to burn the under-wood in other places in November, when the Grass and Leaves are withered and dry, which otherwise would marr their beloved sport of Hunting: But where the Indians died of the plague, not many years ago, there is much underwood between Wessa∣guscus, and Plimouth, because it hath not thus been burned. The several sorts of Timber are thus expressed. Trees both on Hills and Plains in plenty be, The long-liv' Oake, and mournful Cypress Tree, Sky-towring Pines, and Chesnuts coated rough, The lasting Cedar, with the Walnut tough; The Rosin-dropping Fir for Masts in use, The Boatmen seek for Oars, light, neat grown Spruse; The brittle Ash, the ever trembling Aspes, The broad spread Elme, whose concave harbours Wasps; The watry spungy Alder good for nought, Small Elder by th' Indian Fletchers sought, The knotty Maple, pallid Birch, Haw thorns, The Horn-bound Tree that to be cloven scorns; Which from the tender Vine oft takes his Spouse, Who twines imbracing arms abut his Boughs; Within this Indian Orchard Fruitr be some, The ruddy Cherry and the jetty Plumb, Snake murthering Hasel with sweet Saxafrage, Whose spouts in Beer allayes hot Feavers rage, The Diars Shumack, with more Trees there be, That are both good for use, and and rare to see. The chief and common Timber for ordinary use is Oake, and Wal∣nut. Of Oakes there be three kinds, Red, White, and Black, whereof one kind is fittest for Clap-board, others for sawn-board, others for ship∣ping, and others for houses. They yield also much Mast for Hoggs, espe∣cially every third year, the Acron being bigger than our English: The Walnut-trees are tougher than ours, and last time out of mind: The hut is smaller than ours, but not inferiour in sweetness and goodness, having no bitter Pill. In some places there is a Tree that bears a Nut as bigg as a small Pear. The Cedars are not very big, not being above eighteen inches in Diameter, neither is it very high, and its fitter for ornament than substance, being of colour White and Red like Yew, & smells like Ju∣niper, they use it commonly for sieling of Houses, for making of Chests, Boxes, and Staves. The Fir, and Pine-trees grow in many places, shoot∣ing up exceeding high, especially the Pine: They afford good Masts, Boards, Rozin, and Turpentine, they grow in some places for ten miles
together, close by the Rivers sides, where by ships they may easily be transported to any desired Ports. Their Ash is blittle, and therefore good for little, so that the Walnut is used for it. The Horn-bound tree is exceeding tough, which makes it very difficult to be cleft, yet its very good for Bowls and Dishes, not being subject to crack: It grows with broad-spread Arms, the Vines winding their curling branches about them, which afford great store of Grapes, very bigg, both Grapes and Clusters, sweet and good. They are of two sorts, Red and white: there is also a smaller Grape growing in the Islands, which is sooner ripe, and more delicious; doubtless as good wine might be made of them as at Bur∣deaux in France, it lying under the same degree: The Cherry Trees yield great store of Cherries, which grow on Clusters like Grapes; they are smaller than ours and not so good, if not very ripe: The Plumbs are somewhat better, being black and yellow, as big as Damasens, and indif∣ferently well tasted. The White Thorn yields Hawes as big as our Cherries, which are pleasant to the tast, better than their Cherries. The Beasts be as followeth. The Kingly Lion, and the strong-arm'd Bear, The large-limb'd Moosis, with the tripping ear; Quil-darting Porcupines, and Rackcames be, Castled in the hollow of an aged Tree: The skipping Squirrel, Cony, Purblind Hare, Immured in the self same Castle are, Lest red-eyed Ferrets, wildly Foxes should Them undermine, if Rampir'd but with mould, The grim-fac't Ounce, and ravenous howling Woolf, Whose meager pauch, sucks like a swallowing gulph, Black-grittering Otters, and rich coated Bever, The Civet-sented Muscat smelling ever. Lions there be some, but seen very rarely. Bears are common, which be most fierce in Strawberry time, when they have young ones; they will go upright iike a man, climb trees, and swim to the Islands: At which time if an Indian see him, he will swim after him, and overtaking him, they go to Water-cuffs for bloody noses, and scratched sides; at last the man prevails, gets on his back, and so rides him on those watry Plains, till the Bear can bear him no longer. In the Winter they retire to Cliffs of Rocks, and thick Swamps to shelter them from the cold, where they live by sleeping and sucking their Paws, and with that will be as fat as they are in Sommer: Yet the Woolves will devour them: A kennel of them setting upon a single Bear, will tear him in pieces. They are good meat, and seldom prey upon the English Cattel, or offer to assault any man, except they be vexed with a shot. The Moose is somewhat like our Red Deer as big as an Ox, slow of foot, headed like a Buck, some being two yards wide in the head; his
flesh is as good as Beef, his Hide is good for clothing; they bring forth three young ones at a time; fourty miles to the North-East of Massechusets Bay, there be great store of them; they are oft devoured by the Woolves. The Fallow Dear are much bigger than ours, of a brighter colour, more inclining to Red, with spotted bellies; They keep near to the Sea, that that they may swim to the Islands when they are chased by the Woolves They have commonly three young ones at a time, which they hide a mile from each other, giving them suck by turns, and this they do, that if the Woolf should find one, they may save the other; their horns grow strait, over-hanging their heads, so that they cannot feed on things that grow low, till they have mused their heads. The Porcupine is small, not much unlike to an Hedghog, only some∣what bigger: He stands upon his Guard against man or beast, darting his quills into their Leggs or Hides, if they approach too near him. The Rackoon is a deep furred Beast, not much unlike a Badger, having a Tail like a Fox, and is as good meat as a Lamb. In the day time they sleep in hollow Trees, in the light nights they feed on Clams by the Sea side, where they are taken with Doggs. The Squirrels be of three sorts, the great gray Squirrel, almost as big as our Conies. Another almost like our English Squirrels; the third is a flying Squirrel, which is not very big, with a great deal of loose skin, which she spreads square when she flies, which with the help of the Wind, wafts her Batlike body from place to place. The Conies are much like ours in England. The Hares are some of them white, and a yard long; both these creatures harbour themselves from the Foxes in hollow Trees, having a hole at the entrance no bigger than they can creep into. The hurtful Creatures are Squncks, Ferrets, Foxes, whereof some be black, and their Furrs of great esteem. The Ounce, or wild Cat is as big as a Mungrel. Its by nature fierce and dangerous, fearing neither Dogg nor Man: He kills Deer, which he effects thus: Knowing the Deers tracts, he lies lurking in long weeds, and the Deer passing by, he suddenly leaps upon his back, from thence he gets to his neck, and scratches out his throat. He kills Geese also; for being much of the same colour, he places himself close by the water, holding up his bob tail, which is like a Gooses neck, which the Geese approaching nigh to visit, with a sudden jerk he apprehends his desired prey. The English kill many of them, and account them good meat. Their Skins have a deep Fur, Spotted White and Black on the belly. The Woolves differ something from those in other Countries; they never yet set upon any man or woman, neither do they hurt Horses or Cows; But Swine, Goats, and red Calves (which they take for Deer) are oft killed by them. In Autumn and the Spring they most frequent our English Plantations, following the Deer which at those times come down to those parts: They are made like a Mongrel, big-boned, thin paunched, deep breasted, having a thick neck and head, prick ears, and a long snout, with dangerous teeth, long stairing hair, and a great bush tail. Many good Mastiffs have been spoiled by them. Once a fair
Grayhound, ran at them, and was torn in pieces before he could be res∣cued; they have no Joynts from the Head to the Tail. Some of them are black, and one of their skins is worth five or six pound. Of Beasts living in the Water. Their Otters are most of them black, and their skins are almost as good as Bevers; Their Oyl is of rare use for many things. Martins also have a good Fur for their bigness. Musquashes are almost like Beavers, but not so big, the Males stones smells as sweet as Musk, and being killed in Winter or the Spring they never loose their sweetness: they are no bigger than Cony-skins, and yet are sold for five shillings a piece. One good Skin will perfume a whole house full of Clothes. The Bevers wisdom and understanding makes him come nigh to a reasonable crea∣ture. His body is thick and short, with short leggs, feet like a Mole be∣fore, and behind like a Goose, a broad tail like a shoo-sole, very tough and strong: His head is something like an Otters, saving that his fore∣teeth be like Conies, two above and two beneath, sharp and broad, with which he cuts down Trees as big as a mans thigh, or bigger, which af∣terwards he divides into lengths according to the uses they are appoint∣ed for. If one Beaver be too weak to carry the Log, than another helps him: If two be too weak, three or four will assist, being placed three to three, which set their teeth in one anothers tough tails, and laying the load on the hindermost, they draw the Logg to the desired place, they tow it in the water, the youngest getting under it, bearing it up that it may swim the lighter. They build their houses of Wood and Clay, close by a Ponds side, and knowing their seasons, they build their houses answerably, three stories high, that when the Land Floods come they may shift higher, and when the waters fall, they remove lower. These houses are so strong that no Creature, save an industrious man with his penetrating tools can pierce them, their ingress and egress being under water. They make very good Ponds; for knowing where a stream runs from between two rising Hills, they will pitch down Piles of Wood placing smaller Rubbish before it, with clay and sods, not leaving till by their Art and Industry they have made a firm and curious Dam-head, which may cause admiration in wise men. They keep themselves to their own Families, never parting so long as they are able to keep house together. Their wisdom secures them from the English, who seldom kill any of them, wanting time and patience to lay a long siege, or to be often deceived by their cunning evasions. So that all our Beavers come from the Indians, whose time and experience fits them for that imployment.
Of the Birds, and Fowls both of Land and Water. They are ex∣pressed in these Verses. The princely Eagle, and the soaring Hawks, Within their unknown wayes ther's none can chawk: The Hum-Bird for some Queens rich Cage more fit Than in the vacant wilderness to sit. The swift-wing'd Swallow sweeping to and fro, As swift as arrow from Tartarian bow. When as Aurora's infant day new Springs, There th' morning mounting Lark her sweet layes sings. The harmonious Thrush, swift Pigeon, Turtle Dove Who to her Mate doth ever constant prove. The Turkey, Pheasant, Heathcock, Partridge rare, The Carrion-tearing Crow, and hurtful Stare; The long-liv'd Raven, th' ominous Screach-Owl, Who tell (as old wives say) disasters foul. The drowsie Madge that leaves her day-lov'd nest To fly abroad when day-birds are at rest: The Eele murthering Hern, and greedy Cormorant, That neer the Creeks in Moorish Marshes haunt. The bellowing Bittern, with the long legg'd Crane. Presaging Winters hard, and dearth of Graine. The Silver-Swan that tunes her mournful breath To sing the Dirg of her approaching death: The tatling Oldwives, and the cackling Geese, The fearful Gull that shuns the murdering piece: The strong wing'd Mallard, with the nimble Teal, And ill-shap't Loon, who his harsh notes doth sweal; There Widgins, Shildrakes, and Humilitee, Snites, Dropps, Sea-Larks in whole millions flee. The Eagles be of two sorts, one like ours in England, the other some∣what bigger, with a great white head, and white tail, commonly called Gripes, they prey upon Ducks, and Geese, and such Fish as are cast upon the Sea-shore; yet is there a certain black Hawk that will beat this Ea∣gle, so that he is constrained to soar so high, that his enemy cannot reach him: The Hawk is much prized by the Indians, who account him a Sa∣gamores ransom. There are diverse kinds of Hens, Partridges, Heathcocks, and Ducks. The Hum-bird is no bigger than an Hornet, having Spider-like legs, small claws, a very small Bill; in colour she represents the glorious Rainbow: As she flies she makes a noise like a Humble-Bee. The Pidgeons are more like Turtles than ours, and of the same co∣lour, and have long tailes like a Mag Pie, their Feathers are fewer, but their Bodies as big as our House-Doves, they come into the Country to go home-ward in the beginning of their Spring: at which time (saith
my Author) I have seen innumerable; so that I could neither discern beginning nor ending, the length nor breadth of these Millions of Mil∣lions: neither could the shouting of People, the report of Guns, nor the pelting of Hail-shot turn them out of their course, but thus they have continued for four or five hours together: and at Michaelmas they return Southward: yet some there are all the year long, which are often killed. They build some thirty miles Northward; from the English Plan∣tation in Pine-Trees, joyning nest to nest, and Tree to Tree by their nests, so that the Sun never sees the ground in that place, from whence the Indians fetch whole Loads of them. The Turkey is a long Fowl, of a black colour, yet is his flesh white, he is much bigger than our English Turkey; He hath long Leggs where∣with he can run as fast as a Dog, and can fly as fast as a Goose: Of these are forty, fifty, sixty, and sometimes an hundred in a flock: They feed on Acorns, Haws, and Berries, and some will frequent the English Corn. When the ground is covered with Snow, they go to the Sea-side and feed on Shrimps, and Fishes: If you watch them where they Pearch at night, about ten or eleven a clock at night you may shoot as oft as you will, for they stir not except they be wounded: they continue all the year long, and weigh forty pounds and more apeice. Pheasants are rare; but Heath-Cocks, and Partridges are common, whereof our En∣glish kill many. Ravens and Crows, are much like those in other Countries. There are no Magpies, Jayes, Cockcooes, Jackdaws, Sparrows, &c. The Stares are bigger than ours, and are as black as Crows, which do much hurt among the young Corn, and they are so bold that they fear not Guns. Owles are of two sorts, the one is small speckled like a Partridg with eares: The other is almost as big as an Eagle and is very good meat. Cormorants are as common as other Fowles, they devour much Fish. A tame Cormorant, and two or three good Dogs in the water make excellent sport: Cranes are as tall as a man, their bodies not much un∣like the Turkies, they are rarely fat. Also many Swans frequent the Rivers and Ponds, which are very good meat. There be three sorts of Geese; The Brant Goose like one of our wild Geese. A white Goose about the bigness of ours: Of these there will be sometimes two or three thousand in a flock. The third is a grey Goose with a black neck, and a black and white head much bigger than our English: They are killed both flying and sitting. The Ducks are very large, and in great abundance; and so is their Teale. Their Old∣wives never leave tatling day nor night, they are somewhat bigger than a Duck. The Loon is ill-shaped like a Cormorant, but he can neither go nor fly; He makes a noise somestime like a Sowgelders Horn. The Humilites, or Simplicites rather, be of two sorts; The one as big as green Plover, the other is less; they are so simple that one may drive them on heaps, and then shoot at them, and the living will settle themselves on the same place again where the dead are, while you shoot again, so that sometimes above twelve score have been killed at two shoots.
OF FISH. There are great store, and much variety of Fishes thus enumerated. The King of the Waters, the Sea-shouldering Whale; The snuffing Grampus, with the oylie Seal, The storm-presaging Porpus, Herring-Hogg, Line-shearing Shark, the Cat-fish and the Sea-dogg; The scale-fenc'd Sturgeon, wry-mouth'd Hollibut; The flouncing Salmon, Codfish, Greedigut; Cole, Haddock, Haike, the Thornback and Scate, Whose slimy outside makes him seld in date; The stately Bass, old Neptunes fleeting Post, That tides it out and in from Sea to Coast; Consorting Herrings, and the bony Shad. Big-bellied Alewives, Macrils richly clad With Rain-bow colours, the Frost-fish and the Smelt, As good as ever Lady Gustus felt. The spotted Lamprons, Eeles, the Lamperies, That seek fresh water-Brooks with Argu's-eyes. These watry Villages, with thousands more Do pass and repass neer the Verdant shore. Shell-fish of all sorts. The luscious Lobster with the Crabfish raw, The Brittish Oyster, Muscle, Periwig And the Tortoise sought by the Indian Squaw; Which to the flats dance many a Winters Jigg: To dive for Cockles, and to dig for clams, Whereby her lazy husbands guts she crams. The Seal, called also the Sea-Calf, whose Skin is good for divers uses, and his body between Fish and Flesh, neither delectable to the Pallat, nor well agreeing with the Stomack. His Oyl is used in Lamps. The Shark is as big as a man, some as big as a Horse, with three rows of teeth in his mouth, with which he Snaps in two the Fishers Lines; he will bite off a mans Armor Legg at a bit, they are oft taken, and serve for nothing but to manure the Ground. There are many Sturgious, but the most are caught at Cape Cod, and in the River of Meramack, whence they are brought to England, they are twelve, fourteen, and some eighteen foot long. The Salmon is as good as ours, and in great plenty in some places: The Hollibut is like our Plaice or Turbut, some being two yards long, and one broad, and a food thick. Thornback and Scate is given to the Doggs, being so common in many places. The Bass is one of the best Fishes, being a Delicate and fat Fish: He hath a bone in his head that
contain a Saucerful of Marrow sweet and good, pleasant and whole∣some; they are three or four foot long, they take them with a Hook and Line, and in three hours a man may catch a dozen or twenty of them. The Herrings are much like ours. Alewives are much like Herrings, which in the end of April come into the fresh Rivers to spawn, in such multitudes as is incredible, pressing up in such shallow waters where they can scarce swim, and they are so eager, that no beating with poles can keep them back till they have spawned. Their Shads are far bigger than ours: The Makarels be of two sorts; In the beginning of the year the great ones are upon the Coast, some 18. inches long: In Sommer come the smaller kind, they are taken with Hooks and Lines baited with a piece of Red Cloth. There be many Eels in the salt water, especially where grass grows, they are caught in Weels baited with pieces of Lobsters: Sometimes a man thus takes a busnel in a night, they are wholesome and pleasant meat. Lamprons and Lampries are little esteemed. Lobsters are in plenty in most places, very large, and some being twenty pound weight, they are taken at low water amongst the Rocks; the smaller are the better; but because of their plenty they are little esteemed. The Oysters be great, in form of a shoo-horn, some of a foot long, they breed in certain banks, which are bare after every Spring-tide; each makes two good mouthfuls. The Periwig lies in the Oase like a head of hair, which being touched, draws back it self leaving nothing to be seen but a small round hole, Muscles are in such plenty that they give them their Hoggs. Clams are not much unlike to Cockles, lying under the Sand, every six or seven of them having a round hole at which they take in Air and Water, they are in great plenty, and help much to feed their Swine both Winter and Sommer; for the Swine being used to them, will constantly repair eve∣ry ebb to the places, where they root them up and eat them. Some are as big as a Penny Loaf, which the Indians count great dainties. A Description of the Plantations in New-England as they were Anno Christi, 1633. The outmost Plantation to the Southward, which by the Indians is called Wichaguscusset, is but a small Village, yet pleasant and healthful, having good ground, store of good Timber, and of Meddow ground; there is a spacious Harbor for shipping before the Town; they have store of Fish of all sorts, and of Swine, which they feed with Acrons and Clams, and an Alewife River. Three miles to the North is Mount Wolleston, a fertile soil, very con∣venient for Farmers houses, there being great store of plain ground with∣out Trees. Near this place are Maschusets Fields, where the greatest Sagamore in the Country lived before the Plague cleared all: Their greatest inconvenience is that there are not so many Springs as in other places; nor can Boats come in at low water, nor Ships ride near the Shore.
Six miles further to the North lieth Dorchester, the greatest Town in New-England, well Wooded and Watered with good Arrable and Hay ground, fair comfortable Fields and pleasant Gardens: Here are many Cattel, as Kine, Goats, and Swine. It hath a good Harbor for ships; there is begun the fishing in the Bay, which proved so profitable, that many since have followed them there. A mile from thence lies Roxberry, a fair and handsome Country Town; the Inhabitants are rich: It lies in the Mains, and yet is well Wooded and watered, having a clear Brook running through the Town, where are great store of Smelts, whence its called Smelt-River. A quarter of a mile on the North of it is another River, called Stony River, upon which is built a water Mill. Here is good store of Corn and Meddow Ground. Westward from the Town its somewhat Rocky, whence its called Rox∣berry; the Inhabitants have fair houses,, store of Cattel, Come-fields paled in, and fruitful Gardens. Their goods are brought in Boats from Boston, which is the nearest Harbor. Boston is two miles North-East from Roxberry. Its Situation is very plea∣sant, being a Peninsula hemmed on the South with the Bay of Roxberry. On the North with Charles River, the Marshes on the back side being not half a quarter of a mile over, so that a little fencing secures their cattel from the Wolves. Their greatest want is of Wood and Meddow ground, which they supply from the adjacent Islands, both for Timber, Fire-wood, and Hay; they are not troubled with Wolves, Rattlesnakes nor Mus∣ketoes, being bare of Wood to shelter them. Its the chief place for ship∣ping and Merchandize. This neck of Land is about four miles in com∣pass, almost square: Having on the South at one corner a great broad Hill, whereon is built a Fort, which commands all Ships in any Harbour in the Hill Bay. On the North side is another Hill of the same bigness, whereon stands a Windmil. To the North-West is an high Mountain, with three little Hills on the top, whence it is called Tremount. From hence you may see all the Islands that lie before the Bay, and such Ships as are upon the Sea Coast. Here are rich Corn Fields, and fruitful Gardens: The Inhabi∣tants grow rich; they have sweet and pleasant Springs; and for their enlargement, they have taken to themselves Farm-Houses in a place cal∣led Muddy River, two miles off, where is good Timber, Ground, Marsh-Land, and Meddows, and there they keep their Swine or other Cat∣tel in the Summer, and bring them to Boston in the Winter. On the North side of Charles River is Charles Town, which is another neck of Land, on whose Northern side runs Mistick River. This Town may well be paralled with Boston, being upon a bare neck, and there∣fore forced to borrow conveniencies from the Main, and to get Farmes in the Country. Here is a Ferry-boat to carry Passengers over Charles Ri∣ver, which is a deep Channel, and a quarter of a mile over. Here may ride fourty ships at a time. Up higher is a broad Bay that is two miles over, into which run Stony River, and Muddy River. In the middle of this Bay is an Oyster bank.
Medfod Village is scituated towards the North-West of this Bay, in a Creek: A very fertile and pleasant place: Its a mile and a half from Charles Town. At the bottom of this Bay the River is very nar∣row. By the side of this River stands New-Town, three miles from Charles Town. Its a neat and well compacted Town, having many fair build∣ings, and at first was intended for a City; The Inhabitants are mostly rich, and have many Cattel of all sorts, and many hundred Acres of Ground paled in. On the other side of the River lies their Meddow and Marsh Ground for Hay Half a mile thence is Water Town, nothing inferiour for Land, Wood, Meddows and Water: Within half a mile of it is a great Pond, which is divided between those two Towns; And a mile and a half from this Town is a fall of fresh waters, which through Charles River fall into the Ocean: A little below this fall they have made weires, where they catch great store of Shads, and Alewives, an hundred thousand of them in two Tides. Mastick is three miles from Charles Town; seated pleasantly by the waters side. At the head of this River are very spacious Ponds to which the Alewives press to cast their Spawn, where multitudes are taken. On the West side of this River the Governour hath a Farm where he keeps most of his Cattel. On the East side is Mr. Craddocks Plantation, who impailed in a Park for Deer, and some ships have been built there. Winnisimet is a very pleasant place for situation, and stands commodi∣ously. Its but a mile from Charles Town, the River only parting them. Its the lasts Town in the Bay. The chief Islands that secure the Harbor from Winds and Waves, are first Deere Island, within a flight shot from Bullin Point. Its so called, because the Deer often swim thither to escape the Woolves, where six∣teen of them have been killed in a day. The next is Long Island, so called from its length. Other Islands are Nodless Isle, Round Isle; the Governours Garden, having in it an Orchard, Garden, and other conveniencies: Also Slate Island, Glass Island, Bird Island, &c. they all abound with Wood, Water, and Meddows: In these they put their Cattel for safety, whil'st their Corn is on the Ground. The Towns without the Bay are nearer the Main, and reap a greater benefit from the Sea, in regard of the plenty of Fish and Fowl, and so live more plentifully than those that are more remoat from the Sea in the Island Plantations. Six miles North-East from Winnisimet is Sagus, is pleasant for situation, seated at the bottom of a Bay, which is made on the one side with a sur∣rounding Shore, and on the other side with a long Sandy Beach: Its in the circumference six miles, well Woodded with Oakes, Pines, and Ce∣dars; Its also well watered with fresh Springs, and a great Pond in the middle, before which is a spacious Marsh. One Black William an Indian Duke, out of his generosity, gave this place to the Plantation of Sagus, so that none else can claim it; when a
storm hath been, or is like to be, there will be a roaring like thunder which may be heard six miles off. On the North side of this Bay are two great Marshes, divided by a pleasant River that runs between them. The Marsh is crossed with divers Creeks where are store of Geese and Ducks, and convenient Ponds wherein to make Decoys. There are also fruitful Meddows, and four great Ponds like little Lakes wherein is store of fresh Fish; out of which, within a mile of the Town runs a curious fresh Brook which is rarely frozen by reason of its warmness: and up∣on it is built a Water Mill. For Wood there is store, as Oake, Walnut, Cedar, Elme, and Aspe: Here was sown much English Corn. Here the Bass continues from the midst of April till Michaelmas, and not above half that time in the Bay. There is also much Rock-Cod, and Macharil, so that shoals of Bass have driven shoals of Macharil to the end of the sandy bank, which the Inhabitants have gathered up in Wheel barrows. Here are many Muscle banks, and Clam-banks, and Lobsters amongst the Rocks, and grassy holes. Four miles from Saugus stands Salem, on the middle of a neck of Land very pleasantly, between two Rivers on the North and South. The place is but barren sandy Land, yet for seven years together it brought forth excellent Corn, being manured with Fish every third year: Yet there is good ground, and good Timber by the Sea side, and divers fresh Springs. Beyond the River is a very good soil, where they have Farms. Here also they have store of Fish, as Basses, Eels, Lobsters, Clams, &c. They cross the River in Canows made of whole Pine Trees, two foot and an half wide, and twenty foot long, in which also they go a Fowling, some∣times two Leagues into the Sea. It hath two good Harbours, which lie within Derbins Fort. Marvil Head lies four miles South from Salem, a very good place for a Plantation, especially for such as will set up a Trade of Fishing: There are good Harbours for Boats, and good riding for ships. Agowomen is nine miles to the North from Salem near the Sea, and ano∣ther good place for a Plantation. It abounds with Fish and Flesh, of Fowls, and Beasts, hath great Meddows and Marshes, and Arable grounds, many good Rivers and Harbours, and no Rattle Snakes. Merrimack lies eight miles beyond that, where is a River Navigable for twenty miles, and all along the side of it fresh Marshes, in some places three miles broad. In the River is Sturgion, Salmon, Bass, and divers other kinds of Fish. Three miles beyond this River is the out side of Massecusets Pa∣tent; wherein these are the Towns that were begun in the year, 1633. Of the Evils, and Hurtful things in the Plantation. Those that bring the greatest prejudice to the Planters, are the rave∣nous Woolves, which destroy the weaker Cattel, of which we heard be∣fore. Then the Rattle Snake which is usually a yard and a half long, as
thick in the middle as the small of a mans Legg, with a yellow belly: Her back is spotted with black, russet, and green, placed like scales. At her taile is a rattle with which she makes a noise when she is molested, or when any come near to her: Her neck seems no bigger than a mans thumb, yet can she swallow a Squirrel, having a wide mouth with teeth as sharp as needles, wherein her poyson lies, for she hath no sting: when a man is bitten by her, the poyson spreads so suddenly through the veins to the heart that in an hour it causes death, unless he hath the An∣tidote to expel the poyson, which is a Root called Snake-weed, which must be champed, the spittle swallowed, and the Root applyed to the sore; this is a certain cure. This Weed is rank poyson if it be taken by any man that is not bit∣ten, unless it be Phisically compounded with other things. He that is bitten by these Snakes, his fresh becomes as spotted as a Lepers, till he be perfectly cured. She is naturally the most sleepy and unnimble Crea∣ture that is, never offering to leap at, or bite any man, if he tread not upon her: In hot weather they desire to lie in paths in the Sun, where they sleep soundly; A small switch will easily kill them. If a Beast be bitten, they cut his flesh in divers places, and thrust in this Weed, which is a sure Cure. In many places of the Country there be none of them; As at Plimouth, New-Town, &c. In some places they live on one side the River, and if they swim over, as soon as they come into the Woods, they turn up their yellow bellies and die. Other Snakes there be, which yet never hurt ei∣their man or Beast. There be also store of Froggs, which in the Spring time chirp, and whistle like Birds, and in the end of Sommer croake like other Frogs. There are also Toads that will creep to the top of Trees, and sit croaking there to the wonderment of strangers. There be also Pismires, and Spi∣ders, but neither Fleshworms, nor Moles. There be wild Bees or Wasps that guard the Grapes, making her Cob∣web nest amongst the Leaves: Also a great Fly, like to our Horse flies, which bite and fetch blood from man or beast, and are most trouble∣some where most Cattel be. There is also a Gurnipper, which is a Fly as small as a Flea, and where it bites it causes much itching, and scratching. Also the Muskito like to our Gnats: Such as are bitten by them fall a scratching, which makes their hands and faces swell; but this is only the first year, for they never swell the second year. Here also are Flies called Cantharides, so much used by Chirurgions; and divers sorts of Butterflies. Of the Natives inhabiting those parts of New-England. The Country is divided (as it were) into Shires, every several Shire under a several King. On the East, and North-East are the Churchers, and Tarenteens. In the Southern parts are the Pequants, and Naragansets. On the West are the Connectacuts, and Mowhacks. Those on the North of them are called Aberginians, who before the sweeping Plague scorn∣ed
the confrontments of such as now count themselves but the scum of the Country, and that would soon root them out, were it not for the English. The Churchers are a cruel bloody people, which were wont to come down upon their poor neighbours, bruitishly spoyling their Corn, burn∣ing their houses, slaying their men, ravishing the Women, yea sometimes eating a man, one part after another before his face whil'st he was alive: But they say, they dare not meddle with a white faced man, accompa∣nied with his hotmouthed weapon. They are tall of stature, have long grim Visages, slender wasted, and exceeding great arms and thighs, wherein their strength lies; with a Fillip of their finger they will kill a Dogg: They live upon Fruits, Herbs, and Roots, but that which they most desire is Mans flesh. If they catch a stranger they keep him in as good plight as they can, giving him their best fare, and daily pipe to him, paint him, and dance about him, till at last they begin to eat him piece-meal: They are des∣perate in Wars, securing their bodies with Sea-horse Skins, and Barks of Trees made impenitrable, wearing Head-pieces of the same: Their Weapons are Tamahauks, which are Staves of two foot and a half long, and a knob at the end as big as a Foot-ball; these they carry in their right hand, and in their left a Javelin, or short spear headed with a sharp Sea-horse Tooth; they are both deadly Weapons. The Tarenteens are little less savage, only they eat not mans flesh: They are enemies to the Indians amongst the English, and kill as many of them as they can meet with. They are the more insolent because they have Guns, which they trade for with the French, who will sell his eyes, they say, for Beaver. So soon as a Boat comes to an Anchor, they enquire for Sack and strong Liquors, which they much affect ever since the Eng∣lish traded it with them, so that they will scarce exchange their Beaver for any thing else. These are wise, high spirited, constant in friendship one to another, true in their promises, and more industrious than most o∣thers. The Pequants are a stately Warlike People, just in their Deal∣ings; requiters of Courtesies, and affable to the English. The Narragansetz are the most numerous people in those parts, the richest and most industrious: They are also the most curious Minters of their Wampamprag and Mowhacks, which they make of the most inmost wreaths of Perriwinckles shells; the Northern, Eastern, and Western In∣dies fetch all their Coin from them: As also they make curious Pendants and Blacelets, and stone Pipes which hold a quarter of an ounce of To∣bacco; these they make with Steel Drills, and other Instruments, and so ingenuous they are, that they will imitate the English Mold so exactly that were it not for matter and Colour you, could not distinguish them; they make these Pipes of green or black stone; they made also Pots, wherein they dressed their Victuals before they knew the use of our Brass: They seek rather to grow rich by Industry, than famous by deeds of chivalry.
The Aberginians are mostly between five and six foot high, straight bo∣died, strong lim'd, smooth skin'd, merry countenanced, of complexion something more swarthy than a Spaniard; black haired, high forehead∣ed, black eyed, out-nosed, having broad shoulders, brawny Arms, long and slender hands, out-breasts, small wasts, lank bellies, handsome legs, thighs, flat knees, and small feet. Its beyond belief to conceive how such lusty bodies should be support∣ed by such slender foot: Their houses are mean, their lodging as home∣ly, their commons scant, their drink Water, and Nature their best cloa∣thing: You shall never see any monstrous person amongst them, or one whom sickness hath deformed, or casualty made decrepit; most are fifty years old before a wrinkled brow, or Gray Hairs bewrayes their age: their smooth Skins proceeds from the oft anointing their bodies with Oyl of Fishes, and fat of Eagles, and Rackoones, which secures them also against Muskitoes: Their black hair is Natural, but made more jetty by oyling, dying, and daily dressing: Sometimes they wear long hair like women, sometimes they tie it up short like a horse tail: their boyes must not wear their hair long, till they be sixteen year old, and then also but by degrees, some leave a foretop, others a long lock on the crown, or one on each side the head, as best pleases their fancy: They will not endure any Hair on their Chins, but scrub it up by the roots: And if they see one with the appearance of a Beard, they say he is an Eng∣lish mans Bastard. Their cloathing is a piece of cloth of a yard and a half long put be∣tween their Groyns tied with Snake-skins about their middle, with a flap before, and hanging like a tail behind. The more Aged in the Winter wear Leather Drawers like Irish Trowzes; their shooes are of their own making, cut out of a Mooses Hide; have and some skins which they cast a∣bout them like Irish Mantles, being either Bear, Mooses, or Beaver-skins sewed together, &c. and in the Winter deep Fur'd Catskins, which they wear upon that Arm that is most exposed to the weather. When they are disposed to Trade, they choose a good course Blanket, or piece of Broad Cloth, which they make a Coat of by Day, and a covering by Night: They love not to be imprisoned in Cloaths after our Mode. Though they be poor, yet are they proud, which discovers it self by their affecting Ornaments, as Pendants in their Ears, forms of Birds, Beasts, and Fishes carved out of Bones, Shels, and Stones, with long Bracelets of their curiously wrought Wampompeag, and Mowhacks, which they wear about their loins. Many of their better sort bear upon their cheeks the Pourtaictures of Beasts, and Fowls, which they make by rasing of their skin with a small sharp Instrument, under which they convey a kind of black unchage∣able Ink which makes them apparent and permanent: Others have im∣pressions down the out side of their Arms and Breasts like Stars, which they imprint by searing Irons. A Sagamore with a Hum-bird in his Ear for a Pendant, a black Hawke on his Head for a Plume, Mawhack instead of a Gold Chain, store of Wampompeag about his Loins, his Bow in his Hand, his Quiver at his back, and six naked Indians for his Guard, thinks
himself nothing inferiour to the great Cham, and will say that he is all one with King Charles. Of their Diet, Cookery, Meal-times and Hospitality. In the Winter time they have all sorts of Fowls, Beasts, and Pond-fish, with some Roots, Indian Beans, and Clams. In the Sommer they have all manner of Sea Fish, with all sorts of Berries. These they roast or boil in great Kettles, which they gat by trading with the French, and now of the English: Before, they had good earthen Pots of their own making; their Spits are cloven sticks sharpned at one end and thrust into the ground, a dozen of them with Flesh and Fish about a fire, turning them as they see occasion. This they present to their Guests, dishing it in a rude manner, and set on the ground, without Linnen, Trenchers, or Knives; to this they presently fall aboard without Bread, Salt, or Beer, lolling af∣ter the Turkish fashion, not ceasing till their full bellies leave empty plat∣ters. Their Indian Corn they seeth whole, like Beans, eating three or four corns with a mouthful of Fish or Flesh, filling up thinks with their Broth. In Sommer when their Corn is spent Isquoterquashes is their best Bread, like our young Pumpions. When our English invite them to meat, they eat very moderately, though at home without measure. They all meet friends at a Kettle, save their Wives, who attend at their backs for their bony fragments. They keep no set meals, but when their store is spent, they bite on the bit, till they meet with fresh supplies, their Wives trudging to the Clam-banks when other Provision fails. Its the greatest discourtesie you can shew them, not to eat of their Delicates, of which they are as free as Emperors, and not to sup of their Broth made thick with Fish, Fowl and Beasts, all boiled together. Of their Dispositions, good Qualities, as Friendship, Constancy, Truth, and Affability. These Indians are of an Affable, Courteous, and well-disposed Nature, ready to communicate the best of their wealth to the mutual good one of another, and the less abundance they have, the more conspicuous is their love, in that they are as willing to part with their mite in pover∣ty, as their Treasure in Plenty. He that kills a Deer sends for his friends and eats it merrily. He that receives but a piece of Bread from an English hand, gives part of it to his Comrades, and they eat it together lovingly. Yea, a friend can command a friends house, and whatsoever is his (sa∣ving his Wife) and have it freely: and nothing sooner disjoyns them than ingratitude, accounting an ungrateful person, a double Robber, not only of a mans curtesie, but of his thanks, which he might have from another for the same profered and received kindness. They so love each other, that they cannot endure to see one of their Countrymen wrong∣ed, but will defend them stiffly, plead for them strongly, and justifie their integrity in any warrantableaction.
They are true, and faithful to the English, and have been the disclosers of all such treacheries as have been designed by other Indians against them. If any roaving ship be upon the Coast, and chance to harbour in any unusual Port, they will give the English notice of it, which hath been no small advantage. When the English have travelled far into the Couu∣try, they readily entertain them into their houses, quarter them in their Rooms, and provide for them the best victuals they can, and give them kind entertainment, if it be for two or three weeks together. They are also ready to guide them through the unbeaten Wildernesses, and if any loose their way, they will not leave them till they have brought them to their desired place. They are very careful to keep good correspondence with our English Magistrates, being ready to execute any service which they require of them. If any Malefactor withdraw himself from condigne punishment, they will hunt him out, and not rest till they have delivered him up to Justice. They are kind and affable, very wary with whom they enter into friendship; nothing is more hateful to them than a churlish disposi∣tion, or dissimulation: They speak seldom, and then utter not many words, and those they do, they deliver very gravely. They never fall out amongst themselves, nor abuse each other in language. Yea, though in Gaming they lose all their little all, yet is the Loser as merry as the Winner, and they part good friends. Of their Hardness. Their hardness is to be admired, no ordinary pains causing them so much to alter their Countenance: Beat them, whip them, pinch them, punch them, if they resolve otherwise, they will not winch for it: and though naturally they fear death, yet the unexpected approach of a mortal wound by Sword, Bullet, &c. strike no more terrour, causes no more exclamation, no more complaint, than if it were a shot into the Trunk of a Tree. Some have been shot in at the Mouth, and out under the Ear, others into the Breast; others run through the flanks with Darts, others recei∣ved desperate wounds, and yet, either by their rare skill in simples, or by Charms have been cured in a short time. In the night they dare not stir out of their houses, for fear of their Abamaco [the Devil] they will rather lie by an English fire all night, than go a quarter of mile in the dark to their own houses. Of their wondering at their first sight of any new Invention. They being strangers to Arts, are ravished at the first view of any new Invention: They took the first Ship they saw for a mourning Island, the Masts to be Trees, the Sails, white Clouds, and the discharging of great Guns, to be Thunder and Lightning: But this moving Island being stop∣ped by its Anchor, they manned out their Canows to go and pick stra∣bones in it; but by the way, being saluted with a broad side, they cryed
out, with much hoggery, so big walk, and so big speak, and by and by kill; this made them to turn back, and approach no more till they were sent for. They wondred much at the first Wind Mill which the English erected, for its strange whirking motion, and the sharp teeth, biting the Corn so small, and its long Arms, neither durst they stay in so tot∣tering a Tabernacle. The first Plowman they saw was accounted a Jugler, the Plow tearing up more ground in a day, then their Clamshels could scrape up in a moneth. yet are they so ingenious, and dexterous in using the Ax or Hatchet, that probably they would soon learn any Trade, were they not so much wedded to idleness; so that they had ra∣ther starve than work. In brief, they be wise in their carriage, subtile in their Trading, true in their promise, just in paying their Debts: Though their poverty may make them slow, yet are they sure: Some having died in the English debt, have by Will left Beaver for their satis∣faction: They be constant in friendship, merrily conceited in Discourse, not Luxurious, in Youth, nor froward in Old Age. Of their Kings Government, and Subjects obedience. Their Kings inherit, the Son alwayes succeeding his Father. If there be no Son, the Queen Rules, if no Queen, the next of the blood Royal; If any other intrude, he is counted a Usurper; and if his fair carriage win not their love, they will soon unking him. The Kings have not many Laws to Rule by, nor have they any year∣ly Revenews, yet are they so feared, or beloved, that half their Subjects estates are at their service, and their persons at his command. Though he hath no Kingly Rules to make him glorious, no guard to secure him, no Courtlike attendance, nor sumptuous Pallaces, yet they account him their Soveraign, and yield chearful subjection to him, going and coming at his beck without questioning a reason, though the matter thwart their wills. Such as commit Treason, or lay violent hands on their law∣ful Soveraign, die without mercy. Once a year he takes his progress, at∣tended with a dozen of his best Subjects, to view his Countrey, to recre∣ate himself, and to establish good Order. When he comes into any house, without any other Complements, they desire him to sit down on the ground (having neither Stools nor Cushions) and after a while all that are present sit down by him, one of his Seniors making an Oration gratulatory to his Majesty for his love, and the many good things they enjoy under his Government. A King of large Dominions hath his Vice-Royes under him to man∣nage his State Affairs, and to keep his Subjects in good Decorum. For their Laws, as their evil manners come short of other Nations, so they need not so many Laws, yet some they have, which they inflict upon notorious Malefactors, as Traytors, Murtherers, &c. He that deserves death, being apprehended, is brought before the King; and some of his wisest men, and if upon trial he be found guilty, the Executioner comes in, blindfolds him, and sets him in the publick, and brains him with a Club; they have no other punishment save Admonitions, or reproofs for smaller offences.
Of their Marriages. The Kings and great Pawwoos, or Connirers may have two or three Wives, yet seldom use it; others have but one. When a man desires to marry, he first gets the good will of the Maid or Widdow, then the con∣sent of her friends, then, if the King like, the match is made, her Dow∣ry of Wamponpeag paid, and so the King joyns their hands never to part till Death, unless she prove a Whore, for which they may put them away. Of their Worship, Invocations, and Conjurations. As its natural to all Mortals to worship something, so do these. They acknowledge specially two, Ketar, who is their God, to Whom they sa∣crifice when they have a good Crop. Him they Invocate for fair wea∣ther, for Rain, for recovery of their sick, &c. But if they prevail not, their Powwows betake themselves to their Conjurations, and Charmes, by which they effect very strange things, and many times work great Cures. But since the English came amongst them, they are much reform∣ed, and most of them have left these Diabolical practices. Of their Wars. For places of retreat in times of danger they make Forts of fourty or fifty foot square, of young Timber Trees ten or twelve foot high ram∣med into the ground, the Earth being cast up within for their shelter, and with loop holes through which they shoot their Arrows. In war their only Weapons are Bows and Arrows, only their Captains have long Spears, on which, if they return Conquerors, they carry the chiefest of their enemies heads; for they use to cut off their heads, hands, and feet to carry home to their Wives and Children as Trophies of their renown∣ed Victories: They also at such times paint their Faces with diversities of colours to make them the more terrible to their foes; They put on also their rich Jewels, Pendants, Wampompeag, &c. to mind them that they fight, not only for their Lives, Wives and Children, but for their Goods, Lands, and Liberties; they fight without all order, and when they have spent their Arrows, they run away. They are trained up to their Bows from their childhood, and are excellent Marks-men: They run swiftly, and swim almost naturally. Of their Huntings. They have neither Beagles, Hounds, nor Grayhounds, but supply all themselves: In the season of the year they have Hunting Houses in the places to which the Deer resort, in which they keep their Rendesvouze, with their Snares, and all the Accoutrements for that imployment. When they see a Deer Moose, or bear, they labour to get the wind of him, and coming neer they shoot him quite through, if the bones hin∣der
not. They hunt also Wolves, wild Cats, Rackoones, Otters, Bea∣vers, and Musquashes, trading both their Skins and flesh to the English: They have also other devises wherewith to kill their game. Of their Fishings. They are very expert in fishing, knowing all kinds of baits fit for each se∣veral sorts of fish, and for all seasons of the year. They know also when to fish in the Rivers, when at the Rocks, when in the Bayes, and when at the Seas: Before the English furnished them with Hooks and Lines, they made Lines of their own Hemp, curiously wrought, stronger than ours, and used bone-hooks; They make also strong Nets, wherewith they, catch Sturgion; and in the night they go forth in their canooes with a bla∣zing Torch, which they wave up and down, with which the Sturgion being delighted, playes about it, turning up her white belly, into which they thrust a bearded Dart, her back being impenetrable, and so hale her to the shoar. They look out also for sleeping Seals, whose Oyl they much esteem, using it for divers things. Of their Arts and Manufactures. They dress all manner of Skins, by scraping and rubbing, and curi∣ously paint them with unchangable colours, and sometimes take off the hair, especially if they be not in season. They make handsome Bows, which they string with Mooses sinews: Their Arrows they make of young Eldern, which they feather with Eagles feathers, and head them with Brass in shape of a Triangle. Their Cordage is so even, smooth, and soft, that its liker Silk than Hemp. Their Canows are either made of Pine-trees, which, before they had English Tools, they burned hollow scraping them smooth with the shels of Clams, and Oysters, cutting their out-sides with Hatchets of Stone: Others they make of Birch rinds, which are so light that a man may carry one of them on his back. In these tottering Boats they will go to Sea, scudding over the waves, row∣ing with a Paddle: If a Wave turn her over, by swimming they turn her up, and get into her again. Of their Death, Burials, and mournings. Though these Indians have lusty and healthful bodies, not knowing ma∣ny diseases incident to others Countries, as Feavers, Plurisies, Callentures, Agues, Obstructions, Consumptions, Convulsions, Apoplexies, Dropsies, Gout, Stone, Toothach, Pox, Meazles, &c. so that some of them live to sixty, seventy, eighty, yea, one hundred years before death summons them hence; yet when death approaches, and all hope of recovery is past, then to see and hear their heavy sobbs, and deep fetched sighs, their grieved hearts, and brinish tears, and doleful cryes, would fetch tears from an heart of stone. Their grief being asswaged, they commit the bodies of their friends
to the Earth, over whose grave for a long time they weep, groan, and howl, continuing annual mournings, with a stiff black paint on their faces: They mourn without hope, and yet hold the immortality of the Soul, that it shall pass to the South-West Elysium, a kind of Paradise, wherein they shall for ever abide, solacing themselves in Odoriferous Gardens, fruitful Corn-fields, green Meddows, Bathing in cool streams of pleasant Rivers, and shelter themselves from heat and cold in state-Pallaces framed by Dame Nature; at the Portal of this Elisium they say there lies a great Dogg, whose currish snarlings excludes unworthy intruders: wherefore they bury them with Bows and Arrows, and store of Wampompeag, and Mouhak, either to affright the affronting Cerberus, or to purchase greater prerogatives in that in Paradise. But evil livers they go to the infernal dwellings of Abamacho, there to be tor∣mented. Of their Women, their Dispositions, Imployments, Vsage by their Husbands, their Apparel, and Modesty. These Indians scorn the tutorings of their Wives, or to admit them as their equals, though their qualities, and industry may justly claim the preheminence, and command better usage, and more conjugal esteem, their persons and features being every way correspondent, their quali∣fications more excellent, being more loving, pitiful, and modest, mild, provident, and laborious than their lazy husbands. Their imployments are many, for they build their houses in fashion like our Garden Ar∣bors, but rounder, very strong and handsome, covered with close wrought Mats of their own weaving, which deny entrance to a drop of Rain, though it be fierce and long, neither can the North winds find a crany whereat to enter; they be warmer then ours: At the top is a square hole for the smoake to pass out, which is close covered in rainy weather: Yet when they have a good fire, they are so smoky, that they are fain to lie down under the smoake. Their Sommer houses when Families are dispersed upon divers occa∣sions, are less: their winter houses are fifty or sixty foot long; fourty or fifty men lodging in one of them; and when their husbands require it, the Wives are fain to carry their houses on their backs to Fishing and Hunting places; or to a planting place, where it abides the longest. The Wives also plant their corn, which they keep so clear from weeds, with their Clam-shell Hooes, as if it were a Garden rather than a Corn∣field; neither suffering Weeds nor Worms to hurt it. Their Corn being ripe, they dry it in the Sun, and convey it into their Barns, which be great holes digged in the ground like brass Pots, lining them with Rinds of Trees, into which they put their Corn, covering it from their Gurmundizing Husbands, who else would eat up all their allowed portion, and reserved Seed if they knew where to find it. But our English Hoggs having found a way to open their Barn-doors, and to rob their Garners; they are fain to make use of their Husbands help to rowl the bodies of Trees over them, to secure them against
these Swine, whose thievery they hate as much as they do to eat their flesh. Another of their imployments is, in their Sommer processions to get Lobsters for their husbands, wherewith they bait their hooks when they go a fishing for Bass & Codfish. This is their every days walk be the wea∣ther cold or hot, the Waters rough or calm, they must dive sometimes over head and ears for a Lobster, which often shakes them by the hands, with a churlish nip, and so bids them adieu. The Tide being spent they trudg home two or three miles with an hundred weight of Lob∣sters on their backs, but if they meet with none, they have a hundred scouls from their churlish Hsbands, and an hungry belly for two dayes after. When their Husbands have caught any fish they bring it in their Ca∣nows as far as they can by Water, and there they leave it, sending their Wives to fetch it home, or they must fast, which done, they must dress it, cook it, dish it, and present it, and see it eaten before their faces, and their Loggerships having filled their paunches, their poor Wives must scramble for their scraps. In the Sommer when Lobsters be in their plenty and prime, these Indian women dry them to keep for Winter, erecting Scaffolds in the hot Sun, and making fires underneath them, by the Smoake whereof the flies are driven away, till the fish remain hard & dry: Thus also they dry Bass, and other Fishes without salt, cutting them very thin that they may dry the sooner before the Flies spoil them, or the Rain wet them, having a great care to hang them in their smoaky houses in the night, and dankish weather. In Sommer also they gather Flags, of which they make Mats for Hou∣ses; also Hemp and Rushes with dying stuff, of which they make curi∣ous Baskets with intermingled colours, and Pourtraictures of Antique Imagery. These Baskets are of all sizes, from a Quart to a Quarter, in which they carry their Luggage. In Winter they are their Husbands Caterers, trugging to the Clam-banks for their belly-timber: they are also their porters to lug home their Venison, which their laziness exposeth to the Wolves, till their Wives im∣pose it upon their shoulders. They also sew thir husbands shooes, and weave Turkey Feathers for them, besides all their housholds drudgery which daily goes through their hands, and a big belly hinders no bu∣siness, nor doth their childbirth hinder much time, but the young child being greased and sooted, wrapped up in a Beavers Skin, bound to his good behaviour, with his feet up to his Bum, upon a board two foot long, and one foot broad, his face being exposed to the most nipping wea∣ther, this little Pappouse travels about with his barefooted Mother, to paddle in the Icy Clamb-banks, being not above three or four dayes old. The womens carriage is very Civil, smiles being the greatest grace of their mirth. Their Musick is Lullabies to quiet their Children, who yet are generally as quiet as if they had neither Spleen nor Lungs. To hear one of these Indian Women unseen, a good ear might easily mi∣stake their untaught voice for the warbling of a well tuned Instrument.
Their modesty suggest them to wear more cloathes than their Husbands, having alwayes a short Coat of cloth, or Skin wrapped like a Blanket a∣bout their loins reaching to their hams, which they never put off in com∣pany. If a husband sels his Wives Beaver Petticote, as sometimes he doth, she will not put it off, till she hath another to put on. Their mild car∣riage and obedience to their husbands is very commendable; notwith∣standing all their churlishness, and salvage inhumanity towards them, yet will they not frown, nor offer to word it with their Lords, nor presume to proclaim their superiority to the usurping of the least tittle of their Husbands charter, but are contentedly quiet with their helpless condi∣tion, esteeming it to be the Womans portion. Since the arrival of the English comparison hath made their yoake more miserable: For seeing the kind usage of the English men towards their wives, they cannot but as much condemn their own husbands un∣kindness, as they commend the English mens love. But in the mean time, their husbands commend themselves for their wit in keeping their wives in subjection, and to labour as much as they condemn the English husbands for their indulgence and folly in spoiling such good working creatures. These Indian women do oft resort to the houses of the English where∣with those of their own Sex, they do somewhat ease their misery by com∣plaining of their thraldom, and seldom part without some relief; and if their husbands come to seek for their Spaws(for so they call all wo∣men) and do begin to bluster for their idleness, the English woman be∣takes her to her Arms, which are the warlike Ladle, and the scalding Li∣quor, threatning blistering to the naked Runaway, who is soon dri∣ven back by such hot comminations. In a word, the love of these wo∣men to the English, deserves no small esteem, whom they are ever pre∣senting with something that is rare or desired, as Strawberries, Hurtleber∣ries, Rasberries, Gooseberries, Cherries, Plums, Fish, and such other gifts as their poor Treasury affords. New Englands Prospect. Of their Religion. The Natives of New-England conceive of many Divine powers:The good God, but one whom they call Keihtan(they say) is the principal, and maker of all the rest, and himself is made by none. He created the Heavens, Earth, Sea, and all Creatures contained therein. He also made one man and one Woman, of whom oll mankind came. But how they came to be so far dispersed, they know not. At first (they say) there was no Sachem or King, but Keihtan, who dwells above the Heavens, whither all good men go when they die to see their friends, and have their fill
of all thins. Thither bad men go also, and knock at his door, but he bids them walk abroad, for there is no piace for such, so that they wander in restless want, and penury. Never man saw this Kiehtan; only old men tell them of him, and bid them tell their children; yea, to charge them to tell it to their posterities, and to lay the like charge upon them. This power they acknowledge to be good; and when they would ob∣tain any great matter, they meet together, and cry unto him; and when they have plenty and victory, &c. they sing, dance, give thanks, and hang up Garlands in memory thereof. Another power they worship called Hobbamock, which is the Devil; Him they call upon to cure their wounds, and Diseases. And when they are curable, he perswades them that he sends the same for some concei∣ved anger against them; but upon their calling upon him, he can, and doth help them. But when they are mortal and incurable, he tells them that Kiehtan is angry, and sends them, whom none can cure, which makes them doubt whether he be simply good, and therefore in sick∣ness they never call upon him. This Hobbamock appears in sundry forms unto them; As in the shape of a Man, a Deer, a Fawn, an Eagle, &c. But most ordinarily like a snake. He appears not to all, but to the chiefest, and most judicious amongst them, though all of them strive to attain that Hellish honor. He chiefly appears to three sorts of per∣sons: Of the first Rank they are few, and they are highly esteemed of, and they think that no weapon can kill them: The second sort are call∣ed Powahs: and the third Priests. The Powahs chief Office is to call upon the Devil, and to cure the sick and wounded. The common people joyn with him in his Invoca∣tions, by saying Amen to what he saith. The Powah is eager and free in speech, fierce in countenance, and joyneth many Antick and labori∣ous gestures with the same over the party diseased. If the party be wounded, they suck his wounds; but if they be curable, the Snake or Eagle sits on his shoulders and licks the same. Him none sees but the Powah. If the party be otherwise diseased, its sufficient if in any shape he but comes into the house, and it is an undoubted sign of reco∣very. The Powahs in their speech promise to sacrifice many Skins of Beasts, Kettles, Hatchets, Beads, Knives, and the best things they have to the Fiend, if he help the diseased party. When women are in desperate and extraordinary hard travel in in Child-birth, they send for the Powahs to help them. Many sacrifices they use, and sometimes kill their Children. The Nanohiggansets exceed in their blind Devotion, and have great spacious houses, into which their Priests only come. Thither at certain times most of the People resort and sacrifice almost all their riches to their gods, as Kettles, Skins, Hatchets, Beads, Knives, &c. all which the Priest casts into a great fire made in the midst of that house, where they are consumed. To this Offering every man brings freely, and he that brings most, is best esteemed. The Priests are men of great courage and wisdom, and to these the Devil also appears more familiarly than to others, and covenants with
them to preserve them from death by wounds of Arrows, Knives, Hatch∣ets, &c. One of these will chase almost an hundred of their enemies: They are highly esteemed of all, and are of the Sachems Councel, without whom he will neither make War, nor undertake any great matter. In War the Sachems for their more safety, go in the midst of them. They are usually men of the greatest stature and strength, and such as will en∣dure most hardness, and yet are discreet, and courteous in their carria∣ges, How they increase the Priests. scorning theft, lying, and base dealing, and stand as much upon their Reputation as any men. And to encrease the number of these, they train up the likeliest Boyes from their Childhood unto great hardness, and cause them to abstain from dainty meat, and to observe divers o∣ther Rules, to the end that the Devil may appear to them when they are of age. They also cause them to drink the Juice of Centuary, and other bitter Herbs, till they vomit it into a platter, which they must drink again, till at length, through extraordinary pressing of Nature, it looke like blood: And this the Boyes will do at first eagerly, and so continue, till by reason of faintness they can scarce stand on their leggs, and then they must go forth into the cold. Also they beat their shins with sticks, and cause them to run through Bushes, Stumps, and Bram∣bles to make them hardy and acceptable to the Devil, that so in time he may appear unto them. Their Sachems are not all Kings,Their Go∣vernment. but only some few of them, to whom the rest resort for protection, and pay them Homage: Neither may they make War without their knowledge and approbation. Every Sachim takes care for the Widdows, Fatherless, Aged, or maimed, if their friends be dead, or not able to provide for them. A Sachim will not marry any but such as are equal in birth to him, lest his Seed prove ignoble; and though they have many other wives, yet are they but Concubines, or ser∣vants, and yield obedience to the Queen, who orders the Family, and them in it. The other Subjects do the same, and will adhere to the first during their lives, but put away the other at their pleasure. Their Government is successive, not elective. If the Sachims child be young when his Father dies, he is committed to the Protection, and Tuition of some one amongst them, who rules for him till he be of age. Every Sachem knows the bounds and limits of his Kingdom,They maintain their Kings. out of which, if any of his men desire Land wherein to set their Corn, he gives them as much as they can use. In these limits, he that Hunts and kills any Venison, gives the Sachim his Fee; if it be killed on the Land, he hath part of the flesh; if in the water, then the Skin only: The great Sachems or Kings know not their bounds so well. All Travellers or Strangers usually lie at the Sachims house, and when they come, they tell them how long they will stay, and whither they are going; during which time they are entertained according to their quality. Once a year the Priests provoke the People to bestow much Corn on the Sachim, and accordingly at a certain time and place, the people bring many Baskets of Corn, and make a great Stack thereof near to the Sachems house. There the Priests stands ready to return them thanks in the
name of the Sachim, who fetches the same, and is no less thankful, bestowing many gifts upon them. When any are visited with sickness,Their cha∣rity. their friends resort to them to comfort them, and oft continue with them till death or recovery; If they dye they stay to mourn for them, which they perform night and morn∣ing for many dayes after their Burial: But if they recover, because their sickness was chargeable, they send them Corn and other gifts, where∣upon they Feast, and Dance.Their Bu∣rials, and mournings When they bury their dead, they sew the Corps up in a Mat, and so bury it. If a Sachim dyes, they cover him with many curious Mats, and bury all his Riches with him, and inclose the Grave with a Pale. If it be a child, the Father will put all his own special Jewels, and Ornaments into the grave with it: Yea, he will cut his Hair, and disfigure himself, in token of his great sorrow. If it be the Master or Dame of the Family, they will pull down the Mats, and leave the Frame of the house standing, and bury them in, or near the same, and either remove their Dwelling, or give over house-keeping. The younger sort reverence the Elder,Their be∣haviour. and do all mean Offices for them when they are together, though they be strangers. Boyes and Girls may not wear their hair like men and women, but are distinguish∣ed thereby. One is not accounted a man, till he doth some notable act, and shews his Courage and Resolution answerable to his place: The men take much Tobacco, but its counted very odious in a Boy so to do. All their Names are significant and variable.Their names of their mar∣riages, Their Wo∣men. For when they come to be men and women, they alter them according to their deeds, or dispositions. When a Maid is given in Marriage, she first cuts her hair, and then wears a covering on her head till her hair is grown again. Of their Women some are so modest, that they will scarce talk together whilst men are by, and are very chast: Others are light, lascivious, and wanton. If a Woman hath a bad Husband, or affect him not; If there be War between that and any other people, she will run away from him to the contrary party, where she never wants welcome; for where there be most women, there is most plenty. When a Woman hath her Courses,Their mo∣desty. she retires her self from all other company, and lives in a house apart; After which she washes her self, and all that she hath touched or used, after which she is received into her Husbands Bed or Family. The Husband will beat his Wife, or put her away for Adultery. Yet some common Strumpets there are, but they are such as either were never married, or are Widdows, or that have been put away for Adultery: For no man will take such an one to wife. In matters of injustice or dishonest dealing, the Sachim examines and punisheth the same.Their Ju∣stice Pu∣nishments. In cases of theft; For the first offence he is dis∣gracefully rebuked: For the second, he is beaten by the Sachim with a Cudgle on the naked back: For the third, he is beaten with many stripes, and hath his Nose slit, that all men may both know and shun him. If one kill another, he certainly dies for it. The Sachim not only senten∣ceth the Malefactor, but executeth the same with his own hands, if
the party be present, otherwise he sends his own Knife, if he be senten∣ced to dye by the hands of another that executes the same. But if the Offender be to receive any other punishment, he will not receive it but from the Sachim himself, before whom being naked, he kneels, and will not offer to run away, though he beat him never so much, it being a greater disparagement for a man to cry when he is corrected, than was his offence and punishment. They are a very witty and ingenious people:Their in∣tegrity. They keep account of the time by the Moon, or by Sommers or Winters; They know divers of the Stars by name: They have also many names for the Winds: They will guess shrewdly at the Wind and Weather before hand, by ob∣servations in the Heavens. Their Language is very copious and large,Their Lan∣guage. and hard to be learned; And though in an hundred miles distance their Languages differ, yet not so much, but they can understand each other. Instead of Records and Chonicles,Their Chonicles. where any Remarkable Act is done, in memory of it, either in the very place, or by some Path neer adjoyn∣ing, they make a round hole in the Ground a foot deep, and as much over, which, when others passing by, behold, they enquire the cause and occasion of it, which being once known, they carefully acquaint others with it. And lest such holes should be filled, as men pass by, they will oft renew them. So that if a man travels, and can under∣stand his Guide, his Journey will be less tedious, by the many Histori∣cal Discourses that will be related to him. You have heard before of the State of New-England in the year 1633. when she was but in her childhood, but being now grown up to more maturity; Take this account of it, which was written by a Reverend Minister, in January 1668/9, who had lived there 40. years, and there∣fore hath great reason, and good opportunities to be acquainted with the condition of it. WHen we came first to New-England in the year 169. there was then but one Town in the Country, viz. that of New-Plimmouth, which had stood alone for nine years. From that time to this year now beginning 1669. is just fourty years; in which time there has been an increase of fourty Churches in this Colony (but many more in the rest.) And Towns in all New-England, 120. which for the most part lie along the Sea Coast for somewhat more than two hundred miles; only upon Connecticut River, there are thirteen Towns lying neer together; and about the Massacusets Bay, here are above thirty Towns within two, three, four, or five miles asunder. And from the Sea, which hath rendred Boston a very considerable place, and the Metropolis of New-England, all the other Towns on the Sea Coast, and those in the Country depending upon it. I have lately heard some Merchants that knew old Boston, say that this is far bigger, and hath ten times more Trade than that, having many Ships and Catches, and they say no less
than an hundred Catches went from the Country this winter to trade in Virginia; besides many others to the West Indies, and to several parts of Europe. It was doubted for some years, whether there would be a staple Com∣modity in New-England; but God and time have shewed many, as Furs, Fish, Masts, Pipestaves, and Deal-board, and such plenty of Corn and Cattel, that abundance of Provision has been yearly transported for the supply of English Plantations, the West-Indies, and other parts; in so much as though many Gentlemen of great Estates in the first year spent their E∣states, and some of them that were very brave men of publick spirits, were brought very low, both they and theirs: Yet in the latter years, many that have risen out of the dust, by a way of Trading and Merchandising, have grown unto great Estates; some to ten, others to twenty, yea thir∣ty or fourty thousand pound estate. In the year 1643. began the combination of the united Colonies of New-England, which have much encrersed since then; every one of them having their distinct Pattents, except New-Haven, which for want of a Pattent, was since the coming in of our King, taken into the Colony of Connecticut; And though very many of the first commers are now dead and gone, yet there is grown up such a numerous Posterity here, that it's thought there are twenty times more English people now in the Country, then ever came into it. And it's believed by many observing men, that there are many above ten hundred thousand souls. Most of the first Magistrates are dead, and not above two left in the Massacusets; but one in Plymouth, one at Connecticut, and not one at New-Ha∣ven. There came over from England at several times, chiefly before the year 1640. ninety fore Ministers, of which twenty seven returned to England again, and there are now dead in the Country thirty six; and as yet living in the Country thirty one. The Ministers bred up in New-England, are one hundred thirty two, of which two are dead in the Country, fourty one have removed to England, most of them from our Colledges, besides other Schollars that have in England turned to other Professions, and eighty one that are now living in the Country, em∣ployed in the Ministery in several places. There have been several Synods in New-England; The first at Cam∣bridge, in the year 1637. wherein the Antinomian▪ and Familistical Er∣rors were confuted and condemned by the Word of God. The se∣cond at Cambridge in the year 1646. wherein the Magistrates power and Duty in Matters of Religion, and the Nature and Power of Synods was cleared. The third, in the year 1648. where it was de∣clared, that in Point of Doctrine, these Churches consented to the Confession of Faith, put forth by the Assembly at Westminster; and in Point of Discipline, the Platform of the Discipline of these Churches, was then published. The fourth was at Boston in the year 1662. con∣cerning the Subject of Baptism, and Consociation of Churches.
It hath pleased the Lord to give such a blessing to the Gospel a∣mong the Indians, that in divers places there are not only many civilized, but divers that are truly Godly, and shame the English, and are much hated by others of their own Country men, though that Work has met with many Obstructions and Remoraes; chiefly by the Death of some of the Choicest Instruments, and many of the best of the Indians; Yet it may be well believed, that there is such a Seed of the Gospel scattered among them, which will grow unto a further Harvest in God's time.
THE DESCRIPTION OF THE ISLAND OF BARBADOS: With an Account of the Trees, Plants, Herbs, Roots, Fowls, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Insects, &c. As also of their Sugar-Canes, In∣genio's and manner of making their Sugars. THE first Discovery made of this Island was by a Ship of Sir William Curte'us,Barbadoes first disco∣vered. which returning from Pernambock in Brasile, being driven by foul Weather upon this Coast, chanced to fall upon this Island, which is not far out of the way, being one of the most Windwardly Islands of all the Carribies; and Anchoring before it, they stayed some time to inform themselves of the na∣ture of of the place, which by tryals in several places, they found to be so over grown with Wood, as that there could be no Champion Ground discovered wheron to Plant; Nor found they any Beasts, or Cattel there, save Hoggs, whereof there were abundance. The Portugals having long before put some on shore for breed,Hoggs found there. in case they should at any time by foul Weather be driven to, or cast up∣on
on this Island, that so they might there find fresh meat to serve them upon such an exigence.Hunted by the Indians. And the Fruits and Roots that grew there, afforeded them so great plenty of food, that now they were multiplied abundantly. In so much as the Indians of the Leeward Islands that were within sight,Fine Pots. coming thither in their Canoos, and finding such Game to hunt as these Hoggs were, whose flesh was so sweet, and excellent in tast, they came often thither a hunting, staying sometimes a moneth together before they returned home, leaving behind them certain tokens of their being there, which were Pots of several sizes made of Clay, so finely tempered, and turned with such Art, as the like to them for fineness of Mettle, and curiosity of turning, are not made in England, in which they boiled their meat. This discovery being made,The first Painters. and advice thereof sent to their friends in England; other ships were sent with Men, Provisions, and Working Tools, to cut down the Woods, and clear the Ground wherein to plant Provisions for their sustentation, till then, finding Food but straglingly in the Woods. But when they had cleared some quantity of Land, they Planted Potato's, Plantines, and Maies, or Indian Wheat, with some other Fruits, which together with the Hoggs, which they found there, served only to keep life and soul together. And their sup∣plies from England coming so slow, and so uncertainly, they were oft dri∣ven to great extremities: And the Tobacco that grew there, was so ear∣thy and worthless, as that it gave them little or no return from Eng∣land, or other places; so that for a while they lingered in a doubtful condition. For the Woods were so thick, and most of the Trees so large and massy, as that they were not to be faln by so few hands: And when they were laid along, the Boughs were so thick and and unweldy, as required more help of strong and active men to lop, and remove them off the ground; which continued so for many years, in somuch as they Planted Potato's, Maies, and Bonavists between the Boughs as the Trees lay on the ground. Yet not long after they planted Indigo,Indico Planted. Cotton, and Fus∣tick. and ordered it so well, as that it sold in London at very good Rates: And their Cotten Woll, and Fustick Wood, proved very good and staple Commodities: So that having these four sorts of commodities, to traffique with all; Some Ships were invi∣ted in hope of gain by that Trade, to come and visit them, bringing for exchange, such Commodities as they wanted, to wit, Working-Tools, Iron, Steel, Clothes, Shirts, Drawers, Hose and Shooes, Hats, and more Hands. So that beginning to find good by this Trade, they set them∣selves hard to work, and lived in much better condition. But when their Sugar-Canes had been planted three or four years,Sugar Canes planted. they found that to be the principal Plant whereby to raise the value of the whole Island; and therefore bent all their endeavours to improve their knowledge and skill in Planting them, and making Sugar. Which knowledg, though they studied hard, was long in Learn∣ing. This Island which we call Barbado's lies in thirteen Degrees and a∣bout thirty Minutes of Northern Latitude:The scitu∣ation of the Island. The usual Bay into
which Ships put, is Carlile Bay, which without exception is the best in the Island, and is somewhat more than a League over, and from the Points of the Land to the bottom of the Bay,The chief Towns unhealth∣ful. is twice as much. Upon the innermost part of this Bay stands a Town called the Bridge; for that a long Bridge was at first made over a little Nook of the Sea, which yet indeed is rather a Bogg than a Sea. This Town is ill scituated; the Planters looking more after conveniencie than health. But one house being erected, another was set up by it for Neighbourhood, and than a third, and a fourth, till at last it became a Town: Divers storehouses were also built there wherein, to stow their goods, being so neer and con∣venient for the Harbour. But their great oversight was to build a Town in so unhealthfull a place. For the ground being somewhat lower within the Land than the Sea banks are, the Spring-Tides flow over, and so remain there, making much of that flat a kind of Bog, or Marish, which sends out so loathsome a Savour, as cannot but breed ill blood, and probably is the occasion of much sickness to those that live there. The ground on either side this Bay (but chiefly that to the Eastward) is much firmer, and lies higher, and therefore with some charge, may be made as convenient as the Bridge, and much more healthfnl. Three more Bayes there be of note in this Island.The Baies. One to the Eastward of this, which they call Austins Bay: The other are to the West of Car∣lile-Bay. The first whereof is called Mackfields Bay; the other Spikes Bay; but neither of these three are environed with Land, as Carlile Bay is; but being to the Leeward of the Island, and of good Anchorage, they seldome are in danger, unless in the time of the Turnado, when the Winds turn about to the South; And then if they be not well moved, the Ships are subject to fall foul one upon another, and sometimes are driven a ground. For the Leeward part of the Island, being rather shelvy than Rocky, they are seldom or never cast away. The leng the hot Island is twenty eight miles,The big∣ness of the Island. Ils beauty and the breadth in some places seventeen miles, in others twelve; so that they make about three hundred nitety two square miles in the whole Island. It rises highest in the middle, so that when you come within sight of this happy Island, the nearer you come, the more beautiful it appears to the Eye. For be∣ing in it self exceeding beautiful, it's best discerned, and best judged of when your eyes become full Mistris of the Object. There you may see the high, large, and lofty Trees with their spreading branches, and flourishing tops, which seem to be beholding to the Earth and Roots that gave them such plenty of sap for their Nourishment, which makes them grow to that perfection of beauty and largeness: Whil'st they by way of gratitude return their cool shade to secure and shelter the Earth from the Suns heat, which otherwise would scorch and dry it up. So that Bounty and Goodness in the one, and Gratefulness in the other, serve to make up this Beauty, which alwayes would lie empty and waste. By the Commodity of the Scituation of this Island, which is highest in the midst, the Inhabitants within have these advantages. First, a
free prospect into the Sea; then a reception of a opure and refreshing air, and Breezes that come from thence: The Plantations overlooking one another, so as the more in most parts are not debarred, nor restrained of their liberties of the view to the Sea by those that dwell between them and it. Whil'st the Sun is in the Aequinoctial,The length of the Days or within ten degrees of either side, there is little change in the length of the dayes, for at six and six the Sun rises and sets: But when its nearer the Tropick of Capricorn, and in thirty seven degrees from them, then the dayes are some∣thing shorter, and this shortning begins about the end of Octo∣ber. Eight Moneths in the year the Weather is very hot,The tem∣perature. yet not scald∣ing, but that Servants, both Christians and Slaves labour and travel ten hours in a day. For as the Sun rises, there rises with it a cool Brees of Wind; and the higher, and hotter the Sun rises, the stronger and cool∣er the Breeses are, and blow alwaeis from the North-East and by East, except in the time of the Turnado: For then it sometimes chops about into the South for an hour or two, and so returns about again to the Point where it was. The other four Moneths it is not so hot, but is near the temper of the Air in England in the midst of May. And though in the hot sea∣son the Planters sweat much, yet do they not find that faintness which we find in England in the end of July, or in the beginning of August. But with this heat, there is such a moisture as must of necessity cause the Air to be unwholsome. The Planters there are seldom thirsty, unless they over heat their bo∣dies with extraordinary labour,Diseases, or with drinking strong drink, as our English Spririts, or French Brandy, or the drink of the Island, which is made of the scummings of the Coppers that boil the Sugar, which they call Kill-devil. For though some of these be needful in such hot Countries when they are used temperately, yet the immoderate use of them over-heats the bodie, which causeth Costiveness, and Gripings in the Bowels; which is a Disease that is very frequent there, and hardly cured, and of which many die. Their blood also is thinner and paler than ours in England: Nor is their Meat so well relished as it is with us, but flat and insipid; the Hogs-flesh only excepted, which is as good as any in the World. Their Horses and Cattel seldom drink, and when they do, its but in a little quantity, except they be over heated with work∣ing. The moisture of the Air causes all their Knives,The moist∣ness of the air. Tweeses, Keys, Needles, Swords, &c. to rust, and that in an instant. For if you grind your rusty Knife upon a Grind-stone, wipe it dry, and put it into your sheath, and pocket, in a little time after draw it again, and you shall find it beginning to rust all over; which in longer time will eat into the Steel and spoil the Blade. Locks also which are not often used, will rust in the Wards and become useless. And Clocks and Watches will seldom or never go true, and all this is occasioned by the moistness of
the Air. This great heat and moisture together is certainly the cause that Trees and Plants, grow to such a vast height, and largeness as they do there. There is nothing so much wanting in this Island as Springs and Rivers of Waters;A want of water. The only River or Lake. there being but very few, and those small and inconsider∣able. There is but one River, which may yet be termed rather a Lake than a River. The Springs that run into it are never able to fill it: And out-let to the Sea it hath none; but at Spring-Tides the Sea comes in and fills it, and at Neep-Tide it cannot run out again, the Sea-banks be∣ing higher than it. Yet some of it issues out through the Sand, and leaves a mixture of fresh and salt water behind it. Sometimes these Spring-tides bring some Fishes into it, which will remain there, being more willing to live in this mixt water, then in the salt. Sometimes there have been taken in it Fishes as big as Salmons, which have been over-grown with fat and very sweet and firm. But Fish is not often taken in this place, by reason that the whole Lake is filled with Trees and Roots, so that no Net can be drawn, nor Hook laid, without danger of breaking and losing. The River or Lake reaches not within Land above twelve score yards, and there is no part of it so broad, but that you may cast a Coit o∣ver it. The Spring-tides about this Island seldom rise above four or five foot upright. Into these Rivolets there come from the Sea little Lobsters, but wanting the great Claws before,Excellent Lobsters. they are the sweetest, and fullest of Fish that can be eaten. But the water which the people in this Island most relie upon, is rain∣water, Their ponds. which they keep in Ponds, and have descents to them, so that what falls upon other grounds about, may run into them; the bottom of these Ponds are Clay. For if the water find any leak to the Rocky part, it gets into the clifts and sinks in an instant. About the end of De∣cember these Ponds are filled, and with the help they have by weekly showers, they mostly continue so, yet sometimes they find a want. This water they use upon all occasions, and to all purposes, as to boil their Meat, to make their Drink, to wash their Linnen, &c. In these Ponds are neither Fish nor Fry, nor any living or moving things, except some Flies that fall into them; but the water is clear and well tasted; here their Cattel drink also. They also save rain water from the houses, by Gutters at the Eves which carries it down into Cisterns. If any tumult or disturbance be in the Island,Speedy warning of dangers the next neighbour to it discharges a Musquet, which gives an Allarum to the whole Island. For upon the report of that, the next shoots, and so the next, and the next, ill it go through all, and upon hearing of this all make ready. Of their Bread. Bread which is the staff and stay of mans life,Bread of Cssury. is not so good here as in
England; Yet do they account it both nourishing and strengthening. It's made of the root of a small Tree or Shrub, which is called Cussary. This Root is large and round, like the body of a small Still, and as they gather it, they cut sticks or blanches that grow neerest to it of the same Tree, which they put into the ground, and they grow: So that as they gather one, they plant another. This Root when its first gathered is an absolute poison, and yet by good ordering it becomes wholesome and nourishing. First, they wash it clean, and lean it against a wheel, whose sole is about a foot broad, covered with Latine made rough like a greater. This Wheel is turned a∣bout with the foot, as Cutlers use to turn theirs, and as it grates the Root, it falls down into a large Trough which is appointed to receive it. This they put into a strong piece of double Canvas, or Sack-cloth, and press it so hard, that all the juice is squeezed out, and then drying it in the Sun, its fit to make Bread, which they do after this manner. They have a Plate of Iron round,How its made. about twenty inches in the Diameter, a little hollowed in the mid'st, with three feet like a Pot, above six inches high, that they may keep fire under. They heat this Pone (as they call it) so hot as that it may bake but not burn. Then the Indians (who are best acquainted with the making of it) cast the Meal upon the Pone the whole breadth of it, and put it down with their hands, and it will presently stick together, and when they think that that side is enough, they turn it with a thing like a Battle-dore; and so turn and re-turn it till it be enough, which is presently done. Then laying it upon a flat boord, they make others, till they have made enough for the whole fa∣mily. They make it as thin as a Wafer, and yet purely white and crisp. Salt they never use in it, though probably it would give it a better re∣lish. They can hardly make Py-crust of it; For as they knead, or roul it, it will crack or chop, so that it will not hold any Liquor, neither with, nor without Butter or Eggs. There is another sort of Bread which is mixed, being made of the flower of Maise,Bread of Maise, and Cussary to∣gether. and Cussary: For the Maise of its self will make no Bread, it is so extream heavy: But these two being mixed, they make it into large Cakes two inches thick, which tastes most like to our English Bread. Yet the Negroes use the Maise another way. For they tost the ears of it at the fire, and so eat it warm off the fire. The Christian Servants are fed with this Maise, who pound it in a large Morter, and boil it in water to the thickness of Frumentry, and then put it into a Tray and so eat it; they give it them cold, and scarce afford them salt to it;Lob-Lolly This they call Lob-lolly. The third sort of Bread which they use, is only Potatoes, which are the dryest, and largest which they can choose, and this is the most com∣mon sort of Bread used at the Planters Tables. Of their Drink. Their Drink is of sundry sorts.Potatoes used for Bread. Their drink Mob∣by, how made. The first, and that which is most used in the Island is Mobby; a Drink made of Potatoes; thus,
They put the Potatoes into a Tub of water, and with a Broom wash them clean; Then taking them out, they put them into a large Brass or Iron Pot, and put to them so much water as will only cover a third part of them, then covering the Pot close with a thick double cloth, that no steam can get out, they stew them over a gentle fire, and when they are enough, take them out, and with their hands squeeze and break them ve∣ry small in fair water, letting them stand till the water hath drawn all the spirits out of the Roots, which will be done in an hour or two. Then they put the Liquor and Roots into a large linnen Bag, and let it run through that into a Jar, and within two hours it will begin to work: and the next day it's fit to be drunk; And as they will have it stronger or weaker, they put in a greater or a less quantity of Roots. This Drink being temperately made, doth not at all fly up into the head, but is sprightly, thirst-cooling drink. If it be put up into Runlets, it will last four or five dayes, and drink the quicker. It is much like Renish Wine on the Must. There are two several layers wherein these Roots grow; The one makes the Skins of the Potatoes white, the other Red, and the Red Roots make the Drink Red like Claret Wine, the o∣ther white. This is the most general Drink used in the Island, but it breeds Hydropick Humours. Another drink they have which is much wholsomer,Perino how made. though not alto∣gether so pleasant, which they call Perino, much used by the Indians, which is made of the Cussavy Root. This they cause their old toothless women to chaw in their mouthes, and so spit into water, which in three or four hours will work and purge it self of the poisonous qua∣lity. This Drink will keep a moneth or two, and drink somewhat like our English Beer. Grippo is a third sort of Drink,Grippo. but few make it well, and it's rare∣ly used. Punch is a fourth sort,Punch. which is made of Water and Sugar mixt toge∣ther, which in ten dayes standing will be very strong, and fit for La∣bourers. A fifth is made of wild Plumbs which they have in great abundance upon very large Trees. These they press and strain, and they have a ve∣ry sharp and fine Flavour: But this being troublesome in making is sel∣dom used. But the Drink made of the Plantane is far beyond all these.Plantane drink. These they gather when they are full ripe, and in the heighth of their sweet∣ness, and peeling off the Skin, they wash them in water well boiled; and after they have stood a night, they strain it, and bottle it up, and at a weeks end drink it. Its a very strong and pleasant Drink, as strong as Sack, and will fly up into the head, and therefore must be used mode∣rately. The seventh sort of Drink they make of the Skimmings of their Sugar, which is exceeding strong, but not very pleasant: This is commonly, and indeed too much used, many being made drunk by it. This they call Kill-Devil.Kill-devil. Beveridge The eighth sort of Drink they call Beveridge, made of Spring-water,
White-Sugar, and Juice of Oringes. And this is not only pleasant, but wholesome.Pine-drink the best of all. The last and best sort of Drink which the World affords, is the incom∣parable Wine of Pines. And this is made of the pure juice of the fruit it self without mixture of Water, or any thing else, having in it self a natural compound of all the most excellent tasts that the world can yield. I'ts too pure to keep long. It will be fine within three or four dayes. They make it by pressing the Fruit, and straining the Liquor, and keep it in Bottles. Three sorts of Meat. They have several sorts of Meat there,Hogs flesh. whereof the Hoggs-flesh is the most general, and indeed the best which the Island affords. For the Swine feeding daily upon Fruit, the Nuts of Locust, Pompianes, the bodies of the Plantanes, Bonanas, Sugar-Canes, and Maise, make their flesh to be exceeding sweet. At the first coming of the English thither, they found Hoggs of four hundred pound weight, the Intrals taken out, and their Heads cut off. Beef they seldome have any that feeds upon that Island,Beef. except it die of it self: Only such a Planter as was Sir James Drax (who lived there like a Prince) may now and then kill one. Turkies they have large,Turkies. Pullin, and Muscovy Ducks. fat and full of gravy. Also our English Pullen, and Muscovy Ducks, which being larded with the fat of their Pork, and seasoned with Pepper and Salt, is an excellent Bak'd Meat. Turtle Doves they have of two sorts,Turtle Doves. Pidgeons. and very good meat. There are also Pidgeons which come from the Lee-ward Islands in September, and stay till Christmas to feed upon Fruits. Many of these they kill upon the Trees, and they are exceeding fat, and tast excellently. Tame Rabbets they have,Rabbets. but they tast faintly, more like Chickens then Rabbets. They have also divers sorts of Birds, but none that they use for Food. Of their Fish. Now for fish, the Island want not plenty about it, yet the Planters look so much after their profit on the Land,Several sorts of fish. that they will not spare time to catch it, nor to send to the Bridge to buy that which is caught to their hands. But when any have a mind to feast themselves with Fish, they go to the Taverns at the Bridge where they have plenty, and well drest. Butter they seldom have that will beat thick; but instead thereof they use Vineger, Spice, and fry much of their Fish in Oyl, and eat it hot; yet some they pickle, and eat it cold. Yet Collonel Humphrey Walrond having his Plantation near the Sea, hath a Saine to catch Fish withall, which his own servants and Slaves put to Sea twice or thrice a week, and bring home store of small and great Fishes, as Snappers red and gray, Caval∣los,
Macarel, Mullets, Cony-Fish, and divers other sorts of firm and sweet Fish; and some bigger then Salmons, of the rarest colours that can be imagined, being from the back fin which is the middle of the Fish, to the end of the tail, of a most pure grass green, as shining as Satin: The Fins and Tail dappled with a most rare hair-colour; and from the back Fin to the Head, a pure hair-colour dappled with green. The Scales as big as an half Crown piece. It is an exccent sweet Fish;The green Turtle. only there is one kind of Fish here wanting, which are very rife in the adjacent Islands, which is the green Turtle, which the best meat that the Sea affords. In other places they take an infinite number of them by turning them upon their backs with staves, where they lie till they are fetcht away. A large Turtle will have in her body half a bushel of Eggs. When they are to kill one of them, they lay it on his back upon a table, and when he sees them come with a knife to kill him, he vapours out the most grievous sighs that ever you heard creature make, and sheds as large tears as a Stag. He hath a joynt or crevis about an inch within the utmost edge of his shell, into which they put the knife and rip up his bel∣ly, which they call his Calipee, and take out his bowels, and heart, which had three distinct points, and this being laid in a dish will stir and pant ten hours after the Fish is dead: It's of a delicate taste and ve∣ry nourishing. Of The Quelquechoses. The Quelquechoses with which they furnish out their Tables at a feast are,Quasque∣choses. Eggs potcht, and laid upon Sippets soaked in Butter, and juice of Limes and Sugar, with plumpt Currans strewed upon them, and Cloves, Mace, Cinamon strewed upon that, with a little Salt. Eggs boiled, rosted, and fried with Collops. Buttered Eggs, and Amulet of Eggs, with the juice of Limes and Sugar, a Fraize, and a Tansie, Custards and Cheese cakes, Puffs, Cream boiled to a heighth with yolks of Eggs, and seasoned with Sugar and Spice, Jelly which they make of a young Pig, Caves-feet, and a Cock; Cream alone, and some several wayes with the help of Limes, Lemmons, and Oranges; and into some they put Plan∣tanes, Gnavers, and Bonanoes stew'd, or preserved with Sugar, and the same fruit also preserved without Cream, and to draw down a cup of Wine, they have dried Neats Tongues, Westfalia-Bacon, Caviare, Pick∣led-Herring, Botargo, all which are brought to them. From Old and New England,Flesh and Fish. Virginia, and Holland they have Beef, and Pork; As al Ling, Haberdine, Cod, poor-John, Makarels, and Herrings pickled, and Sturgeon. Pickled Turtles they have from the Lee-ward Islands. Of these things they have had in these latter years such store, that the Negroes are allowed for each man two Makarels a week, and e∣very woman one, which are given them Saturday-nights, after which they have their allowance of plantanes, which is every one a large bunch or two two little ones to serve them for a weeks provision.The Ne∣groes alow∣ance. And if any Cattel die by chance, or by any disease, the Christian ser∣vants
eat the bodies, and the Negroes the Skins, Head, and Intrals, which is divided to them by the Overseers. If a Horse dies, the Negroes have the whole bodies, and this they think a high Feast, with which poor souls were never better contented: And the Drink which the ser∣vants have to this Diet, is nothing but Mobby, and sometimes a little Beveridge; but the Negroes have nothing but water. When the chief Planters make a Feast for their friends,An Inland Feast. its either made by such as live within Land, or neer the Sea side. For this Inland Plan∣tation, my Author instanceth in Sir James Draxe, at whose Table he hath seen these several sorts of Meat well dressed: And this Feast was alwayes made when he killed a Beef, which he fed very fat, by allow∣ing it a dozen Acres of Bonavist to feed in. First, he mentions Beef as the greatest rarity in that Island of which he had these Dishes; A Rump boiled, a Chine rosted, a large piece of the breast rosted, a Cheek baked, the Tongue and part of the Tripes in Minced-pies, feasoned with sweet Herbs finely minced, Suet, Spice and Corrans. The Leggs, pallats, and other ingredients for an Oleo Podigro, and Maribones. The Guests having eaten well hereof, the Dishes were taken away, and then came in a potato-pudding, a Dish of Scotch Collips, of a Legg of Pork, Fricacy of the same, a dish of boiled Chickens, a shoulder of a young Goat; a Kid with a Pudding in his belly, a young Pigg exceed∣ing fat and sweet; a shoulder of Mutton which is there a rare Dish: A Pastry made of the side of a young Goat, and a side of a young Porket upon it, well seasoned with pepper, Salt, and some Nutmegs: A Loin of Veal, to which they have plenty of Oringes, Lemons, and Limes; three young Turkies in a Dish, two Capons very large and fat, two Hens with Eggs in a Dish; four Ducklings, eight Turtle Doves, and three Rabbets; And for cold Baked Meats, two Muscovy Ducks larded and seasoned with pepper and salt: And when these are taken from the Table, another course is set on, of Westphalia Bacon, dried Neats Tongues, Botargo, pickled Oysters, Caviare, Anchoves, Olives, and mixt amongst these, Custards, Cream, some alone, some with preserved Plantanes, Bonanoes, Gnavers, and these Fruits preserved by themselves; Cheesecakes, Puffs, sometimes Tansies, Fraises, or Amulets: And for raw fruit, Plantaxes, Bonanoes. Gnavers, Milions, prickled Pears, An∣chove pears, prickled Apples, Custard Apples, Water Milions, and Pines, better then all the rest. And to this they had for Drink, Mobby, Beve∣ridge, Brandy, Kill-Devil, Drink of the Plantanes, Claret, White, and Rhe∣nish Wine, Sherry, Canary, Red Sack, Wine of Fiall, besides several sorts of Spirits that come from England. Now for a Plantation neer the Sea, he instances in Collonel Walronds,A Feast near the Sea. who though he wants Sheep, Goats, and Beef, yet he makes a plentiful supply in sundry sorts of Fish, which the other wants. For all other sorts of Meat which were at Sir James Draxe his Table, he found at Collonel Walronds, as also Mullets, Maquerels, Parrat-fish, Snappers, red and grey, Carallos, Terbums, Crabs, Lobsters, long Fish, with divers o∣thers for which they have no names. Besides he dwelling so neer the
Haven, hath of all the Rarities that are brought into the Island from o∣ther parts; As Wine of all Kinds, Oyl, Olives, Capers, Sturgeon, Neats-Tongues, Anchoves, Caviare, Botago, with all sorts of salt meats, both Flesh and Fish; As Beef, Pork, pease, Ling, Habberdine, Cod, poor-John, &c. Above one hundred sail of ships come yearly to this Island that bring servants and slaves,Merchan∣dize im∣ported and ex∣ported. men and Women, Horses, Beasts, Asinegoes, and Cammels; Utensils for boiling of Sugar; and all manner of Tools for Tradesmen, Iron, Steel, Lead, Brass, Pewter: Cloth of all sorts both Linen and Woollen, Stuffs, Hats, Stockings, Shooes, Gloves, Swords, Knives, Locks, &c. and many other things. And they carry back Indi∣go, Cotten-wool, Tobacco, Sugar, Ginger, and Fustick wood. Of their several sorts of Timber. Timber for building they have great choice and plenty:Timber Trees. As the Lo∣cust Trees which are so long and big as may serve for Beams in a very large room,Locusts. Their bodies are strait, above fifty foot long, the Diame∣ter of the Body about three foot and a half: The Timber hereof is hard, heavy, and firm, not apt to bend, and lasting. The Mastick Trees not altogether so large as the former,Mastick Trees. but tougher. The Bully Tree is somewhat less,Bully Trees. but in other qualities goes beyond the former. It's strong, lasting, yet not heavy, nor so hard for the Tools to work upon. The Red Wood,Red wood and Yellow prickled Wood are good Timber, and higher then the Locusts.Yellow wood. The Cedar is the best of all,Cedars it works smooth, and looks beautifully; Of it they make Wainscot,Iron-Wood. Tables, and Stools. They have Iron Wood, and another sort that will endure wet and dry: Of these they make Shingles, wherewith they cover their houses, because it will neither warp nor crack. Of their Stone. They have two sorts of Stone for building:Stone for buildings. The one lies in Quarries; but these are small rough, and somewhat porous: Being burnt they make excellent Lime, white, and firm, by the help whereof they bind their Stones and make them to endure the weather. The other sort of stone they find in Rocks, and Massy pieces in the Ground which are soft, and therefore they saw them to what Dimen∣sions they please, and the longer it lies above ground the harder it grows. Hangings they use not in their houses, because they would be spoiled by the Ants, eaten by the Cockroaches, and Rats. Of their Servants and Slaves. In the Island are three sorts of Men, Master, Servants, and Slaves.
The Slaves and their Posterity being subject to their Masters for ever,Of their servants and slaves. they take more care of them then of their Servants, which are theirs but for five years by the Law of the Island. So that for the time the servants have the worser lives: For they are put to hard labour, ill lodging, and slighted diet. Formerly the servants had no bone-meat at all, except a Beast died, and then they were feasted as long as that lasted. Till they had planted good store of Plantans the Negroes were fed with Bonavisto, and Lob-Lolly, and some ears of Maise tosted; but now they are well pleased with their Plantans, wherein they much delight, and thus they dress it. It's gathered for them before it's full ripe, by the keeper off the Plantan Groves, who is an able Negro, and laid upon heaps till they fetch them away, which they do every Saturday night about five a clock; for then they give over work sooner then ordinary, partly for this work, and partly because the fire in the Furnace is to be put out, and the Ingenio to be made clear; besides they are to wash, shave, and trim themselves against the Sabbath. It is a fine sight to see an hundred of these Negroes, men and women, every one with a Grass-green bunch of Plantans on their heads, every bunch twice so big as their heads, all marchin gone after another. Ha∣ving brought it home, they pill off the skin of so much as they will use, and boil it, making it into Balls, and so eat it. One bunch a week is a Negroes allowance, which they have no bread, nor drink but water, their Lodging at night is a boord, with nothing under, nor any thing above upon them. The usage of the Christian Servants is much as the Master is,How their servants are used. whe∣ther merciful, or cruel. Such as are merciful, use their servants well, both in Meat, Drink, and Lodging. But the lives of such servants as have cruel Masters, is most miserable. When any ships bring servants thither, the Planters buy such of them as they like, and with a Guide send them to their Plantations, where they must presently build them a Cabin, or else lie upon the Ground. These Cabins are made with sticks, withs, and Plantane Leaves, under some little shade that may keep off the Rain. The food is a few Potatoes for meat, and water or Mobby for drink. At six of the clock in the Morning they are rung out to work with a Bell, with a rigid Overseer to command them, till the Bell ring again at eleven of the clock, and then they go to Dinner, either with a Mess of Lob-lolly Bonavist, or Potatoes. At one of the Clock they are rung out again, where they work till six, and then home to a Supper of the same. But now their lives are much better; For most servants lie in Hamocks, in warm rooms, and when they come home wet from work, they have shifts of shirts and Drawers, which is all the Clothes they wear, and are fed with Bone-meat twice or thrice in a week. Of their great Fires. Sometimes through carelesness of servants,Dreadful fire. whole fields of Sugar Canes, and Houses have been burnt down: For if the Canes take fire,
there is no quenching of them, they burn so furiously, and make a ter∣rible noise;How quenched. For each knot of every Cane, gives as great a report as a Pistol. There is no way to stop it but by cutting down, and removing all the Canes before it for the breadth of twenty or thirty foot down the wind; and there the Negroes stand and beat it out as it creeps along; and some of them are so earnest to stop it, as with their naked feet to tread, and to roll their naked bodies upon it, so little do they regard their own smart in regard of their Masters benefit. When Negroes are brought to be sold,Of the Ne∣groes. the Planters go to the ship to buy them, where they find them stark naked, and therefore cannot be deceived in any outward infirmity. The strongest, youngest, and most beautiful yield the best prizes; thirty pound is the price for the best, and about twenty five pound for a woman Negro; Children are much cheaper. They are very chast people. For when at sometimes they are altogether naked,Their cha∣stiy. they will not so much as cast their eyes upon those parts which ought to be covered. Jealous they are of their wives, and, and take it hainously if any make the least Courtship to them.Their jea∣lousie. And if any woman hath two children at a birth, her Husband provides a cord to hang her, concluding that she hath been false to his bed: And if by the authority of his Master, he be overawed, yet he never loves her after. The Planters allow some of them two or three Wives, but no women above one husband. When a Wife is brought to bed,Of their easie travel the Husband removes into another room, leaving his Wife upon a boord on which she lies, and calls a neigh∣bour to her, who makes her a little fire near her feet, and that serves for Possets, Broths, and Candles. In a fortnight she is at her work a∣gain with her Pickaninny (so they call their Children) at her back, as merry as any other. They have times of suckling their Children, and refreshing them∣selves in the fields; and good reason, for they carry a burden on their backs, and work too. Some of them when their children are three years old, as they stoop in their weeding-work, will set their Pickaninnies a stride on their backs, where he will spur his Mother with his heels, and crow on her back, clapping his hands as if he meant to fly, which the Mother is so well pleased with, that she will continue her painful stoop∣ing work longer then she would do, rather then discompose her jovial Pickaninny, so glad she is to see him merry. The Sabbath dayes they have wholly to their pleasures: In the after∣noons they have Kettle-Drums to make them Musick, and they all go to dancing,Dancing. the men by themselves, and the women by themselves, and sometimes the men wrestle amongst themselves. When any of them die,The Fune∣rals, they make a grave, and bury him in the even∣ing, clapping their hands, and making a doleful sound with their voices. They are cowardly, and therefore bloody, when they have advantages. If you threaten before you punish them, they will hang themselves to a∣void the punishment. If they have bruises or strains, they anoint them∣selves with a kind of Oyl that comes out of Barbary that cures them.And Phy∣sick. When they are sick, or inwardly distempered, a little Kill-Devil revives, and comforts them.
The young Maids have usually large breasts that stand strutting out,Negro. Maids and Wives. hard and firm, but when they are old, and have had children, their breasts hang down below their Navels. They are excellent Swimmers and Divers, both men and women. Some Indians they have from the Neighbouring Islands, or from the Continent, whose Women are better versed in ordering the Cussavy, and making Bread then the Negroes;Indians. As also for making Mobby. The men they use for foot-men, and killing of Fish. One of them will go out with his Bows and Arrows, and in a dayes time will kill more Fish then will serve a Family of a dozen persons whil'st it is good. They are ve∣ry active and learn any thing sooner then the Negroes: Their Women have small breasts, long black hair: Clothes they scorn to wear, espe∣cially if they be well shaped, only they wear something before their pri∣vities. One of these women being got with child by a Christian servant, when the time of her travel came, being loth to be delivered amongst the men, went alone to a Wood, where was a Pond of water, by which she was delivered, and washing her Child in the Water, within three hours came home again with her Child in her Arms, which was a lusty boy. Some of the Planters feed daily two hundred mouthes, and keep them in such good order, as there is no mutinies amongst them, though they be of several Nations. Their first work is Weeding, which if it be neglected but a little time, all is in danger of being spoiled. After Weeding comes Planting, espe∣cially in May, and November: But Canes may be planted at all times, that so one Field may be ready after another. Commonly one Field contains about twelve Acres. Of their Beasts and Cattel. Some Camels they have which are brought to them,Camels. and they are very useful for carrying down Sugar to the Bridge, or bringing from thence Hogsheads of Wine, Beer, or Vineger, which Horses cannot do, neither can Carts pass, the wayes are so Rocky and uneven. One of these will carry one thousand six hundred pound weight, and therefore the surest of any beast. Some Horses they have which are brought from several Countries,Horses. Bulls and Cows. and they use them either for the Ingenio, or for the saddle. Some Bulls and Cows they have from the Isle of May, and Bonavista. The Bulls and Oxen they use for labour in the Ingenio's, and the Cows for the Pail. A Calf here will bring a Calf in fourteen moneths. Asinegoes they have which are of excellent use for carrying Sugar to the Bridge:Asinegoes. For they will go where Horses cannot, by reason of the gullies, and deep wayes: One of them will carry one hundred and fifty pound weight, and some two hundred. Hogs they have in abundance which they keep ininclosures;Hoggs. and they use to sell them alive for 4 d. a pound, and sometime for 6 d. if they be dear.
Sheep they have but few, neither do they thrive in that Pasture.Sheep. Yet the Ews have constantly two Lambs, but their flesh doth not eat well. Some sheep they have from Guinny, and Binny, that have hair instead of wooll, and their flesh is more like to Mutton then the other. Goats they have in great plenty,Goats. and they prosper well, and tast like our Goats: They live in the Woods, and are always inclosed. Of their Birds and Fowls. Birds they have, but two sorts worth the mentioning. The biggest is a Buzzard,Birds and Fowls. somewhat less then ours, and swifter of wing; The on∣ly good they do, is, that they sometimes kill Rats. The other is the larger Turtle Dove,Buzzards. Turtle Doves. of which there is great store. It's handsomer both in shape and colour then ours in England, and is very good meat. There is also a lesser Turtle, a far finer Bird then she. It's of the shape of a Partridge,Thrush. her colour grey, and a red brown under the wings. There is also a bird like a Thrush, of a melancholly look, and her fea∣thers stand alwayes ruffling; she hath loud and very sweet notes. Another there is much like a Ren, but as big as a Trush, she alwayes looks very merry and jolly. There are great flocks of Blackbirds with white eyes,Blackbirds they have a harsh note like our Jayes in England: they are great devourers of Corn, and blossoms of Trees. They have a kind of Stares which walk,Stares. but hop not as other Birds do. They have other like Feldefares with big heads, and therefore they call them Councellers,Counsel∣lers. they have a strange tune, consisting of quarter notes, composed of five tones, and every one a quarter note higher then the other. They have Sparrows,The Hum∣ming Bird. Haysocks, Finches, yellow-Hammers, Titoies, and divers others, for which they have no names: And the humming bird, not much bigger then a humble Bee, wheerof I have one.Teals, Ox∣en, Kine: Sometimes Teals come to their Ponds, which they kill with their Guns. The like they do with Fowls called Oxen and Kine. There is another that they call a man of War,A man of Wyr. much bigger then a He∣ron, and flies out to Sea to see what ships are coming, and when he re∣turns, they know that ships are neer. There are Bats that come abroad in the evening and feed on Flies. Of Snakes and Insects. There are some Snakes of a yard long;Snakes. The harm they do is in Dove-Houses, into which if they can get, they devour the young ones; And they will skim the Milk-pans when they can get to them. There is no venomous beast in the Island. There are Scorpions some as big as Rats, smooth, and coloured like a snake,Scorpious their bellies inclining to yellow, very nimble and quick, they hurt
none; The Snakes and they will fight long, and in the end the Snake prevails, and devours the other. Frogs and Toads they have none.Lizzards. There would be Lizzards but that the Cats kill them; They love much to be where men are, and will gaze in their faces, and hearken to their discourse; Their bodies are a∣bout four inches long, and their tails neer as much, headed like a snake in their colour, when they please, a pure grass-green on the back, blew∣ish towards the sides, and yellowish towards the belly, and four nimble legs, and as cold as Froggs. They have Cock-roaches of the bigness and shape of a Beetle,Cochoa∣ches. of a pure hair-colour; They appear in the evening, and they will fly to your bed, and if you be sleeping, he will bite till he fetches blood, and presently begon, that you seldom find them. The Muskitoes bites and string worse then Gnats.The Mus∣kitoes. Next to these are Merriwings,Merri∣wings. and of so evial a substance, that you can hardly discern them but by the noise of their wings; when they sting, there arises a little knob which will continue so a whole day. Caterpillers sometimes they have in great abundance,Caterpil∣lars. which do much harm, devouring the Potato-plants to the very Roots. Flies they have of so many kinds,Other flies. from two inches long with great horns to the least Atome, so that it's too tedious to speak of them all. They have Ants and Pismires of a small size, but of a great industry; they are every where,Ants and Pismires. in hollow ground amongst the root of Trees, up∣on the Bodie, Branches, Leaves, and Fruit of all Trees; without houses, within their houses, upon their sides, walls, windows, Roofs, Tables, Cupboords, Stools, Beds, Floors, all within and without are covered with them. When they find a dead Cockroch, though he be bigger then a hundred of them, yet they will take hold of him and lift him up, and away they carry him, some going by to assist those that are weary; some (like Officers) lead the way to shew the hole into which he must pass, and if his body do lie a cross that it cannot go into the hole, they give notice to the carriers, that presently turn his body endwise before it come to the hole, and that without any stop, and they never pull contrary wayes. The Planters which are so curious to prevent their coming upon their Tables, Cupboards, and Beds, have little troughs filled with water for the feet of these to stand in; yet all will not prevail, for they will get in the scieling, and so fall down upon them. To keep them from the shelves on which their meat stands, they are forced to hang them to the roof with ropes, and to tar those ropes and the roofs over them. When a Carpet upon a Table is covered over with them, if you kill many, and let them alone but a while, they will carry away all the dead ones. If you set Sugar upon a Table which you have first freed from them, some in the room will presently smell it, and make towards it as fast as they can, and having found it, return again without med∣ling with it, and gives notice of this booty, and then they come in thousands and ten thousands, and in an instant fetch it all away;
so that there is no place safe from these over-busie Creatures. Another sort of Ants there are far larger,Ants. that make their nests as big as Bee-hives, of clay against a wall or Tree, and sometimes within hou∣ses, they make them of several little cels. These the Cockrocha, and Li∣zards make their prey upon; wherefore for their own security, they make several Galleries, some of five or six yards long of Clay also, through which they pass undiscovered: Their Avenues go out amongst Laaves or Moss, that they may not be perceived: By often breaking down their Nests, they are now most of them driven into the woods. Spiders they have, most beautiful and large, and very curious in their Webs, and not venomous. Another harmful creature they call Chegoes,Spiders. in shape not much unlike a Lowse, no bigger then a Mite that breeds in Cheese, their colour is blewish; They get through your stockings into a place of you Skin, most commonly under the Nailes of your Toes, and they lay their Off-spring as big as a small Tare, which will make you go very lamely, and put you to much smarting pain. The Indian Women will put in a small Needle at the hole,Negroes. and wind∣ing the point about the bag, loosen him from the flesh, and so take him out, but the place will fester and rankle a fortnight after they are gone. Some little Animals there are in the Woods no bigger then Crickets,Crickets. that lie all day in holes, but after Sun setting they begin their tunes, having exceeding shrill voices like a pack of small Beagles. This Mu∣sick hath no intermission till morning, and then all is hush't. There are many small Crabs that live upon the Land, of a reddish co∣lour, they are coming from the Sea all the year long (excepting March) and hide themselves in Holes, and hollow Trees, and come into their Houses and Gardens, where they eat Herbs. The Negroes will eat them,Crabs. and count them good meat. In March they come all out of their Holes and march to the Sea in such multi∣tudes as that they cover the Earth: No Hedge, Wall, or House can stop them, but they will over all. Now for Trees. Amongst the Trees,The phy∣sick Nut. there is none of more use then the Physick Nut, and yet hath it poison secretly lodged in it, but that poison makes good Physick: This Tree grows to be eighteen foot high; There are none like it for beauty, and use in the Island. It hath many Sprigs upon it of four, five, and six foot long, which they lop off one after another, and of them make stakes of above four long, and stick them in the ground an inch deep, close to one another, and keep them even with a Rail on ei∣ther side, and in a moneths space they will take root, and send forth Leaves; and in another moneth will be rooted so fast, that they take a∣way the the Railes. These Leaves are large, smooth, and beautifully shaped, of a full green, looking like green Sattin hang'd on a line, so even they hang naturally.
Their Stems grow apace, rather in bigness then in heighth, and within a while imbody themselves one into another, and then they become a ve∣ry strong fence, and so close that a Rat cannot pass through them, nei∣ther will Cattel or Vermin willingly come near them. And as it's a beautiful and useful fence for Gardens and Orchards, and to keep in Conies, Turkies, Muscovy-Ducks, so it excellently fences in their Pastures which they would inclose. Their Fruit also is Phisical: Five of its kernels eaten in a morning fasting, causes both Vomits and Stools. This Nut is like to a white Pear-Plumb, and of a yellowish colour, and of yellowish colour, having on it as great a peelp as a Plumb, which being taken off, you come to the stone of a blackish colour, and within that is a kernel that will part in the middle, where you shall find a thin Film of a faint Carnetion colour. Take off that Film, and you may eat the Kernel safely without any operation at all, and it's as sweet as a Jor∣dans Almond. The Leaves are sharp some like a Vine Leaf, but thrice as big, and much thicker. The poison Tree is very beautiful, almost as large as the Locust:The poi∣son tree. Her Leaves as large and beautiful as the Lawrel Leaves, and very like them. As they cut down these Trees they have Cipers over their Faces: For if any of their Sap flies into their eyes, it makes them blind for a moneth after. Of this Timber they make most of the Vessels wherein they cure their Sugar. There is a Mantionel Tree whose Fruit is Poison.A mantio∣nel tree. The Fruit is like an Apple John, and (they say) that the Indians invenom their Ar∣rows with it. The Cussavy is rather a Shrub then a Tree,Cussavy. the Sprigs as big as a Broom-staff, crooked and ill shaped; The Leaves grow so thick as to cover them, and they grow in bunches, each of them an inch broad, and six or seven inches long, of a Dark Green. The growth of the Roots, and the use of them is set down before. Coloquintida is a very beautiful Fruit,Coloquinti¦da. as big as an Ostrages Egg, of an ill taste, the rind smooth, with various Greens interlaced with murries, yellows, and faint Carnations. Cassia Fistula is a Tree which grows exceeding fast.Cassia Fistu∣la. A Seed of it be∣ing set will in one year grow to be eight foot high, and as thick as a walking staff. The Leaf is like that of an Ash, but much longer, and of a darker colour. The Fruit when it's ripe is of shape like a black Pud∣dling, sometimes sixteen inches long, the pulp of it is Progatine, and a great cooler of the reins. There is a Plant very like a Sugar Cane:A strange Tamarine If it be chewed in the mouth, it causes the Tongue and Throat so to swell, that the party can∣not speak for two dayes. There are Tammerine Trees,Trees. Palm-trees and Palm Trees planted which were brought from the East-India. The Palm yields excellent Wine, which is thus gathered: They cut off the Bark in such a part of the Tree, where a Bottle may be fitly placed, and the Liquor that runs into it, is ex∣cellent good for a day, and no longer. It's a very delicious Liquor.
The Fig-Trees are very large,Figg trees. but bear a small and contemptible fruit, neither are the Leaves like ours, nor so long by a fifth part. The bodies of the Trees are as long as our Elms.Cherry-trees. The Cherry Tree is not altogether so large, the fruit is useless and in∣siped; The colour some resembling our Cherries, and the shape not unlike. The Citron is a small Tree,Citron Trees. though she bears a great Fruit, which weighs it down to the Ground, the Stalk of a dark colour, the Leaf shaped like that of Limon, but of a dark green. The Orange Trees do not prosper so well,Orange Trees. neither is their Fruit so kind∣ly as those of Bermudas: Large they are, and full of juice, but not delici∣ous; besides ther full of Seeds, and their rinds thin and pale. These Trees do not last in their prime above seven years. The Limon Tree is much handsomer and larger; Their fruits is large and full of juice,Limon Trees. and of a fragrant smell. The Lime tree is like a thick Holly-bush in England, and as full of prickles.Lime-trees When they make a Hedge of them about their houses, it's an excellent fence both against the Negroes, and Cattel. It's commonly of seven or eight foot high, extreamly thick of Leaves, and Fruit, and prickles. The leaves and fruit like those of the Limon-tree, yet in the tast of rind, and juice it differs exceedingly. It's very fit for sauce, but eats not well alone. The Prickled Apple-tree grows on a tree with very thick leaves,Prickled Apple Trees. large and of a deep green, shaped like our Walnut leaves. The fruit is in fashi∣on in heart of an Oke, and of that bigness; Green on the outside with many Prickles on it. The tast is very like that of a musty Li∣mon. The Pilchard Pear is much purer in tast,Prickled Pear-trees. and better of shape, not much unlike a Greenfield Pear, of a faint green, inter mixed with some yellow near the stalk: The body of a mixt red, partly Crimson, partly stammel, with prickles of yellow near the top, the end being larger then the middle. The Pomgranate is a beautiful tree, the leaves small and green, mixed with an Olive colour;Pomgra∣nate Trees the blossoms large, well shaped, and of a pure Scarlet colour. The young trees being set in rows, and kept in with cut∣ting, make a very fine hedge. The fruit is well known amongst us. The Papa is but a small tree;Papa-trees the bark of a faint willow colour, the Leaves large, and of colour like the bark; the Branches grow out four, or five of one heighth, and spread almost level from the place where they sprang out; about two foot higher are such other branches spreading in the same manner. The top is handsomly formed, the fruit as big Turnips, growing close to the body of the tree where the branches grow, and of somewhat a fainter willow colour. The tree is soft, with a Knife a man may cut down one that is as thick as a mans legg. They boil the the fruit, and eat it for Sauce with Pork like Turnips. The Gnaver-tree is bodied and shaped like a Cherry-tree,Gnaver Trees. the Leaves somewhat larger and stiffer; the fruit of the bigness of a small Limon,
and near of the colour, only the upper end is somewhat blunter: It's soft and of a delicate tast, within is a pulpy substance full of small seeds, like a Figg, some are white, and some of a Stammel colour. These when they have passed through the body of man or Beast, wheresover they are emptied, they grow, and do much hurt in the pastures where Cattel go that eat of them: For they over run all, and are hardly root∣ed out. The fruit differs in tast, some rank, some sweet. The rind pre∣served is delicate meat. Some Cocos there are,Coco-trees they are seldom above eighty or ninety foot high. Their branches come out in several parts of the trees, leaving spaces between the several heights: The Nuts grow where the lower bows break out: The Nuts are of several sizes, mostly as big as a Foot∣ball, having a green Skin without▪ and between that and the shell a pulpy substance, of which when it's dry they make ropes, being like Hemp hurds. The shell is full of a clear and well-tasted Liquor, very delicious; It's lined within with a substance as thick as itself, of a white colour that tasts better then a Walnut: The Leaves of this tree in colour are like the Olive leaves. The Custard Apple grows on a tree full of Branches,Custard-Apple trees and large leaves: The fruit when ripe, is as big as the largest Pomwater, and of the colour of a Warden; they cut a hole in the lesser end, and so eat out the meat with a Spoon: It tasts exceeding like to a Custard. It hath many smooth seeds in it. The Macow-tree is one of the strangest trees in the Island,Mucow Trees. the Body and Branches being stuck all over with prickles, as black as jet, from one to seven inches long, sharp at point, and taperwise all the way, and wa∣ved as some Swords are; they are hard and excellent for tooth-pikes. The tree is of the size of a Willow-tree, the Leaves of that colour and shape, but very stiff and hard. At the top is a large tuft of Fruit, but not to be eaten, being for shape like that which the Ciprus-tree bears: The body is straight, the branches comely, and the top round. Date-trees are in colour like these,Date Trees, but the leaves longer. The Mangrave,Mungrave Trees. though she be not tall, yet is she of large extent. For there drops from her Limbs a kind of Gum which hangs together till it touch the Ground, and then it takes root: So that this tree so multi∣plies, that a troop of Horse may well hide themselves in it. Of the Bark they make very strong Ropes: And the Indians spin it into a fine thred as Flax make. Of it they make Hamocks, and divers things which they wear. The Calibash-tree bears Leaves,Calibash Trees. of a full and rich green, and in great plenty; Her Fruit is as big as that of a Coco, but not to be eaten: Round as a Ball, and green, smooth, and shining: they grow close to the body of the tree, or Boughs, without stalks. Of this round Fruit they make dishes, Bowls, and Cups, and other Utensils. They look very beautiful on the tree.
There are Bay-trees whose Leaves are so Aromatick,Bay-trees. as three or four of them will amply supply the place of Cloves, Mace, and Cinamon in dressing any Dish of Meat. It's in shape and colour like ours in Eng∣land. The Cedar is the most useful timber in the Island.Cedar It's strong, lasting, and not very heavy, and therefore good for building. It works smoothly, and hath a fair grain, and therefore is much used for Wainscot, Chairs, Stools, and other Utensils; the Leaves are like those of the Ash-trees in England, but somewhat bigger. The Mastick-tree is very tall,Mastick Trees. but the body is slender, and therefore to support her, she hath spurs above seven foot from the ground, fixt into the body, and reach from the tree to the roots: So broad that they make round tables of them, above three foot and an half in the Diameter. This tree hath commonly a double top, one side being somewhat higher then the other. The Fruit is of a Stammel colour, and hath neither Skin nor stone, and is unwholsome. The leaves of it grow of such an heighth, that the form cannot be discerned till they fall down. Some of these trees are about sixty foot high. The Bully-treeBully Trees, is somewhat less, but excellent wood to work on: It bears a fruit like our Bullies. Her body is strait, and well shap't, her Branches proportionable; the timber very lasting. Red-wood is an handsome tree of a midling size,Red-wood Trees. the body about two foot and and an half in the Diameter: the timber works so well that workmen commend it above all other. Prickled yellow wood is as good as the red-wood, strong and lasting: Good for building,Prickled yellow wood. and all work without doors. Iron-wood is so extream hard, that it breaks the Axes that fall it. It is so heavy that it is seldom used in buildings.Iron Wood. It is good for any use without doors. For neither Sun nor Rain can soften it. It's much used for Coggs to the Rollers. Signum vitae,Lignum vitae. they use for the same purpose. They send much of it to England: where it's used for Bowls, Cabinets, Drinking Cups, &c. The Loust-tree is like a Tuscane Pillar,Locust Trees, plain and massie: For the burden it bears being great and ponderous, ought to have a body proportion∣able thereunto. Some of them are four foot in the Diameter near the root, and 30. foot high growing taper-wise. The Head is neither too heavy, nor too light, the branches large; the Springs, Leaves, and Nuts so thick, that one may lie upon them. The Nuts are 3. inches and a half long, and two inches broad, and an inch thick: the shell somewhat thick, of an hair colour: the leaves bigger then those of our Ashes. In every Nut are three or four Kernels. In times of Famine poor people eat them for their sustenance. There is also a bastard Locust-tree that looks fair,Bastard Locust trees. but will not last. The Palmeto hath a body of fourty five or fifty foot high, the Dia∣meter, seldom above sixteen inches:Palmeto trees. the rind, of a poor Ash color full of
wrinkles; the Leaves about two foot and a half long, in bunches as if twenty long flag-leaves were tied together by the broad ends: with bundles of these they thatch houses very neatly, which is dry, warm, and lasting. The Palmeto Royal is the stateliest tree that grows on Earth, for beau∣ty and largeness not to be parallel'd.Palms to Royal Trees. When she is about ten or twelve years old, she is about seventeen foot high; that part which touches the ground is round like  Inkhorn, above which the body of the tree is less, like that part which holds the pen. The body is tawny, and purple, with rings of white and green mix∣ed, that go round about, and stand at six inches distance. About six foot and an half high, grow the bottom of the stalks, thin as Parch∣ment, enwrapping one another so close, as to make a continued stem of the same bigness for two foot and an half above the others, every one of those Skins bearing a stalk which lessens insensibly from the Skin to the Point. These Branches are of several lengths, the most inward are the high∣est; and each stalk is adorned with leaves, and each of these leaves sharp at either end; the Stem is of a pure grass green shining like Ve∣lom, and all the Branches with the Leaves of a full grass green, and speading every way, and the highest of them eight foot above the stem. The Branches sprout from the middle of tree, one at once, and as it opens it spreads the Leaves abroad, at which time the eldest Branch withers, and hangs down till the wind blows it off. Then comes forth another, and another, and still there is a Pike, and a dead leaf, a Pike and a dead Leaf as the tree growes higher and higher, which is till she be one hundred years old. About thirty or fourty yeas old she begins to bear her fruit, which is of the bigness of large Grapes, some green, some yellow, some purple, and then they are ripe when they come to be purple, and fall down; and then the Green turns yellow, and the yellow purple, and so take their turns till the tree gives over bearing. These trees grow till some of them be two hundred, yea three hun∣dred foot high. The top of this tree is of a vast extent, for from the point of the branches on the one side, to the point of the stalk on the other side is seventy eight foot, yet are none of the roots of this tree bigger then a Swans Quil; But there are many of them, and they fasten them∣selves in the Rock which makes the Tree, though so high, and big, able to stand against all wind and weather. The wood of this tree is so hard and tough, that it breakes the Axes of those those that fell it. There are many other sorts of trees, some exceeding large aud beauti∣ful, for which they have no names.
Of Plants. The Ginger is a Root that brings forth blades like the blades of Wheat, but broader, and thicker: They are of a Popinary colour, and the blossome of a pure Scarlet. When the Ginger is ripe, they dig it up, being the Root, and scrape off the outward skin to kill the spirits of it, for else it would grow perpetually. Others scald it to kill the spirits, and that will be black and hard as Wood, whereas the scraped Ginger is white, and soft, and hath a clean∣er, and quicker tast. Red Pepper. There are two sorts of Red Pepper; the one like Coral, of a Crimson and Scarlet colour mixt: the fruit about three inches long, and shines more then the best polished Coral. The other is of the same colour, and glisters as much, but is shaped like a large Button of a Cloake; they have both the same quality; so violently strong, that when they break but the Skin, it causes them to Cough for a quarter of an hour after the fruit is removed; But whil'st they are grabling of it, they never give over. It grows on a little shrub no bigger then a Goosbberry-bush. They have excellent good Cucumbers from the beginning of Novem∣ber, to the end of February, they eat them cold with Oyle, Vineger, and Pepper. But boiled or fried they use them for sauce with Mutton, Pork, Turkies, and Muscovy Ducks. Millions they have likewise for those four moneths: For the most part larger then ours in England, and eat moister. Some of them are sixteen inches long. The Water Million is one of the goodliest Fruits that grows: Some as big as Cloak-bags; purely Green, engravened with Straw-colour. No inch of the Rind is alike, and they are as smooth as polished Glass; with∣in, they are like an Apple for colour, but in tast waterish and wallow∣ish. It's rarely cooling and excellent against the Stone. The Seeds are of a pure Purple; they are full of these seeds. Grapes they have which are indifferently well tasted, but they are never ripe together: There are alwayes some green, some ripe, and some rotten Grapes in a Bunch, and therefore they cannot make Wine of them.
The fruit of the Plantane is of great use,Plantanes. and beauty too. In Plant∣ing them they put a root into the ground six inches deep, and in a very short time there will come out three or four sprouts, whereof one hath the precedence. As this Sprout grows, it springs from the intrinsick part of the Stem, and the out Leaves hang down and rot; But still new ones come with∣in, and rise up as the Palmeto does, like a Pike which opens with the Sun, and becomes a Leaf, and when it's eight or ten foot high, the Pikes and Leaves will be of their full bigness, and so continue till the last Sprout comes forth, which is the Soul of the Plant, and will never be a Leaf: But is the Stem upon which the fruit must grow. When the Leaves come to their full bigness, they rot no more, but continue in their first beauty, a rich green with stripes of yellow. These Leaves are most of them above six foot long, and two foot broad; smooth, shining, and stiff as a Lawrel Leaf, falling from the middle to the end like a Feather: And when it comes to the full heighth, the Leaves will be fifteen or sixteen foot high, the Stem upon which the fruit grows being a foot higher, with a green branch on the top, which branch is very heavy, and then the leaves open and shew the Blossome, which is of a pure purple, and like a heart with the point downwards, being of a pound weight; when this is fallen, the Fruit grows. In six moneths space this Plant will be grown, and the fruit ripe, which is pleasant, wholesome, and nourishing, yellow when it's ripe: But the Negroes desire it green, for they eat it boiled, and it's the only food they live upon. When it's gathered they cut down the Plant, and give it to the Hoggs, for it will grow no more. In three moneths another Sprout will come to bear, and so another, and another for ever. Groves they make of these Plants of twenty A∣cres of ground so planting them in every room that they can walk dry under the leaves, and be shaded from the Sun. The wild Plantane grows much as the other doth,Wild plan∣tanes. but the leaves not so broad, and more upright: The Fruit of a Scarlet colour, and almost three square, but good for nothing. The Bonano differs nothing from the Plantane in the Body and Leaves, but only that the leaves are somewhat less,tanes. Bonanoes. and the body hath here and there some blackish spots, the Blossome no bigger then a large Rose bud, of a faint Purple and Ash colour mixt, the Stalk that bears it, is adorned with small Blossomes, of several colours: The Fruit stands upright like a bunch of Puddings, each of them between four and five inches long. The Fruit is sweeter then that of the Plantane, and therefore the Negroes will not meddle with it. It's near as beautiful a trees as the antane.
The Pine is excellent in the Superlative Degree, both for beauty and tast. Its a full year before it bring forth ripe fruit, but when it comes to be eaten, nothing of rare tast that can be thought on that is not there. A Slip taken from the body of this Plant, and set in the ground, will not presently take root, but the Crown that grows upon the Fruit itself will sooner come to perfection. In a quarter of a year it will be a foot high, and the leaves about se∣ven or eight inches long, appearing like a Semicircle: The colour most∣ly Frost upon Green, intermixt with Cornation, and the edges of the Leaves have teeth like Sawes. The Leaves fall one over another, the points of the lowest touch∣ing the ground. In a quarter of a year more, the Blossome appears on the top of the stem, as large as a great Cornation, the colours, Cornation, Crimson, and Scarlet, in streaks intermixt with yellow, blew, and peach colour-leaves, intermixed again with Purple, Sky-colour, Orange-tauny, Gri∣daline, and Gingeline, White, and Philamot: So that the flower repre∣sents the variety to the sight, which the fruit doth to the tast. When the flowers are fallen, there appears a little bunch of the big∣ness of a Walnut, which hath in it all these colours mixt, which were disper'st in the Leaves, and so it grows bigger for two moneths more; when it's perfect, it is of an Oval Form, and at the upper end grows out a Crown of Leaves much like the former in colour, but more beauti∣ful. Some of them six inches long; the out Leaves shorter by degrees. This Fruit is inclosed with a Rind, which begins with a Skrew at the Stalk, and so goes round to the top, or Crown, gently rising, which Screw is about a quarter of an inch broad, and the figures that are im∣broidered upon it, near of the like dimension, and divisions between; Which divisions are never one over another in the screw, but are always under the middle of the Figures above, which so vary in their colours, as that if you see one hundred Pines, they are not like one another; And every of those Figures hath a little tuft, some Green, some Yellow, some Ash-colour, and some Carnation. There are two sorts of Pines, the King and the Queen-Pine. The Queen is far more delicate, and hath her Colours of all Greens, which shadows intermixt with faint Cornations, but most of all, Frost upon Green, and Sea-greens. The King-Pine hath mostly all sorts of yellows shadowed with Grass-greens. Some of them are fourteen inches long, and six in the Diameter: Most of them having heavy bodies, and slender stalks, bowed down till they are on the ground. Some of them have a dozen little ones round about the prime Fruit, which are ripe by turns, and all very good.
When it's ripe it hath an admirable smell, when they come to eat them, they first cut off the Crown, and send that to be planted: Then they pare off the most beautiful Rind, and cut the Fruit into slices in a Dish, and there issues out a Liquor as clear as Spring-water about six spoonful, which in tast is in a high degree delicious, and in eating the Fruit, the delicate variety of tasts will change and flow so fast upon your Pallat, as your fancy can hardly keep way with them, to distinguish the one from other. How they Plant their Sugar-Canes. They dig a small Trench of six inches broad,Sugar. and as deep, in a straight line, the whole length of the ground where they plant them, then they lay two Canes one by another along the bottom of the Trench, and so continue them the whole lengh of the trenches, then they cover them with earth; and at two foot distance they do the like, till they have planted all the Field. But they plant not too much together, but so that it may ripen suc∣cessively, that their work may come in in order, that they be not idle: for if they be not cut and used when they are ripe, they will rot. From these Canes thus buried, comes forth a sprout at every knot. They begin to appear a moneth after their setting, and in a moneth more they are two foot high at the least, and in the mean time they weed them, and supply where there are any defects. These Canes with their tops are about eight foot high, the bodies about an inch in the Diameter; the Knots five or six inches distant one from the another. When they are ripe they cut them with little hand Bills, six inches above the ground, and divide the tops from the Canes; And then holding the Cane by the upper end, they strip off all the blades, which with the tops they give to their Horses; the Canes they bind in Faggots, and send them home upon Asinegoes, each of them carrying three Faggots; two upon crooked sticks on the sides, and one in the middle. And these Creatures being used to it, will of them∣selves go and come without a guide. The place where they unload them, is a little plat of ground near to the Mill-house which they call a Barbica. Being laid in the Barbica, they wk them out clean, not suffering them to grow stale; for in two dayes the Juice will turn sower, and spoil all; And in the next place, they grind them with Horses under three Rollers, whose Centers being of Brass, Steel, turn very easily: But when the Canes are between the Rollers, it's a good draught for five Oxen or two Horses. In a little time then all the Juice is pressed out, and then two Ne∣gro Girls take out the Canes, and corry them away, laying them on a heap at a Distance. Under the Rollers there is a Reciever into which the Liquor falls,
and from thence by a Pipe of Lead, is carried into a Cistern, which is near the stairs that goes down from the Mill to the Boyling-House. From thence it passes through a Gutter to the Clarifying Copper: And as it Clarifies in the first Copper, and the Scum rises, it's conveyed to a second Copper, where it's again scummed, both which scums be∣ing very Drossy, are thrown away; But the Skimming of the other three Coppers are conveyed to the Stilling-house, where it stands in Cisterns till it be a little sowre. Thus the Liquor is refined from one Copper to another, and the more Coppers it passes through, the finer and purer it is. When it comes to the tach it must have much keeling and stirring, and as it boiles, they throw into the four last Coppers a Liquor made of Wa∣ter and Withs, which they call Temp, without which the Sugar would be clammy and never kern. When it's boiled enough, they poure two spoonfulls of Sallet-Oyl into the Tach, and then it gives over to bubble, then after much keel∣ing they take it out of the Tach with Ladles, and remove it into the cooling Cistern. This work continues from Monday morning till Saturday night, without any intermission, day and night, with fresh supplies of Men, Horses, and cattel. The Liquor being so cool as that it's fit to put into Pots; first stop∣ping the sharp end of the Pots with Plantane Leaves, they fill them, and let it stand till it be cold, which will be in two dayes and two nights; Then they remove them into the Trying-house, and pulling out the stopples; the Molosses runs out into a Gutter that carries it into Cisterns again, and that they call Peneles, which is a Sugar somewhat inferiour to Muscovados, which will sweeten pretty well, and is of a reasonable good colour. When it's well cured, they remove the Pots from the Curing Room into the Knocking Room, and turning them upside down, they knock them till the Sugar falls out, in which there are three sorts. The first is Brown, Frothy, and light; The bottom is of a darker colour, Gross and Heavy, and full of Molosses, both which they cut a∣way and boil them again with Molosses for Peneles. The midle, which is more then two thirds of the whole, is a White colour, dry, and sweet, which they send to their Storehouses at the Bridge, there to be put in Casks and Chests to be shipt away. Though the Muscovado Sugars require but a moneths time in ma∣king, after it is boiled, yet White Sugar requires four Moneths, and its made thus. They take Clay and temper it with Water to the thickness of Fru∣mentry, and pour it on the top of the Muscovado-Sugar as it stands in the Potts, and there let it remain four Moneths, and when it comes to be knock't out of the Pots, the top and bottom will be like Mus∣covadoes, but the middle perfect White, and excellent Lump Sugar.
The Skimmings before spoken of, when they have stood till they are a little soure, they still it; and the first spirit that comes, is a small Li∣quor, which they call Low-Wines, which they Still over again, and then comes off a very strong Spirit, which is very Soveraign when they are ill with Colds, which the Negroes are oft subject to, having nothing to lye upon but aboard, and nothing to cover them. And though the Dayes be hot, the Nights be cold, and they com∣ing hot, and sweating from their dayes labour, are subject to catch cold; and when they feel themselves amiss, one dram of these Spirits cures them. And the Christian Servants, when their Spirits are exhausted by their hard labour and sweating in the Sun ten hours every day, and their sto∣macks weakened, a Dram or two of these Spirits is a great comfort and refreshing to them. They make much money also of them by selling them at the bridge, so that they make weekly so long as they work, 30. l. Sterling, besides what is drunk by their servants and slaves. WITHS. There is another Plant which they call a With, which is exceeding harmful; For it pulls down all it can reach to, Canes and all other Plants. If it comes into a Garden, it will wind about all Hearbs, and Plants that have stalks, and pull them down and destroy them. If into an Orchard, it will climb up by the bodies of the Trees into the Branches, and draws them as it were into a purse (for out of the main stock hundred of sprigs will grow) and if any other Tree be near it will find the way to it, and pull the tops of them together, and hinder the growth of the Fruit; and cut the main stock at bottom in hope to kill it; the moisture in the Branches above will cast down a new root into the ground; yea, it will reach the highest Timber, and so en∣wrap their branches as to hinder their growth; and oftentimes it fastens one Tree to another, so that one shall hinder the growth of ano∣ther. If you clear a passage of ten foot broad between a Wood where it grows, and your Canes over night, and come the next morning, and you shall find the way crossed all over with Withs, and got near to the Canes, and if they once get amongst them, you cannot destroy the one without the other; for wheresoever they touch ground, they get new Roots, and so creep into every place, and as they go pull all down. Yet have they some good virtues; for they serve for all uses where ropes or cords are required; as for binding their Wood and Canes into Fag∣gots, &c. And without them they were in an ill condition, having no o∣ther wood fit for hoops for their Hogsheads, Barrels, and Tubs; and they can have them of what length and bigness they please; And for such uses they are very good.
There are several kinds of these Withs, some that bear fruit some∣what bigger then the Cod of a Bean, which being divided long-wise with a Knife you shall perceive the most various and beatiful colours that can be, and so well matched, as to make up a very great beauty. Many Canes there be in the Island,Canes. some large enough to hide five hundred men; the runaway Negroes oft shelter themselves in for a long time, and in the nights range abroad, and steal Pigs, Plantanes, Potatoes, and Pullen, and feast all day upon what they stole in the night: And the nights being dark, and their bodies black, escape undiscovered.Old withs. Another sort of Withs they have that are made of the Gum of Trees, which falls from the boughs drop after drop, one hanging by another till they touch the ground, from whence they receive nourishment and grow larger: And if three or four of them come down so near as to touch one another, and the wind twists them together, they appear like ropes. Aloes they have growing there very good, and its a beautiful Plant, and the leaves four Inches broad,Aloes. and three quarters of an inch thick, and a foot and half long, with prickles on each side, and the last Sprout which rises in the middle, bears yellow Flowers, one above another, which are two foot higher then the Leaves. These thick Leaves they take and cut them through, and out of them issues the Aloes, which they set in the Sun that rarifies it, and makes it fit to keep: They save the first running, for if it run too long it will be much worse. This Plant in England we call Semper vivens. Of this is there to be be made an admirable Medicine for a Burn or Scald. An Ointment foor a burn or Scald, thus, Take Semper vivens, Plantane Leaves, and the green Rind of Elder, of each a like quantity, and boil them in Sallet Oyl, till all the Tin∣cture be drawn in boyling. Then strain out the Oyl well, and put it on the fire again, and put to it a small quantity of the Spirits of Wine, and so much Yellow Wax as will bring it to the consistence of a Linement to keep it for use. There also the sensible Plant, which closes the Leaves upon any touch with your hand, or that end of the staff by which you hold, and in a little time will open again. There are few flowers in the Island, and none of them sweet. The White Lilly, and Red Lilly are much fairer then ours, and very beautiful, but neither of them sweet. The Saint Jago Flower is very beautiful, but of an unpleasing smell. Another flower they have that opens not till Sun setting, and is clo∣sed all day, and therefore they call it the Flower of the Moon.
It grows in great tufts, the Leaves like a heart, the point turning back: The flower is of a most pure Purple. After the flower appears the seed, black with an eye of Purple, of the shape of a small Button, so finely wrought, and tough with all, as it may well trim a suit of Apparel. There is Purceane so plentifully every where, as makes it dise∣steemed. Herbs, and Roots. There are brought from England, Rosemary, Time, Winter-Savory, Sweet-Marjerom, Pot-Marjerom, Parsly, Penny-royal, Camomil, Sage, Tansie, Lavender, Cotton, Garlick, Onions, Coleworts, Cabbage, Tur∣nips, Redishes, Marigold, Lettice, Taragon, Southern-wood, &c. all which prosper well. There is a Root which was brought thither by the Negroes, Large, dry and well tasted. It's good boyled to eat with Pork, mixt with Butter, Vineger, and Pepper; It's as big as three of our largest Turnips. The strength of the Island. This Island is strong by scituation; For there cannot be any safe Landing, but where the Harbours, and Bayes are, which lie to the South-West, and those places are so Defencible by Nature, as with small cost they are strongly fortified. In the year one thousand six hundred and fifty they were able to mu∣ster ten thousand Foot, as good, and Resolute men as any in the World, and a thousand good Horse, and since then, they are much increased. Their Laws and Government. Their Laws are like ours in England, and they are governed by a Go∣vernour, and ten of his Council; four Courts of Justice in Civil Laws which divide the Countrey into four Circuits. Justices of Peace, Constables, Churchwardens, and Tithingmen. Five Sessions in a year were held for trial of Criminal Causes, and Ap∣peals from Inferiour Courts. When the Governour pleases to call an Assembly for the last Ap∣peals, and making new Laws, or abolishing the Old; It consists of the Governour, his Councel, and two Burgesses chosen by every Pa∣rish. There are in the Island eleven Parishes: No Tithe paid to the Mini∣ster, but a yearly allowance of a Pound of Tobacco upon an Acre of every mans Land, besides Church-Duties for Marriages, Baptizings, and Burials.
Their Weather. Four Moneths in the year the Weather is colder then in the other eight, and those are November, December, January, and February; yet are they hotter then with us in May. There is no general Fall of the Leaf, every Tree having a particu∣lar time for it self, as if two Locust-trees stand but at a stones cast distance, one lets fall her leaves in January, another in March, another in July, another in September. The Leaves when Fallen under the Tree, being most of them large and stiff, when they were growing, and full of veins from the middle stalk to the upper end, when the thin part of the Leaf is consumed, those veins appear like Skelletons, with the strangest works and beautifullest Forms that can be imagined. Negroes Heads. They also find in the Sands things that they call Negroes-heads, about two Inches long, with a Forehead, Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Chin, and part of the Neck: They are alwayes found loose in the Sands, without any Root. It is black as Jet, but whence it comes they know not. TAR. They have no Mines, not so much as of Coles in the Islands. There flows out of the Rock an Unctious substance, somewhat like Tar: It is excellent good to stop a Flux being drunk: And for all Aches, and Bruises, being anointed with it. It is so subtile that being put into the hand and rubbed there, it works through the back of it. PITCH, and MOVNTIACK. There is another Gumming Substance that is black and hard as Pitch, and is used as Pitch; they call call it Mountiack.
An Excellent REMEDY Against the STONE. MY Author relates this Story concerning himself, that du∣ring his abode in the Barbadoes, he was taken with such a fit of the Stone, that for fourteen dayes together he made not one drop of water; But when he despaired of life; God sent him such a Remedy as the World can∣not afford a better. For within ten hours after this ta∣king of it, he found himself not only eased, but cured: It brought away all the stones and gravel that stopped the passage, and his water came as freely from him as ever before, and caried before it such quan∣tities of broken stones, and gravel that the like hath hardly been seen. And afterwards being in the like torment, he used the same remedy, and found the same ease. The Medicine was this, Take the Pizle of a green Turtle that lives in the Sea, dry it with a moderate heat, pound it in a Morter, and take as much of this Powder as will lie upon a shilling, in Beer, Ale, or Whitewine, and in a short time it will work the cure. These Turtles are frequent in the Chariby, and Lucayick Islands near to the Barbadoes, to which many of them are brought. Three sorts of Turtles. There are 3. sorts of Turtles: The Loggerhead-Turtle, the Hawks-bill-Turtle, and the green Turtle, which is of a less magnitude, but far ex∣celling the other two in wholesomness, and rareness of tast. That part of the Island which is the most remote from the Bridge, (the onely place of Trading) by reason of deep and steep Gullies in∣terposing the passage, is almost stopt. Besides, the Land there is not so rich and fit to bear Canes as the other: Yet it's very useful for plant∣ing,
Provisions of Corn, Bonavist, Cassavy, Potatoes, &c. As also of Fruit, as Oranges, Limons, Lymes, Plantanes, Bonanoes: Likewise for breeding of Hoggs, Sheep, Goats, Cattel, and Poultry to furnish either parts of the Island which wants those Commodities. The Sugar Canes are fifteen Moneths from the time of their planting, before they come to be fully ripe. From the Island of Bonavista they have Horses brought to them, whose Hooves are so hard and tough, that they ride them at the Barbadoes down sharp and steep Rocks, without shooes: And no Goat goes surer on the sides of Rocks, or Hills then they. FINIS. (Here place the Examples of Minerals and Stones.)
EXAMPLES OF THE Wonderful Works OF GOD IN THE CREATURES. CHAP. I. Of strange Stones, Earth, and Minerals. 1. IN Cornwal, near unto a place called Pensans, is that famous stone called Main-Amber: which is a great Rock advanced upon some other of meaner size, with so equal a counterpoize, that a man may stir it with the push of his finger, but to remove it quite out of his place, a great number of men are not able. Camb. Brit. p. 188. The like is in the Coun∣try of Stratherne in Scotland. 2. In Summerset-shire, near unto Cainsham are found in Stone-quar∣ries, stones resembling Serpents, winding round in manner of a wreath, the head bearing up in the Circumference, and the end of the tail, taking up the centre within: but most of them are headless. Camb. Brit. p. 236. 3. In Gloucestershire upon the Hills near Alderly are found certain
stones, resembling Cockles, Periwinckles, and Oisters, which seem to be the gaimsome works of nature, or such shells turned into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 363. 4. In Yorkshire, about Whitby are found certain stones fashioned like Serpents, foulded and wraped round, as in a wreath, so that a man would verily think that they had been somtimes Serpents turned into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 718. 5. Also in the same Country at Huntly Nabb, there lye scattering here and there amongst the Rocks, stones of divers bigness, so Ar∣tificially by nature shaped round in manner of a Globe, that one would take them to be big bullets made by the Turners hand, for shot to be discharged out of great Ordnance; in which, if you break them, are found stony Serpents, enwrapped round like a wreath: but most of them are headlesse. Camb. Brit. p. 721. 6. In the County of Cornwal near unto St. Neots, there are a num∣ber of good great Rocks heaped up together, and under them one stone of lesser size, fashioned naturally in the form of a Cheese lying in presse, whereupon its named Wring-cheese. Camb. Brit. p. 192. 7. In Richmondshire amongst the ragged Rocks, are found stones like unto Periwinckles, Cockles, and other shell fish. Camb. Brit. p. 727. 8. In the County of Hereford, a hill which they call Marcley-hill, in the year 1571. (as though it had wakened on a sudden out of a deep sleep) roused it self up, and for the space of three dayes together moving and shewing it self (as mighty, and huge an heape as it was) with roaring noise in a fearful sort, and overturning all things that stood in the way, advanced it self forward, to the wondrous a∣stonishment of the beholders. Camb. Brit. p. 630. 9. In Glamorganshire in a Rock or Cliffe, by the Sea side, there appeareth a very little Chink, unto which, if you lay your ear, you shall hear a noise as if it were of Smiths at Work, one while the blowing of the bellows, another while the striking of the sledge, and Hammer; sometimes the sound of the grindstone, and Iron tools rubbing against it, the hissing Sparks also of Steel-Gads with∣in holes as they are beaten, and the puffing noise of the Fire burning in the Furnace. Camb. Brit. page 643. This is called Merlins Cave. 10. At Aspley Gowick in Bedfordshire, near unto Woburn, there is a kind of earth that turns Wood into Stone: For proof whereof there was a Wooden Ladder in the Monastry of Woburn, that having lien a good while covered in that earth, was digged forth again all Stone. Camb. Brit. p. 401. I have a peece of Wood turned into Stone by that earth. 11. In Kile in Scotland, there is a Rock about twelve foot high, and as much in breadth, called the Deaf-Craig: For though a man call never so loud, or shoot off a Gun on the one side, yet his fellow on the other side cannot hear the noise. Description of Scotland.
12. In Argile there is a stone found in diverse places, which being laid under straw, or stubble, doth set it on fire, by reason of the great heat that it gathereth there. Idem. 13. It is most strange, yet true, that the Armes of the Duke of Rohan in France, which are Fusils, or Lozenges, are to be seen in the wood, and stones, through all his Country: so that if you break a stone in the middest, or lopp a bough of a Tree, you shall behold the the grain thereof (by some secret cause in nature) Diamonded, or streaked in the fashion of a Lozeng. Camb. Brit. 14. In Warwick-shire, the Armes of the Shugburies, which are starres, are found in the stones in their own Manner of Shugbury; so that break the stone where you will, and there is the exact fashion of a star in the end of it. Idem, I have some of these stones. 15. In the Kingdom of Fesse in Affrica there is a Mountain called Beniguazeval, in the top whereof there is a Cave that casteth out fire perpetually. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 807. 16. In Prussia there is great store of Amber, which groweth like Coral in a mountain of the North-Sea, which is clean covered with water: by the violence of the waves beating against this Rock, the Amber is oft broken off, and cast up by the Sea into their Havens. 17. About Bever Castle in Lincoln-shire, are found the stones cal∣led Astroites, which resemble little stars joyned one with another, wherein are to be seen at every Corner, five beams, or rayes, & in the middest of every ray is to be seen a small hollownesse. Camb. Brit. 18. We have Corral, Amber, Emralds, Calcedony, Pearl, Onix, Sardonix, Sardis, Bezar, Hemathist, and the Turquoise from Arabia, Indostan, and Persia. Pearls, Berils, Saphires, and Adamants, from Zeilan. Jasper, Cornelion, Agate, Heliotrope, Jacinth, and Chry∣solite, from Malabar, Narsinga, and Cochin-china. Diamonds from Bor∣neo, and Gulkunda. Gold, Silver, Rubies, Saphires, Granats, Topaz, Emeralds, Smaradg, Espinels, Cats-eyes, and Porcellane, from Pegu, Siam, Bengala, Sumatra, Japan, and China.
CHAP. II. Examples of the rare Works of God in the Creatures. Of Trees, Hearbs, Plants, and Gums. 1. OF Date-Trees some are Males, and other Females: the Male brings forth Flowers onely; the Female Fruit, but the Flowers of the Female will not open unlesse the boughs, and Flowers of the male be joyned unto them: and if they be not thus coupled, the Dates will prove stark naught, and have great stones in them, Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 823. 2. Neer unto the Grand-Cairo in Egypt, is a Garden environed with a strong Wall; in the Garden is a large fountain, and in the middest of it groweth the only Balm-tree bearing true balm, that is in the world: it hath a short stock or body, and beareth leaves like unto Vine-leaves, but not altogether so long. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 838. 3. In the Country of Indostan they have a pleasant clear liquor which they call Taddy, issuing from a spongy Tree that grows straight, and tall, without boughs to the top, and there spreads out into bran∣ches, somwhat like to an English Colewort, where they make incisions, under which they hang earthen pots to preserve the influence: that which distils forth in the night, is as pleasing to the taste, as any white Wine, if drunk betimes in the morning; and of a peircing, and medicinable quallity, excellent against the stone. But in the heat of the day the Sun alters it, so that it becomes heady, Ill-relished, and unwholesome. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1469. 4. For Cotton Wooll, they plant seeds, which grow up into shrubs like unto our Rose-bushes: It blows first into a yellow blossome, which falling off, there remains a Cod about the bignesse of a mans thumb, in which the substance is moist, and yellow, but as it ripens, it swells bigger, till it break the Cod, and in short time becomes as White as Snow, and then they gather it. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1470. 5. The Cynamon tree is a small tree, and low, having leaves like to our Bay-tree: In the month of March, or April, when the sap go∣eth up to the top of the tree, they cut the bark off the tree round about in length; from knot to knot, or from joynt to joynt, above, and below, and then easily with their hands they take it away, lay∣ing it in the Sun to dry, and yet for all this the tree dyes not, but against the next year it will have a new bark, and that which is ga∣thered every year is the best Cynamon: that which grows longer is
great, and not so good. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1709. 6. In India is a tree called Arbore de Ray's or the Tree of roots, it groweth first up like other trees, and spreadeth the branches, out of which there come strings, which seem a far off to be cords of hemp, which growing longer till they reach the ground, there take root a∣gain: so that in the end one tree will cover a great peece of ground, one root crossing within another like a Maze, each of these young trees will in time grow so big, that it cannot be discerned which is the principal trunk, or body of the tree. 6. There is also a tree called Arbore-triste, or the sorrowful-tree, so called, because it never beareth blossoms but in the night-time, and so it doth, and continueth all the year long: So soon as the Sun sets, there is not one blossom seen upon the tree, but presently within half an hour after, there are as many blossoms as the tree can bear, plea∣sant to behold, and smelling very sweet; and as soon as the day comes, and the Sun is rising, they all presently fall off, and not one is to be seen on the tree, which seems as though it were dead, till evening comes again, and then it begins to blossom as it did before: its as big as a Plumb-tree: it groweth up quickly, and if you break but a branch of the tree, and set it into the earth, it presently takes root, and grows, and within a few days after it beareth blossoms, which are like Orange-tree-blossoms, the flower white, and in the bottom some∣what yellow, and redish. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1780. 8. There is also an herb in India, called by the Portugals, Herba sentida, or feeling Herb, which if a man touch, or throw Sand, or any other thing upon it, presently it becomes as though it were wi∣thered, closing the leaves together, and it comes not to it self a gain, as long as the man standeth by it, but presently after he is gone, it openeth the leaves again, which become stiffe, and fair, as though they were newly grown: and touching it again, it shuts, and becomes withered as before, so that its a pleasure to behold the strange nature of it P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1781. 9. Pepper is planted at the root of some other tree, and runs up it like Ivie: the leaves are like the Orange-leaves, but somewhat smaller, green, and sharpe at ends: the Pepper groweth in bun∣ches like Grapes, but lesse, and thinner; they are always green till they begin to drye, and ripen, which is in December, and Ja∣nuary, at which time it turns black, and is gathered. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1782. 10. The best Ginger grows in Malabar; it groweth like thin, and young Netherland Reeds, two or three spans high, the root whereof is the Ginger, which is gathered in December, and January. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1782. 11. The Clove-trees are like Bay-trees, the blossoms at the first white, then green, and at last red, and hard, which are the Cloves; these Cloves grow very thick together, and in great numbers: In the place where these trees grow, there is neither grass, nor green herbs, but is wholly drye, for that those trees draw all the moisture unto them. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783.
12. The Nutmeg-tree is like a Pear-tree, but that its lesse, and with round leaves, the fruit is like great round Peaches, the inward part whereof is the Nutmeg; this hath about it an hard shell like wood, and the shell is covered over with Nutmeg-flowers, which is the Mace, and over it is the fruit, which without, is like the fruit of a Peach. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783. 13. Gumme-Lac comes most from Pegu: where are certain very great Pismires with wings, which fly up the trees like Plumb-trees, out of which trees comes a certain Gumme which the Pismires suck up, and then they make the Lac round about the branches of the trees, as Bees make Wax; and when it is full, the owners come, and break∣ing off the branches, lay them to dry; and being dry, the branches shrink out, and the Lac remains. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1783. 14. Amber-greese, is usually cast upon the Sea-shore, which as some suppose, is the dung of the Whale; or as others, the sperme, or seed of the Whale consolidated by lying in the Sea. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 772. 15 The Herb Addad is bitter, and the root of it so venemous, that one drop of the juice will kill a man within the space of one hour. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 850. 16 Of Palm-trees, which they keep with watering, and cutting every year, they make Velvets, Satins, Taffaties, Damasks, Sarce∣nets, and such like, all which are spun out of the leaves cleansed, and drawn into long threads. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 985. 17. Frankincense grows in Arabia, and is the gumme that issueth out of trees. Idem. p. 1781. 18. In Mozambique, Manna is procreated of the dew of Heaven, falling on a certain tree, on which it hardens like Sugar, sticking to the wood like Rozen, whence its gathered, and put into jars, and is used much for purging in India. Idem. p. 1554. 19. Mastick-trees grow only in the Island of Sio: the trees are low shrubs, with little crooked boughs, and leaves: In the end of August they begin their Mastick-harvest, men cutting the bark of the Tree with Iron instruments; out of which the Gum distills uncessantly for almost three months together. Idem. p. 1812. 20. Spunges are gathered from the sides of Rocks, fifteen fathom under water, about the bottom of the Streights of Gibralter, the peo∣ple that get them, being trained up in diving from their child-hood, so that they can indure to stay very long under water, as if it were their habitable Element. 21. In Manica, is a tree called the Resurrection-tree, which for the greatest part of the year is without leaf, or greenness: but if one cut off a bough, and put it into the water, in the space of ten houres, it springs, and flourisheth with green leaves; but draw it out of the water, as soon as it is dry, it remaineth as it was before. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1537. 22. There is in the Island of Teneriff (which is one of the Canaries) a Tree as big as an Oke of a middle size, the bark white like Hornbeam, six, or seven yards high, with ragged boughs, the leaf like the Bay-leaf.
It beareth neither fruit, nor flower; it stands on the side of an hill, in the day its withered, and drops all night (a cloud hanging thereon) so that it yeelds water sufficient for the whole Island, wherein are eight thousand souls, and about an hundred thousand Cammels, Mules, Goats, &c. The water falls from it into a pond made of brick, paved with stone; from whence its conveyed into several ponds, thorough the whole Island. They also water there∣with their Corn-ground, for they have no other water in the Island, except Rain-water. The Pond holds twenty thousand Tun of water, and is filled in one night. Many of our English that have been there have attested the truth hereof. Idem. p. 1369. Concerning which Tree, Sylvester the Poet made these Verses: In th' Ile of Iron (one of those same Seven Whereto our Elders happy name have given) The Savage People never drink the streams Of Wells, and Rivers, as in other Realms. Their drink is in the Air! their gushing spring, A weeping Tree out of it self doth wring. A Tree, whose tender-bearded-Root being spread In dryest sand, his sweating-Leaf doth shed A most Sweet Liquor; and (like as the Vine Untimely cut, weeps (at her wound) the Wine In pearled tears) incessantly distils A royal stream, which all their Cisterns fills Throughout the Island: for all hither hie, And all their Vessels cannot draw it drye! 23. Aloes growes in the Island of Socotera, which is nothing but Semper vivum, it is so full of a Rosin-like juice, that the leaves are rea∣dy to break with it: which leaves they cut in small peeces, and cast them into a clean pit made in the ground, and paved: there it lies to ferment in the heat of the Sun, whereby the juice floweth forth, which they put in skins, and hang them up in the wind to drye, whereby it hardens. P. Pil. v. 1. p. 419. 24. Indico groweth in the Moguls Country, having a small leaf like that of Sena: the branches are of a wooddy substance like Broom: It grows not above a yard high, the stalk about the bignesse of a mans thumb: The seed is included in a small round Cod of an inch long. This once sowed lasteth three years: that of the first year makes a weighty reddish Indico, that sinks in water, being not yet come to its perfection: that of the second year is rich, very light, and of a perfect Violet-colour, swiming on the water: that of the third year is weighty, blackish, and the worst of the three. This herb, when its cut, is put into a Cistern, and pressed down with stones, then covered over with water, where it remains till the substance of the herb is gone into the water: then its drawn forth into another Cistern, and laboured with staves till it be like Batter, then they
let it seeth, and so scum off the water two or three times, till nothing but a thick substance remains, which taking forth, they spread on a cloath, dry it in the Sun, then make it into balls, dry it on the sand, which causes the sandy foot: That is best, which is of a pure grain; Violet-colour, is glossie, dry, and light. Idem. p. 430. 25. Sir James Lancaster in his East-Indy Voyage, in the Isle of Som∣brero found on the Sea-sands, a young twig growing up to a tree, and offering to pluck up the same, it shrank down into the ground, and when it was by strength pulled up, a great Worm was the root of it, and as the Tree groweth in greatnesse, the Worm diminisheth: This Tree plucked up, the leaves and pill stripped off, by that time its dryed, is turned into a hard stone; so that this Worm was twice transformed into different natures, after a wondrous manner: Of these he brought home many. P. Pil. v. 1. p. 152. 26. About Saffron Walden in Essex, there grows great store of Saffron, which was first brought into England, in the reign of King Edward the third. This in the month of July every third year, being pluck∣ed up, and after twenty dayes, having the root split, and set again in the earth, about the end of September it putteth forth a whitish-blew flower; out of the midst where of there come three chives, which are gathered in the morning before Sun-rising, and being plucked out of the flower, are dried by a soft fire; and so great is the increase that commeth thereof, that out of every Acre of ground, there are made fourscore, or an hundred pound weight of Saffron, whilst it is moist, which being dryed, yeeld some twenty pound weight. And the ground which three years together hath brought Saffron, is so enriched there∣by, that it will bear very good Barley, many yeares together with∣out dung, or manuring. Camb. Brit. p. 453. 27. All along the shores of the Red-sea are abundance of Palm-Trees of a very strange nature: They grow in couples, Male and Fe∣male: both thrust forth cods full of seed: but the Female is only fruitful, and that not except growing by the male, and having her seed mixed with his. The pith of these Trees is an excellent sallet, better than an Artechoke: Of the branches are made bedsteads, Lat∣tices, &c. Of the leaves, Baskets, Mats, Fans, &c. Of the outward husk of the cod, cordage; of the inward, brushes. The fruit it beareth is like a Fig, and finally it is said to yeild whatsoever is necessary for the life of Man. It is the nature of this tree, that if never so great a weight be laid upon it, it will lift & raise up it self the more; for which it was given to conquerors in token of victory. Herb. Trav. 28. In Italy there grows an Herb called Balilisco, which hath this innate property; that if it be laid under a stone in some moist place, in two days space it produceth a Scorpion: Raimunds Mercu. Ital. 29. The Assa-Faetida Tree is like our Bryer in height, the Leaves resemble Fig-leaves, the root is like our Radish: though the smell be so bace, yet the taste is so pleasing, that no meat, no sauce, on ves∣sel is pleasing to the Gusarat pallats where it grows, except it rellish of it. Herb. Trav.
30 Benjamin is either pure, cleer, and white, or yellow, and streaked: This Gum issues from an high tree, small, and furnished with fruit∣lesse branches; the leaves are not unlike to those of the Olive: Pegu and Siam yeild the best. 31. The Coco tree is very rife in the East-Indies. In the whole world there is not a tree more profitable than this is, neither do men reap more benefit of any other tree than of this. The heart of the Tree makes good timber, planks, and masts for ships: with the leaves there∣of they make sails, with the rind of it they make cordage: A Gum that grows out of it caulks the ship: the fruit of it is a kind of Nut, which being full of kernel, and a sweet liquor, serves for meat and drink: much wine also it yeilds, & of the wine they make Sugar, and Placetto. The wine they gather in the spring of the year out of the middle of the Tree, from whence there runs continually a white thin liquor, at which time they put a vessel under it, and take it away full every morning, and evening, and then distilling it, they make a very strong liquor of it. Of the Nuts also they make great store of Oil: out of the tree they make Bows, Bedsteads: of the leaves also they make very fine mats, which whilest green, are full of an excellent sweet liquor, with which if a man be thirsty, he may satisfie himself: with the bark they make spoons, dishes, and platters for meat. The first rind of the Nut they stamp, and make thereof perfect Ockam: and the store of these Nuts serve for merchandise. So that out of this one Tree, they build and rig ships, furnish them with meat, drink, u∣tensils, and merchandise, without the least help of any other what∣soever. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1466. and 1704. 32. Mr. Herbert in his Travels thus describes it. The Tree that bears the Coco, is strait, & lofty, without any branches, save at the very top, where it spreads its beautiful plumes, and Nuts like Pearles, or Pen∣dants adorning them. It is good Timber for Canoes, Masts, Anchors: The leaves for Tents or thatching: the rind for sailes, Matteresses, Cables, and Linnen: the shels for furniture: the meat for victualling. The Nut is covered with a thick rind equal in bignesse to a Cabbage. The shell is like the skull of a man, or rather a deaths-head, the eyes, nose, and mouth, being easily discerned: within it is contained a quart of sweet and excellent liquor, like new white-wine, but far more aro∣matick tasted: the meat or kernel, is better relished than our Phel∣berds, and is enough to satisfy the appetite of two reasonable men. —The Indian Nut alone Is cloathing, meat, and trencher, drink, and Can. Boat, Cable, Sail, Mast, Needle, all in one. Herb. And Sylvester hath set them forth to the life in these verses. The Indian Isles most admirable be, In those rare fruits call'd Coquos commonly; The which alone far richer wonder yeilds, Then all our Groves, Meads, gardens, orchards, Fields.
What wouldst thou drink? the wounded leaves drop wine. Lackst thou fine linnen? dresse the tender rine. Dresse it like Flax, spin it, then weave it well, It shall thy Camrick, and thy Lawn excell. Longst thou for Butter, bite the poulpous part, For never better came to any mart. Do'st need good Oyle? then boult it to, and fro, And passing Oyl it soon becometh so. Or Vinegar? to whet thine appetite; Why, Sun it well; and it will sharply bite. Or want's thou Sugar? steep the same a stownd, And sweeter Sugar is not to be found. 'Tis what you will; or will be what you would: Should Midas touch it, sure it would be gold. And God, all-good, to crown our life with Bayes, The Earth with plenty, and his Name with praise, Had done enough, if he had made no more But this one plant, so full of choicest store; Save that the world (where, one thing breeds satiety) Could not be fair, without so great variety. 32. The Plantan Tree is of a reasonable height; the body about the bigness of a mans thigh, compacted of many leaves, wrapped one upon another, adorned with leaves in stead of boughs from the very ground, which are for the most part about two ells long, and an ell broad, having a large rib in the middle thereof. The fruit is a bunch of ten, or twelve Plantans, each a span long, and as big almost as a mans wrist; the rind being stripped off, the fruit is yellowish, and of a pleasant taste. Pur. Pil. p. 416. 33. The Cedars of Mount Libanus grow higher than Pines, and so big, that four or five men with their armes can but fathom them; the boughs rise not upward, but stretch out a cross, largely spread, and thickly enfolded one in another, as if done by Art, so that men may sit, and lie along upon the boughs: the leaves are thick, narrow, hard, prickly, and alwayes green; the wood is hard, incorruptible, and sweet smelling; the fruit like the Cones of Cypress, gummy, and marvellous fragrant. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1500. 34. In Africa are many Palmeta trees, whence they draw a sweet, and wholsome Wine, by cutting, or boring holes into the body of the Tree, into which a Cane is put that receives the sap, and conveys it into Gourds: It tastes like white Wine, but it will not last above four and twenty hours. Idem. 35. In New-Spain there are many trees which they call Manguey: It hath great, and large leaves, at the end whereof is a strong, and sharp point, which they use for pins, and needles, and out of the leaf they draw a kind of thred which they use much to few with. The body of the Tree is big, which when it is tender, they cut, and out of the hole proceeds a liquor which they drink like water, being fresh, and
sweet. This liquor being sodden, becomes Wine, which being kept till it be sower, makes good Vinegar: Boil it it a litle more than for Wine, and it makes a fine Syrup; and boil it till it be thick, and it makes Hony. Idem. v. 3. p. 957. 36. There is a certain Tree in New-Spain called Tunalls, in whose leaves breed certain small worms, which are covered with a fine web, compassing them in daintily. This in the season they gather, and let it drye, and this is that Cochenille, so famous, and dear, wherewith they Dye in grain. Idem. 37. The Jack, or Giack is an high tree, and uneasy to be ascended; the Jack for shew and bigness resembles a Pumpeon: without, it is of a gold yellow, mixt with veins; within, its soft, and tender, full of golden coloured cloves, each full of kernels, not unlike a great French Bean, but more round, each of them hath an hard stone within it, the fruit is somewhat unpleasant at the first taste; tis glutinous, and clammy in the mouth, but very restorative, and good for the back. 38. The Ananas is not inferiour to the Jack in bulk, and round∣nesse: It ariseth from no seed, or sowing, but from a root like an Artichok: when they are ripe they shew themselves, and are not a∣bove two foot high: without, it is covered with a drie rind, hard, and skaley; within, its wholesome and pleasant, and though a little of it seems to satiate the appetite, yet the stomach likes it well, and its easie of digestion. 39. The Duroyen is somewhat like the Jack, in shape round, the in∣ward vertue, is far greater than the outward beauty: at first opening it hath an unpleasant smell: the meat is whitish, and divided into a dozen cells, or partitions, filled with stones as big as Chesnuts, white and cordial. Its a fruit nutritive, and dainty, and may well be called an Epitome of all the best, and rarest fruits in the the Orient. 40. The Arec-tree is almost as high as a Cedar, but more like the Palmeto: I'ts of a fuzzie, hollow substance, adorned at every top with Plumes, wherein the fruit hangs in clusters; its in shape and bigness like a Wallnut; white and hard within; hath neither taste, nor smell: they never eat it alone, but wrap it in a leaf of Bettle, and are frequently chawing of it: some adde to it a kinde of Lime made of Oister-shels, it cures the Chollick, removes Melancholly, kills Worms, provokes lust, purges the maw, and prevents hunger. Its much used in the East-Indies. 41. The Palmeto-tree is long, strait, round, and soft, without leaf, bough, or branch, save at the top, and those are few, green, and sedgie: under which branches there appear certain codded seeds: Both the Male, and Female bear blossoms, but the Female only beares fruit, and yet not that, unlesse a flowring branch of the Male tree be yearly inoculated: The leaves serve for many uses. At the top of this tree there is a soft pith, in which consists the life of it: for that being cut out, the Tree dyes. This pith is in bignesse like small Cabbage, in taste like a nut kernel, and being boiled it
eats like a Colly-flower. But of more value is the Palmeta Wine, which is sweet, pleasant, and nourishing in colour, and taste not un∣like Muskadine: It purges, cures obstructions, and kills the Worms. If it stand two dayes in the Sun it makes good Vinegar. The Wine is thus gotten. They cut a small hole in two or three Trees that grow together, which in a short time are filled with the sap that issues in them, which with a Cane, or Quill, they draw forth. Pur. Pil. 42. In Summersetshire, near unto Glastenbury, in Wiral Park was that famous Hawthorn tree, which used upon Christmas day to sprout forth as fresh as in May; but now its cut down. Camb. Brit. p. 227. 43. In the Marishes of Egypt grow those sedgie reeds, called Pa∣pyri, whereof formerly they made Paper, and from whence ours that is made of rags assumed that name. They divide it into thin flakes, whereinto it naturally parteth: then laying them on a Table, and moistening them with the glutinous water of Nilus, they press them together, dry them in the Sun, and then they are fitted for use. Pur. Pil. v. 2 p. 898. CHAP. III. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fountains, Rivers, and Waters. 1. IN the Bishoprick of Durham in Derlington field, there are 3 pits of a wonderful depth, called by the Vulgar Hell-Kettles, in which the water by an Antiperistasis, or reverberation of the cold air, striking thereupon, waxeth hot; which pits have passage un∣der ground, into the River Teese, as Archbishop Guthbert Tonstal ob∣served, by finding that Goose in the River which he had marked, and let down into these pits. Camb. Brit. p. 737. 2. In Yorkshire, neer unto Knasburow Castle is a Well, in which the waters spring not up out of the veins of the earth, but distil, and trickle down, dropping from the Rocks hanging over it, whence its called Dropping-Well: into which, what wood soever is put, it will in a short space be turned into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 700. 3. In Caermardenshire, neer unto Careg Castle, there is a fountain that twice in four and twenty hours ebbeth, and twice floweth, re∣sembling the unstable motions of the main Sea. Camb. Brit. p. 650. 4. In Westmerland, hard by Shape, there is a Well, or Fountain, which after the manner of Euripus ebbeth, and floweth many times in a day. Camb. Brit. p. 762. 5. In Ireland is a Fountain, whose water killeth all those Beasts that drink thereof, but hurteth not the people, though they usually drink of it. Ortelius.
6. Near unto Lutterworth in Leicester-shire, there is a spring of water so cold, that in a short time it turneth straws, and sticks, into stone. Camb. Brit. p. 518. 7. In Derbyshire in the Peak-Forrest not far from Buxtone, is a Well which in a wonderful manner doth ordinarily ebb, and flow, four times in the space of one hour, or thereabouts, keeping his just tides. Camb. Brit. p. 558. 8. Also in the same Country at the spring head of Wie there rise, and walm up, nine Fountains of hot waters, commonly called Bux∣ton Wells, very sovereign for the stomach, sinews, and whole body. Camb. Brit. p. 557. 9. In Scotland on the bank of Ratra neer unto Stang's Castle, there is a Cave, wherein the water distilling naturally by drops from the head of the Vault, is presently turned into Pyramidal stones; and were not the said hole or Cave, otherwiles rid, and cleansed, the whole space as far as up to the vault, would in a short time be filled therewith. Camb. Brit. Scotl. p. 48. 10 In Scotland in the Countrey of Murray, there is a River called Naes, the water whereof is almost always warm, and at no time so cold that it freezeth, yea, in the most cold time of winter, broken ice fal∣ling into it, is dissolved with the heat thereof. Defcrip. of Scotl. 11. Also in Galloway, the Loch called Loch-Merton, is of such a strang nature, that the one half of it doth never freeze in the coldest winter. Descrip. of Scotl. 12. In Lenox is a great Loch or Meer, called Loch-Lowmond, in length twenty four miles, and eight in breadth, wherein are three strang things: First, Excellent good Fish without any sins: Secondly, a floating Island whereon many Kine feed: And thirdly, Tempestuous waves rageing without winds, yea, in the greatest calms. Desc. of Scotl. 13. There is a certain Island called Lounda in the Kingdom of Con∣go, wherein is no fresh water (being a very sandy ground) but if you dig but the depth of two or three hand breadths, you shall find sweet water, the best in all those Countryes: and (which is most strang) when the Ocean ebbeth, this water grows brackish, but when it flows to the top, it is most sweet. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 989. 14. Not far from Casbine, the Regal City in Persia is a fountain of a strang, and wonderful nature, out of which there continually spring∣eth, and issueth a marvellous quantity of black Oil, which serveth in all parts of Persia to burn in their houses, and is usually carried all o∣ver the Countrey upon Kine, and Asses, whereof you may often meet three or four hundred in company. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1431. 15. About three days journey from old Balylon, is a Town called Ait, and neer unto that is a valley of pitch very marvellous to behold, wherein are many Springs, throwing out abundantly a kind of black substance, like unto Tar, and Pitch, which serveth all the Country thereabout to staunch their barques and boats with: every one of which springs makes a noise like to a Smith's Forge in puffing and blowing out the matter, which never ceaseth day nor night, and the
noise is hard a mile off: the Moors call it Hell-mouth. P. Pil. v. p. 1437. 16. Clitumnus is a River in Italy, which makes all the Oxen that drink of it, white. Fulk. Meteor. Lib. 4. 17. The River Melas in Boeotia makes all the Sheep that drink of it, black. Plin. 18. The Fountain of Jupiter Hammon, is cold in the day time, and hot at midnight. 19. The Fountain of the Sun hath its water extream cold, and sweet at noon; and boiling hot, and bitter at midnight. Plin. lib. 2. c. 103. Augustine. 20. There is a River in Palestine called the Sabbatical River, which runs with a violent and swift stream all the week; but every Sabbath it remains dry, Joseph. de Bel. Jud. l. 7. c. 24. Some question the truth of this. 21. In Idumae is a Fountain called the Fountain of Job, which for one quarter of the year is troubled and muddy; the next quarter bloo∣dy, the third green, and the fourth clear. Isiod. 22. The River Astaces in the Isle of Pontus uses sometimes to over∣flow the fields, after which whatsoever sheep, or milch-Cattle feed thereon give black milk. Plin. l. 2. c. 103. 23. Furius Camillus being Censor in Rome, the Lake Albanus be∣ing environed with Mountains on every side, in the time of Autumn when other Lakes and Rivers were almost dry, the waters of this Lake after a wondrous manner began to swell, and rise upwards, till at last they were equall with the tops of the Mountains, and after a while they brake thorow one of those Mountains, overflowing and bearing all down before them till they emptied themselves into the Sea. Plut. 24. The River Dee in Merionneth-shire in Wales, though it run through Pimble-Meer, yet it remaineth intire, and mingles not its streams with the waters of the Lake. Cam. Brit. 25. Ana a River in Spain, burieth it self in the earth, and runneth under ground fifteen miles together, whereupon the Spaniards brag that they have a bridg whereon ten thousand Catle feed dayly. 26. Pliny tells us of a Fountain called Dodon, which always decrea∣seth from midnight till noon, and encreaseth from noon till mid∣night. 27. He also tells us of certain Fountains in an Island neer Italy, which always increase and decrease according to the ebbing, and flowing of the Sea. 28. Aristotle writeth of a Well in Sicilie, whose water is so sharp, that the Inhabitants use it instead of Vinegar. 29. In Bohemia neer to the City of Bilen is a Well of such excel∣lent water, that the Inhabitants use to drink of it in a morning instead of burnt wine. Dr. Fulk. 30. In Paphlagonia is a Well, which hath the taste of wine, and it makes men drunk which drink of it; whence Du-Bartas,
Salonian Fountain, and thou Andrian Spring, Out of what Cellars do you daily bring The oyl, and wine that you abound with so? O Earth, do these within thine entrals grow? &c. 31. Aelian mentioneth a Fountain in Boeotia neer to Thebes, which makes Horses run mad if they drink of it. 32. Pliny mentioneth a water in Sclavonia which is extream cold, and yet if a man throw his cloath cloak upon it, it is presently set on fire. 33. Other waters there are which discolour the fleeces of the sheep which drink of them: whence Du-Bartas, Cerona, Xanth, and Cephisus do make, The thirsty flocks that of their waters take, Black, red, and white: And neer the crimson deep, Th' Arabian Fountain maketh crimson sheep. 34. And again. What should I of th' Illyrian Fountain tell? What shall I say of the Dodonean Well? Whereof the first sets any cloathes on fire; Th' other doth quench (who but will this admire) A burning Torch: and when the same is quenched, Lights it again, if it again be drenched. 35. In the Province of Dara in Lybia, there is a certain River, which sometimes so overfloweth the banks that it is like a sea, yet in the Summer it is so shallow, that any one may passe over it on foot. If it overflow about the beginning of Aprill, it brings great plenty to the whole region; if not, there follows great scarcity of Corn. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 823. 36. In the Kingdom of Tunis neer unto the City El-Hamma, is a hot River, which by diverse Channels is carried through the City, the water of it being so hot that few can endure to go into it, yet having set it to cool a whole day, the people drink of it. Idem. p. 821. 37. In Africa, there is a River called Margania, and by it a salt spring which turns all the wood is thrown into it, into hard stone. Idem. p. 1547. 38. The River Meander is famous for its six hundred windings, and turnings, in and out: whence that of the Poet, Quique recurvatis ludit Maeander in undis. Maeander plays his watry pranks, Within his crooked winding banks. 39. Groenland in the Hyperborean Sea, was discovered Anno Christi
1380. it hath in it the Monastery of St. Thomas situate in the North-East part thereof at the foot of a Mountain, where there is a River so hot, that they use to boil their meat in it, and it serves for other such purposes as fire doth with us, Isac. Chron. p, 275. 40 The river Hypanis in Scythia every day brings forth little bladders, out of which come certain flies which are thus, bred in the morning, are fledge at noon, and dye at night. Fit Emblems of the vain, and short life of Man. 41 The famous River of Nilus in Egypt useth once in the year to over∣flow her banks, whereby the whole Country is watered. It usually be∣ginneth to overflow upon the seventeenth of June, and increaseth daily, sometimes two, sometimes three fingers, and sometimes half a cubit high on a day. The increase of it is known by a Pillar erect∣ed in a Cistern, whereinto the water is conveyed by a Sluce; which Pillar is divided into eighteen parts, each a cubit higher than the o∣ther. If the water reach no higher than to the fifteenth cubit, they expect a fruitful year: if it stay between the twelfth, and fifteenth cubit, the increase of that year will be but mean. If it reach not to the twelfth, its a sign of scarcity. If it rise to the eighteenth, the scarcity will be greater, in regard of too much moisture. This Ri∣ver continueth forty dayes increasing, and forty dayes decreasing. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 838. 42. Another thing is wonderful, which is this: In the Grand Cairo (which is the Metropolis of Egypt) the Plague useth many times to be very violent, till the River begins to overflow its banks, at which time it doth instantly cease. So that whereas five hundred a day dyed the day before, not one doth die the day following. Idem. p. 897. 43. In the County of Devon, not far from the Town of Lidford, at a Bridg, the River Lid is gathered into a strait, and pent in be∣tween Rocks, whereon it runneth down a main, and the ground dai∣ly waxing deeper, and deeper under it, his water is not seen, only a roaring noise is heard, to the great wonder of those that pass by. Camb. Brit. p. 199. 44. In Warwickshire, at Nevenham Regis, three fountains arise out of the ground, strained through an Allom Mine: the water whereof carrieth the colour, and tast of Milk, which cureth ulcers in the blad∣der, or kidneys caused by the stone, and provoketh urine abundantly; Green wounds it cleanseth, closeth up, and quickly healeth; being drunk with salt it looseth, and with Sugar it bindeth the belly. A∣bout fifty years ago these Wells were famous, and in great request, many resorting to them, and the water by others was sent for far and near. Idem. p. 562. 45. In Herefordshire, a little beneath Richards Castle, Nature, who never disports her self more in shewing wonders, than in waters, hath brought forth a pretty well, which is alwayes full of little fish bones, although they be drawn out from time, to time, whence its common∣ly called Bone-Well. Idem. p. 619.
46. In Yorkshire, upon the Sea-shore by Sken-grave, when the winds are laid, and the weather is most calm upon the Sea: the water lying level and plain without any noise: there is heard here many times on a sudden, a great way off, as it were, an horrible, and fearful groaning, which affrights the Fishermen at those times, so that they dare not launce forth into the Sea. Idem. p. 720. 47. Pliny tells us of the Fountain Chymaera, that is set on fire with water, and put out with earth, or hey. Plin. nat. Hist. Lib. 2. c. 106, 107. 48. The same Author also tells us, that in the hot deserts of India grows a certain kind of Flax that lives in the fire, and consumes not: we have seen (saith he) table-cloathes made of it, burning in fires at feasts, by which they have been cleansed from their stains, and spots, and made whiter by the fire than they could be by water. 49. At Belgrad in Hungary, where Danubius, and Sava (two great Rivers) meet, their waters mingle no more than water and Oil: not that either flote above other, but joyn unmixed; so that near the middle of the River I have gone in a boat (saith Sir Henry Blunt in his voyage into the Levant) and tasted of the Danow, as clear, and pure as a well; then putting mine hand an inch further, I have taken of the Sava, as troubled as a street-channel, tasting the gravel in my teeth. Thus they ran sixty miles together, and for a dayes journey I have been an eye-witness of it. CHAP. IV. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fishes. 1 ANno Christi 1204. at Oreford in Suffolk, a fish was taken by the Fishermen at Sea, in shape resembling a wild man, and by them was presented to Sir Bartholomew de Glanvil, Keeper of Oreford Castle. In all his limbs and members he resembled a man, had hair in all the usual parts of his body, only his head was bald. The Knight caused meat to be set before him, which he greedily de∣voured, and did eat fish raw, or sod: that which was raw he pressed with his hand, till he had squeezed out all the moisture: He uttered not any speech, though to try him, they hung him up by the heels, and grievously tormented him. He would get him to his Couch at the setting of the Sun, and rise again at the Sun-rising. One day they brought him to the haven, and let him go into the Sea, but to prevent his escape, they set three rows of very strong nets before him to catch him again at their pleasure: but he, straitwayes diving to the bottom, crept under all their nets, and shewed himself again to them, and so often diving, he still came up, and looked upon them that stood on the shore, as it were mocking of them.
At length after he had sported himself a great while in the water, and there was no hope of his return, he came back to them of his own ac∣cord, and remained with them two months after. But finally, when he was negligently looked to, he went to the Sea, and was never after seen, or heard of. Fabians Chron. 2. Anno Christi 1404. some women of Edam in the Low-Countries, as they were going in their barks to their cattel in Purmer-Meer, they often saw at the ebbing of the water, a Sea-women playing up and down, whereat at the first they were afraid, but after a while, incou∣raging one another, they made with their boats towards her, and the water by this time being not deep enough for her to dive in, they took her by force, and drew her into the boat, and so carried her to Edam, where in time she grew familiar, and fed of ordinary meats: and being sent from thence to Herlem, she lived about fifteen years, but never spake, seeking often to get away into the water. Belg. Com∣mon-Wealth. p. 102. 3. In the Seas, near unto Sofala are many Women-Fishes; which from the belly to the neck are very like a woman▪ The Females have breasts like womens, with which also they nourish their young. From the belly downward they have thick, and long tails, with fins like a Dolphin: the skin on the belly is white; on the back rougher, than a Dolphins. They have arms, which from the elbows end in fins, and so have no hands: the face is plain, round, and bigger than a mans, deformed, and without humane semblance: They have wide mouths, thick hanging lips like a Hound; four teeth hanging out almost a span long like the tusk of a Boar: and their nostrils are like a Calves. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1546. 4. Upon the coasts of Brasile are often found Meer-Men, which are like unto men of a good stature, but that their eyes are very hol∣low. 5. Captain Richard Whitburn in his description of Newfound-land, writes that Anno Christi 1610. early in a morning as he was standing by the water side, in the harbour of St Johns, he espied a strong Creature swimming very swiftly towards him like a women, looking chearfully upon him: Her Face, Eyes, Nose, Mouth, Chin, Ears, Neck, and Forehead were like a womans. It was very beau∣tiful, and in those parts well proportioned, having hair hanging down round about the head: He seeing it come within a pikes length of him, stepped back, whereupon it dived under water, swimming to a∣nother place, whereby he beheld the shoulders, and back down to the middle, which was as square, white, and smooth as the back of a man; from the middle to the hinder part it pointed in proportion like a broad-hooked Arrow: Afterwards it came to a Boat wherein some of his men were, attempting to come in to them, till one of them struck it a full blow upon the head: Others of them saw it after∣wards also. 6. About Brasile are many Meer-Men, and Meer-Women, that have long hair, and are very beautiful. They often catch the Indians as
they are swimming, imbracing them, and kissing them; and clasp them so hard, that they crush them to death, and when they per∣ceive that they are dead, they give some sighs, as if they were sorry Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1315. 7. There are also another sort of them, that resemble Children, and are no bigger, that are no ways hurtful. Idem. 8. The Torpedo is a strange kind of fish, which a man holding in his hand, if it stir not, it produceth no effect; but if it move it self never so little, it so torments the body of him that holds it, that his arteries, joints, sinews, & all his members feel exceeding great pain, with a cer∣tain numness, and as soon as he layeth it out of his hand, all that pain, and numness, is gone also. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1183. See more of it afterwards. 9. In Sofala are many River-horses, as big as two of our horses, with thick, and short hinder legs, having five clawes on each fore-foot, and four on the hinder; the mouth is wide, and full of teeth, four of which are above two spans long a peece; the two lower stand up∣right; the two upper are turned like a Boars tush; they live in the water, but feed on the land upon grass: they have teats wherewith they nourish their young ones: Their Hides are thicker than an Ox∣es; they are all of an ash-colour Gray, with white strakes on their faces, or white Stars in their foreheads. Idem. p. 1544. 10. In the mouth of the River of Goa, there was taken a fish of the bigness of a Cur-Dog, with a snout like an Hog, small eyes, no ears, but two holes in-stead thereof: It had four feet like an Elephant: the tail was flat, but at the end round, and somewhat sharp: It snort∣ed like a Hog; the Body, Head, Tail, and Legs, were covered with broad Scals as hard as Iron, so that no weapon could peirce them: when he was beaten, he would rowle himself round like an Urchin, and could by no strength be opened, till he opened of his own accord. Idem. p. 1774. 11. There are also Toad-Fishes of about a span long, painted, ha∣ving fair Eyes: when they are taken out of the water, they snort, and swell much: their poison lies only in the skin, and that being flaid off, the Indians eat them. Idem. p. 1314. 12. The Cuttle-Fish hath a hood alwayes full of black water, like Ink, which when she is pursued by other fishes that would devour her, she casts it forth, which so darkens and foileth the water, that she thereby escapeth. Idem. 13. There are a sort of fishes, whose wonderful making magnifi∣eth their Creator, who for their safety hath given them fins, which serve in-stead of wings: they are of such a delicate skin interlaced with fine bones as may cause admiration in the beholder: These fishes are like to Pilcherds, only a little rounder, and bigger: they flye best with a side wind, but longer than their wings are wet, they can∣not flye; so that their longest flight is about a quarter of a mile. The Dolphins, and Bonitos do continually hunt after them, to prey upon them: whereupon for safety they take the air: but then there is a Fowle called an Alcatrace, much like a Hern, which hovers in the air to seize upon them.
Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Caribdim. Out of the frying Pan into the fire, as our Proverb hath it. 14. There is often a strang fight in the Sea between the Whale and his enemies, viz. The Swordfish, and the Thresher. The Swordfish is not great, but strongly made, and between his neck and shoulders he hath a bone like a Sword, of about five inches broad, and above three foot long, full of prickles on either side. The Thresher is a bigger fish, whose tail is broad, and thick, and very weighty. The fight is in this manner; the Swordfish placeth himself under the belly of the Whale, and the Thresher above with his tail thresheth upon the head of the Whale, till he forceth him to give way, which the Swordfish perceiv∣ing, wounds him in the belly with the Sword, and so forceth him to rise up again. In this manner they torment him, that the fight is some∣times heard above three leagues off, the Whales roaring being heard much further, his onely remedy in this case is to get to the shore, which he laboureth to do as soon as he sees his enemies: for then there can fight but one with him, and for either of them hand to hand he is too good. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1377. 15. Mr. Herbert in his East-Indy voyage, relates of a Shark taken by one of their men, that was nine foot and an half in length, and they found in her paunch fifty and five young ones, each of them a foot in length, all which go out and in at their pleasures: She is armed with a double row of venemous teeth: and is guided to her prey by a little Musculus, or Pilot-fish that scuds to and fro to bring intelligence, the Shark for his kindnesse suffering it to suck when it pleaseth. 16. The Sea Tortoise is not much differing from those at land, only her shell is flatter: by overturning them they are easily taken, being hereby dis-enabled either to sink, or help themselves: they taste wate∣rish, and cause Fluxes: they superabound in eggs, one of them having in her neer two thousand, which eggs are pale, and round, and will never be made hard with boiling. Herberts Travels. p. 26. 17. In the Indian Sea is an Eagle-fish, whose eyes are five quarters asunder, from the end of one fin to the end of the other are above four yards: Its mouth and teeth resemble a Portcullis: it hath a long small tail, and it is rather to be wondered at then to be eaten. 18. In Le-Maires voyage about the world, a certain fish, or Sea monster, with an horn, struck against the ship with such violence, that shook it, whereupon the Master looking overboard, saw the Sea all bloody, but knew not what should be the cause, till coming into Port-Desire, where they cleansed and trimmed their ship, they found seven foot under water, a Horn sticking in the ship, for bignesse, and fashion like an Elephants tooth: yet not hollow, but all solid of hard bone, which had pierced through three double planks, and was entred into a rib of the ship, it stuck about half a foot deep in the ship, and by great force was broken off, which caused that great monster to bleed so much as discoloured the water. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 90.
19. The Mannaty is a strange fish resembling a Cow: Her face is like a Buffalo's, her eyes small and round, having hard gums instead of teeth: they feed much on the shore, which makes them taste like flesh of veal: their intrails differ little from a Cows: their bodies are commonly three yards long, and one broad, they swim slowly wanting fins, in the place whereof they have two things like paps, which are their stilts when they creep on the shore to graze, where they sleep long, sucking in the cool aire: they cannot keep under water above half an hour. The stone generated in their head is most esteemed, being soveraign against choller adust, the stone collick; and dissenteryes, if beaten small infused in wine, and drunk fasting. Herb. Trav. p. 26. See more afterwards. 20. The Carvel comes of the foam of the sea, every where floating upon the surface of the Ocean, of a round form, throwing abroad her strings like so many lines, which she can spread at pleasure, therewith angling for small fishes, which she catches at leasure: you may call her a Sea-Spider: for when she sees her web too weak, she can blow an infectious breath foaming death, or such a sting as if she had bor∣rowed it from a Scorpion. Idem. 21. In the East-Indies is a trade wind, which they call a Briese, or Monson, which blows West all April, May, June, July, August, and part of September, and East the rest of the year: Only on the East of Su∣matra, it blows five months East, and five months West, and the other two variable. This is well known to our East-Indy Merchants. 22. The Torpedo is a Fish like a Bream, but somwhat thicker: some Marriners having one of them in a net, went to take it forth, but one of them presently cryed out that he had lost the use of his hands, and armes: another that was bare-legged putting his foot to it, lost the sence of his leg: but after a while their feeling returned again: where∣upon calling their Cook, they bade him to take and dresse it, who laying both his hands thereon, made grievous moan that he felt not his hands: but when its dead it produceth no such effect, but is good meat. Pur. Pil. p. 1568. 23. About Jamica in the West-Indies, is a Fish called a Manati which is of a strange shape, and nature: It brings forth her young ones alive, and nourisheth them with Milk from her teats, feeding upon grass in the fields, but lives for the most part in the water: the hinder-parts of it are like unto a Cow, and it eats like veal. Idem. v. 3. p. 930. 24. In Brasile are Oxe-fishes, which are very good meat: For head, hair, skin, cheeks, and tongue, they are like Oxen: their eyes small with lids to open and shut; which no other fish hath: It breatheth, and therefore cannot be long under water: Instead of fore-feet, it hath two arms of a cubit long, with two round hands, and on them five fin∣gers close together, with nails like a mans; under these arms the female hath paps wherewith she nourisheth her young, she brings forth but one at once. It hath no fins but the tail, which is also round and close: their bones are all maffie, and white like Ivory: of this Fish they make great store of sweet Oil: they feed most upon the land. Idem. v. 4. p. 1313.
25. In Sir Fran. Drakes voyage about the world, when they came to the Island of Celebes, which is wholly overgrown with wood: amongst the Trees night by night, they saw infinite swarms of fiery worms flying in the air, their bodies no bigger than of our English Flyes, which made such a shew, and gave such a light, as if every twig or tree had been a burning candle. In which place also were great store of Bats, as big as large Hens. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 56. 26. In Captain Saris his voyage to Bantam, about mid-night, they fell into the strangest, and fearfullest water that ever any of them had seen, the water giving such a glaring light about the ship, that they they could discern letters in a book thereby, whereas a little before it was so dark, that they could discern nothing. This made them fear that it had been the breach of sunken ground: But finding that they had failed half an hour in it, and saw no alteration, they perceived at length, that it was a multitude of Cuttle-fish that made this fear∣ful shew. Pur. Pil. p. 352. CHAP. V. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Fowls, and Birds. 1. IN one of the Scottish Islands there is a rare kind of Fowl un∣known to other Countrys, called Colca, little lesse than a Goose: They come thither every year in the spring, hatch, and nourish their young ones: About which time they cast all their feathers, and become stark naked all their bodies over, and then they get them∣selves to the Sea, and are no more seen till the next spring: Their feathers have no quill, as other feathers have, but are all like unto Down, wherein is no hardnesse. Descr. of Scot. 2. In the North Seas of Scotland are great loggs of Timber found, in which are ingendred after a marvellous manner, a sort of Geese, called Claik-geese: and they do hang by the beak till they are grown to perfection, and then they receive life and fall off: they are many times found, & kept in admiration for their rare manner of Generati∣on: They are very fat, and delicious to be eaten. Idem. Some question the truth hereof. 3. Storks are so careful of their parents? that when they grow old, and so are unable to help themselves, the young ones feed them: and when in passing the Sea their wings fail them, the young ones will take them on their backs, and carry them over. And this is re∣markable about them. 4. The Town of Delph in the Low-Countries is so seated for the breeding, and feeding of those Birds, that it is hard to see an house wherein they do not build. In this Town upon the third of May, Anno Christi 1536. a great fire happened when the young Storks were grown pretty big: the old ones perceiving the fire to approach to their Nests,
attempted to carry away their young ones, but could not, they were so weighty, which they perceiving, never ceased with their spread wings to cover them, till they all perished in the flames together. Belg. Common Wealth. p. 63. 5. In America there are certain small Birds called Viemalim, with small and long bills, that live upon the dew, and of the juice of Flow∣ers, and roses, like Bees: their feathers are of very curious colours: they dye, or sleep every year in October, sitting upon the bough of a Tree in a warm place, and in Aprill following, when the Flowers are sprung, they awake again. I have one of them. 6. In the Arabian Deserts there are great store of Ostriches, that go in flocks, and often affright passengers that are strangers, with their fear∣ful schreches, appearing a farr off like a Troop of horsmen. Their bodies are too heavy to be born up by their wings, which, though uselesse for flight, yet serve them to run with greater speed, so that a swift Horse can scarce overtake them: whatsoever they finde, be it stones or iron, they greedily swallow it down, and concoct it: when they have laid their eggs, (which are as big as a Culverin Bullet) they forget where they left them, and so return no more to them: but they are hatched by the heat of the Sun in the warm sands: hence those expressions, Lam. 4. 3. The Daughter of my people is become cruel, like the Ostriches in the wildernesse: whereupon she is made the Embleme of folly, Job 39. 14. &c. She leaveth her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust, and forgets that the foot may crush them, &c. 7. In Brasile there is a little bird, which they call The risen, or Awa∣ken Bird, because it sleeps six months, and awakes the other six. It hath a Cap on its head of no one colour, but on what side soever you look, it sheweth Red, Green, Black, and other colours, all very fine, and shining: the Breast also shews great variety of colours, especially Yellow, more fine then Gold; the Body is Grey, and it hath a very long small Bill, and yet the tongue is twice as long as the Bill: it flyes very swiftly, and makes a humming like a Bee. It always feeds flying. Pur. Pil. 8. In Socotera there are Bats, whose bodies are almost as big as a Co∣nies, their Heads are like Foxes with an hairy Furr upon them: In other things they are like our Bats. One of them being killed by some English, his wings when they were extended, were an ell in length. their Cry is shril and loud. Idem. 9. In Italy are the Flies Cantharides, which by day are of a Green shining colour, but in the night they shine in the Air, like flying Glow-Worms, with Fire in their Tailes. Raimunds Mercu. Ital. 10. In China there is a Fowl of a prodigious shape, and bignesse: It is three foot high: the body being exceeding great, more than a man can fathom: their feathers are all white like a Swans, their feet broad like Fowls that swim: their neck half a fathom long, and their beak half an ell, the upper part of it being crooked. From the nether part of the beak there hangs a very great and capable bag of a yellow gol∣den colour, resembling Parchment. With these Fowls the Natives
use to fish, as we do in England with Cormorants. They will catch fish with great dexterity, and when they have filled their great bag, which will hold divers fishes of two foot long a peece, they will bring them to their Masters. Pur. Pil. v. 2. 1643. 11. In the African Desarts is a certain Fowle called a Nesir, some call it a Vultur. Its bigger than a Crane. In flying it mounts very high, yet at the sight of a dead carkass, it descends immediatly. She lives long, and in extream old age looseth her feathers, and then return∣ing to her nest, is there fed by the young ones of the same kind. Idem. 12. Near unto the Streights of Magellane, there is an Island called Penguin Island, wherein are abundance of Fowls called Penguins that go upright, their wings, in stead of feathers, are only covered with down, which hang down like sleeves faced with white. They flye not, but walk in paths of their own making, and keep their divisi∣ons and quarters orderly. They are a strange Fowle, or rather, a miscellaneous creature, of Beast, Bird, and Fish: but most of Bird. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 536. 13. In the Isle of Man, there is a sort of Sea-Fowles called Puffins, they are of a very unctious constitution, and breed in Cony-holes (the Conies leaving their burrows for that time) they are never seen with their young, but very early in the morning, and late in the e∣vening: they nourish their young (as it is conceived) with Oil drawn from their own bodyes, and dropped into their mouths; for that be∣ing opened, there is found in their crops no other sustenance, save a single Sorrel-leaf, which the old give their young (as is conjectu∣red) for digestions-sake; the flesh of them, whilst raw, not savoury, but powdered, it may be ranked with Anchoves, and Caviare; pro∣fitable they are in their feathers, and oil, which they use much a∣bout their Wooll. 14. the Isle of Mauritius is a Fowle called a Dodo; Her body is round, and extream fat, which makes her pace slow: few of them weigh less than fifty pound: Her Wings are so small, that they can∣not lift her above the ground: Her head is variously dressed, the one half-hooded with downy black feathers; the other wholly naked, of a whitish colour, as if a transparent Lawn had covered it: her bill is very hooked, bending downwards, the breathing place being in the midst of it, from which part to the end, the colour is light green, mixt with a pale yellow: Her eyes are round, and small, and bright as Diamonds: her cloathing is of the finest down; her train is of three or four short-feathers, her legs thick, and black; her tallons sharp; her stomach so hot, that she digests stones, or Iron, as doth the Ostrich. 15. In Lincolnshire there is a Bird called a Dotterel, so named of his doltish foolishness: Its a bird of an apish kinde, ready to imitate what it sees done: they are caught by Candle-light by the Fowlers ge∣stures; for if he put forth and arm, they stretch forth a wing: if he sets forward a leg, or hold up his head, they likewise do the same:
In brief, whatsoever the Fowler doth, the same also doth this fool∣ish bird, until it be caught within the net. Camb. Brit. p. 543. 16. There is an Island called Bas, bordering upon Lathaien in Scot∣land, unto which there resort a multitude of Sea fowls, especially of So∣land Geese, which bring with them such abundance of Fish, that, as it is reported, an hundred souldiers that lay there in Garrison for defence of the place, fed upon no other meat, but the fish that was thus brought to them: And the said Fowls also bring such a num∣ber of sticks, and twigs, wherewith to build their nests, that thereby the inhabitants are also abundantly provided of fewel for the fire: and such a mighty gain is made of their feathers, and oil, that no man would scarcely beleeve it, but he that hath seen it. Camb. Brit. of Scotland. p. 12, 13. 17. In Magallanes voyage about the world, the King of the Island of Bacchian sent the King of Spain two dead birds of a strange shape: they were as big as Turtle-Doves, with little heads, and long bills, long small legs, and no wings, but in-stead thereof certain long fea∣thers of divers colours, and tails like Turtle-Doves: all their other feathers were of a tawny colour; they flye not, but when the wind blows; and they call them Birds of God. Pur. Pil v. 1. p. 44. 18. In Sofala in the East-Indies is a kinde of Bird called Minga, green, and yellow, very fair, about the bigness of a Pigeon, which never treads on the ground, their feet being so short, that they can scarce be discerned: they settle on trees, of the fruit whereof they live: when they drink, they flye on the tops of the water; and if they fall on the ground, they cannot rise again; their flesh is fat and savoury. Idem. p. 1546. CHAP. VI. The wonderful works of God in the Creatures. Of strange Beasts, and Serpents. 1. WHilst Sir Thomas Row, our English Ambassador, was at the great Moguls Court, he saw many stately Elephants brought before the Emperour: some of which being Lord-Elephants (as they called them) had their chain bells, and furniture of gold, and silver, each of them having eight, or ten other Elephants waiting on him: they were some twelve companies in all, and as they passed by, they all bowed down before the King very handsomely. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 550. 2. Though these Elephants be the largest of all beasts, yet are they very tractable, unless at such times when they are mad through lust: some of them are thirteen, and some fifteen foot high; their colour is usually black, their skins thick, and smooth without hair; they de∣light much to bathe themselves in water, and are excellent swim∣mers,
their pace is about three miles an hour; of all Beasts they are most sure of foot, so that they never stumble, or fall to indanger their rider: they lye down, and rise again at pleasure, as other beasts do; they are most docible creatures, doing almost whatsoever their Keeper commands them. If he bid one of them affright a man, he will make towards him, as he would tread him in pieces; and yet when he comes at him, do him no hurt: If he bid him abuse, or disgrace a man, he will take dirt, or kennel-water in his trunk, and dash it in his face, &c. Their trunks are long, grissely snouts hang∣ing down betwixt their teeth, which (as a hand) they make use of upon all occasions. Some Elephants the great Mogul keeps for execu∣tion of malefactors; who being brought to suffer death by that migh∣ty beast, if the Keeper bid him dispatch the offender presently, he will immediately with his foot pash him in peeces: If he bid him tor∣ture him slowly, he will break his joynts by degrees one after ano∣ther, as men are broken upon the wheel. 2. An English Merchant of good credit being at Adsmeer (a City where the great Mogul then was) saw a great Elephant daily brought through the Market-place, where an Hearb-woman used to give him an handful of hearbs as he passed by. This Elephant afterwards be∣ing mad; brake his chains, and took his way through the Market∣place; the people being affrighted, hasted to secure themselves, a∣mongst whom was this Hearb-woman, who through fear, and haste, forgat her little childe. The Elephant comming to the place where she usually sate, stopt, and seeing a child lye about her hearbs, took it up gently with his Trunk, and without harm, laid it upon a stall hard by, and then proceeded in his furious course. Idem. p. 1472. The Males Testicles lie about his forehead: the Females teates are betwixt her fore-legs; they carry their young two years in their wombs: conceive but once in seven years: they are thirty years be∣fore they come to their full growth, and fulfil the accustomed age of a man before they die. 3. As Pyrrus King of Epyrus was assaulting the City of Argos, one of his Elephants called Nicon. i. e. Conquering, being entred the City, perceiving that his governour was stricken down to the ground from his back with terrible blows; ran upon them that came back upon him, overthrowing friends, and foes, one in anothers neck, till at length, having found the body of his slain Master, he lift him up from the ground with his trunk, and carrying him upon his two tush∣es; returned back with great fury, treading all under feet whom he found in his way. Plut. In vita Pyrri. 4. The Lion hath the Jackall for his Usher, which is a litle black, shag-haired beast, of the bigness of a Spaniel, which when the even∣ing comes, hunts for his prey, and comming on the foot, follows the scent with open crye: to which the Lion as chief Hunt gives dili∣gent ear, following for his advantage: If the Jackall set up his chase before the Lion comes in, he howles out mainly, and then the Lion seizeth on it, making a grumbling noise, whilst his servant stands
by barking, and when the Lyon hath done, the Jackal feeds on the relicks Idem. p. 1575. See more afterwards, Example seventeen. 5. The Panther hath a very sweet smell, so that other Beasts are much taken therewith, but they are terrified with the ugly deformi∣ty of his face; and therefore as he goes he hides that part between his legs, and will not look towards them till he hath gotten them within his compasse, which when he hath done, he devours them without mercy: so deals the Devil with wicked men, strewing their way to Hell with variety of worldly delights, and profits (the thorns of affliction must not touch their flesh, nor Hells terrors come within their thoughts) till he hath made them past feeling, then he devours them. Plin. nat. Hist. L. 8 C. 17. 6. The Rhynoceros is so called because of the horn in his nose: he is a large beast, as big as our fairest Oxe in England: His skin lyeth plated, and as it were in wrinkles upon his back: Their Horn, Teeth, Claws, yea flesh, and blood, are good against poyson, which, as is conceived, proceeds from the Herbs which they feed on in Bengala, where are most store of them. 7. The Camelopardalus is the highest of Beasts, so that a man on horseback may ride upright under his belly, his neck is long, so that he usually feedeth upon the leaves of trees: his colour is white and speckled, his hinder legs are shorter than his former, so that he cannot graze but with difficulty. P. Pil. p. 1381. He is also called a Jaraff. 8. In India is a certain beast called a Buffelo, which is very large, hath a thick and smooth skin, but without hair: She gives good milk, and her flesh is like Beefe. Idem. p. 1469. 9. In the same Country also are certain wild Goats, whose Horns are good against poison, Pur. Pil. p. 472. 10. In the Country of Indostan in the East-Indies, are large white Apes, as big as our Grey-hounds, which will eat young Birds, where∣upon Nature hath taught their Dams this subtilty: they build their Nests on the utmost bowes at the end of slender twigs: where they hang them like Purse-nets to which the Apes cannot possibly come: yet many times with their Hands they will shake those boughs till the nests break, and fall down, and then they will devour them. Pur. Pilgrimage p. 1475. 11. The Camelion is of the shape, and bigness of a Lizzard, it is a deformed lean, and crooked creature, having a long and slender tail, like a Mouse, and is of a slow pace. It lives only upon Flys. It chan∣geth colours according to the variety of places where it comes. It is a great Enemy to venemous Serpents; for when it sees any lie sleeping under a Tree, it gets upon a bough just over the Serpents head, & void∣eth out of its mouth, as it were a long thred of spittle, with around drop hanging at the end, which falling on the Serpents head, imme∣diately kills him P. Pil. p. 848. 12. There was lately found in Catalunia, in the Mountains of Cerda∣nia, a certain Monster, that had humane shape as far as the waste, and downwards it was like a Satyre: He had many heads, Arms, & Eyes,
and a mouth of extraordinary bigness, wherewith he made a noise like a Bull: His picture was sent by Don John of Austria (now Go∣vernour of the Low Countrys) to the King of Spain, and afterwards many Coppies thereof were drawn, and sent abroad by Ambassadors, and other persons to several Princes, and States in Europe. Hist. of this Iron age. 13. In Brasile is a certain Beast called a Tamandua or Ant-Bear of the bignesse of a great dog, more round than long, and the tail above twice so long as the body, and so full of hair that under it he shelters himself from rain, heat, cold, and wind. His head is small; and hath a thin snout: his mouth round, with a tongue three quarters of a yard long: he is diligent in seeking Ant-hills, which he tear∣eth with his claws, and then thrusts in his long tongue, upon which the Ants run, and when it is full, he licks them in; and this is all his food. Pur. Pil. v. 4. p. 1301. 14. The Armadillo is of the bignesse of a Pig, and of a white co∣lour: It hath a long snout, and the body is covered with shels like Plates, wherewith they are armed: for they are so hard that no ar∣row will pierce them except in the Flanks, where they are softer: their flesh is good to eat, they dig holes in the ground with their snouts, in which they lye. Idem. 15. The Porcupine hath bristles, or quils, white and black, of a span and an half long, which they can cast: and they have this qua∣lity, that where one of these bristles enters into the flesh, if it be not pulled out presently, it will work it selfe quite through; they are of a good flesh, and taste. 16. The Civet-Cat exceeds the Castor for bignesse, her head is lit∣tle, her eyes clear; hath a long muzzle; sharp, and offensive teeth. Her hair is parti-coloured, harsh, and bristley, yellow above, and whiter downwards; The pocket wherein the Civet is bred is neer the geni∣tory, which is taken forth with a spoon or stick; But when she is wild, she casts it forth of her own accord, and by the scent it is found by the passengers. 17. The Lyons in Affrick, are more fierce than in colder Coun∣tryes; here was one of their skins brought into England, which from the snout to the top of the tail, contained one and twenty foot in length. They engender backwards as do Camels, Elephants, Rhinoce∣roses, Ounces, and Tygers. They spare such men as prostrate them∣selves to them, and prey rather upon men than women, and not at all on Infants, except compelled by hunger. His tail is his Scepter, by which he expresses his passion. He shrinks not at danger, except some covert of woods hides him from witnesses, and then he will take the benefit of flight, which otherwise he seems to disdain. 18. The Hyaena hath no joints in her neck, and therefore stirs not her neck, but with the bending of her whole body. She hath one continued tooth through her whole mouth. 19. In Africk are many wild Asses, whereof one male hath many females, and he is so jealous, that he bites off the stones of the young
males, if the suspicious female prevent him not by bringing forth in a close place. 20. The Dabuh is a simple Creature, like to a Wolf, but that his legs and feet are like to a mans, they which know his haunt, with a Taber, & singing, will bring him out of his den, and captivate his ears with their Musick, whilst another captivateth his legs with a rope. 21. The Zebra is a very beautiful Creature, resembling a curiously shaped horse, but not all out so swift, all over-laid with party colou∣red laces, and guards, from head to tail. 22. In Sofala there is a certain creature called Inhazaras as big as a hog, & somewhat like, with thin black hair, having on his hinder feet five fingers like unto a mans, and four on his forefeet; they live meer∣ly upon Ants, by thursting their tongues which are two spans and an half long into an Ant-hil, whereon the Ants running, they pull them into their mouths, and so eat them: some call them Ant-Bears. Pur. Pil. 23. There is in Affrica a certain monster called Pongo, in the whole proportion like unto a man, but that it is bigger. It hath a mans face, hollow eyes, long hair upon the brows, his face and ears being without hair: but his body is all hairy of a dunish colour, &c. He differs from a man only in his legs, which have no calves: he goes alwayes upright upon his legs, and he carries his hands clasped in the nape of his neck, when he walkes upon the ground: They use to sleep in trees, and live upon fruits and nuts. Idem. v. 2. p. 982. 24. In Congo there is a strange Creature as big as a Ram, that hath wings like a Dragon, a long tail, and great chaps, with diverse rows of teeth: They feed upon raw flesh. Idem. p. 1003. 25. In Affrica there is a beast called a Dabuk, in bignesse and shape, resembling a Wolf, saving that his legs & feet are like a mans. He u∣seth to take dead men out of their graves, and eat them. Idem. p. 847. 26. In the Kingom of Mexico there are Kine, with bunches on their backs, about the bigness of our bulls, having little horns, and more hair on their foreparts than behind, which is like wooll: On the back∣bone they have maines like horses, and long hair from their Knees downward, with much long hair on their throats: They are meat, drink, shooes, houses, fire, vessels, and their masters whole substance. 27. Other Creatures there are as big as horses, which the Spaniards for their fine Wooll call Sheep: One of their horns usually weigheth fifty pounds. P. Pil. v. 4. p. 1561. 28. In Virginia is a beast called a Possown, the female whereof hath a bag under her belly, from whence she letteth forth her young ones, and taketh them in again at her pleasure. Idem. p. 1772. 29. In Socotera are Sheep, whose tails weigh twenty eight pounds a peece, which therefore are usually cut off from the Ewes, least they should hinder their breeding. 30. In the Great Mogols Countrey there are Asses with horns, where∣of they make diverse sorts of drinking cups, of excellent vertue. Some judging them to be the right Unicorns horn. Idem. p. 436. 31. Most certain it is, that the Irish Cows will not give down their
Milk, unless their own Calves be set by their sides, either alive, or else the skin of the dead Calf must be stuffed with straw, and set by them. Camb. Brit. of Ireland. p. 1145. 32. In the Island of Orknay the Ewes are of such fecundity, that they bring forth constantly two, and many times three Lambs a peece; There be neither ravenous nor venemous creatures there; nor if trans∣ported thither, will they live in that Island. Description of Scotl. 33. There are three sorts of Camels: the first sort are gross, and tall of stature: these will usually carry one thousand pound weight a peece; when they are to be loaden, being beaten on the knees, and neck with a cudgel, they will kneel down; and when they feel their load sufficient, they will rise up again of themselves. The second sort of them have two bunches on their backs, and are fit either for burthen, or to ride on. The third sort are of a slender, and low sta∣ture, called Dromedaries, unfit for burthens, but they excel in swift∣ness, so that in the space of one day they will travel one hundred miles, and will so continue for eight, or ten dayes together, with very little provender; and they will abstain from drink, eight, ten, and sometimes fifteen dayes together, without any inconvenience, as they travel through the Deserts. 34. Musk is taken from a little reddish beast, that they beat with many blows in one place, that so the blood may gather into it: and when the skin is by this means swoln, and full of blood, they bind it strait, that the blood may not issue forth, and being put into one, or more bladders, its dryed on the beasts back, till the bladder fall off of it self; and so that blood after a month becomes excellent musk. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1500. 35. Amongst the Blackmoors, there is a strange beast called a Car∣buncle, which is seen only by night, having a stone in his forehead that shineth incredibly, and giving him light whereby to feed: But when he hears the lest noise, he presently lets fall over it a skin, which he hath as a natural covering, least his splendor should betray him. Pur. Pil. v. 1. p. 416. 36. In Abassia are Kine with horns like unto Harts-horns: O∣thers there be that have but one Horn in the midst of their fore∣heads of about a span and an half long, turning upward. Pur. Pil. v. 2. p. 1495. 37. There is in the Country of Mexico a kinde of sheep, which all things considered, is a beast of the greatest profit, and least charge that is: For from them they draw meat and cloathing: They use them also to carry all their burthens, having need neither of shooes nor saddles, nor yet of Oats, so that they serve their Masters for nought, feeding only on Grass which they find in the fields: There are two kinds of these creatures, the one bearing Wooll, the other are bare, which are the better for burthen; they are big∣ger than great Sheep, and less than Calves; they have long necks like a Cammel. They are of divers colours, some white, some black, and others grey, or spotted; Their flesh is good meat, but
that of their Lambs is best: Of their Wooll the Indians make cloath some courser, other finer like half-silk; they also make Carpets, and Coverings, and other exquisite works of it, which last long, and have a very good gloss; they die it into sundry colours: upon these the Spaniards carry their bars of silver; one of these sheep carrying about an hundred and fifty pound weight. 37. In the stomach, or belly of this beast, is found the Bezar's stone; sometimes one alone, sometimes two, three, or foure: They are different in form, greatness, and colour; some like Filbeards, o∣thers like Walnuts: Some as big as Pigeons Eggs, some as big as Hens Eggs: In form some are round, some oval, and of other formes. For their colour, some are black, some white, some grey, dark green, and some as if they had been gilded: they are all made of divers filmes, and skins one upon another. P. Pil. v. 3. p. 969. 38. There is in Italy the Tarantula (a kind of Serpent) the venome whereof hath such an operation, that whosoever is stung with it, fal∣leth a dancing, and capering, and nothing can allay it but Musick. Raimunds Mercu. Ital. Examples of Dogs love to their Masters. 39. When the Athenians quit their City, and betook themselves to Sea, upon Xerxes his invasion of Greece, Xantippus the Father of Pericles had a Dog, which for sorrow that his Master had left him behind him, cast himself after him into the Sea, swimming still by the Gallies side wherein his Master was, till he came to the Isle of Salamina, where so soon as the poor Cur landed, his breath failed him, and he dyed presently. Plut In vita Themist. CHAP. VII. Admirable Works done by the art of man. 1. PRotogenes the Rhodian, an exquisite Painter, bestowed seven years in drawing a most curious picture, which when Apelles beheld, he stood amazed at the excellency of the workman∣ship, so that for a while he could not speak, but afterwards he said, This is an admirable work, and of huge labour, yet he wants an Ora∣tor to extol his workmanship to the skies. When King Demetrius besiedged the City of Rhodes, he took the suburbs, and in them this picture, whereupon the Citizens sent to him, requesting him not to deface it; to whom he answered, That he would sooner burn the Picture of his Fa∣ther, than hurt a peece of such admirable Workmanship. Diod. Sic. Plut.
Glasses malleable. 2. Anno Christi 1610. amongst other rare Presents sent from the Sophy of Persia, to the King of Spain, were six drinking glasses so ex∣quisitely tempered, that they could not be broken. Turk. Hist. p. 1273. Stone-henge Described. 3. About six miles from Salisbury, upon the plains, is to be seen a huge, and monstrous peece of work, such as Cicero calleth insanam substructionem. For within the circuit of a ditch, there are erected in the manner of a Crown, in three ranks, or courses, one whithin ano∣ther, certain mighty, and unwrought stones, whereof some are twen∣ty eight foot high, and seven broad; upon the heads of which, others like overtwhart peeces do bear, and rest cross-wise with tenents, and mortesses, so as the whole frame seemeth to hang, whereof its com∣monly called Stone-henge. Camb. Brit. 4. In Westmerland hard by Shape, there be hung stones in form of Pyramids, some of them nine foot high, and fourteen foot thick, rang∣ed directly as it were in a row for a mile in length, with equal distance almost between them. Camb. Brit. p. 762. Mausolus his Tombe Described. 5. Artimesia Queen of Halicarnassus, when her husband Mausolus dyed, built him a stately Tomb, accounted for the rare workmanship, and costly magnificence one of the worlds Wonders. It was five and twenty cubits high, and supported with six and thirty curious pillars, of which Martial thus writeth: Are nam vacuo pendentia Mausolaea, laudibus immodicis Cares ad astra ferunt. The Mausolaea hanging in the skie, the men of Caria's praises Deifie. 6. When Sir Thomas Row was Ambassador there, the Great Mogul built a stately Monument for his Father: it was about twenty years in building, and three thousand men working daily at it: it was built square, three quarters of a mile in compass: it was made with seven heights one above another, and each narrower than other, till you come to the top where the herse is: At the outward Gate is a most stately Palace, and Gardens walled about, at least three miles in com∣pass; all built at a vast charge. Pur. Pil. p. 226. 7. Mr. Herbert, who saw it afterwards, thus describes it. It consists (saith he) of four large squares, each about three hundred paces
long, the matter is Freestone polished, having at each Angle, a small Tower of party coloured Marble. Ten Foot higher is another Tarras, on each side beautified with three such Towers. The third Gallery hath two Towers, on each side. The fourth, one. The fifth, half, and a small square Gallery mounting to a Royal Pyree, within which is the Mummy of Ecbar; bedded in a Coffin of pure Gold. The whole structure is built in the midst of a spacious and curious Garden, surrounded with a Wall of red stone, and planted with beautiful and odoriferous flowers. Porsennah's Tomb Described. Porsenna King of Hetruria, not far from the City of Clusium, built for himself a Monument of square stone, each side of it was three hundred Foot broad, and fifty Foot High; within which square Basis, there was an inextricable Labyrinth, into which whosoever adventured without a Clue, could find no passage out. Upon this square he erected five Pyramids, four in the corners, and one in the midst; in the bottom they were seven∣ty five Foot broad, and each of them one hundred and fifty Foot high, on the top was one Brass Circle, and covering for them all, from which there hung Bells fastened with Chains, which being moved with the Winde, gave a sound a far off: Upon this brazen Circle stood other four Pyramids, each of them one hundred Foot high; and upon them (being covered with a∣nother plain) were again erected five other Pyramids, the height whereof my Author was ashamed to name: So foolishly did he waste the wealth of his Kingdom, that in the end the commendation of the Artificer should be the greatest. Pliny out of Varro; and Greaves out of him. 8. In the Great Moguls Country, from Agra to Lahar (which are the two chief Cities in this Empire) is about four hundred English miles: The Country in all that distant, being even without Mountains or Hills: And the High-way betwixt them, is planted on both sides with Trees, like unto a delicate walk. P. Pil. v. 2. p. 1468. The Trees are Mulberry-trees. And in all this way, ever and anon, are Inns built by several Kings, and great men, for the Entertainment of stran∣gers: In which you may have a Chamber for your self, room for your Hourse, and Horse-meat, but little for your Servant: When a man hath ta∣ken up his Lodging, no other may dispossess him. In the Morning about break a day, all make ready to depart, at which time the Gates are opened, and none suffered to depart sooner for fear of Theeves. P. 520. The first Invention of Printing. 9. Laurence Jans, a rich Citizen of Harlem in the Low-Countries, walking forth one day into the neighbouring Woods for recreation, began to cut in pieces of wood the Letters of his Name, Printing them on the back of his hand; which pleasing him well, he cut three or four Lines which he beat with Ink, and printed them upon Paper, wherewith he much joyed, and determined to find out another kind of Ink more fastening, and hold∣ing, and so with his Kinsman Thomas Peterse, found out another way to
print whole Sheets, but of one side only, which are yet to be seen in the said Town: Afterwards he changed his Letters of Wood into Lead, and after that into Tin, and so by degrees this famous Art of Printing grew to perfection. Belg. Common-Wealth. p. 57. 11. Some say that John Guttenburg of Strasburg, was the first Inventer of it, Anno Christi 1440. In which City he first practised it, and removing from thence to Mentz, there perfected it. They say that Tullies Offices was the first Book that ever was printed. P. Ramus Schol. Math. L. 2. 12. It doth with wonderful celerity convey Learning from one Coun∣try, and Age, to another. Imprimit ille die, quantum vix scribitur anno. The most famous Printers were. 13. Aldus Manutius, and after him Paulus his Son in Venice. In France, Crispinus, Henry Stevens, Father to Charles; and Charles to Robert; Ro∣bert to Henry, and Henry to Paul, all Printers. 14. Christopher Plantine of Antwerp, was a most Famous and Learned Printer. 15. Frobenius, that was Erasmus his Faithful Printer. 16. Daniel Bombergus, an excellent Printer of the Hebrew Bible, and many other Hebrew Books, &c. The first Invention of Guns. 17. A German Fryer of the Order of St. Francis, called Bertholdus Swart, being very studious of Chymistry, as he was one Evening (for the finding out of some Experiment) very busie in tempering Brimstone, Sul∣phureous powder of dryed Earth, and certain other Ingredients in a Mor∣ter, which he covered with a stone: When it grew dark, he took his Tin∣der-box to light him a Candle, a Sparke whereof by chance flying into the Mortar, caught hold of the Brimstone, and Salt-Peter, and firing, with a sud∣den flash blew up the stone. The cunning Chymist guesng what it was which wrought this effect, never left till he found out the certainty, and then taking an Iron Pipe, he crammed it full of the same Ingredient, together with some stones, and so putting fire to it, he saw that with great fury, and noise it discharged it self: Soon after which, he communicated this his In∣vention to the Venetians, who, having been often vanquished by the Geno∣wayes, did by the help of these Bombards, or Guns, give them a notable dis∣comfiture. Anno Christi 1380. Bucholtz. 18. At Middleburg in Zealand, in the Steeple of the Abby-Church, there is a Bell of eighteen thousand weight to strike the Hours on, and twenty four small ones which serve for the Chymes. Belg. Common-wealth. p. 162. A Description of the situation of Utrecht in the Low-Countries. Utrecht in the Low-Countries, is so situated, that one may go to what
Town he please of fifty, that lye round about it in one day. And in a Sum∣mers day, if one go early from Utrecht, he may dine at any one of twenty six Towns, where he pleaseth, and return to his own House to Supper. Idem. p. 200. Trajan built a Bridge over the River Ister, or Danow, containing twenty Arches, each Arch being one hundred and fifty Foot high, sixty thick, and one hundred and seventy Foot distant one from another: So that the whole length of it was four thousand seven hundred and seventy Foot, which was almost a mile long. The River was very deep, and swift, and the bottom not firm ground, neither could the stream be diverted any other way; all which made the Work far more difficult, and admirable. Ancus Martius, the fourth King of Rome, built a Wooden Bridge over the River Tybur, yet without Nails, or Pins, so that in times of War it might be taken down: Afterwards Aemilius the Consul built it of stone: And last∣ly Antoninus Pius the Emperour built it of Marble. FINIS. Soli Deo Gloria.
