C5385 12039130 52932
KNEAZE ALEXEY MICHAILO∣VITZ Great Duke of Moscovie Aged XXXIV Yeares. 1664. Cross Sculpsit
THE Present State OF RUSSIA, In a Letter to a Friend AT LONDON; Written by an Eminent Person residing at the Great Czars Court at Mosco for the space of nine years. Illustrated with many Copper Plates. O utinam Ars mores animum{que} depingere posset, Pulchrior in terris nulla Tabella foret! LONDON, Printed by John Winter, for Dorman Newman at the Kings Arms in the Poultry, A. D. 1671.
To the Reader. READER, THe Author of this subsequent Rela∣tion was a Gentle∣man of large Parts, and had an esteem proportion∣ably amongst those to whom he was willing to im∣part his Sentiments of things, and those were ma∣ny, not only in his native Country England, but in France, Italy, Holland, Ger∣many, Flanders, Russia, &c.
In which last place he continued nine years in an honourable imploy under that Great Emperour. His Genius led him to be curious and inquisitive, mostly, after those things that were difficult to be at∣tained to; and perhaps he found the means of gather∣ing these few Papers toge∣ther, as hard and uneasie as any thing that he endea∣voured after in all his Tra∣vels. He had the happiness to be a Favourite to the Great
Tzar and his Patriarch (things not usually compe∣tible) and (it may be) has made a farther discovery of he Russ affairs then any Stranger has been capacita∣ed to do before or since. These few Sheets he col∣cted when he was in Mos∣, and designed (since his ming from thence) to me∣odize, and Print them der the Title of The Life Ivan Vasiloidg (part of hich I saw:) But an acute unkinde disease put a riod to that and his life:
What you here finde was given to one of his Atten∣dants; who was loath the world should lose the read∣ing of so much truth con∣cerning that Nation (al∣though it were unfinished, and altogether rough) I must suppose you will finde many faults, some of the Correctors, and some of the Printers; and if there be any of the Authors, I hope your candor will pardon his as wel as theirs. Farewell. N. D.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. OF the Russians nature in general. Their contempt of Learning. Their Clergy. Liturgy. Churches. Ceremo∣nies in Devotion. Hours of Prayer. The Priests names. Habits. Wives. Bap∣tism. The unnatural death of Apo∣states, CHAP. II. Of their Marriages. The Clerks ce∣remony towards the Bride. Her manner of conduct. The Epithalimum sung by Boys and Girls. The old Womans advice
to the Bridefolk. The Bridal Room. The Bridegrooms boots pull'd off by the Bride. Their severe Discipline to their Wives censured. No process in Law a∣gainst it. The Parents contract with their Daughters Husbands. Witchcraft used at Weddings, Abstinence from Ve∣nery. The penalty for marrying a second or third Wife. The Emperours second Son. The manner of the Emperours electing a Wife. His disappointment how punished. His Sallary to the wronged Virgin. The Queens Relations. Of the Czaroidg not seen publickly till Fifteen. Of the Russian Children. When and how weaned. Of their Fasts and Pennan∣ces. CHAP. III, Of the Patriarch in general. He is su∣preme head of the Church. Of his Pal∣lace. The Ceremony of Palm-Sunday. His Mitre. Of the Russian Bells. The Patriarchs Present to the Emperour. His
Action on Good Friday. His charge to the People. The Story of a Countrey Fel∣low. Their salutation on Easter Day. The Patriarchs Presents to the Czars Servants and Nobility. Their entertainments. The Ladies Complements one to another. CHAP. IV. Of their Burials. The women are obliged to mourn. Their Dirges. The Ceremony used to the dead. Those that are kill'd or frozen to death, buried at Mid-sommer. Of their Carnaval and exces∣sive drinking. The sad consequence there∣of. CHAP. V. Of their Imagery. Pictures exchanged in the God-market, saved in Conflagrati∣ons; they highly prize them, bestow Je∣wels on them. The punishment of a Wo∣man who stole her pearl from an Image,
though in case of necessity. Heresie punished. Of their Friars and Nuns. CHAP. VI. The Tragical Relation of a Mon∣key. His several tricks. How he threw down the Images, and scar'd the Priest. His apprehension, and final condemnation. The Authors Reflections. CHAP. VII. Of their Musick. A story of one of their Embassadors. Beggars in Russia beg in Tunes. Their Drums, Trumpets and Hunting-horns.
CHAP. VIII. Of their nuptial proceedings, soon consummated. They act by Bro∣kers. The mans friends see the Bride naked. How a young fellow was cheated. The punishment of those Women who kill their Hus∣bands. CHAP. IX. A merry story of a great Fish, which the Friars took to be a De∣vil. The contrary being disco∣ver'd, they are asham'd, and make an Entertainment. Another story of a Fish, but more Tragical. What ensued upon it.
CHAP. X. Of the Chircasses. Their Religion, Complexion, Drinking, Dancing, Govern∣ment, Souldiery and Witchcraft. CHAP. XI. Of the Russian Government. Laws. Manner of writing. Their Clerks how called. Their Characters whence borrow'd. Their Petitions. His Imperial Majesties person and character compar'd with his Fathers. The Empire miserably impove∣rished and depopulated by the Tartarian Invasions. CHAP. XII. The Emperours rise. His Ancestors but Dukes of Volodimir. His Pallace how call'd. Of Juan Vasilowidg, and his divers odd humours, his Petition to one of his Diacks. His Conquests. How he
was loved. How he fined Vologda. How he served the women that laughed at him. Of the Vayods mistake. Another Vay∣od how punished for taking a Goose. Juan a great lover of Queen Elizabeth. How he serv'd the French Embassador. How Sir Jerom Boze came off. A Shoomaker presented the Emperour with a Turnep, how rewarded. What the Emperour did with the Turnep. How a poor man en∣tertained him. His associating with Thieves. How he was served by one of them, and how he preferr'd him. CHAP. XIII. Of the present Emperour or great Czar. Czar from whence derived. His Titles and Arms. He marries not out of his own Dominions. His Diet. Lodging. Recreations. Visits. The Czarodges Birth.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Emperours Revenues, great Pri∣viledges, Trading, Provision, Traffick, al∣lowance to his Houshold. Of his Pallace, high Tower. Of his Boyars. Of the Mo∣nasteries and Nunneries. Officers of State. The Czars temperance. Of his entertaining the Nobility. A story of General Leshly. CHAP. XV. Of the City of Mosco. Of the Czars Jewels. Of his Clothes, Of the Queen and her maids of honours attire. Their journeys in Waggons. How they rode formerly. The mode and language of the Russes all one. They differ in their actions from all other Nations. Of their Clock Dyals, and contrariety to other people in several things. And of other Customs they have
CHAP. XVI. Of their Judiciary proceedings. Of mur∣ther how punish'd; the accused must confess the fact. Of their Executioner and cruel Torments. The punishment of Coyners. A Fellow that shot at a Jack∣daw how punish'd. Conspirators banish∣ed into Syberia, &c. Hanging lately used amongst them, and how. CHAP. XVII. Of Syberia and its Inhabitants. Chay and Bour Dian brought from thence, their qualities. Tambul the Metropo∣lis of Syberia. A discourse of Sables, how kill'd. The excessive coldness of this Countrey. How they feed their Cows. Of the River Ob. What Caviare is made of. Of Samogeda, their Dyet. Sledges how drawn. Hunting. Indi∣stinct habit. Of their manners. And o∣other remarkable observations concerning these Northernlings in general.
CHAP. XVIII Of the Southern parts of Syberia. The Wilderness called Step, full of Cherry-trees and fine Flowers. Of Elks. Of the Koorick and Perivoshick. The Coun∣trey of Squirrels. Of a little Bird like a Woodcock, Another like a Hawk. A third as big as a Swan. The story of the Vegi∣table Lamb refuted. CHAP. XI A brief account of Tartary. It's Metro∣polis. To whom the Tartars pay Tribute, The Muscovite formerly tributary to the Crim-Tartar. How far they march in a day. They eat horse-flesh, but no bread nor salt, the reason why. They are very quick-sighted, excellent horse-men. Of the Colmack Tartars. The Crim's describ'd they deride the Russian wor∣ship. The grounds why they do it.
CHAP. XX. What the simpler sort of Russians are their Idolatry and ignorance, what they think of St. Nicholas, their high conceit of good works. They are great Rogues. Some are good among them. The Poles are not so barbarous as the Russes. The Poles characteriz'd, their Laws; their King how stiled, he is very magnificent. King Henry weary of the title. How he made shift to get away out of Po∣land. CHAP. XXI. Of Lues Venerea. Of the Polonian Pli∣ca, a familiar distemper, and very infecti∣ous, yet they highly esteem it. When hair first began to be powdred. The Poles more honourable in keeping Ar∣ticles than the Russes. A comparison of the Polish and Russian Languages. Their salutations are stately. How the Tar∣tars and Chircasses salute. The Chir∣casses Religion.
CHAP. XXII Of the Present Czar his Father. Grave Wolmer how disappointed in Mar∣riage. Czar Michaels death. The story of Boris Juanoidg. How the Czar elects a Wife. Whom Boris preferr'd. His height makes him envied. Eliah ex∣alted. The Russians extol Marriage. Eliah disabled. Who succeeds him. Na∣shokin a great Reformer. Highly com∣mended, His words concerning the French and Danes supporting the Hol∣landers against England. He is a great lover of the English. How he censured a Bill of Mortality, and some other dis∣course which he held. CHAP. XXIII. The Czars description. His answer to a Stranger. How he appears in publick. He never visits any Subject. His Court without noise. He seldom dines publick∣ly. At Easter his Subjects kiss his
hand. How he pays his Strelsies. What he has done to employ the poor. The Czaritza governs the Women. From whence the Emperour's chief Revenues proceed, CHAP. XXIV. The Czar goes every year to a house of pleasure call'd Obrasawsky. Of the curious tents erected there. How cautious the Emperour is of letting the vulgar sort behold his pastimes. This commended for several reasons. None are to petition the Czar in the fields. What hapned to a poor Russian Captain for so doing. The Emperours resentment for his death. Peter Solticove turn'd out of Office, and banished the Court; the cause why. Nashockin put in his place. The Czar in the night time visits his Chancellors desks. He has Spyes in every corner. 'Tis death to reveal any thing spoken in the Court. The Russians answer to inquisitive persons. The Czars chil∣dren how attended; they are bound to keep secrecie.
CHAP. XXV. The story of a Jew turn'd Maho∣metan, he falsly accuses Nashock∣in, and is lash'd for his pains. Jews how crept into the Court. A Discourse of Bogdan Mat∣feidg (the Czars great Favou∣rite) his Pandor and Amours. His Ladies jealousie, how she was made away. The Czar reproves him. He and Nashockin no good friends. Of the Czars Religion, vvherein he is very zealous and constant. He fasts at several times eight months in a year, dis∣poses of all Ecclesiastical Prefer∣ments. His high commendation.
CHAP. XXVI. Trading in Russia very low. Eng∣lish Cloth a drug, why slighted. The Authors Reflection. If Persians trade there, what Eng∣lish are like to suffer. What the Russians are in general. Concer∣ning the Dutch, what the English must do to out-vye them. How much they abuse us to the Empe∣rour. 'Twere convenient for Eng∣land to undeceive the Czar. How things should be represented to Nashockin and Bogdan. The Russians mightily pleased with their peace with Poland.
CHAP. XXVII. Of Caviare, how and where made. The length of the Fish Bellu∣ga. Caviare of two sorts. The Belluga swallows abun∣dance of Pebbles; it is an ex∣cellent meat. Isinglass is made of his Sounds. CHAP. XX Of several sorts of Mushrooms which grow in Russia, their forms and qualities, they are divided by Botanists into two kinds, viz. Lethales and Salutiferae.
A SURVEY Of the present State of RUSSIA, CHAP. I. Of the Russians nature in general, their con∣tempt of Learning, their Clergy, Litur∣gy, Churches, Ceremonies in Devotion, hours of Prayer, the Priests names, Ha∣bit, Wives, Baptism: The unnatural death of Apostates. AS for the Situtaion of Russia; it is so well known, that it would be a needless labour for me to set it down; my design at present is to Survey e Religion and Manners of the Inhabi∣tants. And to this purpose, I have made a
slender Essay, the truth whereof, I hope, will excuse the plainness of the dress; the stuff is course, and the thread not fine▪ but the matter I conceive will be both pleasant and profitable. Having had therefore fair opportunities, and good intelligence, I am the more wil∣ling to give you an account of this Em∣pire. Indeed, hitherto no man of parts or abilities has been suffered to travel the Country. For the people are very jea∣lous, and suspect those who ask them any questions concerning their Policy, or Religion, they being wholly devoted to their own Ignorance, and Education; (which is altogether illiterate, and rude, both in Civil and Ecclesiastical Affairs) look upon Learning as a Monster, and fear it no less than a Ship of Wildfire; and thus they verifie the old Saying, Ars nullum habet inimicum praeter igno∣rantem. In the year of our Lord, 1560. the Art of Printing was brought in amongst them (as Thevet relates in the life of Ba∣sil) and a Latin School also was erected, but the Tribe of Levi soon destroyed it, Vi & Armis. I shall therefore com∣mence
my discourse with them, who are not set apart for this Function, as in other Nations, but any Lay-man of a good life and conversation may take up∣on him the Priesthood. This Nation received the Christian Faith about six hundred years since, from a certain Priest of Chioff, who is said to cure one of the Dukes of Musco by prayer, upon which Miracle he and all his people were baptized. They bor∣row their Liturgy from the Greek Church, which is written in the Scla∣vonian Language, and used in their de∣votion with as much knowledge, as the Latin amongst the Papists. They fol∣low the Greeks, though lamely, in the Architecture of their Churches, whose chief ornaments are Images, adorned with rich Stones and Pearls, wherein they admit no Sculpture but only paint∣ing; for they look upon the Romish Statue-worship as Idolatry. They kneel not in their devotions, but lie prostrate▪ and upon some great Vigils they stay all night in their Churches, at certain times prostrating and crossing them∣selves, and knocking their heads against
the Ground. At certain Intervals they discourse of business, and most com∣monly the Emperor dispatches the Af∣fairs in the time of their Service, where he is attended with all his Nobility; and if he miss any, he makes inquiry af∣ter them. At Whitsontide they fall pro∣strate upon Sycamore branches (our Maple, which they call Sycamore with us, but falsely) wherewith their Chur∣ches are strew'd, upon a fond perswasi∣on that the holy Ghost descends upon these leaves, as Manna upon Oake∣leaves. They have no Instrumental Mu∣sick, for the last Patriarch abrogated it, because the Papists used it. In their Prayers, three hours after Sun-rising, they call Obedny, at Sun-set Vecherney; about one a clock in the morning, Zaou∣trinys. Miserere mei Domine (which they call Hospody pmele) they repeat an hun∣dred times; and that Priest is counted the best fellow that can mumble most in a breath. You shall have five or six reading confusedly together, one a Chap∣ter, another a Psalm, a third a Pray∣er, &c.
A Parish-Priest they call a Pope; as Pope Petro, Pope Iuan; a Bishop Me∣tropolite; a chief Pope Protopope. The Popes go most commonly in Purple, some in Green, others as they fancy, only distinguish'd with two flaps on both sides their breast, and a purple Scul-cap to cover their shaven crowns. They never cut the hairs of their heads or beards; a thing not observed by any other Clergy in the world. A Pope must be a married man, and the Husband but of one Wife; grounded on that Text, a Bishop must be the Husband of one Wife. Hereby it appears, the Popes Priesthood is wrapped up in his Wives Smock; for when she dies he must offi∣ciate no longer, which makes them in∣dulge their Wives more then ordinary for their Office sake. They marry young, that they may come early into a liveli∣hood, their Wives are also distinguish'd from others by a flap on each side their breast. Their Baptism differs not from the Romish, but only in dipping all over. He that takes up the Russian Faith, be he Lutheran or Papist, must first re∣nounce his former Baptism, curse Father
and Mother, and spit thrice over his shoulder. It was a custom to hire Strangers to christen the Russians, but now they are grown wiser than to buy souls at that rate. 'Tis observed by some old Standers here, that of two hundred Eng∣lish, Scotch and Dutch, who have re∣nounced their Religion, few, or none, have died a natural death. CHAP. II. Of their Marriages; the Clerks ceremony towards the Bride, her manner of con∣duct, the Epithalamium sung by Boys and Girls; the old Womans advice to the Bride-folk; the Bridal Room; the Bride-Grooms Boots pull'd off by the Bride; their severe Discipline to their Wives censured; no process in Law against it; the Parents contract with their Daugh∣ters Husbands; Witchcraft used at Wed∣dings; abstinence from Venery; the penalty for marrying a second or third Wife; the Emperors second Son; the manner of the Emperors electing a Wife; his disappointment how punished; his
Salary to the wronged Virgin; the Queens Relations; of the Czaroidg not seen publickly till Fifteen; of the Russian Children; when and how wean∣ed; of their Fasts and Pennances. THeir Marriages are not very solemn; a few attend the Bride about three a clock in the afternoon, and at their coming out of the Church, the Panna∣ma, or Clerk, strews Hops upon the Bride, and wishes her children as thick as Hops; another with a Sheep-skin coat turn'd outward meets her, and prays she may have as many children as there are hairs on his coat. The Bridegroom is led home by young Fellows, and the Bride (being cover'd all over) by an old Woman, and the Pope marches before with his Cross. They sit a while down at Table with Bread and Salt before them, but eat no∣thing; In the mean time a Quire of Boys and Girls standing aloft, sing Epithala∣miums, or nuptial Songs, so bedawb'd with scum of bawdry and obscenity, that it would make Aretines ears glow to hear them. After this they are conduct∣ed by the Pope and Old-women to a
Room, where she advises the Bride to be debonair and buxom, and exhorts the Bridegroom to bestow due benevolence, and here they are shut up for two hours; the old Woman in the interim attends for the tokens of Virginity, which ha∣ving gotten, she goes triumphantly, and demands Albricias of the Parents, first tying up the Brides hair which before hung over her ears. The married cou∣ple must have no earth over their heads (a Ceremony strictly observed, as if mortality then ought not to be the object of their meditations) for you must know all warm Rooms are covered with earth half a yard thick to keep in the heat. The Bridegroom has a Whip in one Boot, and a Jewel or some Money in the other, he bids the Bride pull them off, if she happens upon the Jewel, he counts her lucky, and bestows it upon her; but if she lights upon the Boot with the Whip in it, she is reckon'd amongst the unfortunate, and gets a Bride-lash for her pains, which is but the earnest-penny of her future entertainment. The Russians discipline to their Wives is very
rigid and severe, more inhumane in times past then at present. Yet three or four years ago a Merchant beat his Wife as long as he was able, with a Whip two inches about, and then cau∣sed to put on a Smock dipt in Brandy three or four times distilled, which he set on fire, and so the poor creature pe∣rished miserably in the flames: Cer∣tainly this person was a Monster, not a Man, born of a Tygress, not a Woman, and in no wise deserved the Epithete of good or wise. For the Heathens themselves condemn such unchristian illany. Hom. II. . And yet what is more strange, none prosecuted her death; for in this case they have no penal Law for killing of a Wife or Slave, if it happen upon cor∣rection; but it is a strange chastisement to kill, seeing the design hereof was ne∣ver intended to end people, but to mend them. Some of these Barbarians will tye up their Wives by the hair of the
head, and whip them stark naked. But this severity is not commonly used, un∣less it be for Adultery or Drunkenness: And I perceive it begins to be left off, or at least the Parents endeavour to pre∣vent it, by their cautious contracting their Daughters; For in their Joyntures they oblige their Husbands to find them with clothes suitable to their quality, to feed them with good wholsom meat and drink, to use them kindly without whip∣ping, striking or kicking them, many more terms and tautologies they use; not unlike the Common Laws of Eng∣land. Upon Forfeiture they put this in execution, which is determin'd in one Court, but not without bribery, as all other Suites are. I wish the English had more of the former (I mean their expedition) and less of the latter, viz. their corruption. Seldom a Wedding passes without some Witch-craft (if people of quality marry) chiefly acted as 'tis thought by Nuns, whose prime devotion tends that way. I saw a fel∣low coming out of the Bride-chamber, tearing his hair as though he had been mad, and being demanded the reason
why he did so, he cry'd out: I am un∣one: I am bewitch'd: The remedy they use, is to address themselves to a white Witch, who for money will un∣avel the Charm, and untie the Cod∣piece-point, which was this young mans ase; it seems some old Woman had yed up his Codpiece-point. The Ec∣lesiastical Law commands their absti∣ence from Venery three days a week, viz. Monday, Wednesday, Friday. After oition they must bath before they enter he Church. A man that marries a se∣cond Wife is debar'd the Church, but ot the Church-porch: If a third the Communion: If a man thinks his Wie arren he will perswade her to turn Nun, that he may try another; if she refuses he will Cudgel her into a Monastery. f the Empress had not brought a second Czaroidg or Prince, born June 2d. 1661. after four Girls together, 'tis thought she would have been sent to her Devoti∣ons. His Imperial Majesty intending to marry, had divers young Ladies brought before him, at last he liked one (which they say is very beautiful still) but his chief Confessor had a mind to perswade
him to another, who had an younger Sister, so when this fair Lady was brought, they found his Majesties incli∣nations so strong for her, as they fear'd she would get the Crown, and indeed so she did; it being a Ceremony, upon his liking, to tye the Crown upon her head, but the plot was so laid, that the Women should tye up her hair so hard as to put her into a Swoon, which they did, crying out she had the Falling-sick∣ness: Upon this her Father was accused of Treason for proposing his Daughter, whip't, and sent with disgrace into Sybe∣ria, where he died. The Maid remain still a Virgin, and never had any fit since The Emperor being conscious of the wrong: he had done her, allows her a ve∣ry great Pension. The King's Father in Law, Eliah the Son of Daniel, dares not say the Empress is his Daughter, nor dare any of her Kindred own themselves to be so; non dare Iuan Paoloidg Mar∣tischca say he is his Uncle. None are suffer'd to see the Czaroidg▪ but at fifteen years old he is exposed to publick view, though not seen by any before, but his chief Tutor, and some Family-Servants:
only Relations may see young children among the Russians, for they will seldom permit any Strangers to look upon them, for fear they should cast some ill aspect upon them. Their Children are commonly strong and hardy, they give them suck not above a month or two at the most; after which they feed them with an Horn, or Silver Cup made Horn-wise, with a dryed Cows-dug tied to the small end, through which they suck. At two years old they observe their Fasts, which are se∣vere: They have four in a year, and in Lent, upon Wednesdayes, Fridays and Sa∣turdaies, they eat no Fish, but feed on Cabbage and Cucumbers, and course Rye bread, and drink Caenasse, which is a Liquor one degree below our small Beer. They will not drink after a man that eats Flesh. If a Medicine has Cor. cer∣vi, ungul. Al. or pil. lepor. in it, they will not take it, though to save their lives, so precise are they in observing their Fasts: Their Pennance commonly is so many bowings, and knockings of their heads before an Image, and some∣times
to eat nothing but Bread and Salt and Cucumbers, and to drink Water for a season. That which is Poga∣no (or unclean) may not be eaten at any time; as Horse-flesh, Mares-milk, Asses-milk, Hares, Squirrels, Coneys, Elks: Theriaca or Treacle, is Pogano, because it has Vipers flesh in it. Castori∣um, Musk and Civet are not to be used internally amongst them. Sugar-Candy, and Loaf-Sugar are Scarumna, or prohibited in Fasting-dayes; a Knife that has cut Flesh is Scarumna for a Sootky, or twenty four hours. 'Tis good policy, as it happens, that they are so strict, else the Flesh in the Country would soon be destroyed; For the Russian Boors being perfect Slaves, are careless of more than what serves from hand to mouth; and as for the surplus, the Lord or his Steward takes it away.
CHAP. III. Of the Patriarch in general, he is supreme Head of the Church: Of his Pallace: The Ceremony of Palm-Sunday: His Mitre: Of the Russian Bells: The Patriarchs present to the Emperour: His Action on Good-Friday: His charge to the People: The Story of a Countrey-Fellow: Their salutation on Easter Day: The Patriarchs Presents to the Czar's Servants and Nobility: Their entertainments: The Ladies Comple∣ments to one another. THe Patriarch is supream Head in all Church-Affairs, highly honoured by his Majesty: But upon some pett he retired himself to his Countrey-house about two years ago: Some say he be∣gan to innovate certain things, or rather reform them; for he is no lover of Ima∣ges, to which the Russes are grosly de∣voted. The See continues vacant, and they cannot chuse another in his place.
His Pallace joyns to the Emperours, built of Stone, and stately enough for its bigness; his place is supplied by a Metropolite in the Ceremony of Palm-Sunday: After this manner. The Emperour accompanied with all his Nobility and Gentry, richly clad in cloth of Gold (having sent an hundred Scavingers before to clear the way) walks a foot, led by to Princes or Knezis, just before him walks his Hand kerchief-Bea∣rer, with a rich embroyder'd Handkerchief on his right Arm, then he goes to a Church, called Jerusalem, and by the way prays at a place made up of Stone, and round like a plate-form, here he bows towards the East, and after enters into the Church hard by, from whence after an hour he returns with the end of the Patriarchs Bridle upon his right Arm, whose Reins are four yards long, sup∣ported by three Noblemen behind his Majesty: The Patriarch sits side long up∣on an Horse covered all over with fine white Linnen, in his hand he holds a rich Cross, and blesses the people: He wears no Mitre, but a low crown'd Cap all plated with Gold, and richly beset with
depiction of building.
ewels, the brim is narrow, lined with rmines, not much unlike Elmo di Mam∣ino, Mambrino's Helmet which Don uixot got from the Barber; but in ain English it was nothing but his Ba∣. All the Metropolites, Popes, Pro∣-Popes wear Copes; a company of oys carry divers pieces of cloth, about or 5 yards long, of red, green yel∣w, blew, &c. and spread them before e Patriarchs stately Palfrey. The No∣lity and Chancellors carry sprouted llow in their hands instead of Palm; great guard of Souldiers lie prostrate ith their faces to the ground: Boys othed in white are carried upon a Pa∣ant, on which is a Tree, with Apples stned to it, at which the boys catch. he great Bells toll enough to deafen e hearers, for here are the greatest ells in the world, and his Majesty de∣ghts in them; one of these are said to eigh above thirty Tun weight. The eremony being ended, the Patriarch nds his Majesty a purse of Money, con∣ining an hundred Rubbles: If his Ho∣ness would give me such daily wages, would gladly be his Groom.
On Good Friday the Patriarch goes into an Hole in the Church, and there he stands to bless the People, and gives them this charge. Go your way, nei∣ther eat nor drink for three daies space; at night he lies prostrate, and prays till Easter day. A Country Russ, that waited on an English Gentleman, went out of curio∣sity to see this Ceremony, and unexpect∣edly hearing the charge of three days abstinence, returned home very melan∣choly; but as he sighed to himself, his Master demanded the reason of his sad∣ness, to which he answered, I am com∣manded by the Patriarch to fast three days, and having eaten nothing to day, I fear I shall die for hunger. But how∣ever, in this hungry posture he was fain to continue with great affliction and re∣luctancy, bewailing his unfortunate cu∣riosity, till Sunday relieved him. On Easter day they greet one another with a kiss, both men and women, and give a red Egg, saying these words, Christos vos creesh. In the Easter week all his Ma∣jesties Servants and Nobility kiss the Patriarchs Hand, and receive either
This Hand sheweth how the Russ ought to set their Fingers when they Cross themselves. This Hand sheweth how the Russ Priests ought to set their Fingers when they Bless or Cross the People.
gilded, or red Eggs; the highest sort three, the middle two, and the most in∣ferior one. Their greatest expression of joy upon Festivals is drinking, and the greater the day is, the greater are their debauches. To see Men, Women, and Popes reeling in the streets is counted no dishonour. After a very great Entertainment or Poctivat among the grand Ladies, the Lady of the Feast sends her chief Gentle∣man the next day with an Howd'ye to her Guests, to enquire of their health, and if they got well home, or slept well. The Lady answers: I thank thy Lady for her good cheer, which made me so Merry, [pian-drunk,] that indeed I know not how I got home! A fine com∣mendation indeed for her Ladiship. The Mother many times gives her Child a Love-name, by which he is called: As Almaus my Diamond: The Diack of Prosolsky Precaus, is called Boris Iuano∣dg; but his right name is Eliah Iuano∣dg.
CHAP. IV. Of their Burials: The Women are obliged to mourn: Their Dirges. The Ceremo∣ny used to the dead: Those that are kill'd or frozen to death, buried at Midsom∣mer: Of their Carnaval and excessive drinking: The sad consequence there∣of. THeir Burials are strange, as soon as the breath is out of the body (as we commonly express it) they carry the Corps into the Church, where it abides not long before it be buried in the Church-yard. The Wife of the deceased is obliged to howl most pitifully, and hire others to do the like, but little rea∣son have they to do it, considering their severe usage; but custom, not love, may possibly incite them to do it: Ut fleren oculos erudiere suos, is Ovid's genera observation on the whole Sex. The Russians count that the greatest Funeral where are most Women-mourners; such were the Praeficae among the old Romans.
These therefore in a doleful tone cry out (as the wild Irish do, O hone) Tim∣minny Dooshinca; Alas my Dear, why hast thou left me, was I not obedient to to thee in all things? was I not careful of thy House? did I not bring thee fine Children? hadst thou not all things in abundance? Or thus; Why wouldst thou die? hadst thou not a fair Wife, pretty Children, much Goods, good Clothes, and Brandy-wine enough? As soon as any one is dead they open the windows, and set a Bason of holy Wa∣ter for the Soul to bath in, and a Bowl of Wheat at the head of the Corps, that he may eat, having a long Journey to go. After this they put on his feet a pair of black-shoes, and some Copeakes, or pieces of money in his Mouth, with a Certificate in his hand (from the Metro∣polite of the place) to St. Nicholas, of his life and conversation. If any one dies without Confession and Extreme-Unction, he is denied Christian burial. Such as are kill'd or frozen to death, are brought into the Zemzky precaus, an Office for that, and
many other trials, and there they are ex∣posed to view three or four dayes; if any own them they are carried away, if not they are sent to the Bosky or Bogh∣zi Dome (i.e. God's House) which is a great pit in the fields arched over, where∣in they put an hundred or two hundred, and let them rest till Midsummer, and then the Popes go and bury them, and cover them with earth. Thirty daies after burial, they read the Psalter over daily upon the Grave, having a little Booth made up of Mats to shelter them from the weather, but what their meaning is in this, I cannot understand. In the Carnaval before Quadragessima, or Lent, they give themselves over to all manner of debauchery and luxury, and in the last week they drink as if they were never to drink more. Some drink Aqua-vitae four times distill'd, until it fire in their mouths, and kindle a flame not unlike that of Bocca di inferno, which issues out at their throat; if they have not milk given them to drink, they pre∣sently die. Much wiser in my judgment are our English Bully-rocks, who love
to keep fire at its due distance, no less then a Pipes length off their Noses. These drinking bouts are commonly at∣tended with quarrels, fightings and mur∣thers. This custom the Jovial Poet look'd upon no less then barbarous: In∣ter potandum pugnare Thracum est, barba∣rum tollite morem, verecundum{que} rixis prohibete Bacchum. Some of these go∣ing home drunk, if not attended with a sober companion, fall asleep upon the Snow (a sad cold bed) and there they are frozen to death. If any of their acquaintance chance to pass by, though they see them like to perish, yet will they not assist them, to avoid the trouble of examination if they should die in their hands: For those of the Zemsky precaus will extort something out of eve∣ry bodies purse, who comes to their Of∣fice. 'Tis a sad sight to see a dozen people brought upright in a Sledge fro∣zen to death, some have their arms ea∣ten off by Dogs, others their faces, and others have nothing left but Bones: Two or three hundred have been brought after this manner in the time of Lent. By this you may see the sad consequence
of drunkenness, the Epidemick distem∣per not only of Russia, but of England also. CHAP. V. Of their Imagery: Pictures exchanged in the God market, saved in Constagrati∣ons; they highly prize them, bestow Je∣wels on them: The punishment of a Wo∣man who stoll her pearl from an Image, though in case of necessity. Heresie punish∣ed▪ Of their Friars and Nuns. THeir Imagery is very pitiful paint∣ing, flat and ugly, after the Greek manner; I asking why they made their God's so deformed, they answered me, they were not proud. When a Picture is worn out, they bring it into the God-market, where laying it down, they chuse out a new one, and deposite mo∣ney for the exchange (for they must not be said to buy it) if the money be not enough the God-maker shoves it back, and then the Devoto adds more, till the other be satisfied.
An obliterate Image they put into the River, and crossing themselves, bid it Prosti, i. e. Farewell Brother. And if any of their Brethren meets with Jove, he turns into Neptune, and they crossing themselves, cry, Prosty Bradt, God be with you Brother. In time of fire they strive above all things to save their Ima∣ges: but if they escape not the Confla∣gration they must not be said to be burnt, but gone up. If a Church be burn'd, they say it is ascended, they must not say burn'd. These are their pretty ridi∣culous distinctions, 'tis wonder they do not, with Anaxagoras, affirm Snow to be black. Sometimes they will hold their Gods to the fire, trusting they can help them, if they will. A Fellow thinking to have staid the fire by that means, held his Micola so long, that he had like to have been burnt himself, and seeing he did him no good, he threw him into the midst of the fire, with this curse. Noo Chart. i. e. The Devil take thee. They bestow Jewels upon them of a great va∣lue. This year a Woman, who had formerly adorn'd her Micola with some Pearl, being necessitated, came to the
Church, and pray'd Micola to lend her some of his Jewels, for she was at pre∣sent in great want, the dumb brute not speaking any thing to the contrary, she (thinking silence gave consent) made bold to take a Ruby or two off him: but the Pope spying her, complains to the Ju∣stice, who commanded both her hands to be cut off, which was done three months since. In their private houses they do ordina∣rily give and take, as they thrive in their business; for if they have any great losses, they will come home and rob Micola to his shirt. Herosie among the Russes is punished with fire. The Here∣tick goes up to the top of a little house, and so jumps in, and upon him they throw straw and Luchines, which are dry splinters of Fir-wood, these being fir'd soon soffocate him. Satis super{que} severa est hac animadversio. The Fryars and Nuns are not so strict as in the Roman Church. The Fryars are great Traders in Malt, Hops, all sort of Corn, Horses, Cattle, and what∣soever else may but enrich them. The Nuns go abroad, some begging, others
visiting the great Ladies, where they get a Fox before they return home. These are fine Votaresses indeed▪ CHAP. VI. The Tragical Relation of a Monkey. His several tricks. How he threw down the Images, and scar'd the Priest. His ap∣prehension, and final condemnation. The Authors Reflections. NOw that I am discoursing of the Russian Church, it will not be amiss to relate a sad Tragical story, which was acted in the time of our English Resident, who it seems had a Monkey famous amongst the Muscovites to this day, for he would take money in his mouth, and go into the Market, and shew it to the Costard-mongers, who in kindness would give him Nuts and Apples; many such apish pranks he was wont to play. But we come now to the Catastrophe of his mirth. Being not content to act a merry part in Foro, he begins lu dere cum Sacris, and goes into a
Church hard by the English House, where he crept in and tumbled down their Gods. The Priest amaz'd to see what was done, crosses himself a thou∣sand times, and sets their God-ships in their places again, exorcises the foul Fiend, taking his Horse-tail dipt in holy water, he dashes the doors and win∣dows, that this Devil might not re-enter. But for all this, one morning early Pug came in at a window, and began with St. Nicholas and the rest of the Gods and Goddesses in order, as they stood in his way; down he throws Dagon and the wares of Rimnon as zealously as if he had been bred up in new England, and ever and anon he grinn'd in the Popes face, who standing arm'd with a Cross and holy Water, therewith besprinkled Pug, who (hating it as bad as the Devil,) fled home. Presently the Pope goes to the Patri∣arch, and complains most bitterly a∣gainst a Nincheen (or Stranger) living in the English house, for throwing down many of their Gods, breaking their Lamps, pulling off their Jewels and Chains of Pearl wherewith they were
adorn'd and lastly for prophaning the holy place. Hereupon an order was sent to search and examine the Embassa∣dors house; all his Retinue was brought forth. No, it was none of them, but a little Ninicheen; so the young chil∣dren were brought out, and by chance the Monkey came jumping in with the Children: O that is the Nincheen, quoth the Pope, apprehend him, which was done accordingly, and the Patriarch finding out the folly, was asham'd, and sent away the Priest with disgrace for a Fool. But however, poor Pug (to pa∣cifie the angry Gods) was deliver'd over to the secular power, who chastisd him so severely that he dyed upon it. Now Chronology would be enquir'd into, Whether Ben Johnsons Zeal of the Land, or Countrey man of Banbury, who in a Fanatick fury destroy'd the Ginger-bread-Idols in Bartholomew Fair, for which he suffer'd persecution, and was put into the stocks: Or this American Reformer, who threw down the Russi∣an Ginger-bread (for if you saw their Images, you would take them for no better than guilded Ginger-bread) I
say whether of these two is the Pro∣to-Monkey, Martyr, and ought to have precedency in their Canonization. But I leave the determination of this nicety to those who are profess'd Criticks, and well vers'd in Controversie. This special piece of the Russian Church-History was forgotten to be in∣serted in its right place, and therefore is set down here by way of Corollary. I pretend not to be an exact Historian, or Methodist, and so must beg my Rea∣ders pardon. However I relate the truth as it comes to my memory. CHAP. VII. Of thheir Musick. A story of one of their Embassadors. Beggars in Russia beg in Tunes. Their Drums Trumpets and Hunting-horns. BEfore you go out of this holy Church (which I never desir'd to enter) pray be pleased to hear some of the Russian Musick: Ever since
Orpheus his time these Beasts have de∣lighted therein. If you you have heard the Musick of the Sphears Pray stay and hear the Musick of the Bears. Which do at pleasure force both smiles and tears. They modulate so sweet you would admire um, Their piping's just as if Pan did inspire um, And for the Harp They'r Asini ad Lyram. The Swedes call the Russes Bears, or Ursae septentrionales. By the way suffer me to tell you a story of Eliah when he was Embassador in Holland. This man being treated with all Dainties both of Flesh and Fish, said, he had rather have a piece of Paultusse, or Turbet half salt∣ed, which begets such an Hogo as best suits a Russian paat, but strong enough to destroy a whole Guild of squeasy stomach'd Cockneys. The Hollanders willing to gratifie his ears with the best Musick in all Holland, both Vocal and Instrumental, asked him how he liked it, to which he replied; very well, for the Beggars use to beg in such Tunes in Russia. What tunes they were I know not. But all the Beggars here beg sing∣ing,
as well Prisoners as Cripples, and a strenuous voice looseth nothing by its harsh notes. For the Russians love no∣thing soft or smooth but their womens fat sides. But I come to their Musick, least I should tyre you with tuning it. You must know they have Musick-Schools, where Children are brought up with great diligence, and in much severity. Their notes are very strange, borrowed, I suppose, of the Greeks, or Sclavonians. Their Gamut has small variety; instead of Fa, sol, la, they sing Ga, ga, ge, warbling them out, as if they were indeed either gag'd or throttled. Their Cadences and Closes are so un∣expected, that they seem frighted into them, as our Fidlers are when a Con∣stable comes in the midst of a Lesson. Sometimes they will run hard upon a scent, as though they meant to imitate the Italian Recitative Musick. Finally, when they have brought up these chil∣dren to a perfection, what with Bases, Tenors, Contratenors, and Trebles, you shall hear as good a Consort, as ever was sung a at Cats Vespers. They have but little Instrumental Musick, it being
prohibited by the Patriarch in oppositi∣on to the Romish Church. And it has al∣so been thought State policy to forbid all Musick or Jollity among the Com∣mons, to prevent Effeminacy. They have Bagpipes, and small Fiddles with bellies like Lutes, wherewith they play four or five notes. As for their Warlike Musick they have Kettle Drums, whose dull sound does well agree with the Russian Satur∣nine Genius. And the Trumpet, which I think has not been long used, for they can hardly blow it so well as a Sow-Gelder does his Horn. In their hunting they use brass Bugles, which altogether make an hideous noise. In short, if you would please a Russian with Musick, Get a consort of Billings-gate Nightin∣gales, which joyn'd with a flight of screech Owls, a nest of Jackdaws, a pack of hungry Wolves, seven Hogs in a win∣y day, and as many Cats with their Corrivals, and let them sing Lacrymae, and that will ravish a pair of Russian uggs, better than all the Musick in Ita∣, light Ayres in France, Marches of England, or the Gigs of Scotland.
They are great strangers to Dancing, as esteeming it beneath their Gravity. Sometimes in their wine they will cause their Slaves, both Tartars and Polacks, to dance after their way, which is as rude as our Trenchmore. This I had prick't down by one of the Patriarchs Choristers, be∣ing Anthems of the several times of Prayer, viz. Morning, Even∣ing, and Midnight. 1. Obedni Anthem. Deliver me, O Lord of thy abun∣dant mercy. For thy mercy sake cleanse me of my sins; O Lord my Saviour. 2. Tzaoutrinys. We trust in Christ our Saviour: and our hope is in him. Hallelu∣jah, &c.
3. Vecherny. Lord hear my prayer; And hear me when I call: And let my cry come unto thee. CHAP. VIII. Of their nuptial proceedings, soon consum∣mated. They act by Brokers. The mans friends see the Bride naked. How a young fellow was cheated. The punish∣ment of those Women who kill their Hus∣bands. THeir way of proceeding in their Mar∣riages puts me in mind of Terence, where the Father abruptly tells his Son he must be married. Uxor tibi ducenda est Pamphile hodie praeterens modo apud forum. They give their children but short warning, and they must not refuse
the Parents choice; nor their Lords neither: For example, at this time Bo∣ris Juanoidg Morosof, the second man in the Empire propounds one of his Re∣tainers in marriage to a rich Widow of Dutch extract, but Rebaptiz'd into the Russian Faith. The Widow falls down at Boris Juanoidges Ladies feet, Sister to the press, and intreats her to interceed for her to her Lord, for she was minded to remain a Widow during life. No re∣quest would be granted: What, said she, wilt thou Bischest, i.e. dishonour my Lord so far as to refuse that man, to whom my Lord has given his word that he shall marry thee. A great disgrace it is to offer the least affront or denial to that which may tend to the breach of my great Lords word. They do most by Brokers,, and the Young-man seldom sees his Wife till they come into the brides Chamber; if she be ugly she pays for it soundly, it may be the first time he sees her. To prevent future mistakes, the Bride∣grooms Friends, viz. five or six Wo∣men see the Bride stark naked, and ob∣serve whether she has any defect in her
Body, if but the least Pimple appear, she must be cured of it before she mar∣ries. One at Vologda intending to marry his Daughter, employ'd a Broker to a young man, who would not have her till he had seen her: Hereupon it was order∣ed she should pass through such a Street at Noon-day, the fellow was placed in an house, and was to see her through an hole; now the wench (you must know) had but one eye, and he was set on the right side, where she appear'd hand∣some, and passed for currant; so the Indentures were drawn, and Sureties gi∣ven that he should not beat, but how they were kept, I have not yet learned. A Woman that kills her Husband is bu∣ri'd alive, put into the ground up to the neck, and there suffer'd to die, which is soon done in Winter. Here the crime and the punishment are well accommodated: For it is fit she should die without mercy, who had no bowels nor affection left for her Husband.
CHAP. IX. A merry story of a great Fish, which the Friars took to be a Devil. The contrary being discover'd, they are asham'd, and make an Entertainment. Another story of a Fish, but more Tragical. What en∣sued upon it. BEfore I leave the Church-men, I must tell you a merry story of the Monastery of Rostone, which stands up∣on a Lake, and not far from this Friar there is a Nunnery also, for commonly they are near together. In this Lake, about twenty years since, a Fish was seen of such a magnitude, that they sup∣posed it could not be a Fish, but rather some spectrum, Leviathan, or Water-Devil. It would often appear half a∣bove water, which made an Eagle stoop at it with such violence, that piercing his Talons into the Flesh, he could not pull them out again; but Leviathan plunging to the bottom with his enemy, carried him into an unknown element,
and so overcame him, but could not be so rid of him, for his Talons still stuck fast, which made him repair to the shore, where being seen by the Friars with feathers on his back, he confirm'd their Fears; and therefore to prevent further mischief, they fell a ringing the Bells, went on procession with all the in∣struments and weapons of defence, wherewith these Friars-militant wont to resist the foul Fiend, but all this did little avail to profligate the supposed enemy of Mankind. At last one Mr. Ro∣ger Eaton a Merchant coming by, hears this sad Relation, and being curious to see with the rest, who stood upon the shore, he undertook to encounter the Monster; an attempt no doubt as peri∣lous by Water, as that of St. Georges was by Land; the worst was, he could not find a Russ so bold & hardy as to row the Boat for him, till he had made one cou∣ragious by drinking. In short, he shots the Beast with a screw'd Gun, who be∣ing taken up, proved to be nothing else but an over-grown Pike▪ a yard and an half long, and as big as a Man. The Fraternity asham'd of their Processions
made against a silly Fish, did neverthe∣less to gratifie their Champion, make themselves and him drunk, and so the Play ended. But a worse Tragedy was acted, when they took another Pike not so large at this, intending to entertain one Mr. White an English Merchant; for the Cook cutting it open, found a new-born Infant in its belly, which was sus∣pected to be thrown in by one of the Nuns: This accident spoil'd their in∣tended mirth, and the farther enter∣tainment of Strangers. CHAP. X. Of the Chircasses. Their Religion, Com∣plexion, Drinking, Dancing, Govern∣ment; Souldiery and Witch-craft. THe Chircasses hold the same Greek Faith with the Russians, but are not altogether so superstitious; for they permit Strangers to come into their Churches. One of their Protopopes had appointed one in the Parish to come to him about mid-night unto private con∣fession,
but as the story goes, she fail'd of her promise. Next morning in the Church she stands aloof by her self, and after the Protopope had incens'd the rest of the good women, he comes to her, and instead of a Benediction, he de∣mands why she kept not her promise; to which she replied. Chichaco Boyallis, I was afraid of Chichaco (a curst Cur which he had) then he incens'd her again, and said he was tyed up, Then (quoth she) Moya Dooshinco, My Dear, Ah what a sinner was I, that I knew not so much before. Excuse this Drollery, which only serves as a Farce to fill up the Scene of a jejune story; for I shall hard∣ly make the Description of this barba∣rous place worth the pains and trouble of Reading. Now we are in Chichass Land, it will not be amiss to tell you what people they are, viz. A kind of Tartars, a rude swarthy look'd people; their Women are very unhandsome, gross, and grosly given to drinking; so that at an Enter∣tainment they will be drunk before meat comes on the Table, and with eating recover themselves, and after Dinner
be drunk again, and then recover them∣selves by Dancing, which they love so much, that they count him a mean man who does not keep a Fidler in his house. Their Government is perfectly Anarchi∣cal, for upon an Insurrection they de∣stroy'd all their Nobility and Gentry, and are now govern'd by Collonels of their own chusing, with whom the meanest is Hail Fellow well met. Soul∣diers they call in their Language, Cos∣sacks, which makes some mistake, and think them to be a Nation. These people are much devoted to Witch-craft, and count it an extraordinary piece of learn∣ing practised by the chief Women in the Countrey. They are more hospitable to Strangers than the Russians, and their Countrey or Land is better and war∣mer.
CHAP. XI. Of the Russian Government Laws. Manner of writing. Their Clerks how called. Their Characters whence borrow'd. Their Petitions. His Imperial Majesties per∣son and character compar'd with his Fa∣thers. The Empire miserably impove∣rished and depopulated by the Tartarian Invasions. THe Russian Government is perfectly Monarchical, it has offices call'd Precauses; the dispensation of their Ju∣stice is commonly Arbitrary, for they have very few written Laws, they go much upon Presidents (but money is their best President, which overthrows all the former) They waste abundance of Paper in writing down things at large (as our Common-law Clerks do) all in Rolls of a great length, and al∣though they have a Table before them, they cannot write but upon their knees, after the old fashion that St. Jerom is pictur'd. Their Clerks they call Podi∣acks,
and he that is Lord Deputy, Di∣ack. They borrow most of their Cha∣racters from the Greeks, (in num∣ber. 42.) All things are transacted by way of Petition, which is roll'd up like a Wa∣ser, and the Petitioner holds it up be∣fore the Boyar, who if in a good humour puts forth his hand to receive it, and either reads it presently, or gives it to his Diac, who commonly must be brib'd for a Remembrancer. His Imperial Majesty is a goodly per∣son, two months older than King Charles the Second, of a sanguine com∣plexion, light brown hair, his beard uncut, he is tall and fat, of a majesti∣cal Deportment, severe in his anger, bountiful, charitable chastly uxorious, very kind to his Sisters and Children, of a strong memory, strict in his Devoti∣ons, and a favourer of his Religion; and had he not such a cloud of Syco∣phants and jealous Nobility about him, who blind his good intentions, no doubt he might be numbred amongst the best and wisest of Princes▪ His Father was a great lover of English men, and a man
Cyrillic alphabet. А Auz Б Booki В Geadi Г Glaghole Д Dobro Е Yeast Ж Shiveate Selo З zembla И Isha К Kako Л Ludy М Meslate Н Nash О One П Pokoy Р Rutse С Slou Т Twerda У  Eke Ф Fer Х Kher Ote Ц Tsi Ч Cherve Ш Sharv Щ Tshaw Year Ы Yeare Ь Ere yea you Ю yous ya O Pse eta Eshitsa
of peace: but this Emperour is of a warlike spirit, ingaged against the Crim, Polacks and Swedes, with what success let time declare. Thus much I know: This Empire is impoverish'd, depopu∣lated and spoil'd so much in ten years, as it will not recover its pristine prospe∣rity in forty. Seven years ago the Plague carried away 7 or 8 hundred thousand people: And three years since the Crim carried away captive out of the Bor∣ders 400000 souls into perpetual Cap∣tivity, besides 300000 were consu∣med and kill'd by dint of Sword in seve∣ral Armies; the best of the Land is ha∣rass'd, the rest untill'd for want of men. For in five hundred Versts, travel up the River, you may see ten women and chil∣dren for one man. All things are there become scarce; every thing six times the rate that it was formerly; and Cop∣per-money is not valued.
CHAP. XII. The Emperours rise. His Ancestors but Dukes of Volodimir. His Pallace how call'd. Of Juan Vasilowidg, and his divers odd humours, his Petition to one of his Diacks. His Conquests. How he was loved. How he fined Vologda. How he served the women that laughed at him. Of the Vayods mistake. Another Vay∣od how punished for taking a Goose. Juan a great lover of Queen Elizabeth. How he serv'd the French Embassador. How Sir Jerom Boze came off. A Shoomaker presented the Emperour with a Turnep, how rewarded. What the Emperour did with the Turnep. How a poor man en∣tertained him. His associating with Thieves. How he was served by one of them, and how he preferr'd him. REturn we now to our Great Empe∣rour, who is an absolute Morarch, but has a Council both general and par∣ticular to advise with. His Dominions
are inlarged by his Forefathers; for at first they were but Dukes of Volodimir, and increasing in strength possess'd them∣selves of Mosco, or (as they write) Mos∣cua. The Emperours Pallace to this day is called, Crimlena Gorod, or Crim-Castle. Juan Vasilowidg (that is called the Tyrant) was a stout Prince, but had many strange humours. One day he came to his Diac, and gave him a Petition, de∣siring him that he would be pleased to make ready 20000 Men and Arms by such a time, and he should be very thank∣ful to him, and pray for his health, and so he subscrib'd himself, Thy humble Ser∣vant, Jocky of Moscua. In this Expe∣dition he conquer'd Casan, a thousand Versts down the River Volga, and Astra∣can (quasi civitas) the Imperial City two thousand Versts hence; Took Syberia three thousand Versts distant, and one of the best flowers of the Empire. The people loved him very well, for he treat∣ed them kindly, but chastised his Boy∣ars. He had a Staff with a very sharp Spike in the end thereof, which in dis∣course he would strike through his Boy∣ars feet, and if they could bear it with∣out
out any flinching, he would highly prefer them. He once sent to Vologda for a Colpack of Fleas, and because they could not bring him full measure, he fined them. On a Festival he play'd certain mad pranks, which caused some Strangers, viz. Dutch and English Women to laugh; he taking notice hereof, sent for them all to his Pallace, and had them strip't stark naked before him in a great Room, then he commanded four or five bushels of pease to be thrown down be∣fore them, and made them pick them all up, when they had done he gave them some wine, and bad them take heed how they laugh'd before an Emperour again. He sent for a Nobleman of Casan, who was call'd Plesheare, which is Bald, and the Vayod mistaking (as the Russians say) thought he had sent for an hundred and fifty Baldpates: Polteraste sounding like his name signifi'd so many. He therefore got together about eighty or ninety, and sent them up speedily, with an excuse that he could find no more in his Pro∣vince, and desir'd pardon. The Emperor seeing so many Baldpates, wonder'd what
it meant, and cross'd himself; at last one of the chief delivering the Letter, he ask'd his Diack what he wrote to the Vayod, who shew'd him the copy, by which he found out the mistake, and so making the Bald-pates drunk for three dayes, he sent them whom again. Ano∣ther Vayod had taken a Goose for a bribe stuff'd full of Ducats, and being complained of, he took no notice of him, till one day passing through the Poshiarr (an open place like Smithfield, where execution was us'd to be done) he commanded the Hangman to cut off his Arms and his Legs; and at every blow the Hangman asked him whether Goose was good meat. He courted Queen Elizabeth very much to marry her, and was a great friend to the English. Once upon a sus∣picion of Treason, he fortified Vologda, and drew all his Treasure thither, and as some think upon extremity, intend∣ed his flight for England. This Empe∣rour erected the best buildings in all Moscua. This Juan Vasilowidg nail'd a French Embassadors hat to his head. Sir Je∣rom
Boze a while after came as Embas∣sador, and put on his Hat, and cock't it before him, at which he sternly de∣manded how he durst do so, having heard how he chastisd the French Em∣bassador. Sir Jerom answer'd, he re∣presented a cowardly King of France, but I am the Embassador of the invin∣cible Queen of England, who does not vail her Bonnet, nor bare her Head to any Prince living; and if any of her Ministers shall receive any affront a∣broad, she is able to revenge her own quarrel. Look you there (quoth Juan Vasilowidg to his Boyars) there is a brave Fellow indeed, that dares do and say thus much for his Mistris; which Whoreson of you all dare do so much for me your Master? This made them envy Sir Jerom, and perswade the Em∣ror to give him a wilde Horse to tame; which he did, managing him with such rigour, that the Horse grew so tyr'd and tam'd, that he fell down dead under him; this being done, he asked his Ma∣jesty if he had any more wild Horses to tame. The Emperour afterwards much honour'd him, for he loved such a da∣ring
fellow as he was, and a madd blade to boot. When Juan went his progress, many of the Commons as well as Gentry presented him with fine Presents: A good honest Bask-shoemaker, who made shoes of Bask for a Copeak a pair, con∣sults with his wife what to present his Majesty; says she, a pair of fine Lop∣kyes, or shoes of Bask; that is no rarity (quoth he); but we have an huge great Turnip in the Garden, we'l give him that, and a pair of Lopkyes also. Thus they did; and the Emperour took the present so kindly, that he made all his Nobility buy Lopkyes of the fellow at five shillings a pair, and he wore one pair himself. Thus put the man in stock, whereby he began to drive a Trade, and in time grew so considerable, that he left a great estate behnd him. His Fa∣mily are now Gentlemen, and call'd Lopotsky's. There is a tree standing near his quondam house, upon which it is a custom to throw all their old Lop∣kyes as they pass by, in memory of this Gallant.
A Gentleman seeing him so well paid for his Turnep, made account by the rule of proportion to get a greater Reward for a brave Horse; but the Emperour suspecting his design, gave him nothing but the great Turnep, for which he was both abash'd and laugh'd at. Juan in a disguise sought a lodging in a Village nigh the City, none would let him in but a poor man whose wife was then in Travel, and deliver'd whilst he was there; away he went before day, and told the man he would bring him some Godfathers next day; according∣ly he and many of his Nobility came and gave the poor Fellow a good largess, and burn'd all the houses in the Village but his, exhorting them to charity, and telling them, because they refused to admit Strangers into their houses, they should be forced to seek their Fortunes, and try how good it was to lie out of doors in the Winter. Sometimes he would associate with Thieves in a disguise, and once he ad∣vis'd them to rob the Exchequer; for (says he) I know the way to it; but one of the Fellows up with his Fist, and
struck him a hearty good blow on the Face, saying, Thou Rogue, wilt thou offer to rob his Majesty who is so good to us; let us go rob such a rich Boyar who has cozen'd his Majesty of vast sums. At this Juan was well pleased, and at parting changed caps with the fellow, and bid him meet him next morning in the Duaretz (a place in the Court where the Emperour used often to pass by) and there (said he) I will bring thee to a good cup of Aqua vitae and Mead. The Thief came accord∣ingly, and being discover'd by his Ma∣jesty, was call'd up, admonish'd to steal no more, preferr'd in the Court, and serv'd for a discoverer of Thieves.
CHAP. XIII. Of the present Emperour or great Czar. Czar from whence derived. His Titles and Arms. He marries not out of his own Dominions. His Diet. Lodging. Recreations. Visits. The Czaroid∣ges Birth. THis present Emperour comes of Juans Race by the Mothers side: He had an elder Brother, an hopeful Prince, although he would take Pigeons, and pick out their eyes, saying to one, thou art a Traytor, and to another, cutting off his head, Thou art Ivan such an one, a Rebellious Traytor to my Father and me. But he dyed young. All the Emperours Sons are call'd Czarowidges, that is to say Czar's Sons, As for the word Czar, it has so near re∣lation to Cesar (as Thevet observes in Ba∣sils life) that it may well be granted to sig∣nifie Emperour. The Russians would have in to be an higher Title than King, and yet they call David Czar, and our
Kings, Kirrols, probably from Carolus Quintus, whose history they have among them. The present Emperours name is A∣lexie Michalowidg Romanove. viz. Alex∣is the Son of Michael the Roman. He puts in many Titles into his broad Seal as the Spanyards do. And thus he stiles himself. BY the Grace of God We the Great Lord Tzar, and Great Duke Alexei, Michailorich of all Great, Little, and White Rosia. Self upholder of Mosco, Kyore, Ʋladimer, Norgorod. Tzar of Cazan. Tzar of Astrachan. Tzar of Siberia, Lord of Plesco, and Great Duke Smolensko, Twersko, Ʋgorsko, Permsko, Veatsko, Bol∣garsko. Lord and Great Duke of Norgorod in the lower Countreys of Chernigove, Rezan, Rostoue, Yeroslave, Beloozer, Odooria, Obdo∣ria,
Condinea, and all the Nor∣thern parts Commander. Lord of the Land of Iveria, of the Kar∣talinian and Groozinian Dukes: And of many other Dominions and Countreys, East, VVest and North Heir thereof, From Fa∣ther and Grandfather Lord and Monarch. The Emperour in his Arms gives the spread Eagle, as descending from the Roman Emperours, but he carries a distinction, for he bears between the double head of the Eagle a mitred Crown, and in the Eagles breast St. George on Horse-back; which some say was added upon Queen Elizabeths be∣stowing the Order of the Garter to Juan Vasilowidg. The Czarowidg (as I said elsewhere) is not seen of the people till he is about fifteen years old, nor of many Noble∣men; but then he is exposed to publick view, carried upon mens shoulders, and set on high in the Market-place, which
is to prevent Impostors, wherewith this Land has often been deceived. The Czar marries not out of his own Dominions, but takes a wife where he pleases, though seldom out of the Nobi∣lity. When she dyes, all the interest of her Kindred and Relations dies with her. Eliah the present Emperours Fa∣ther in law was of so mean account, that within this twenty years he drew wine to some English men, and his daughter gather'd Mushrooms, and sold them in the Market. The other which he should have had was a Captains Daughter. The Imperial Pallace is built of Stone and Brick, except some lodgings where∣in his Majesty sleeps and eats all the win∣ter: For they esteem wooden Rooms far wholsomer than Stone; and they have some reason to think so, because their stone Rooms being arched thick reverberate a dampness when the Stove is hot. The Emperour lodges three sto∣ry high. His drink is Brague made of Oates. His bread is made of Rye, which the Russians esteem a stronger nourish∣ment than Wheat. The Czar lyes in no sheets, but in his Shirts and Drawers,
under a rich sable Coverlid, and one Sheet under him. His Recreations are hunting and hawking. He keeps above three hundred Falconers, and has the best Ger-Falcons in the World, which are brought from Syberia; he flyes at Ducks or other Fowl. He hunts the Bear, Wolf, Tyger, Fox, or rather baits them at his pleasure. Whensoever he goes forth, the East Gate of the inner Wall of the City is shut till he returns. He seldom visits any Subject, yet the last year he did, but went not in the common way, for the side of a wall was pull'd down. At the birth of the Czaroidg the Commons for joy bring him great Presents, which he returns back again, but if he likes any of them, he gives the full worth. On the Saturday after Good Friday, he goes into some of the Prisons, examines the Prisoners crimes, and delivers many of them. An English man put in for coyn∣ing, was lately releas'd. They put very few to death here, only whip them, which is worse than the paines of death.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Emperours Revenues, great Privi∣ledges, Trading, Provision, Traffick, al∣lowance to his Houshold. Of his Pallace, high Tower. Of his Boyars. Of the Mo∣nasteries and Nunneries. Officers of State. The Czars temperance. Of his entertaining the Nobility. A story of General Leshly. AS the Emperours Territories are great, so is his Revenue; For (First) he is master in a manner of every man's Estate, the Son does alwaies petition for his Fathers Land. They all hold in Capite. He is heir to all who dye inte∣state, criminally or without heirs. Secondly, his Customs are very con∣siderable. Thirdly, The Cabacks (or places where in are sold Aqua-vitae and strong Beer) are his Royalty, and farms out fome for 10000 Rubbles per annum, and some again for 20000 Rubbles. Fourthly, His Bath-Stoves, which
are very frequent here, are a great En∣trado, for their Religion obliges to free-Baths, both Men, Women and Chil∣dren. When they are hissing hot, they cast cold water upon them. Some come out into the Snow, and tumble in it stark naked, and then go into the Stove again. Fifthly, He is the chief Merchant in all the Empire. Sixthly, His Sable Trade in Syberia yields a vast treasure, brought in by the exil'd Slaves sent thither in disgrace. Seventhly, The Caviare made at A∣stracan, as also the Ithyocolla and Agarick, all which he monopolizes. All his Provision is brought in by those who hold Lands in Villenage. This year a Fire hapning in his Store-house burnt and broyl'd sixty thousand Flitches of Bacon. By which you may see the Russians are no Tartars, abhorring Swines flesh. Yet they retain some of the Mosaical Law about Hares, Squir∣rels and Coneys: Yea, they hold it Po∣gano to eat Veal, but not Lamb; such a flock of blind Owls are they, more in love with their own Twilight, than with our Noon-day, because the weak eye-sight
Ivan Ʋelacky Iohn the Great
sight of their understanding is dazled with the bright beams of truth. When the Greeks or Persians come the Empe∣rour ingrosses all their Commodities at a price. To Archangel, he sends great quantities of Hides, Wax, Potash, Hemp and Flax, and so furnishes him∣self with their Commodities, which serve him to give away amongst his Sub∣jects; for most of his Graces are be∣stow'd in Silks, Sables, Cloth, Velvet, or cloth of Gold. To his Houshold Servants he gives allowances of Meal, Honey, Fish, Nut-oyl, Oates, Beer and Mead. His Imperial Pallace is encom∣pass'd with an high brick Wall, larger by half than the circumference of the Tower, herein are twenty four Churches and Chappels, most of them have guild∣ed Cupola's, and great Crosses, which make a splendid show altogether. The high Tower, called Ivan Velicky, was built by Juan Vasilowich. It stands by its self, and serves for a Belfry, wherein are thirty or forty Bells. The Cupola of this Tower is guilt, the body of Brick and Stone, and the height as great as St. Marks Tower at Venice. Some of
the chief Boyars have Pallaces of Stone within the walls of the Court, as Knez Jacob a Chircasse Prince, Boris Juannoidg, Morosof▪ the Emperours Guardian in his minority: Knez Alexis Master of the Fur-Office, Mehectowidg Trebotsky a Ge∣neral, Eliah Danelowidg, Meluslafsky the Emperours Father in law, Knez Juan Vasiloidg Adofsky. There are also five Monasteries, and two or three Nunneries together, with most of the Precauses, or Courts of Ju∣stice, the Apotheca, or Ammunition Gal∣lery. The Czar has Officers of State as other Princes have, but not of so great value. His Gentlemen of the Bed-chamber come not into his Chamber, but wait in the next Room to it, and at the Table also, some two or three Rooms off. The Czar is temperate in his Diet, drinks very little Wine, sometimes he drinks at meales a little Cinnamon wa∣ter, or oyl of Cinnamon in his smal beer. For Cinnamon here (you must know) is the Aroma Imperiale,; the scents of Musk and Ambergreece are not much esteem'd, but Rose water is much used at Court, and so is holy Water in the Church.
At the entertainment of his Nobili∣ty, the Emperour sits in his Chair, and delivers out of his hand a Chark of treble or quadruble Spirits, which are able to take away his breath who is not ac∣custom'd to them. His Majesty will laugh to see his Subjects handsomly fuddled, and sometimes he will put Mer∣cury into their Liquor. Old General Alexander Leshly a Scot aged ninety nine years; now alive at Smolensko, had dis∣course with the Emperour about the storming of Smolensko, who being ear∣nest to hear would not dismiss Leshly, then afflicted with an uncessant Diarrhaea▪ his modesty kept him a little too long, but at last being necessitated, he got away abruptly: The Emperour wondring at it, demanded the reason of his suddain departure; but understanding how the case went with the old man, who had lost nothing but the bolt of his back-gate, he fell into such a laughter as sufficiently declar'd he was not displeased with the Generals abruptness.
CHAP. XV. Of the City of Mosco. Of the Czars Je∣wels. Of his Clothes, Of the Queen and her maids of honours attire. Their journeys in Waggons. How they rode formerly. The mode and language of the Russes all one. They differ in their actions from all other Nations. Of their Clock Dyals, and contrariety to other people in several things. And of other Customs they have THe City of Mosoua (as the Russians write it) stands upon a geat deal of ground, encompass'd with three Walls, besides that of the Imperial Castle. The innermost is a red Wall of Brick, the next to this is the white Wall, and the third is wooden Wall fill'd up with earth, which I suppose to be fifteen or sixteen Miles compass, and it was made up in four or five days, upon the ap∣proach of the Crim-Tartar; there is as much Firr in it as would make a row of Lendon Paper-houses fifteen miles long. Since his Majesty has been in Poland, and seen the manner of the Princes
houses there, and ghess'd at the mode of their Kings, his thoughts are advan∣ed, and he begins o model his Court and Edifices more stately, to furnish his Rooms with Tapestry, and contrive houses of pleasure abroad. As for his Treasure of Jewels, I think no Prince oth exceed him, yet he hath many ul Stones, but the Russians affecting greatness in Jewels, will upon that score ispense with small faults. The fashion of the Emperours clothes is like that of Nobility, but only richer. That of he Empress is the like, only the tire of head is higher, and her smock-eeves longer, about ten or twelve yards English, and her upper most Gown has wide sleeves like our Batchelors of Arts, which all her women of honour wear also. Commonly her Imperial Maje∣sty makes her Journeys in the night with most of her women (in Waggons co∣ver'd with red cloth) viz. Chamber-women, Ladies and Embroideresses. Not long since they were use to ride on Horseback with white Hats, a skain of silk about their Necks, and Asride. Ri∣um teneatis Amici.
The mode of men and women, rich and poor, are all one, all over the Em∣pire, from the highest to the lowest, and their Language one, yea and Religion too, which certainly must hugely tend to their peace and preservation. Here I might make some Reflections up∣on our own unhappy divisions and diffe∣rences in opinions, but this perhaps might be censur'd as an unhistorical Action, and therefore, Cynthius aurem.— The Russians are a People who differ from all other Nations of the world, in most of their Actions. Their Shirt they wear over their Drawers, girded under the Navel (to which they think a Girdle adds strength) None, neither male nor female, must go ungirt for fear of being unblest. They whistle not with their lips (that they count prophane) but through the Teeth▪ a strange way of whistling indeed. Whe they spit on any thing to wipe it (as Shoes, &c.) they do use an action no unlike sneezing. In cases of admiration or incredulity, instead of a shrug, they wave their heads from one shoulder to another. Their very speech and acce
also differs from other Nations. 'Tis grand Sin with them to omit lotionem st mictum. As we use paper in our acking-Office to clear accounts, so Ju∣ de Rusco uses a little Spade made of thin shaven, like the Ivory Spatula's hich Merchants and Scriveners use to ld up letters, and smooth them. In our Clock-Dyals the Finger moves the Figure: In the Russian e contra, Figures move to the Poynter. One Mr. Holloway, a very ingenious man, contrived the first Dyal of that fashion; ying, because they acted contrary to men, 'twas fitting their work should e made suitable. Because the Roman Catholicks kneel at their devotion, they will stand, for they look upon kneeling s an ignoble and barbarous Gesture. ecause the Polonians shave their eards, they count it sinful to cut them. Because the Tartar abhors Swines-flesh, ey eat it rather than any other flesh, though its food is most Pogano, or un∣lean of any Beast. They count it a eat sin for a Russ to lye with a Dutch woman or English Woman; but a ve∣ial Piccadillo for a Russ woman to pro∣stitute
her self to a Stranger, for they say her issue will be educated in the true an∣cient Faith, but a Russ gets an uncircum∣cized child of a Stranger. The pree Rye above Wheat, and stinking Fish a∣bove fresh. They count their miles bninties, and not by hundreds. Thei New years day is the first of September From the Creation they reckon 706 and odd years. To things improbabl they easily give credit, but hardly be∣lieve what is rational and probable. In their salutes they kiss the woman right cheek. Lands 25 of Inheritance are entayl'd upon the youngest Brother. They write upon their knees, thoug a table stand before them. They sow with the needle toward them, and thrust it forward with thei fore-finger; it should seem they are ba Taylors. They know not how to eat Pease an Carrets boyld, but eat them shells an all, like Swine. They do not pick thei Pease, but pull them up by the roots and carry them into the Market to b sold▪
They know not the name of Cornuto: ut of a Cuckold they say, He lyes under e Bench. They will sooner take the word of a an who has a Beard, than the oath of ne who is Beardless. The beauty of Women they place in eir satness, juxta illud alicum, Dio i faccia grassa, to mi faro bella. God ake me at, and I'le make my self beau∣ful. Their painting is no better than that f our Chimneys in the Summer, viz. ed Oaker and Spanish White. They paint or stain their teeth black, on the same design that our Ladies ear black patches: Or it may be their eth being spoil'd by mercurial paint∣g, they make a vertue of necessity, and y up that for an Ornament which is ally a Deformity. Low foreheads d long eyes are in fashion here; to hich purpose they strain them up so rd under their Tyres, that they can ill shut them, as our Ladies lift up eir hands to their heads. They have secret amongst them to stain the very lls of their eyes black. Narrow
and slender Wasts are alike ugly in the sight. A lean Woman they account u wholsom, therefore they who are i∣clined to leanness, give themselves ov to all manner of Epicurism, on pu∣pose to fatten themselves, and lye a be all day long drinking Russian Bran (which will fatten extreemly) the they sleep, and afterwards drink agai liste Swine design'd to make Baco These are their odd customs, which may justly censure as the Satyrist d the debauch'd Romans in his time, say∣ing. Dum vitant stulti vitia in contrar currunt. And indeed to say truth the madness is so great, that all the Hel∣bore in Anticyra cannot purge it away▪
CHAP. XVI. Of their Judiciary proceedings. Of mur∣ther how punish'd; the accused must confess the fact. Of their Executioner and cruel Torments. The punishment of Coyners. A Fellow that shot at a Jack∣aw how punish'd. Conspirators banish∣ed into Syberia, &c. Hanging lately used amongst them, and how. I Cannot at present give you an ac∣count of their Judiciary proceedings, which are very confused, and yet they have a method, and every Province its Precause or Office, wherein is a Bayor, or Lord, and a Chancellor call'd a Diac, who hath many Clerks under him: He represents the Boyar, who is the Repre∣sentative of his Imperial Majesty. If there be a Suit in Law, and no bribes on either side, most commonly the Plain∣tiff gets the better for they presume he has most right. Murther is here to be bought off with money; If a Man kill his Slave or his Wife in correcting them, there is no
law against them. Or if a man is mur∣ther'd, and no body prosecured his mur∣therer, the law takes no notice of his death. The accused cannot be condemn'd although a thousand witnesses come in a∣gainst him, except he confesses the Fact; and to this end they want not torments to extort Confessions; For first, they put them upon the Strappado, if this does not, they secondly whip them, and herein their Hangmen are very exqui∣site: For 'tis said at six or seven lashes they are able to kill a man. Sometimes the consederate will see the enemy to execute such a piece of his office, to pre∣vent farther mischief. They can strike to an hairs breadth, and with a sharp kind of Iron pierce through the very Ribs; they will slice down a mans back like a Chine of Pork, and when that's done, they will salt the raw place, bind his hands and legs, and putting a Cowlstaff through them, hold him over the Fire, and Carbonadoe him. If he persists (for may be the party has nothing to confess) they let him loose, and the Hangman sets his shoulders, and
lets him rest twenty days, till he be al∣most well, and then repeats the former Torments, and perhaps pull out a Rib or tow with a pair of hot Pincers; If all this will not do (for some will out∣stand all these Tortures) they will then shave the crown of his Head, and drop cold water upon the bare place, which some that have felt, acknowledge to be the quintessence of all Torments; for every drop strikes like a dart to the very heart. All this is done where the Hangman is not brib'd, for he will then cut deep. I have seen some whose backs have been scarifi'd like the bark of a Tree, which afterwards were healed, but they could never wear out the scars and marks thereof. The punishment of Coyners is to melt some of the coyn, and pour it down their throat. Neque enim lex u∣stior ulla est, quam necis Artifices Arte perire sua. A Fellow two years ago, being fool-hardy, shot at a Jack-daw in the Imperi∣al Court, but the Bullet glanced, and fell into one of his Majesties Rooms, for which fact he lost his left Leg and
right Hand. If there be secret conspi∣racy contrived and disclosed in the act∣ing, the Traytors are secretly torment∣ed, and afterwards sent towards Syberia; and in the way an hundred or two hun∣dred Versts off, softly put under the Ice. Others having their Noses cut off, and their eyes pull'd out, or their Ears cropp'd, are banished into Syberia, three thousand Versts distance. Hanging has not been in use but of late years; for the dull Russ thought if the Malefactor were strangled, his soul was forced to sally forth at the Postern-gate, which made it Pogano, viz. defiled. The Hangmans place is hereditary, and he teaches his children to strike upon a lea∣thern Bag. The Malefactor puts his head into the Noose, and turns himself off when the Hangman commands him.
CHAP. XVII. Of Syberia and its Inhabitants. Chay and Bour Dian brought from thence, their qualities. Tambul the Metropo∣lis of Syberia. A discourse of Sables, how kill'd. The excessive coldness of this Countrey. How they feed their Cows. Of the River Ob. What Caviare is made of. Of Samogeda, their Dyet. Sledges how drawn. Hunting. Indi∣stinct habit. Of their manners. And other remarkable observations concern∣ing these Northernlings in general. SYberia is a vast unknown Province, reaching to the Walls of Cataya. I have spoken with one that was there, who traded with the Chinesses, and another also who said he saw a Sea beyond Sybe∣ria wherein were Ships and Men in strange habits, like the Chinesses by their description, rich in cloth of Gold and Jewels, no Beards but on their upper lip. From hence this latter brought Chay and Bour Dian. The Chay is that which we call Teah or Tey, and Bour∣dian.
is Anisum Indicum Stellatum, the Merchants say they use it (as we do in England) with Sugar, and esteem it a rare Remedy in diseases of the Lungs, flatus Hypochondriaci, and distempers of the Stomach; 'tis brought over in pa∣pers about one pound weight, written on with Chinese Characters. They who travel into these parts are six years in their Journey, staying for winter way in some places, and summer in others. The Metropolis of Syberia is Zambul, the Residence of the chief Vayod. They trade in Furs, and chiefly in Sables, which, as some say, are found in no o∣ther part of the world beside. They feed on a Berry or Nut, which here grows plentifully upon trees, what it is I can∣not learn, but am promised some of them, with further information. They hunt six or seven weeks together, and are drawn by Dogs, whom they feed with Fish, wherewith their Lakes and Rivers abound,: they put forty or fifty Dogs in a Sledge, and are cloth'd with treble Furs; they lie out all night in the coldest season, and make fires, with which they dress their Fish. The Dogs
are expert in finding out the Sable, and the Men as dextrous in shooting them in the nose with a bolt, which makes them become a prey to the hounds. Ex∣cept they hit the Sable in the nose they lose him, for he is an hardy Beast, and will run away with an Arrow in his Bo∣dy; besides, it spoils the Fur. 'Tis so excessive cold here, that wa∣ter thrown up into the Air will descend congeal'd into Ice. The most Northern parts afford no Bread, but Fish in abun∣dance, which they eat dryed instead of bread, and yet they live to a great age. They feed their Cows with Fish during the frost, which makes the milk taste fishy. The River Ob is a vast River, whose end is as yet unknown: there is great store of Fish call'd Bebuga, much like a Whale, but better meat, out of whose spawn and the Sturgeons toge∣ther, they make Caviare at Astracan, which they lay in great heaps of salt, and after a little fermentation press it, and barrel it up. We have some here unpress'd; 'tis a great dainty, but will not keep.
The North of Syberia is call'd Samo∣geda, or Tsamoeida, which signifies Ca∣nibals, or Men-eaters, for they eat those whom they conquer in battel. Their food is most Fish, their riches Deer, of which they have great herds, and so tame, that at whistle they will appear at hand, and suffer themselves to be har∣nessed, and put to the sledges by pairs, which they will draw swiftly as wind eighty miles a day. When they hunt for new Deer, they consult the Priest, who, after many ceremonies and conju∣rations, tells them in what quarter they must go, and most commonly they find his predictions true. There is no di∣stinction in the clothes of Male or Fe∣male, but both are made of Deer skins, with the hair side outward, which by experience they find the warmest. You can hardly distinguish the men and women by their visage, neither wear Beards, and both have faces like Ba∣boons. Their Manners, Language and Religi∣on are brutish, for they worship the Sun and Moon, and good reason have they to adore the one, and make good use of
his light, which they enjoy so little in the winter. They are excessively jea∣lous of their Wives, which puts me in mind of the strength of fancy and cu∣stom: One being ask't if he thought not an English Woman (then present, young and handsom) as pretty and fair as his Lady ugly; answer'd, no surely, thy Wives complexion is pale, like the belly of a Fish, our Womens colours are natural and genuine. Their Daugh∣ters are esteem'd great Riches, and must not be seen by young men, till contract∣ed in Marriage, which they are at six or seven years old, that they may be sure to have them Virgins: they buy them of their Parents for so many head of Deer, and take them home to their houses, and lock them up al Italiano. The men like∣wise serve their wives so, when they go an hunting, and 'tis as ordinary as strings to a purse. For they have a Proverb, He that leaves his purse open invites a Thief to it; such as have seen their En∣gines, say they come not short of the Italian ones. Their houses are only round tents made of Deer-skins and Matts, with a
fire in the midst, and a hole at the top for the smoke, about which they lye round, and find themselves warm e∣nough. In the Summer they remove near the Rivers to fish, which they dry, and preserve against Winter, they kill their fishes with arrows, and most com∣monly eat them raw: they eat young Puppies, and count them a rare dish. They are not thought worthy of a Go∣vernour by his Imperial Majesty, nor so considerable as to be taxed, only vo∣luntarily they pay a few Deer. None understand their barbarous language but themselves, nor yet their Laws which they execute secretly. When they sell a Deer to Strangers, they are sure to indent to have the garbage, which they eat after a slight squeezing out of the excrements. He is best qualifi'd a∣mongst them who knows most in Magick, wherein they are excellent, especially before Strangers, but amongst the Russes they dare not play any feats, least they should be accused. At Archangelo di∣vers of them being treated by an English Merchant, one in the company being ve∣ry drunk, besoul'd himself, and was as
rude as a Bear, or Tom a Bedlam. Hereupon an old Woman was call'd in, who whisper'd in his ear, touch'd his forehead, and the man became as sober as if he had drunk nothing. CHAP. XVIII. Of the Southern parts of Syberia. The Wilderness called Step, full of Cherry-trees and fine Flowers. Of Elks. Of the Zoorick and Perivoshick. The Countrey of Squirrels. Of a little Bird like a Woodcock. Another like an Hawk. A third as big as a Swan. The story of the Vegitable Lamb refuted. GOing towards the more Southern parts of Syberia, you shall see a Wilderness called the Step, which is six or seven hundred Versts long, most of it s Champain, it has but few Rivers, et the ground is incredibly fruitful. There you may ride a days journey through a field of Cherry-trees, not a∣ove three quarters of a yard high; the reason why they are such dwarffs, is, be∣cause
they are so often burnt down by Strangers or Travellers, who making fires in the Autumn catelesty depart, and the grass being long and dry takes fire, which sometimes has pursued them to death, two or three hundred Furlongs have been burnt at a time. These trees yield a sine red Cherry, but very tart: Such as have been transplanted have proved very good. I have spoken with those who have seen here variety of Tu∣lips, Damask and red Roses. Asparagus exceeding large, Onions, Marjoram, Time, Sage, Chicory, Endive, Savo∣ry, &c. & what else we carefully nourish in our Gardens; Liquorish also in great plenty, which invite thither Ursa major and Ursa minor: lastly Parsips and Carrets. Merchants fetch from thence much Salgemmar, and Nitre. Their Elks are the largest in the world; they have also a little Beas call'd a Zoorick, about the bigness of a Badger, but not of that make; it has dark brindled fine smooth hide, short legs, a little head, a back almost a spa broad, and is indeed a pretty plump crea∣ture. They dwell under ground like
Coneys, When Colonel Crafords Re∣giment quarter'd near their cells, they came out wondring at them, and stand∣ing upon their hinder legs, they made such a shrill and unexpected noise, as put the men into such a fright, and the horse grasing by them, that some ran a∣way ten Versts before they could be overtaken. The Russes relate strange stories of their mutual Wars, taking Prisoners, and making Slaves to bring in their winter provision, as Hay and Roots; his may pass for a Russian Fable. But, or certain they say, that their Burroughs are very finely contriv'd, and that they are so neat and curious in their houses, that if any of them dye in the Burrough, they will carry them out and bury them. n these parts there is another Beast call'd Perrivoshick, whose furr is brown yel∣ow, mixed with a little white and black, which shews well in a coat, though little valued here, because the urr is short, and of little warmth; this beast s said to be very civil in carrying Squirrels and Ermines over Rivers, and this is the reason why he is called Perri∣voshick, i. e. the Ferry man or Tran∣sporter;
and the same word in the Russi∣an tong signifies a Translator. The Russes say these Beasts take great de∣light in transporting other creatures. I never heard it from any eye-witness, but this I have, that whole Countreys of Squirrels having spent their provision on the one side the River, will adventure over to the other, using their tayls for their Masts, Rudder and Sails, and a small chip or stick for their Boat, with a fore-wind, which veering about ha∣zards the whole Fleet; for they cannot tack about, and if once their sails take wet they are utterly undone and defunct. About Cazan and Astracan there is a little Bird about the bigness of a Woodcock, his legs and bill not unlike a Snipe, but the feathers and neck like a Cock of the Game, being cut and trimm'd they fight like Cocks, sparring at one another, and yet they have no spurs. They are in continual war, i kept in the house, and will lie on their guards with their bills on the ground, and at first advantage run a tilt with their single Rapiers, as violently as any Duellist, brusling up their neck-fea∣thers
(a guissa di gallo) they are meat be∣yond Quails, and are also fnd about Archangelo, with another Bl as great as an Owzle, made like an Hawk, who flyes at smaller birds, catches them, sticks them on a thorn, and picks them very clean before she eats them. There s a Bird brought hither from Astracan as big as a Swan, not unlike in his body and his feet, but hath somewhat shorter and thicker neck; he has also a very ide throat able to swallow down a fish ine inches adout. Perhaps in some hi∣stories of these parts, you may have eard of a vegitable Lamb, which de∣ours all the grass about it, and then flyes; but this is as true as the story of Monocular people in Sir John Mande∣ils Travels, and such like Fables, which ave not the least shadow of truth.
CHAP. XIX. A brief account of Tartary. It's Metropo∣lis. To whom the Tartars pay Tribute, The Muscovite formerly tributary to the Crim-Tartar. How far they march in a day. They eat horse-flesh, but no bread nor salt, the reason why. They are very quick sighted, excellent horse-men of the Colmack Tartars. The Crim's describ'd, they deride the Russian wor∣ship. The grounds why they do it. HAving fetch't this compass, I thin it fit to touch upon Tartaria, an tell you what account I have had from thence, which though incompleat tak as you find it, and be pleased to excus the brevity of this Narration. The Metropolis of Tartary is calle Crim, it is a strong walled Town upo the Tartarian Sea, from whence the grea Cham is nam'd the Crim-Tartar. The say the City is built of Stone and Bri very stately. The people are tributa
to the Turk, and Moscua was formerly tributary to them, and paid ten thou∣sand Sheep-skin coats yearly to the Duke of Moscovi's homage, which was to feed the Crims horse with oates out of his Cap, to this also he was sworn by a strict dath. But within this ten years the tribute has been refused, because the Tartar broke the League by inva∣ding the Confines: And indeed they are troublesom neighbors, like Flyes when they are routed, they fly in a mo∣ment, dispersing themselves one by one, but at night rendezvous again; and 'tis almost as impossible to got one of their led horses, which will not leave their companions. They will march an hundred miles a day with changing their horses once or twice; for every man is furnished with three at four at least. If any of them tyre o dye, they share them among the troop, and being sufficiently chased un∣der the saddle, they make an hearty meal of them. If any of them fall sick, they give him some Mares milk, or fresh bloud from an horse which they bld on purpose.
They bring no Salt nor Bread along with them, nor do they eat any at all, alledging that Salt makes them dim∣sighted, and Bread breeds a dull and heavy nourishment. They are certainly as quick-sighted as any people in the world, and will de∣scry upon the Step or Wilderness (where a man hath nothing to hinder his prospect thirty or forty miles round) I say, they will descry a single man, when a Russ cannot see a whole troop of Tartars. There are no better Horsemen in the world, at full speed they will raise up themselves upon their stirrops, and shoot behind them with their arrows, which sufficiently gall their enemies Horse. The Colmack Tartar-women are as good souldiers as their Husbands, many of them acknowledge the Emperour for their Soveraign. This year an an army of Women to revenge the taking of some Children and Captives by the Crim's people, encoun∣tred the Tartars Army, took many pri∣soners, and routed the rest. O brave
Virago's! worthy to be numbred a∣mongst the Amazonian Worthies. The Colmacks have a vast Countrey, and live in Tents, where they use gra∣sing, Tamberlane was born here. They are larger siz'd than the Crim-Tartars, and of an other feature, but more swarthy. The Crim-Tartars are flat-fac'd, small ey'd, have their eyes deep set, narrow foreheads, and low broad shoulders; they are of a middle stature, so shaped, that 'tis hard for them to conceal themselves in any place wheresoever they shew their faces. They break the noses of their chil∣dren being new born; saying, it is a fool∣ish thing to wear a nose, that stands in a mans sight. They are all Mahome∣tans, and laugh at the Russians for wor∣shipping a painted piece of board, and say 'tis better to worship the Sun, be∣cause he has a glorious body, does the world much good, and none can injure him as they may a wooden Idol. Your Gods (say they to the Russes) in a short time grow blind, (i. e. obliterate) and then you throw them into the River with a Copeak or two, and a piece of Olibanum
tyed up in a string, and so commit them to the Volgian stream which runs into the Caspian Sea; and we take them up, and broil a piece of Horse flesh upon them. What is that for a God? which is no better then a Gridiron, and cannot re∣sist the hands of them that destroy it. Most rationally spoken. Mosovitae non possunt respondere Argumento.
CHAP. XX. What the simpler sort of Russians are, their Idolatry and ignorance, what they think of St. Nicholas, their high conceit of good works. They are great Rogues. Some are good among them. The Poles are not so barbarous as the Russes. The Poles characteriz'd, their Laws▪ their King how stiled, he is very magnificent. King Henry weary of the title▪ How he made shift to get away out of Po∣land. TRue it is the simpler sort of people in Russia are meer Idolaters, and in the Northern parts, as Archangele and Cola, they know no other God but St. Nicholas, whom they really imagine to to rule all the world. They say he came to St. Nicholas (a Port-town by Archan∣gel) swimming from Italy upon a Mil∣stone; if any Russ should question the truth of this story 'tis as much as life is
worth. They celebrate the Festivals of their own Saints with greater honour than the Apostles. For they say of St. Ni∣cholas, he is Nasha Bradt, one of our Bre∣thern, and has a greater kindness for us his Countrey-men, than St. Peter or St. Paul who never knew us. When they have extorted a vast Estate out of the bowels of poor people, and grind∣ing the faces of Strangers, they think to expiate all their wicked actions at last by building a Church, and endowing it with abundance of Images adorn'd with Je∣wels, and furnishing it with a Ring of Bells; this they account a meritorious work, and indeed it is so when the glory of God is chiefly aim'd at, and not self∣interest and vain applause sought there∣by. Greater Rogues there are not in the whole world, yet there is many good people also. Such as have improv'd their parts by conversing with Stran∣gers, are more civiliz'd; yea those who have seen the Polish way of living, which though I cannot much admire, yet sure∣ly 'tis not so barbarous as the Russian; for they have a way to improve their wits by Learning, which they are de∣bar'd
in Muscovia; and may travel out of their own Countrey, a thing prohi∣bited to the Russians. Poles▪Notwithstanding all these improve∣ments, they are a scurvy nasty Nation as as ever I convers'd with, proud and in∣solent, hugely self-conceited, alwaies extolling their own Countrey above all others, vain and prodigal in their ex∣pences before company, gawdy in their Apparel, rich in their Horses and Trap∣pings, civil and hospitable to Strangers, till they have seen all their pomp, and have been drunk twice or thrice, and then like Welshmen they are willing to be rid of them. They are greater Drin∣kers than the Russes, and so quarrel∣some in their drink, as few Gentlemen are seen without some eminent scars, which they wear as badges of honour gotten in the wars of Bacchus. Their Laws are the most barbarous of any people living, for homicide is satisfi'd by a pecuniary mulct, a Crown (as I remember) for killing a Peasant, and so higher according to the quality of the person.
Their King may be stiled Rex Baccha∣torum, for in their Comitia, when a vote has passed all but one peremptory Cox∣comb, he will rise up in the spirit of contradiction, and laying his hand up∣on his Cimitar saucily protest against it, though not able to give a reason for what he says, and perhaps the business is demurr'd for that time; next day be∣ing half drunk, he will be the first in passing the very same vote. Their King is little better than a painted Rudder, which seems to steer, but does not. Henry the Third, afterwards King of France was (as I take it) King of Poland, and so weary of his Kingship, that he would willingly have chang'd it for a pair of Shoes of good running Leather. On a certain day he made an entertain∣ment for many of the Nobility, whom he made drunk, having for his own wine nothing but fair water colour'd red: One of these drunken Lords he laid in his own Royal Bed, the Curtains were drawn, and Waiters stood by the bed side, who knew nothing of the design. In the mean time the King slip't away, and by horses laid on purpose made his es∣cape out of the Confines.
The Son of Bacchus being in the interim well attended, at last awakened, and betray'd the plot, whereupon they made all possible hast to catch their King a∣gain, but being gone into another Coun∣trey they treated with him, beseeching him to return, and they would for the future be very civil unto him; but he answer'd, No. That bird deserves to be a prisoner all its days, that will return again to the Cage when he is once got loose: As for mine own part I had rather be a Peasant in France, than King in Poland. Stul∣tissima optio—
CHAP. XXI. Of Lues Venerea. Of the Polonian Plica, a familiar distemper, and very infecti∣ous, yet they highly esteem it. When hair first began to be powdred. The Poles more honourable in keeping Ar∣ticles than the Russes. A comparison of the Polish and Russian Languages. Their salutations are stately. How the Tar∣tars and Chircasses salute. The Chir∣casses Religion. MY Lady Lues Venerea is as well known in Poland as in the place where she was born; not a mushy panny (Lord) nor a pannya (Lady) but are inti∣mately acquainted with her, and so is the Court and the Countrey. The Russes in the conquests of Vilna, and many other Towns and Pro∣vinces on the Borders of Poland, have taken her Ladiship prisoner, whom they are like to keep longer than their Towns. For till this War she was not known
here this thousand years: But when she gets into such a cold Countrey as this, she earths like a Badger so deep, that there's no driving of her out without a Pickaxe or Firebrand; juxta illud, les Veroles de Rouen et la boue du Paris ne ja∣mais sortont la pais sans oster la piece. The Pox of Rouen, and the Dirt of Paris ne∣ver go away without taking a piece out. But what is worse, the Poles have the Plica as familiar among them, as the French have the Itch; and so infectious too, that few in a house escape it when 'tis once crept in amongst them. Cer∣tainly there cannot be a greater plague in the world, for besides its many dreadful symptoms, the nasty elfish lock stinks like an old Ulcer, and yet they wear it as a badge of Nobility. Some you shall have with hair full of brayds or knots, as I saw a Monks, which look'd like Medusa's, who for this monstrosity was accounted a man of more than ordinary sanctity. The like esteem they have of Horses, who are troubled herewith in their Manes, or Foretops, for they think them Steeds of good courage and service, If an envi∣ous
person cuts off never so little of the Plica, the Horse either dyes, runs mad, or becomes blind and lame. They say the first use of Hair-powder came from the Poles, who were fain to perfume the Plica to abate its odious stench. 'Tis hard escaping this disease if you pass through the Countrey, where Arsenical Mines poyson the water, for it comes on a suddain; Unico aquae Arseni∣cae haustulo, &c, The Poles are more honourable in keeeping their Articles and Covenants than the Russians, who seldom keep faith with an enemy, if the breach thereof be but advantageous. Yet in private con∣cerns the Russ fears an oath, because 'tis seldom administred, which makes it the more to be reverenced. Their Languages differ not much, just as English and Scotch, the Polish is said to be the more copious and com∣plemental, but to my ears, which judge by outward sounds, it seems the more harsh in pronunciation, and worse than a medly of Welsh, Irish and Cornish. They spit in your face when they talk. Their Orthography is like the Welsh,
six Consonants to one Vowel. Their salutations are in lofty terms, they bow not so much as the Russians. The Tar∣tars salute with their fore-finger upon their mouth, and a little nod, and em∣brace their Superiors about the knees. The Chircasses salutes are blunt and rude, as, how do thy Children and thy Servants, thy Cows and thy Sheep, thy Horses and Goats and Swine, thy Cocks, Hens and Turkeys, are they all in good health? This they punctually repeat every morning they meet. They are of the Greek saith, but not so superstitious as the Russians, who think their Chur∣ches defiled if a Stranger sets his foot in∣to them, and therefore wash them after that pollution, and the Stranger must ei∣ther turn Russ, or satisfie his folly with the loss of his life; in which they imi∣tate the Mahometans, as also in many other fooleries.
CHAP. XXII. The Court of Russia. Of the Present Czar his Father. Grave Wolmer how disappointed in Mar∣riage. Czar Michaels death. The story of Boris Juanoidg. How the Czar elects a Wife. Whom Boris preferr'd. His height makes him envied. Eliah ex∣alted. The Russians extol Marriage. Eliah disabled. Who succeeds him. Na∣shokin a great Reformer. Highly com∣mended, his words concerning the French and Danes supporting the Hol∣landers against England. He is a great lover of the English. How he censured a Bill of Mortality, and some other dis∣course which he held. IT would be too tedious and imperti∣nent at this present time to recount the rise of the Family of the Romanoves,
how they assum'd the name of Czar, how Basil about one hundred and forty years since reduced the lesser Dukes of Russia, and Juan Vasilowich prosecuted what his Father began, and subdued the Kings of Cazan, Astrocan and Sy∣beria; this would become the history of the Czars life, which I wish I had opportunity and ability to write: For certainly since Kings raign'd upon earth, there never was a man heard of more prodigiously Tyrannical, and yet a more fortunate Prince than he. The Father of this present Czar was was Michael, a Prince of incomparable clemency and magnificence, a lover of peace and amity with all Christian King's, kind to Strangers, and very Re∣ligious. Grave Wolmer, the late King of Denmarks natural Son should have married his Daughter, but the Clergy objected he was an Heretick, hereupon proffer'd his Chaplains should main∣ain the truth of his Faith, which the Russian Priests refusing, the Czar breaks ut into passion; saying, What Faith this that we profess, that you are un∣willing to bring to a tryal. Some few
days after going well to bed, about mid-night he was taken with a vomit∣ing, and dyed in the morning, and (after the Russian fashion) was carried into the Church the next night. So the dis∣pute ended. His Czaritsa did not long survive him, and Grave Wolmer was fain to leave his Mistris, and shift for him∣self as well as he could. This Czar often charged his Son to follow his Governours counsel in all affairs, who was Boris Juanoidg Moro∣sove by name, of whose Father the Russes relate this story, That he being a favourite of the great Tyrant, presumed (being a Widdower) to beg one of his handsome Concubines for a Wife, which was granted him, but whilst they were at their amorous enjoyments shut up in the Bathstove, he secretly convey'd wild Bear, which fell upon them, and devour'd them both. He had two Sons Boris and Chleab, which the Emperou educated. Boris being a kind of Lord Protector, diminished the number o houshold Servants, brought the rest t half wages, rais'd the Customs, and gav Embassadors half allowances, sent a
the old Dukes to Governments afar off; Ripnine to Belgorod, and Corakin to Ca∣zan. The Czar being to take a Wife, all the choice beauties in the Countrey are brought before him, one he fancies, and gives her a Handkerchief and Ring, she appears again in a Royal dress; but Bo∣ris ordered the Crown to be tyed so hard about her head, that she fell into a swoon, this was presently construed an Epileptick fit,; her Father being ex∣amined with torments, was, alas poor old Gentleman, sent into Syberia, and died by the way with grief, and left his Fa∣mily in disgrace. The maid is still alive, but never known to have had any more fits. She has been offer'd many Noble∣men, but refuses all, and keeps the Hand∣kerchief and Ring. The Czar allows her a pension to expiate the injury done to her Father and Family. Boris Juanoidg proposed Mary the Daughter of Eliah Daneloidg of obscure Gentility, rais'd by the death of his Uncle Grammatine the Chancellor of the Embassadors Office, to whom he fill'd wine in his minority, The present
Ctzaritsa has often gone into the woods to gather Mushrooms. She was a tole∣rable beauty. adorn'd with the precious jewels of modesty, industry and religi∣on. She was married prrvately for fear of Witch-craft, which is here com∣mon at Nuptials. Boris petitioned for the younger Sister Anna, and obtain'd her, and from thence concluded his in∣terest well rivetted. But the Lady was not so well pleas'd with him being an old Widdower, and she a succulent black young Lass; so instead of chil∣dren jealousies were got, which produ∣ced a leathern lace about a finger thick, a complement that often passes between the Russian Lords and their Ladies, when their Amours are extravagant, or the Brandy wine too strong in their heads. One William Barnsly an English man (born at Barnsly Hall in Worcestershire) was sent to Syberia by this Boris's insti∣gation for being suspected too familiar in his house. He has been their above twenty years, and at last he turn'd Russ, and was richly married. This height of Boris draws envious eyes from the ancient Nobility, whom
he daily makes to decline, and brings in creatures of his own. The people mur∣mure at their new Taxes, accuse Boris, and peremptorily demand him of the Czar, who finding himself surpriz'd, de∣sir'd the life of Boris might be spared, and kissing the Cross, swore he should never come to the Court again. The old Nobility are countenanced for a time: In the mean while the commons are complemented underhand to petiti∣on for Boris his Restauration, which was easily granted. Boris hereupon gratifies the people, and becomes their Favou∣rite, and a patron also to Strangers. He died six years since, in a good old age, successful he was in his Counsels, belo∣ved of his Prince, lamented by the People, but not of the Nobility, who cannot yet accomplish their designs. For Eliah Daneloidg is made Generalissi∣mo. He is a goodly person, has limbs and muscles like Hercules, a bold man, of great parts, and such a vast memory, that he knew all the Commission Officers of an Army eighty thousand strong, where they quarter'd, and what their qualifications were; the Czar rather
Cizaritsa has often gone into the woods to gather Mushrooms. She was a tole∣rable beauty. adorn'd with the precious jewels of modesty, industry and religi∣on. She was married prrvately for fear of Witch-craft, which is here com∣mon at Nuptials. Boris petitioned for the younger Sister Anna, and obtain'd her, and from thence concluded his in∣terest well rivetted. But the Lady was not so well pleas'd with him being an old Widdower, and she a succulent black young Lass; so instead of chil∣dren jealousies were got, which produ∣ced a leathern lace about a finger thick, a complement that often passes between the Russian Lords and their Ladies, when their Amours are extravagant, or the Brandy wine too strong in their heads. One William Barnsly an English man (born at Barnsly Hall in Worcestershire) was sent to Syberia by this Boris's insti∣gation for being suspected too familiar in his house. He has been their above twenty years, and at last he turn'd Russ, and was richly married. This height of Boris draws envious eyes from the ancient Nobility, whom
he daily makes to decline, and brings in creatures of his own. The people mur∣mure at their new Taxes, accuse Boris, and peremptorily demand him of the Czar, who finding himself surpriz'd, de∣sir'd the life of Boris might be spared, and kissing the Cross, swore he should never come to the Court again. The old Nobility are countenanced for a time: In the mean while the commons are complemented underhand to petiti∣on for Boris his Restauration, which was easily granted. Boris hereupon gratifies the people, and becomes their Favou∣rite, and a patron also to Strangers. He died six years since, in a good old age, successful he was in his Counsels, belo∣ved of his Prince, lamented by the People, but not of the Nobility, who cannot yet accomplish their designs. For Eliah Daneloidg is made Generalissi∣mo. He is a goodly person, has limbs and muscles like Hercules, a bold man, of great parts, and such a vast memory, that he knew all the Commission Officers of an Army eighty thousand strong, where they quarter'd, and what their qualifications were; the Czar rather
fear'd him than lov'd him; but the Czaritsa alwaies kept up his Interest. He is made Lord Treasurer, and six or seven Offices more are conferr'd upon him, all which he manages with great vigour, but not without Bribery. Which the Czar did the more connive at, because he knew full well that this Silver stream at long running would fall into the Oce∣an. Notwithstanding all these expecta∣tions, at last perceiving Eliah too kind to some of his handsome Tartar and Polish slaves, he urged him (being an old Widdower) either to marry or re∣frain the Court. For the Russians high∣ly extoll marriage, partly to people their Territories, and partly to prevent Sodomy and Buggery, to which they are naturally inclined, nor is it punish∣ed there with Death. A lusty Fellow about eight years since being at this beastly sport with a Cow, cry'd to one that saw him Ne Misheay, do not inter∣rupt me; and now he is known by no other name over all Muscovy, then Ne Misheai. Eliah at present having had an Apo∣plectick fit, is disabled in body and
mind, and knows no body without be∣ing told. His miss had been the greater, had not that great States-man Nashockin, succeeded and suppli'd his place in many Offices. It was this Nashockin who concluded the peace with Poland upon honourable terms, and finished the League with Swedland. He is now made Chancel∣lor of the Embassadors Office, Treasu∣rer, Lord of Russia minor, and has seve∣ral other Offices. He contriv'd the Silk-trade through Russia, and 'tis thought all the Indian Trade will be drawn that way. He is now about re∣forming the Russian Laws, and new mo∣delling all the Czardom. There shall be no delatory Suites; all Governours with their Assistants shall have power of life and death; for before all Criminals were brought to Mosco, with no less trouble than charge to the Czar. This same counsel Jethro gave to Moses. This Nashockin is one who will not be corrup∣ted, he is a very sober abstemious man, indefatigable in business, an admirer of Monarchs: Speaking about the French and Dan siding with the Hollander a∣gainst
England, he brake forth into these words. I wonder that these two King's should have no more prudence or rea∣son, than to support or countenance such Boors against the Monarch of England, who should rather joyn together with the rest of the Princes in Europe to de∣stroy all Republicks, which are no bet∣ter than the Nurseries of Heresie and Rebellion. I have heard him say, that 'tis the Czars interest to keep a good correspondence with the King of Eng∣land above any other Christian Prince. He is the only Patron the English have. Being sollicited to admit of English goods, he produced the London Bill of Mortality, wherein very few dyed of the Plague; notwithstanding (said he) how do we know but the Goods may be brought out of some of the infected houses, and one spark of fire will kindle a whole sack of Charcoale. 'Tis a strange custom to publish your infirmi∣ties. Beggars indeed expose their ul∣cers to to raise commiseration, and get relief. But they who proclaim the Pst, give a caveat against all commerce of them, as men set up lights to keep ships
off their coasts. Another thing seems strange unto us, that Royal Letters are often sent privately to us in in behalf of private men to demand Justice, as if our Czar had not made sufficient provi∣sion for Strangers as well as Natives. We seldom have any such applications from any other Prince but that of Den∣mark, where we hear they are purchas'd at a cheap rate: What they cost in Eng∣land we know not, but what have we to do with the customs of other Nations. Their clothes will not fit us, nor our cloths them: thus he ended his discourse abruptly, and if he had spoken more then he had mind should be repeated. But by this you may judge (tanquam ex unque leonem) that he is a great Politician, and a very grave and wise Minister of State, not inferiour peradventure to any one in Europe.
CHAP. XXIII. The Czars description. His answer to a Stranger. How he appears in publick. He never visits any Subject. His Court without noise. He seldom dines publick∣ly. At Easter his Subjects kiss his hand. How he pays his Strelsies. What he has done to employ the poor. The Czaritza governs the Women. From whence the Emperour's chief Revenues proceed. I shall now give you a further descrip∣tion of the Czar. He is a goodly person, about six foot high, well set, in∣clin'd to fat, of a clear complexion, lightish hair, somewhat a low forehead, of a stern countenance, severe in his chastisements, but very careful of his Subjects love. Being urged by a Stran∣ger to make it death for any man to de∣sert his Colours; he answer'd, it was a hard case to do that, for God has not given courage to all men alike. He ne∣ver
appears to the people but in magni∣ficence, and on Festivals with wonderful splendor of Jewels and Attendant▪ He never went to any Subjects house but his Governours when he was thought past all recovery. His Centinels and Guards placed round about his Court, stand like silent and immoveable Statues. No noise is heard in his Pallace, no more than if uninhabited. None but his Dome∣sticks are suffer'd to approach the in∣ward Court, except the Lords that are in Office. He never dines publickly but on Festivals, and then his Nobility dine in his presence. At Easter all the No∣bility and Gentry, and Courtiers kiss the Emperours hand, and receive Eggs. Every meal he sends dishes of meat to his Favourites from his own Table. His stores of Corn, and dry'd flesh are very considerable, with these he pays his Strelsies or Janzaries, giving them some cloth, but very little money; for they have all Trades, and great Priviledges. The Emperour with his Pottash, Wax and Honey, he buys Velvet, Sattin, Da∣mask, cloth of Gold and Broad-cloth, with which he gratifies his Officers for their service.
He hath now seven Versts off Mosco, built Work-houses for Hemp and Flax, in that good order, beauty and ca∣pacity, that they will employ all the poor in his Kingdom with work. He hath allotted many miles of wast Land for that design. The Czaritza is to govern the wo∣mens side for her use and profit. Thus the Czar improves the Manufactures of his Countrey, feeds all the Labourers as cheap as we do our Dogs. And lays up the money that comes out of the Cabacks, Bath stoves, Tart, Pitch, Hemp, Flax, Honey, Wax, Caviare, Sturgeon, Bellusa, and other salted and dry'd fish from Astracan, Cazan, the Lake Belsira, and many other Lakes and Rivers with which the Countrey abounds, especi∣ally Syberia in the latter.
CHAP. XXIV. The Czar goes every year to a house of plea∣sure call'd Obrasawsky. Of the curious tents erected there. How cautious the Emperour is of letting the vulgar sort behold his pastimes. This commended for several reasons. None are to petition the Czar in the fields. What hapned to a poor Russian Captain for so doing. The Emperours resentment for his death. Peter Solticove turn'd out of Office, and banished the Court; the cause why. Nashockin put in his place. The Czar in the night time visits his Chancellors desks. He has Spyes in every corner. 'Tis death to reveal any thing spoken in the Court. The Russians answer to inquisitive persons. The Czars chil∣dren how attended; they are bound to keep secrecie. EVery year towards the latter end of May the Czar goes three miles out of Mosco, to an house of pleasure call'd
Obrasausky: In English Transfiguration, being dedicated to the Transfiguration in the Mount. And according to that, Master 'tis good for us to be here, let us make three Tabernacles; So the Empe∣rour has most magnificent Tents, his own is made of cloth of Gold, lined with Sables. His Czaritsa's with cloth of Silver, lined with Ermines. The Princes according to their degree. His and Czarritsa's, with those of his eleven children and five Sisters, stand in a circle with the Church-Tent in the middle, the most glorious shew in its kind that ever I saw. There are Rails and Guards set Musquet shot from them, beyond which no man may pass without order: Fo the Czar will have none of the vul∣gar people to be eye-witnesses of his pa∣stimes. Indeed the too near approaches of the common Rabble make discovery of Princes infirmities, not to say vani∣tes, Majesty is jealous of Gazers. This made Montezume King of Mexico keep his Subjects at such a distance that they urst not behold him, familiarity breeds contempt, when Princes expose them∣selves too much unto publick view, they
grow cheap, and are little regarded. There∣fore in a Theatre, the Stage is rail'd in, that the Spectators may not crowd upon the Scenes, which shew best at a distance. And so it fares with Princes, the more they are reserv'd the more they are observ'd, the more implor'd the more ador'd; otherwise they run a great hazard of being contemn'd, and reckon'd no better than their Subjects, seeing an equal mortality and frailty of flesh attends all men. When the Czar goes into the Countrey or fields to take his pleasure he gives strict charge that none should interrupt him with Petitions. A Captain of white Russia, and native of that Countrey being three years without pay, and finding no re∣stress from Peter Solticove Lord of that Province, came and press'd too near the Czars coach; the Czar perceiving no petition in his hand, suspected he might e an Assassinate, and with his staff once Cxar Juans) not unlike a dart, in∣ending to push the fellow away, he ruck him to the heart, and he died. The Nobility rid up to the coach, and arching what arms the man had, found othing but a wooden spoon, and a peti∣tion
for three years Arrears, Where∣upon the Czar smote his Breast, saying, I have kill'd an innocent person, but Peter Solticove is guilty of his blood, whom God forgive; and immediatly sending for him, after a severe check, he turn'd him out of his place, banish∣ed him from the Court, and appointed Nashockin that great Minister of State to take his Office, and examine and find out the misdemeanours thereof. This hapned in June last, and this action was but whispred, and that too with much peril of a mans tongue. In the night season the Czar will go about and visit his Chancellors Desks, and see what Decrees are pass'd, and what Petitions are unanswer'd. He has his spyes in every corner, and nothing is done or said at any Feast, publick Meet∣ing, Burial or Wedding but he knows it. He has spyes also attending his Ar∣mies to watch their motions, and give a true account of their actions: These spyes are Gentlemen of small fortunes who depend on the Emperours favour and are sent into Armies, and along with Embassadors, and are present on all pub∣lick occasions.
'Tis death for any one to reveal what is spoken in the Czars Pallace. I being curious to see the fine buildings for the Flax and Hemp, ask't to what end they were built, but not a Workman durst tell me, though they know it well e∣nough; but they replied, God and the Emperour know best, this was all I could get from them. The Czars chil∣dren are attended with children of their own bred up with them, and there is none of them but know their distance, and their degrees of bowing to all sorts of persons. None dare speak a word what passes in their Court.
CHAP. XXV. The story of a Jew turn'd Maho∣metan, he falsly accuses Nashock∣in, and is lash'd for his pains. Jews how crept into the Court. A Discourse of Bogdan Mat∣feidg (the Czars great Favou∣rite) his Pandor and Amours. His Ladies jealousie, how she was made away. The Czar reproves him. He and Nashockin no good friends. Of the Czars Religion, vvherein he is very zealous and constant. He fasts at several times eight months in a year, dis∣poses of all Ecclesiastical Prefer∣ments. His high commendation. THis Summer a Jew turn'd Persian Mahometan, and an
Interpreter to the Persian Mer∣chants, came in their behalf with a loud complaint against Na∣shockin for a business depending in the Embassadors Precause, or Court. To whom the Czar re∣plied, saying, I have left Na∣shockin to determine all affairs of Merchants, let him do you Ju∣stice, but if I find your Inter∣preters complaint impertinent, I shall place all my displeasure on his back; and so it prov'd, where∣upon he was graced with thirty good ashes laid on in order like red tape upon tawny leather, and doubtless they will out-last the best Garment he hath: For their whippings are very keen, and cut to the bone. The Jews of late are strange∣ly crept into the City and Court,
by means of a Jewish Chyrurgi∣on (pretendedly baptiz'd Luthe∣ran) who assists Bogdan Matfeidg (Steward of the Houshold) in his amours, and supplies him with Polish handmaids, he being bred up in Poland. But his Lady (as she had good cause) being jea∣lous of these handsome Slaves which her Husband kept, some in his Gardens, and some in his House, became a burthen unto him; they therefore one night last Winter brought her some Dainties, which she eat, and was merry after it, but in the morning was found dead in her bed. O∣thers say 'twas a poysoned glass of wine they gave her, which cu∣red her of all diseases. This cau∣sed much grumbling among the Commons, and since that time
the Czar has urged him to marry, and abandon that wicked life he led with his Polish Doxies, or else he should his place. 'Twas said he would take one of his Mi∣stresses for his wife. This Bog∣dan is the Czars great Favourite, Lord High Steward, and regu∣lates all domestick Affairs. He was bred up from a child with the Czar, and is of the same age. They call him the whispering Fa∣vourite, because when ever he comes to Council, he acts behind the Door. Nashockin is no friend to him, nor he to the English, be∣ing better suppli'd with money from the Dutch. As to the Czars Religion, he is of the Greek Faith, and very strict in the observation thereof. He never misses divine Service,
if he be well he goes to it, if sick it comes to him in his chamber. On Fast-dayes he frequents mid∣night prayers (the old vigils of the Church) standing four, five or six hours together, and pro∣strating himself to the ground sometimes a thousand times, and on great Festivals fifteen hun∣dred. In the great Fast he eats but three meals a week, viz. on Thursday, Saturday Sunday; for the rest he takes a piece of brown bread and salt, a pickled Mush∣room or Cucumber, and drinks a cup of small beer. He eats Fish but twice in the great Lent, and observes it seven weeks together, besides Maslinets (or cleansing) week, wherein they eat milk and eggs. Out of the Fast he ob∣serves Mondays, Wednesdays and
Fridays, and will not then eat any thing that comes of flesh. In fine, no Monk is more observant of Canonical hours, then he is of Fasts. We may reckon he fasts almost eight months in twelve, with the six weeks fast before Christmas, and 2 other small fasts. Those that instituted so many Fasts advanced fish to spare flesh, which else would be destroy'd, because they are forc'd to house their Cattle all the winter, some∣times five months space. The Czar does not disdain to assist at the Processions bare-headed, and on foot if it be not rainy. He is a great Patron of the Church, yet restrains the profuse bounty of dying men to the Clergy. None can found a Monastery without his licence. He makes bold with
the Church Treasary upon loan in time of war, and pays it again ad Graecas Calendas. For indeed should he not do so his contribu∣tion would fall short, seeing the Church holds almost two third parts of the Czardom. In his Pallace he has an Hospital of very old men, 120 years old, with whom he often discourses, and delights to hear them tell what pass'd in his Ancestors time. Once a year, viz upon good Friday, he visits all the prisons in the night, and taking personal cogni∣zance of all the Prisoners, buys out some that are in debt, and re∣leases others that are criminal, as he thinks fit: He pays great sums for such as he is inform'd are really necessitated. His Czaritza buys out Women. He disposes
of all Ecclesiastical preferments, but has left the election of the Patriarch to lot, having (as he thinks) had ill luck in using his Prerogative for the late Patriarch Nicon. To conclude this Chapter, without doubt this present Em∣perour of Russia is as pious, con∣scientious, clement, merciful and good a Prince as any in the world. As for his People and Ministers of State, they are like other Na∣tions, ready to act any thing for Bribes or Money, and to deceive as many as they can.
CHAP. XXVI. Trading in Russia very low. Eng∣lish Cloth a drug, why slighted. The Authors Reflection. If Persians trade there, what Eng∣lish are like to suffer. What the Russians are in general. Concer∣ning the Dutch, what the English must do to out-vye them. How much they abuse us to the Empe∣rour. 'Twere convenient for Eng∣land to undeceive the Czar. How things should be represented to Nashockin and Bogdan. The Russians mightily pleased with their peace with Poland. THe Trade last Summer was very low in Mosco, by reason of their late war, which had
dreyn'd them of two Fifths, besides the raising of their Customs, and taking their Goods by force for copper mo∣ney, which fell from an hundred to one, till at last it was call'd in, to the undoing of many men. Divers hang'd themselves, others drunk away the resi∣due of their States, and dyed with drinking, English Cloth is a Drug, because dearer than the Dutch, which though slight, and shrinks a sixth part in wet∣ting, yet the Russians like it, because they say none but new cloth will shrink, but we are too blame for not fitting them with the like. Again, we keep our old trade of Cloth, but they bring Silks, and all manner of pedlary ware, which vends better than cloth, the which grows now much out of Fashion. Sed si populus vult decipi, decipiatur. If the Persian and Indian Silk trade prevail in Russia, the Czar, I fear will think it too great a boon to restore the English Immunities, and 'twill be as hard for them to regain their priviledges,
as it was for Pharoahs people to drive their Charriots through the Red Sea, when their wheels fell off. As I have nothing to say against the magnificence, splendor, clemency and rtue of the Czars own person, So I have no reason to recommend the Russes integrity, for the generality of them are false, Truce-breakers, subtile Foxes▪ and ravenous Wolves, much altered, since their traffick with the Hollander, by whom they have much improv'd themselves in villany and deceit, The Dutch, like Locusts, swarm in Mosco, and eat bread out of the Eng∣lish-mens mouths, they are more in number, and richer, and spare no gifts to attain their ends; whereas the Eng∣lish depending on their old priviledges, think 'tis enough to say with the Jews, We have Abraham to our Father, we are English men, do us right, or we will complain: But the Russians are of Solomons opinion, that money answers all things.
If we would out-do the Dutch Trade, it must not be driven on by such as take up Goods upon trust and time, as it has been these twenty years last past. At present they come like Lo∣custs out of the bottomless pit, and so they do all the world over, where there is a Sun-shine of gain. In Russia they are better accepted than the English, because they gratifie the Nobility with gifts, which they will have if they lend any assistance. The Hollanders have another advan∣tage, by rendring the English cheap and ridiculous by their lying pictures, and libelling pamphlets, this makes the Russian think us a ruined Nation. They represent us by a Lyon painted with three Crowns revers'd and without a tail, and by many Mastive Dogs, whose ears are cropt and tails cut off. With many such scandalous prints, being more ingenious in the use of their Pen∣ils than Pens. These stories take much with barbarous people, when no body s present to contradict them.
It would not be impertinent, in my opinion, if some intelligent person in Moscua should represent the state of his Majesty of Great Britains King∣doms, Forces and Territories to the best advantage, and also his Colonies in the West-Indies, with all their Re∣venues, and drawing a Map of the aforesaid places, present it to Afa∣nasy Nashockin, to breed in him an opi∣nion of his Brittish Majesties real greatness, which the Dutch have so much extenuated. Bogdan Matfoidg the Chamber-Favouritie should not be neglected neither. He fancies Rari∣ties, and therefore should be present∣ed▪ with some. For as Nashockin maintains reason of State, so Bog∣dan must be the man to procure the Czars personal affection towards his Majesty of Great Brittain. The Russes are very proud of, and much pleased, with the honourable peace they have made with Poland, and now think no Nation superiour;
for they are never good natur'd but when they are either beaten or bri∣bed. No master (to them) like Mars nor mistris like Luna, these indeed are the only Planets, which rule the world.
CHAP. XXVII. Of Caviare, how and where made. The length of the Fish Bellu∣ga. Caviare of two sorts. The Belluga swallows abun∣dance of Pebbles; it is an ex∣cellent meat. Isinglass is made of his Sounds. HAving elsewhere mentioned Ca∣viare, I shall now give you a full account thereof; It is made at Astra∣can, of the Rows of Sturgeon and Bel∣luga. The Belluga is a large Fish, a∣bout twelve or fifteen foot long, with∣out scales, not unlike a Sturgeon, but more ushious and large; his flesh is whiter than Veal, and more delicious than Marrow. Of these two Fishes they take great numbers only for their Rows sake, which they salt and press▪ and put up into Casks, some they send
unpress'd, and a little corn'd with Salt being accounted a great Dainty. Ca∣viare is of two sorts, the first made of the Sturgeons spawn, this is black, and small grain'd, somewhat waxy, like Potargo, and is call'd Eekra by the Rus∣sians, the Turks make this. The se∣cond sort is made of the Belluga's Row, in whose belly is found an hundred and fifty, and two hundred weight of spawn, 'tis a grain as large as a small pepper corn of a darkish gray. The Belluga lyes in the bottom of the River, and swallows many large pebbles of an in∣credible weight to ballast himself a∣gainst the stream of Volga, augmented by the snows melting; when the wa∣ters are asswag'd he disgorges himself. His spawn is call'd Arminska Eckra, perhaps the Armenians were the first makers of Caviare. This they cleanse from its strings, salt it, and lay it up∣on shelving boards to drain away the yly part, and the more unctuous fat∣y substance; this being done they put into casks, and press it very hard, ill it become indurate.
Near Astracan they kill many hundred of Belluga's for the spawn, and thr away the rest; but 'tis pitty, seeing Fish is one of the greatest Dainties th comes out of the watry Element, espe∣cially his belly, which surpasses marrow of Oxen. That glew wh they call Isinglass is made of the B∣luga's sounds.
depiction of mushrooms.
CHAP. XXVIII. Of several sorts of Mushrooms which grow in Russia, their forms and qualities, they are divided by Botanists into two kinds, viz. Lethales and Salutifrae. IN describing the Vegetables which grow in Russia, I shall only give you an account of some few Mushrooms very re∣markable for their shape and qualities. Being seven in num∣ber.Fig. 1. 1. Rizhices black and red, they are small, and grow in Ma∣rishes in one nights space. 2. Vol∣nitzi's black and brown, with some red and copped. 3. Grib∣buy's are brown and darkish yel∣low, with a stalk like a Piaster.
4. A Groozshdy grows hollow like a Simnel, and being full ripe is white like a well order'd Tulip. 5. Dozhshovick is white, large and spongy. Lethalis habe∣tur. 6. Fungus faviginosus, Ho∣ney-comb-Mushrooms, in Russ Smorteshkyes are the first that ap∣pear above ground, Gribbuys next, and the rest towards the Autumn. 7. Maslenicks, But∣ter-Mushrooms, signifying the fat of the earth. Fungos dividunt Botanici in Lethales & salutiferos sive edi∣les. Lethales apud Ruthenos pau∣ci sunt, ediles varii & nullibi me∣liores, pauperum sunt cibus, divi∣tum cupedia-Mille carri Moscoviti∣i fungis onerati in ipsa Moscu quotannis expenduntur. Servantur autem muria conditi.
Carri autem sunt parvi & sicut Hyber∣nici unico equo tracti. Qui primo suc∣crescunt mense Maii vel Aprilis numeran∣tur inter Lethales & a Gerrardo nostro Faviginosi nuncupantur. Hic vero Mag∣natum fercula adornant: Et charo vaene∣unt. Fig. 2.Ruthenici Smortezshkys, Artocreata & Juscula ingrediuntur. Sub fine Mensis Maii & initio Junii(modo pluit) prorumpunt unica nocte Riz∣shickys minores fungi quìdam nigricant, alii rubescunt, praecipue in locis paludosis. Fig. 3.Volnitzi sunt fusci coloris russi{que} magis cacuminati. Fig. 4.Gribbuy's Junii mense primum apparent praedictis majores fusci, russi, duri stipite in forma medictatis Collumellae tumescen∣tes. Fig. 5.Groozshidys fungorum maximi: pal∣mam lati, instar Omasi bubuli sunt Crassi & candidi. Dum crudi sunt succo abun∣dant, eos sicut Tithymallum muria corri∣gunt
Rutheni, aliter fauces & guttur in∣flammabunt. Ipse semel nimis inconsidera∣te assatos comedere tentabam, non sine suffo∣cationis periculo. Fig. 6.Mastenickys quasi pinguedo terrae, nam Masla apud Moscovitas, butyrum, oleum, sevum, omne{que} adiposum vel oleaginosum significat: nam dicunt Masla Carrova Oleum vaccinum, Derravanna masla olcum olivarum, vel potius oleum Arborarium, nam Derrava arborem sonat. Hi Maslinickys mense Julio nascuntur, & colori Butyri rectissime assimilantur. Sed de Fungis satis. ☞Herbarists divide Mushrooms into poysonous and wholsom, or edible. The Russians have but few poysonous, many wholsom, then which there are none bet∣ter, for these are the poor mans food, the rich mans dainties. A thousand Cart-loads of Mush∣rooms are yearly spent in Mosco,
depiction of mushrooms.
they are preserved in brine. Their Carts are small ones, like the Irish drawn with one horse. Those which spring first in April or May are reckon'd poysonous, and by Gerard are call'd Honey-comb Mushrooms; but in Russia they adorn great mens tables, and carry a good price. The Russian Smorteshkyes are put into pyes and pottage.Fig. 2. Fig. 3.In the end of May, and begin∣ning of June (if it rain) the Rishickys break forth in one night, these are a lesser sort of Mushrooms, some are blackish, others reddish, especially in Fen∣nish places. Fig. 4.Volnitzis are of a brownish tawny colour, and more cop∣ped.
Gribbuys first appear in June greater than all the rest, brow∣nish, reddish, hard stalk'd, swel∣ling in the middle like a pillar. Fig. 5.Groozhdys, the greatest of Mushrooms, an hand breadth, like a Cow-tripe thick and white, whilst raw very iuycy; the Rus∣sians correct it (as they do Sea∣lettice) with brine, else they will inflame the chops and throat, once I rashly adventur'd to eat them roasted, not without dan∣ger of choaking. Fig. 6.Maslenicks signifie the fat of the earth. For Masla amongst the Russians denotes butter, Oyl, Tallow, or any fat or oyly thing, as masla Corrova, Cow-oyl: Der∣ravana masla, oyl Olive, or oyl of trees; for Derrava sig∣nifies a tree.
Maslinickys spring in July, and resemble the colour of butter: but this shall suffice touching Mushrooms. Thus Reader thou hast had a brief and pleasant Nar∣ration of Russia, and which indeed was never perfected by any, for reasons assigned by the Author at the beginning of this Treatise.
The Stationer to the Reader. THis Copy I received from the hands of a Gentleman that attended upon the learned Dr. C. all the time of his being with the Emperor of Russia, It was then in the form of a Letter written with the Doctors own hand to an eminent Do∣ctor of Phisick here in London. After∣wards I was advised by several Persons of Quality to put it into the hands of some that were learned and skilful, to distribute it into Chapters and Sections, for the more easie finding out anything contained there∣in, and the better methodizing it, that it might answer the Title designed for it. And in regard the Author died before it came to the Press, which prevented his looking it o∣ver, or correcting any thing that might be oc∣casioned through his hasty writing of it, I was necessitated to get another worthy person to Transcribe it, who being altogether a stran∣ger, not only to the Doctors stile and way of writing, but also to the stile and language of this Country of Russia except by reading. The Reader I humbly conceive will not won∣der
if some litteral and other small errors in that Language have escaped his hand, which is most in the proper names of Men and Office, and indeed not so much to be at∣tributed to the Transcribing as the Print∣ing, Russ being a language not ordinarily printed in England. All which mistakes are carefully and faithfully collected, by comparing the Book with the first Copy: And whereas in p. 6. it is said it was a custom to have strangers, to christen the Russian, read to be christened Russ; and in p. 84. l. 21. the word being is to be left out: The Russian words that are to be cor∣rected, are as followeth. Page 13 line 17. for Caenass r. quass. p. 19. l. 21, r. Almaus & l. 22. r. Posolsky. p. 28. l. 23. & 296. r. Nimcheen. p. 36. l. 9. for press, r. Empress, p. 38. l. 3. read Rostove, p. 41. l. 8. read Boyalsa, and l. 19. Chir∣chass. p. 46. l. 18. r. Pleasheve. p. 54. l. 16. for in r. him. p. 55. l. 3. read Mi∣chailouich, l. 5. r. Kyove, l. 6. r. Nou∣gorod, p. 77. l. 19. r. Beluga, p. 112. l. 16. r. Beluga, p. 119. l. 15. r. lashes, p. 121. l. 4. add the word loose. FINIS.
Books sold by Dorman Newman at his Shop at the King's Arms and Bible in the Poultry. Folio. THe History of King John, King Henry the Second, and the most Illustrious King Edward the First, wherein the ancient Soveraign Dominion of the Kings of Great Brittain over all persons in all causes is assert∣ed and vindicated: with an exact History of the Popes intollerable usurption upon the Liberties of the Kings and Subjects of Eng∣land and Ireland. Collected out of the anci∣ent Records in the Tower of London. By Wil∣liam Prinn, Esq; of Lincolns Inn, and keep∣er of his Majesties Records in the Tower of London.
A Description of the four parts of the world, taken from the works of Monsieur Sanson Geographer to the French King, and other eminent Travellers and Authors; to which is added the Commodities, Coynes, VVeights and Measures of the chief places of traffick in the world, illustrated with vari∣ety of useful and delightful Maps and Figures. By Rich. Blome Gent. Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Suffer∣ings and Deaths of those excellent Perso∣nages that suffered for Allegiance to their Soveraign in our late intestine Wars, from the year, 1637, to 1666 with the Life and Martyrdome of King Charles the First. By David Lloyd▪ The Exact Polititian, or Compleat States∣man, briefly and methodically resolved in∣to such Principles, whereby Gentlemen may be qualified for the management of any pub∣lick trust, and thereby rendred useful for the Common-welfare. By Leonard Willan, Esq; A Relation in form of a Journal of the Voyage and Residence of King Charles the Second in Holland. The History of the Cardinals of the Ro∣man Church, from the time of their first Crea∣tion to the Election of Pope Clement the
Ninth, with a full account of his Con∣clave. Doctor John Don's Sermons in Folio. Stapletons Juvenal large Fol. Quarto. The Christian mans Calling, or, a Trea∣tise of making Religion ones Business; where∣in the Christian is directed to perform in all religious duties, natural actions, particular vocations, family-directions, and in his own recreations in all relations, in all conditions, in his dealings with all men, in the choice of his company, both of evil and good, in soli∣tude, on a week-day, from morning to night, in visiting the sick, and on a dying bed. By George Swinnock. Mr. Carils exposition on the Book of Job. Gospel Remission, or a Treatise shewing that true blessedness consists in the pardon of sin. By Jeremiah Burroughs. An exposition of the Song of Solomon. By Iames Durham late Minister in Glasgow.
The real Christian, or a 'Treatise of effectu∣al calling; wherein the work of God in drawing the soul to Christ being opened ac∣cording to the holy Scriptures, some things required by our lae Divines as necessary to a right preparation for Christ: and a true closing with Christ, which have caused, and do still cause much trouble to some serious Christians, and are with due respects to those worthy men brought to the ballance of the Sanctuary, there weighed, and accordingly judged: to which is added a few words con∣cerning Socinianism. By Giles▪ Firmin sometimes Minister at Shalford in Essex. Mount Pisgah, or a Prospect of Heaven, be∣ing an exposition on the fourth chapter of the first Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians. By Tho. Case sometimes student in Christ-church, Oxon, and Minister of the Gospel. The vertue and value of Baptism. By Zach. Crofton. The Quakers spiritual Court proclaimed; being an exact narrative of a new high Court of Justice, also sundry errors and corruptions amongst the Quakers which were never till now made known to the world. By Nath. Smith who was conversant among them four∣teen years.
A Discourse of Prodigious abstinence oc∣casioned by the 12. months fasting of Martha Taylor the med Darbyshire Damosel; prove∣ing, that without any miacle the texture of humane bodies may be so altered that life may be long continued without the supplies of meat and drink. By Iohn Reynolds. Octavo and 12. Vindiciae Pietatis, or a vindication of Godli∣ness from the imputation of folly and fancy; with several directions for the attaining and maintaining of a godly life. By R. Allin. Heaven on Earth, or the best▪ Friend in the wrst times; to which is added a Ser∣mon preached at the funeral of Thomas Mosley Apothecary: By James Janeway. A token for Children, being an exact account of the conversation, holy and exemplary lives, and joyful deaths of several young children, By James Janeway. Justification only upon a satisfaction, By Rb. Ferguson.
The Christians great interest, or the tryal of a saving interest in Christ, with the way how to attain it. By William Guthry late Mini∣ster in Scotland. The vertue, vigour and officacy of the Promises displayed in their strength and glo∣ry. By Tho. Henderson. The History of Moderation; or, the Life, Death, and Resurrection of Moderation, to∣gether with her Nativity, Country, Pedigree, Kindred and Character, Friends, and also her Enemies. A Guide to the true Religion; or, a Dis∣course directing to make a wise choise of that Religion men venture their salvation upon. By I. Clappam. Rebukes for▪ sin by God's burning anger; by the burning of London; by the burning of the VVorld, and by the burning of the wick∣ed in Hell-fire, to which is added a Discourse of Heart-fixedness. By Tho. Doolittle. Four select Sermons upon several texs of Scripure, wherein the VVill-worship and Idolatry of the Church of Rome is laid open and confuted. By William Fenner.
The life and death of Dr. James Vsher Arch∣bishop of Armagh and Primate of Ire∣land. A most comfortable ond Christian Dialogue between the Lord and the Soul: by William Cooper Bishop of Galloway. The Canons and Institutions of the Qua∣kers agreed upon at their General Assemby at their new Theatre in Gracechurch-street. A Synopsis of Quakerism; or, a Collecti∣on of the fundamental errors of the Quakers. By Tho. Danson. Blood for Blood, being a true Narrative of that late horrid murher committed by Mary Cook upon her chid. By Nath. Partridge; with a Sermon on the same occasion, by Iames Sharp. The welcom Communicant in Octavo. The present state of Russia, by Dr. Samuel Collins, who resided nine years in that Court, Octo. 1. The discovery of natural corruption. 2. The remedy of natural corruption.
3. Meditations of mortality: 4. The description of a Friend. 5. Gods Troops invading man. 6. The helpfulness of faith in great try∣als. These six several Treatises by Nicho. Locki Minister of the Gospal. FINIS.
