C581 11976439 51791
TO THE ILLVSTRIOVS PRINCESS, MARY Dutchess of RICHMOND and LENOX. Madam, I Humbly offer Your Grace the last sacri∣fice of this nature that is in my power, having only a hope that it may be re∣ceiv'd by You with that favour as when it was formerly presented. And so, Madam, I only dare to appear in an address to You, as others to their Altars, who by sacrifices get pardon for their defects, if not advance their devotions. This was to your Sex in∣deed
a peculiar offering, whilst all either gave as much Passion to their Adorers, or wisht their Beauties great enough to do it: your Graces excel∣lencies alone have been by all admi∣rers esteem'd at so great and just a va∣lue, as to create, and not reward mens passions. This with as just a reverence I present to you, hoping for this Ro∣mantique passion such an entertain∣ment as none durst expect for real ones; your severity would deny a reception to those, which your cha∣rity may grant to this: And believe, he that attempts all ways to express his respects and duty, has more then Fortune will give him leave to shew, The unhappy condition at this time of MADAM, The most humble of all your Graces most ob∣liged Servants, ALEX. GOUGHE.
THE Names and Characters of the Persons. KIng of Burgony. Agenor Clarimant His sons. Cleon Senor Stremon Three Lords disaffected to th Prince Agenor. Lucidor, a Lord Clindor, a Captain Friends to Agenor. Merchant. Captain. Souldiers. Clorinda, the Kings Niece. Selina, her Woman. King of Neustrea. Prince of Aquiain Two other Princes Suitors to Austell. Lords A Druid. Sailors. Austella, the Kings daughter. Olinda, her Sister. The Scenes BURGONY. NEUSTREA.
THE Passionate Lover, FIRST PART. Act. 1. Scaen. 1. Enter Lucidor, and Clindor, and a Captain, (severally.) Lucid. WEll met, Clindor. Clind. I would it were so. Lucid. Why, what mis∣fortune is happened, man? Clind. A pox on Fortune, she ne'r was friend of mine; And now the wars are at end, there's no way left For men of merit to supply themselves: But cou'd I
Catch that Beldam by the foretop, I would so Lug her Ladiship. Lu. Thou mistakest, And threatnest Opportunity: 'tis she that hath A lock before, and bald behind; but Fortune is a Mighty Goddess, and must be reverenc'd. Cl. A Quean, a Strumpet by this hand; and sh you talk of Is her Bawd; they pickt my pockets with a pair o Dice, giving the mony to a Sot, that scarce knew How to tell it when he had won it. Lu. That was ill luck. Cl. To lose a months pay in a night, now when I' Never like to see another muster, nor hope of booty los O I could eat these fingers! Lu. Lose not thy patience, and then thy monie Will not afflict thee. Cl. Pray will ye lend me 20 Crowns, and keep i for me. Lu. Keep what? Cl. My patience. Lu. Thou hast none. Cl. To what end then was your grave advice, My great Foolosopher! stand by. Enter Senor and Stremon. Sen. Believe me, if the insolencie of these Com∣manders That are come back with the Prince be not restrain'd, This Court, best ordered in the world, Will grow to Barbarism and shame our Nation, Chiefly us that should keep all in form. Str. My Lord, take heed whilst you too much study A regularity, you not forget the proper time: The Court is yet a kind of Camp, a place of free access,
In which the Prince is as the Sun, Whose cheerful rays give life to all. Clind. Wil't please your Lordship to buy a Vir∣tue of me? Sen. Sure I believe 'tis a very beggerly one. Cl. Your Lordship's a witch; 'tis Patience indeed, The beggers virtue; you shall have it for 20 crowns. Sen. Sirra, this sawciness may in time Procure you the beggers punishment To exercise your virtue, A whip. Clind. Hum, a whip! Lu. Your Lordships reply was by much too harsh For harmless merriment, and argues you Of a proud dogged nature. Sen. Pray teach not me to speak, my Lord, Until I go about to teach you how to fight. Lu. I would your formal Lordship wore a sword, I should most gladly learn. Sen: I do not want when I intend to wear one. Lu. Certain you do, pray put it on against I see you next, let this remember you. Puls him by the nose. Sen. What insolence is this? Clind. My Lord fight with him, or by this hand Ye have got my patience, and you shall pay me for't. Sen. How now you base Rascal! Enter Agenor, Cleon, and Attendants. Age. Who's that he calls so? Lu. One sir, that I have seen do bravely in the wars. Age. The attribute was very course: Sir, you must know those whom I call fellows n arms, and who for you and me, and all Have spent their bloods, must meet with better Recompence then contumelious words. 'Tis such as you that buz into my Fathers ears
A thousands tales, contract his bounties into nothings Or little to any soldier; and this not as good husbands For your master, but your selves, that your shares May be greater. Sen. I hope your Highness will on better knowledg Change this hard opinion. Cle. I dare engage my self, your Highness May absolutely dispose my Lord. Age. Since you esteem him as a friend, I should not Be displeased to have cause to believe it. Cle. The occasion is only wanting, Sir. Age. Well my Lord, if it prove so, I know how To reward those that serve me. Go Lucidor And enquire if my Father be ready yet. Sen. If it please your Majesty, I shall. Age. You forget, my Lord, That title is only due to my Father. Clind. To whom he had so great a mind to make complaint, That he forgot himself. Age. Let him complain: Those that are mine I will secure. Clind. Who are not such, deserve not your pro∣tection. Age. There, share that purse betwixt you; I'l go. Be to night at my chamber at 9 a clock: now leave us. Clind. The Gods bless your Highness. Lucid. What say you now to the old Beldam, is she not kind? (manent Age. Cleon. Clind. She durst do no other. [Exeunt. Cleon. Sir, as I told you, upon my knowledge Your Father is possest with a belief That your late victories and custom of commanding In the Army, hath made you quite forget How to obey; and Sir, to humble you, your greatest Captains Do receive daily affronts:
Age. My Captains! even my self do feel their injuries. My needful bounty's censured prodigality, My courtesie insinuations; and all What I have ever learnt for good or commendable Turn to my prejudice: Nothing, I see, Can please my Father, or free me from suspition, Unless I prove my self or base, or foolish. Cleon. The present affairs, sir, of this Kingdom Call for a man both wise and valiant: Such I must say you are; nor is this needful truth Thus timely urged, to be esteemed a flattery, Though spoken to your self. Your father, sir, was what you are; But now time and infirmities have brought him Near to what we truly might call dotage In a meaner man. And is it reasonable You should stand by an idle looker on, Whilst his weak or false Councellors and he Make peace or war with foreign States, Dispose of government and Offices at home, Not on the best deserver, but the greatest briber, Or such a Lords particular friend or kinsman. Age. Truth is, I do appear now at home of no esteem: Even those Princes lately made subject By my sweat and blood, no one of their Ambassadors Makes any particular address to me. Cle. 'Twere madness if they should, The certain way to miss their ends; no sir, Your younger brother Clarimant is the known Powerful Advocate for favors from the King; And for the Prince himself, and power, Are both laid prostrate at the feet Of his fair Cousin the Lady Clorinda. Age. Does she not deserve to be obeyed?
Cle Doubtless no Virgin lives that equals he in merit: And yet 'tis possible the Prince may have Another end besides her personal worth, Which makes him court her. Age. What end? Cle. You know, sir, at least must needs have heare Her ancestors have been pretenders, to this Crown, And time hardly wears out the right of Princes. Age. 'Tis true, hardly where right; But a pretension not then prosperous, Neither lives but to shame the undertakers memory But were it otherwise in this particular, I durst trust my brother, indeed in any, For I know his love to me is firm. Cle. Sir, 'tis a noble confidence in you, Nor would I seek to change that quiet peace That lodges in your mind, for a worse guest, suspition But if I do not freely speak my fears, I shall be guilty of a treason to my Prince And friend. Your brother sir, fosters ambitious hopes And howsoe'r you slight Clorinda's title, That is their chiefest nourishment. Age. It is impossible. Cle. If I should tell you, some believe your fathe Holds what I have said, is conscious that he Does keep the Crown by wrong, and so would By a marriage set all strait; this would exact A greater faith then you, I know, can yet allow. Age. 'Tis true, for this implies my disinheriting The falshood of my brother, nay something mo Then this, which I may chance one day to tell yo freely: But now I live curbed in my person, Nay my thoghts pent up, when I would ease My heart by uttering them.
Cle. Enlarge your self each way. Age. Oh I must not Cle. Then I will for you. My grief to see my Country Lose the advantage of your best of years For action, makes me speak plain and home, Though to the hazard of my head, if you mislike The councel; nor will I put you upon danger, And not share it with you? Age. What is't you mean? I am confident you love me. Cle. As I do happiness, which is included In your knowledge of my faith and love. Age. Speak then. Cle. In short 'tis this: Propose a war in Germany, raise a great Army▪ Live there a King, since here you cannot. Age. My father never will consent. Cle. Where's that Souldier or Commander, will not obey Your summons? Age. To raise an Army, my Father not allowing it, Were treason; which once proclaim'd, would startle The most resolute. Cle. Scarce a man, if you should on the contrary Make known what your intents were for your Coun∣tries Honor and profit. Age. But in the mean time should they seise my person? Cle. But in the mean time should you seise your Fathers person, which is sure much easier to do. There's but few Nations that adore the setting sun; The braver spirits do attend his rise, And hope to mount with him aloft. Age. Though I confess I willingly would aid My Fathers feeble arm to hold the scepter right, I would not force it from his hands.
Cle. Two hands upon one scepter; men will in∣terpret Violence; however since 'twas ordain'd in one, If violence at all, let it be powerful in effect: The happy issue then may change the attribute To providence care of the present & the future state: Age. It is an affair of a high consequence, Pray see me in the morning, I must take time To think— Exit. Cle. Do Prince, 'tis my desire, since thought Must make that poison work, I have distill'd Into thy soul; the compounds are so strong And operative, that it must cause destruction To thy self, father, or brother, if not all. But soft; much time, and many dangers Must be past, ere I can hope to touch that happy Period; the part I long have acted Must be still maintain'd; a seeming faithful Servant to the father and his sons, By each believ'd so tender of their safeties And their honour, as if I had no sense Of what concern'd the other two. The grounds thus laid, and mutual jealousies growing In each, I am secured from a discovery By any general conference of theirs: Nay, should an intimacie hold, as 'tis not like, Betwixt the brothers, yet am I still secure By their own nobleness, scorning to tell Councels The secrets of an Enemy, much less reveal these of a friend, Which when I do, I shal no other but my self betray; Friendship's an useful word, the substance thrown away. Exit. Enter Clindor, Selina. Clind. Nay, Lady, if you flie, being so able to desend,
shall suspect you have an ambush here: 'le make good this ground, proud of my purchase; I know 'tis of such value, that the restoring Will press you to another parly. Sel. Why think you so? To lose your company withall, Will make the loss of any thing I have about me in∣sensible. Clind. Make good your word; change but your maidenhead For this; and if I ever trouble you again— Sel. O insolence! can you believe that such a jewel Is reserv'd for you? you may as well by your small Single valor hope to surprise the strongest fort. Clind. Nay perhaps sooner, Lady; may be you Know the first impossible. Sel. I know 'tis impossible you should be other Then a rude Soldier. Clind. True, whilst you are an uncivil Lady, 'Tis wisdom to frame our selves like to the company We wish to keep. Sel. Indeed I must confess you put upon me in this seeming Censure, a mighty obligation: your words imply as much, As if I would be wicked, you for conformity Would be so too; in troth I do not doubt it: But that you can as well conform yourself to better Images, is that I have no reason to believe. Clind. From these your hard opinions, yet in a milder phrase Exprest, judge charitably, that my disrespect Is likewise lessening: And certain, Lady, So many beauties as shew themselves about your Person, were gifts the Gods repented of, Which made them place a soul whose pride might tel the world It was a goodly Temple built to shew their power, But not to share their adoration.
Sel: I see you are an experienc'd Soldier, And are not without stratagems, making your Battery on the weakest side. You praise the beauty Of my person, and dispraise my mind: That too for what we almost hold a vertue, (pride) Grant us but fair, whate're we seem, it is Impossible we should be angry. Clind. No more of these ingenious confessions, Lady, Let I become Apostate from my old religion, And believe there may be other beauties in your sex Then what the eye surveys. Sel. I am wondrous sorry if I have said any thing To gain your good opinion. Enter Clarimant and Clorinda. Cli. O fear not, Lady, I am not so much taken yet To trouble you with lamentable verses, Or blow the candle out with sighs: breaking my buttons After a full meal, s the highest I can reach to: I assure you, Methinks that Princely pattern is scarce worth The following. The King! Enter Old King, Cleon, Senor, Stremon. O. K. I see you lose no opportunity to become Gracious with the Ladies, I like it well; Your brother's more unnatural, and courts the men. Cle. The men of action, sir, he does indeed. O. K: The men of turbulencie and ambition: But I shall check his and their haughty spirits. Cle: Let what you do, sir, be with moderation, He's of a fierce nature, and can ill endure Reproof, however just. O. K. Fierce nature! shall I observe a boy? I am his father and his King; and what he fails In duty to the one, the other shall inforce him To confess and satisfie.
Cle. 'Tis just indeed. O. K. And being so, I mst not fear to let him know His faults. [Enter Agenor and Lucidor Now sir, what would you with us? Age. I must not hope, sir, you will grant the suit I come to move, until I see your brow more calm▪ O. K. If you mislike these looks, remove the cause. Age. Perhaps it is not, sir, in me, but in your self: There are some waters where the billows rise Though no cross winds do blow; Earthquakes are in Another kind the same, the causes dark, And yet not more then are your groundless distastes From whence this tempest grows. O. K. Your words explain your actions, and your actions them: From both you do conclude my weakness, And your innocence from fault. Age. The latter is, and still hath been my study: Shew me wherein, sir, I have err'd, In what I have deserved your hard opinion: Till when I would not, sir, by asking pardon Create a guilt. O. K. I know you rather do expect that I should sue to you, And I will do it. Pray give me leave to be A King some few years more; you know I shall not trouble you when your turn comes. Clorind. Dear servant, I find my self not well. Clari. Heaven forbid! Exeunt Clor. Clari. Age. Sir, I do find your age is wrought upon By some unworthy men, who for their own ends Keep me from that interest nature and reason Ought to yield me in your love; which since I cannot hope from you by my true service, (Still misinterpreted) I scorn to seek To gain it by a flattery of them.
O. K. I know those whom I favour, Are for that cause the objects of your hate. And 'tis not strange, that having forfeited Much of your own obedience, you should mislike Their faithfulness. Age. I see, sir, 'tis in vain to plead a cause Already judg'd against me: Cunning Weighs down my interest in your blood. I came, sir, with a hope to obtain some suits For others, which now reason commands me to let fall, And rather beg what I am only likely to obtain. O. K. What's that, I pray? Age. Your leave sir, to retire My self, to free your Majesty And me both from disturbance. O. K. You ask and grant your self, 'tis well. Exeunt Agen. Lucid. Clind. Cle. Sir, that retirement he intends, Grows not from duty, but ambition. Out of that cloud ere long he means to break Forth gloriously; the world, sir, cannot admit More then one Sun; and he's resolved to shine, Though nature suffer in it. O. K. It was still my fear, you have no other proofs But your conjecture. Cleon. I would I had not, sir; but such my love is to your Majesty. That to preserve the Royal stem, I must not fear To hazard breaking a corrupted branch. At more convenience I shall inform you. Exeunt King, Cleon, Attendants. Sen. The King is old and sickly, inconstant by nature; And we must, whilst this heat of passion lasts, Work for our safety by the Princes ruine. If he should come to reign, our power, if not our, lives,
Is at end; but both are likely to be safe And prosperous under his brother Clarimant, Who is of a soft and gentle nature, Apt to be governed. Stre. Especially when it shall appear We have both will and power to serve him In attaining to the Crown. Senor. Perhaps Lord Cleon does resolve the same, And he's man of power and blood; we being join'd How can we miss our end, Since the whole Court does on us three depend? Exeunt. Enter Clarimant and Clorinda: Clar. Dear Lady, do not welcom sadness thus: Trust me, it is an ill mannered guest, And seldom leaves us; though we grow weary Of its company, and wish it gone. Clor. Not be sensible when there is cause, Would shew stupidity. Clar. Wife men affirm there is no cause of sorrow But for offending heaven. Clor. These strengths of mind you Men enjoy, Are certain to our weaker sex denied. Clar. Alas, but I am none of those; For if you grieve, I cannot be exempted. Clor. Would I had kept my troubles to my self then! I would not have them grow by being guilty Of infecting you. Clar. A sympathie with you for what concerns my self, Though it be grief to me, is pleasing. Clor. I must not say so much for you; And yet this is the only time I ever wisht Your absence: pray sir be pleased to leave me To my self.
Cla. And 'tis the only time I ever durst seem Disobedient; be but your self, and I will leave you But whilst you are in bondage, A prisoner to your grief, I must not. Clo. Ye are cruel in you kindness, sir, And tie me faster: A ransom of my tears Being plentifully paid, perhaps may free me; And whilst you stay, shame bars me from the trial. Cla. I would not see you weep; for if your tears Were shed in vain, it would call in question My religion, as having paid my vows To powers insensible. Clo. Take heed, sweet Prince, you do not jest your self Into idolatry, and over-act that part you personate, To please a brother; that were a guilt Neither your tears not mine can expiate, Cla. I fear your warning comes too late for me. Clo. I hope I understand you not. Cla. You do not Lady, nor I my self, For I have spoke I know not what: shame forces An obedience, which your commands could not. All peace of mind wait on you. Enter Agenor. Stay brother, whither so fast? I came to seek you, Stay— Cla. Not for the world, and pray henceforth Let us not injure truth. Exit. Age. What means this? Clo. My Lord, I know not well, some discontent. Age. Are we alone? is there no other eye but that of Heaven beholds us? Clo. None that I know. Age. Blest opportunity! still I am fearful; for your sake I would not have our loves discover'd now by chance Which with such art and care hath been so long
Conceal'd from all men but my brother. Clo. I would it had been so from him too, sir: Age. Why do you fear he will discover us? Clo. O no sir, but— Age. But what? Clo. The gods were witness enough for me, sir, 'Twere my glory, were it known; if in your fortune But a slave, I should with joy proclaim to all The world what your interest were in me: But for your sake, considering how you father Frowns already, I scarce dare to my self Whisper the joy of being yours. Age. My father! let not that trouble you, We will be free as he ere long, and our commands Better obeyed. Clo. O speak not again my fears! how sir? better obeyed! Age. By those that love me, and will live and die with me. Clo. Die with you, sir! why should that come in question? Age. Only as an expression of my friends affection. Clo. But sir, were all men what they seem, That which I fear you do intend, is that Which heaven cannot approve; take heed of dis∣obedience, sir. Age. Why doest thou plead against thy self, a∣gainst thy joyes And mine? Now as I am, I dare not look on these Bright eyes, the comforts of my life, nor touch this hand, These lips, not speak but by the assistance Of my brother. Clo. This is a freedom, sir, modesty could not allow Did we oft meet; and as it is, do not again Expect it.
Age. Why, dearest, are you so nice? you do no love me: Your hand you will not sure refuse me. Clo. I shall, sir, if you presume upon an opportunity▪ Age. You never did deny that favor to my brothe As my substitute. Clo. It is confest, and that in publike too, More willingly I there would grant him any mode Favor, then here to you in private. Age. That's strange. Clo. Do we not often give those praises to a perso Absent, which modesty would make us blush To speak unto himself? Age. It seems I must be only favored by attorny▪ Clo. Not so; the mind being the noblest part, I'st not enough if that be happy? Age. Yes, if it could subsist without a body: Which since it cannot, dearest mistres, if you'll be just, The beauties of your person must in some measure Satisfie the flames that they create. Offers to kiss her. Clo. Sir, I believe you will not think 'tis a forc'd modesty That I put on; though I should tell you I am not pleas'd At all to be alone with you, yet how much I do love you, it were in vain to speak. That love enjoins, as you will keep your faith To me, not to disturb the quiet of your Father And this Kingdom, likely to be yours; Do not expect to find them faithful in the time To come, to whom you shall teach falshood By your own example. Age. Happily I have no such design; we are ingrate To fortune and to Love, in spending this happy Opportunity on any other subject Then what may tend unto his glory.
Clo. I see, Sir, I must leave you, or my modesty. Age. Dear do not frown; pardon those faults Your beauties and my love engage me in. Clo. Should I grant that for an excuse sufficient, Where should we find a guilty or immodest person, Since all immoderate desires do find a beauty In their object, which promises a pleasure By enjoying? My love then yours is of a purer Kind, and fit it should, as growing from A nobler cause, your greater merit: Be witness heaven, I never yielded yet To any thought or motion, wherein your happiness Had not precedence. Age. Should I pretend to what you do appropriate, The greatest love, 'twould shew presumption. Yet here I offer what you dare not perform To me, a free unlimited disposing Of my person and my will. Clo. I take you at your word; and though your Humble servant, as a Mistress do impose These two commands: Be modest in your love, And patient in your expectation of a Crown; Let all things be mature and ripen'd to perfection, Then they are sweet and lovely; but on the Contrary, many infirmities accompany Abortive births, seldom or never lasting. She offers to go away: Age. Sure you will not leave me thus. Clo. Yes sir, I must, The greatness of my love commands me, Remember your promise. Age. You do express it strangely; Would you stay longer, if you loved me less? Clo. With much more confidence. I tremble, sir, lest Some unwelcom person should find us here Alone; if there were company with whom you Might discourse, I should stand by and hear you
With delight, look on you with much more: Now apprehension of discovery takes away All pleasure from me. Age. If we must ever live with this constraint upon us, Where are the joys of love? It rests not sure Alone in being beloved, but in possession. He that despairs in love, hath a more happy fate Then I: You do not love me sure; what have I More then words to build my faith upon? If you have pitty in you, be more kind, Or free me from my last engagement. Clo. Not for a million. Age. Trust me, I shall not hold my self sufficiently Obliged, unless I seal my promise on your lip. Clo. He that will break his word, no other tie Can hold him. Age. Yet never any fearful Creditor (Such you appear to be) refused an Obligation. Clo. This is the last you ever as a Mistress Shall receive from me. Age. May your last words prove happily prophe∣tick! Clo. Think on your promise, sir. Exit. Age. I do; so sweet was the engagement, That whilst I think on it, even then It prompts me to the breaking, the only way For to attain a greater bliss in her. Promises Made in prejudice of Love, I should be most profane To keep; nor can she be offended, however fear And modesty in her forbad me to attempt. Power, and her dear Embraces, are alike The objects of my soul: shall danger then make me retire? No, danger thrusts me on, and tells me there's no safety But in arms, which well imployed, cancels my fault Unto my father, and smooths Clorinda's brow:
he cannot be so cruel to herself to frown On disobedience that presents a Crown. Exit: Act. 2. Scaen. 1. Enter Clarimant. lar. O Fool! for ever thou hast forfeited thy bliss, She never will endure to hear thee speak, Or look upon her more. What falshood ust she think me guilty of? I am so sensible Of my offence, that though she would admit me, durst never see her more: How poor a value then ears life! Enter Agenor with a Picture. Brother! Clar▪ Ha! Age. How strangely you are alter'd! Clar. You do not erre sir, I was not wont to be thus sad. Age. Nor do I hope you will continue long so; Your grief may prove infectious, pray shake it off, You shall not else keep company with my Clorinda. Clar. I never will, sir. Age. How, brother? Clar. This sadness will not leave me. Age. Come, by all our interests I conjure you peak freely what troubles you. Clar. Then sir, in short, you have undone me. Age. I! dearest brother. Clar. Yes, you: Did you not enjoin at I should make in publike address to your Mi∣stress, which received opinion you might be freer your love?
Age. Had you engaged me in the like, I should with joy have done it. Clar. My care was such to do it to the life, That I am really become what I did personate; Are not you then the cause that I am miserable? Age. What do I hear! can there be truth in this If it be so, speak it again. Cla. 'Tis that I never must deny, I love her more then I do life. Age. Or faith, or honour, do you not? Cla. Sure I believe nothing with her can stand i competion long. Yet I will never see her more. Age. It is not fit you should. What do I feel Can the meer name of Rival trouble me? Yes, with the addition that he is my brother. But whither am I falling? Assist me Reason, Let me but weigh my Mistresses unequal'd beauty And her greater merit, and that must prove Both his excuse, and my assurance. Cla. I fear, sir, you are angry; Not that I valu Any danger, but that I would not have you so unjus Age. Trust me I am not, brother, I will admit you as a friendly Rival: Make her inconstant once, and I shall gladly quit her Cla. Had you so mean a thought of her or me, It were an injury I could not suffer. Age. Come, come, upon my life I have not. Some business, brother, of the highest importance Commands me from you, perhaps from Court er long. And that I may assure you of my love and trust, Carry from me this Picture to my dearest Mistress. Clar. Sir, I beseech you pardon me; I would no see her When I may avoid it; there's too much danger In the object.
Age. Remember she's your Brothers Mistress, that will protect you. Cla. I never did forget, pray send it by some other. [Offers the Picture back.] Age. I shall believe you do indeed intend to wooe My mistress from me, since you refuse to appear to her My friend and messenger. Cla. Sir, I will do it; but henceforth never mis∣doubt The strengths you hold upon me; for I in it o break a resolution equal to a vow. Age. Farewell. Exit. Clar. How hard a fate is mine! to what cross actions oth our passions move? I flie from what I wish; Yet to assist anothers flame, I grant what so my own I had denied. Oh no, it is not thus; or every action rightly weighed, it will be found, Our own advantage is the proper center Where all lines meet: For if I truy apprehended discontent from seeing her, I should not sure ave yielded to the inforcement of my brother. o, 'tis with me as with those men who are y nature strongly tempted to some lust, as'd in the sin, yet grant no guilt, Only alleadging for excuse, They must. Exit. Enter Cleon and Selina. Cle. Sweet Selina, it is not now that I shall need o make a declaration of my love, ou long have known the engagement of my heart. Sel. My Lord, my obligations are so great, hat you may justly claim the utmost of my power oward the accomplishment of your desires. Cle. I have been too unthankful to so true a friend;
But be assured that thou shalt have my best Of fortunes with me; in the mean time wear this To keep me in thy memory. Sel. It needs not sir, I have already too many testmoni Of your favor, to forget. Cle. When was Prince Clarimant with thy Lad Sel. When was he not? I fear, sir, her affection To him is so rooted, that it will grow for ever. Yet I have used those arts you taught me, And some female practises of mine, but all in vain. But sir, despair not, since as yet you never Did make known your love to her; and were she My mind, she soon would make a difference Betwixt a boy, a child, and such a man as you. Cle. Friendship doth blind thee, more then o does me: The frost I wear upon my locks, will keep My fire from kindling in her breast; Whilst equal youth and beauty in the Prince Gives nourishment unto a mutual flame. Sel. I hope it will— [Aside] Cle. Yet prethee say that I would speak with h And have a care none overhear our conference. Sel. My Lord, I shall endeavour it; she's now the garden. Exit. S Cle. It is not love alone unto the Princess perso I know I cannot be so faithless to my own designs, No, 'tis her interest to the Crown engages me As much as does her beauty or her wit: And yet she holds by those, when I do see, Or hear her speak, great power upon me. But I must watch my flame, no spark let fall That may give any light of my affection to her, In a third person I must try her, Since she's of humane race, a woman to her moth Whether from her be not derived some seeds
Of the first female weaknesses, ambition and Inconstancie; which if I find, I'll nourish them, And in their growth my hopes; but if I see Such powerful charm no alteration move, She claims my adoration, cures my love. [Enter Clorinda, Selina.] She comes, be firm my resolution, The splendor of her eyes is powerful; already My designs meet with confusion: Love gives the lye To my ambition, triumphs o're my discretion, And tels me that a Crown's an aiery nothing Compared with the possessing of her personal Beauty: what wonders will the magick of Her tongue perform? Clo. What means this? Cle. 'Tis best I should at once profess my love, And in her scorn receive a glorious death— Stay, let me be a King first; and then to offer Up my self to my great Deity, Brings no dishonor to her shrine. Clo. My Lord, did you not desire to speak with me? Cle. Madam, I did; and the affair is of such weight, That though I had consulted with my self before, I durst not utter it without a second thought, And none but your dear self to hear it. Clo. Leave us. Exit Selina: Cle. Madam, amongst those many whom your perfections Have devoted to your service, though not so happy As with others to express my zeal, There's none, without exception I dare speak it, Would sooner undertake, or hazard more to serve you. This if you can believe, I dare enlarge my self: If not, I must be satisfied with this expression.
Clo. My Lord, if I be not mistaken, you are a frien To those whom all know I do value highly; that, Were I ignorant of your own worth, Is argument enough for my esteem and trust. Cle. I here do call the Gods to witness, That all my study, all my friendship tends to you advantage: Nor is the Prince at all considerable to me, But as he is your servant; but for your sake I wish he were the the Monarch of the world. For, how so much perfection can be ordain'd To bless a Subjects bed, comes not within The compass of my faith; and Prince Clarimant Is never like to be a King. Clo. To what tends this? Cle. But had your love been plac'd upon his bro∣ther As his is upon you, ere long your beauties Might have found their proper foil, a Crown, To set hem off as a bright constellation, there All eyes might look on you with wonder And delight; but in a Subjects name, your glorie Are obscured. Clo. Either the Prince, as being his friend, Hath made discovery to him of our loves, Or he hath found cause to suspect. Cle. Madam, I see what I have spoke, begets you trouble. Clo. I must confess it, sir; can it do less, When I shall hear a person of your merit, A friend as you profess, perswading me To quit my faith for the vain expectation Of a Crown. Cle. Madam, the Crown will soon be his, as certai As he loves you, and both as certain as I live. Clo. It is impossible that Prince Agenor he should love, And never speak his passion.
Cle. No more then it was in me. Clo. How sir, in you? Cle. Madam, I will confess a secret to you, burn with a more zealous consuming fire Then ever yet was kindled in a mortals breast; Have often seen my Mistress, spoke to her, Had opportunities alone, as now with you: Yet such was my respect to her, I never durst Express my passion▪ Then, Madam, from the purity Of my affection, judge of the Prince, And reward his sufferings. Clo. I must try him; Can this be possible? Cle. Iove strike me with his thunder, If what I now have said, be not a truth: Clo. My Lord, if it be thus, I shall at least find pitty For his sufferings: my best of wishes too For your success in love. Cle. Would you be pleas'd, when I shall let you know Her name, to be my advocate? I cannot doubt My happiness. Clo. Sure he means me.—Alas, my Lord, what you desire I should perform for any worthy person, Much more for you, since what I shall perswade Must tend for certain to her happiness. Cle. Can I ask more? she courts me to discover. Enter Selina. Divinest Lady, The Prince your servant desires admittance. Cle. Hell take him! Madam, be pleas'd to grant me The honor of your hand as an assurance Of your promis'd favor. Clo. If you believe I have the power to serve you In your love, name but the time and person, I am ready to assist you, were it this minute.
Cle. I should too much presume upon your favo The Prince your servant being so near attending. Clo. Do not mistake sir, he may stay. Cle. Why am I fearful? dare I believe my self happy, That you would miss the Prince's company a minute To pleasure me? Clo. Yes by my life, two minutes; nor is't in Meer curiosity to know the loves of others, But that I hold my self obliged no longer To be ignorant of one whose worth and beauty Hath the force to ad your conquest to Lov's triumph Yours who have been still observed victorious In the subduing every other passion. To force an inclination, is an act of power, Where every common beauty can subdue the amo∣rous. Cle. Not to have yielded homage here, had been a flat Rebellion, since all hearts are a tribute due To her perfections; which justice will inforce you To confess, when you know how much she doth Resemble you. Clo. 'Tis plain he loves, rather would have me think so, My Lord, your last words give me cause to doubt, Not so much your attaining, as the over-value Of the purchase; and that I may not have a less esteem Of you, I must confess I do not wish to know her now. Enter Selina and Clarimant. Sel. Madam, the Prince! Cle. How shall I understand this dark Enigma? Hope, or despair? 'tis time must cleer it. Sir, I presume to have that interest in you, You will not be offended at your stay.
For the injury, name your own satisfaction. Clar. So kind, Madam, to me who have no other merit But obedience, how can there be an injury? Clo. In this unjust acknowledgment, much mo∣desty appears: How winning must your words and actions be, When they are accompanied with truth? Clar. That only must be truth with me, Which you are pleas'd to have so; I will not own A faculty that prompts me to a contradiction: Yet never could I yield to my own praise, But as I am dignified in being your creature. Clo. In being so absolutely mine, you make me richer In my own esteem, then all additions which the world Can yield besides. Cle. This Lady can dissemble; but with whom she does so, I am yet to learn. It is not fit I should disturb This harmony; the God of love is hovering Not far off, delighted with the musick Of these melting accents: For I, a profest opposite To all his sweetness, have forfeited my manners by my stay. Clor. Not so, my Lord; the excess of kindness I have shewed Prince Clarimant, Must clear all suspition in this Lord, If he had any, that I love Agenor. Cle. Sir, be happy in this Princess to my wish, Which hath a latitude as great as you can Think. Your Father by my means (if I may boast A service to my Princely friend) highly approves The match.— All happiness attend you both. Exit.
Clar. How fortune mocks me! Clo. Struck with a sudden sadness, sir! Selina, Ex. Sel. Call for my servants, I'll go to Court, Have you any service to command me, sir? Clar: Madam, I see you fain would change the Scene: How soon are you weary of his company, To whom just now you did profess so much? Clo. Not weary, sir, but yet I hope That you have not forgot to whom All those professions were intended. Clar. Yet they were spoke to me, the words ac∣companied With proper accents, your eyes, to speak Loves lan∣guage; And here before Lord Cleon with more perswasive Eloquence then ever. Clo: 'Tis true, it makes me almost blush to think How much I courted you: Heaven knows I could not for the world have spoke Or lookt so on your brother; the reason was, I feared that Cleon did suspect whom I did Love indeed. Clar. And you to cozen him, used me so over∣kindly, At first I doubt not but you laid the plot Of thus disguising your affection. Clo. You speak as if you did repent the obligation You have laid upon your brother and my self. Clar. Do you esteem it one? Clo. A great one, sir, believe. Clar. Heaven knows I not repent it then; But can you think that when you look and speak With passion, whoever hears must not be moved, And in despight of duty wish Though dare not hope, that he were the object Of that passion: Clo. Oh misery!
Clar. How could I then, to whom they were addrest, Having withall a sympathie of blood, But find joy as a brother, at first no more, Which warranted for just, at last that pleasure Ere I was aware betrayed to me a deeper And more peculiar sense of happiness in you. Clo. Add not that vanity unto your falshood, To hope from me a common estimation after this. Clar. Add not injustice to your cruelty, To hate where you should pitty: The injunction Did proceed from you, you are the first And the immediate cause that I am miserable: Which makes me often doubt, since it proceeds from you, Whether it be a crime or no. When I shall find it Such, you shall not need to frown or threaten Punishment by hating me, once confident you do, Without a cause I know you cannot; I will inflict more, then happily you will wish I should. Clo. The Judge and the accused so neer allied, As we are to our selves, no crime is great enough For punishment. Clar. Madam, you much mistake; I cannot be the Judge. That am am the Plaintiff: for who does, at least justly Can complain of injury but I? How is my love, Since a requital is not in my wish, a wrong To you or to my brother? Clo. No! why did you by complaining Make me know your passion? Clar. Now you have named my guilt, Alas I find I have too much approved that law Which says, no man is bound to be his own accuser. You are the proper Judge, truth speaks in you,
Let your severest censure fall, and by the Gods I am your faithful Executioner. Clo. Then— Clar. Stay, first receive this Picture of my happy Brother, Sent from himself, the occasion of your trouble, Now, I speak not this in my excuse, To raise your pitty up against your justice; For I at last was pleas'd in the imployment. Nay, now profess to you and all the world, Whilst I have life, I shall adore you. Clo. And must I sentence you then, Like to a desperate person that hath done Some wickedness so great, for which the happiness Of sorrow is denied. Clar. You must for what concerns my loving you. Clo. Then hear a sentence proper to the guilt: Your eyes and tongue, which did betray your vertue, Must never meet in me their objects more. Clar. Misery! never to look or speak to you, Is that my doom? Clo. It is justly inflicted. Clar. I not dispute; but shall it never be revok'd? Clo. It is from me inviolate by all the Gods; You may to morrow break it, and I look you should. Clar. I must confess, what ere I do resolve, 'Tis not unlike I should. Clo. I thought no less. [She offers to go] Clar. But Madam, I will never see to morrow, Death is more welcom then to disobey you. Clo. Hold sir. Clar. How long? Clo. Sure you are not in earnest.
Clar. Not in earnest! death could have brought no pain ike this; I see I did so well dissemble once, That I am thought to do so still. This is an injury so great, it frees me From disobedience. Offers his sword agen upon himself: Clo. Oh hold, as you doe love me. Clar. As you do hate me, let me die. Clo. No, you mistake, Or would by death frustrate your punishment. If you were dead, no longer should remain The sense of your offence, or my just hatred For it: Live to be sorry, that way expiate Your guilt, I do not say your punishment. But if you kill yourself on this occasion, Making me accessary to your murder, call the Gods to witness I will revenge it By making you like guilty of your Brothers death, For I will never see him more: how horrid Should I look drest in a scarlet robe Dyed in your blood. Clar. All these are trifles, whilst your (just) Yet most hard sentence rests upon me, Never to see you more. Clo. Would vertue could permit to make your noble sufferings less: Your love might be received, and yet your person Never gain access. [Exeunt.] Clar. O cruel pitty!
Enter Cleon with a Letter and Papers. Cle. reads. Meet me with all the forces you ca Raise, at Lassent on the frontiers of Germany; th Imployment you then shall know. —As I could wish. [Enter Old King.] You Powers, why should I be thought a person Capable of his temptation? but there's no help, He that hath lost his own vertue, may well expect To make another false. The Rocks, whose constanc Denies an entrance to the beating waves, Though they want motion, yet in their firmness Seem to take revenge by casting the attempting Billows with disperst drops upon the movers Face: So though all motion be denied Against the person of the Prince, from reverence To the Father, yet here I may revenge My injuries, and manifest the vanity of his design In this dispersion. [Tears the Letter] O. K. Hold, hold, why do you tear the paper [He takes up some.] Cle. What do you mean sir? 'twas but a trivia Note, Howe'r the impertinencie of the Sender Moved me. O. K. A trivial Note! can thy faith stile that so, Wherein my safety is concern'd? Cle. How sir, your safety! O. K. Come, come, dissemble not; we will be both reveng'd. Cle. Reveng'd, on whom? O. K. On my false Son: No more I say, For know, your tenderness hath trencht upon your faith, I must know every circumstance, Dare nott hide it from me:
Cle. Remember, sir, he is your son, your heir, A Prince in whom your peoples hopes and joyes are fixt: ay these close to your heart to move your pitty; And then what my unhappy memory contains Of what was writ. O. K. Nay, if a Councellor suspect his memory, His Princes safety at the stake, 'tis fit he trust His own care, I'll gather these. Gathers the papers. Cle. Your pardon, Royal sir; you shall know every Circumstance: but sir, remember still How dear your son is to your people, Lose not their love by cruelty to him. O. K: Not dearer sure to them then you. Cle. Nay, then this be my witness of the con∣trary— o, read, till it kill all nature in thee, And corrupt thy brain, uch loss to him must prove my greatest gain. Exeunt. Act. 3. Scaen. 1. Enter Agenor (with a Paper) Lucidor: Age. ALl these you say are ready. Lu. All on my knowledg; there's no other fear, ut that your troops will be too full. Might I have iven advice, ere this you had been gone; here's danger in your stay, so many flock hither rom the Court, your house is no way able o contain them, and some no doubt that come Spies.
Age. To morrow early I'll be gone, I must this night Bid farewell to my dearest Mistress.—Now. Enter Clindor. O sir, I have rid; my horse fell dead just at the door▪ You are betrayed, sir, proclaim'd a Traitor, Your Fathers Guard I overtook. Age. Where? Clind. By this time they are at the gates. Lucid. O heavens! my fears are faln upon us. Age. What's to be done? Clind. Let us make good the gates against them▪ Age. There's none dares touch my person. Lucid. Believe it not sir, there is no fafety: Your Fathers jealousies are wrought to a strange Height, and those whom you least suspect I fear conspire your ruine, to advance Your brother to the Crown. Age. Who do you mean? Lucid. Lord Cleon. Age. It is impossible. Clind. I saw Prince Clarimant and him together And Cleon's words were to the Captain of the guar Bring him alive or dead. Lucid. Sir, be advised, there is no safety In the Kingdom for you, until this storm blow ove▪ Age. What, shall I flie? Lucid. Rather then fall. I know there's thousan Will live and dye with with you, but here they a not. Enter Lord. The Guard, Sir, do approach the house on every sid Clind. Make sure the gates. Lucid. That will not do't; fire soon will ope ther
—Down with them, Fire the gates, Within a crying: Lucid. Hark! Age. Let's force our passage through them. [They clash their swords within.] Exeunt. Enter Clindor, and four Guard. Clind. My friends, this care is needless; why do you hold me? I am not mad. I. Mad, sir, we do not think it. Clind. Nor can I swim, I do assure you. I. What then? Clind. Then you are sure I cannot scape your hands, as the Prince did. I. No sir, we'll look to you for that: Bring him away before the King. Clind. Before the King! of what will you accuse me? I. For being accessary of the Princes flight. Cl. O 'tis well, then we'll ev'n hang for company. I. For company! Cl. Even so, if I be accessary, you let him scape. I. Why, could we help it, when he leapt into the river? Cl. Had your Zeal been so hot to serve the King, as you do now make shew of, You would have dows'd in over head and ears. 2. What, drown our selves? Cl. Yes, any thing in zeal: My zeal to justice shall hang all you and my self Too, for in my conscience we deserve it; what, shrin for a little water? I. He tels us true, our fault will be esteem'd as great as his. Cl. Come, come along my friends, we must before the King. I. Very pretty.
Clind. You will not find so, when my most nob Lord Cleon shall with the King Judge of your actions. I. Well Captain, we acquit you; I find indeed We should be fools to accuse each other. Clind. Speak for your selves, &c. Enter Old King, Clarimant, Cleon. O. K. Urge nought in his excuse, he's a bo Traitor, And he shall know his birth is no excuse For disobedience. Clar. Sir, I dare pawn my life, my brother neve di Nor does intend ill to your Royal person. O. K. If it were so, am not I wounded in m Ministers? [Enter Capt.] This natural tenderness of thine, a Brothers, Condemns him most unnatural to me a Father. Now speak, is the Traitor coming to assault us? Capt. No sir, but he is scap'd our hands. Cle. How? scap'd! Capt. He resolutely made his passage through u And we pursuing to take him, he with Lucidor Leapt into the river, and swam to a small piace Of his own, that always lay there for his Pleasure, in which they are put to sea. Cle. With all speed make to the shore, and se what course They hold: if he sir in despair should go into Newstre With whose King you now have difference About the staying of your ships of treasure, And the Isle of Cires; no doubt much danger Threatens your self and State; to prevent which, Straight raise an Army, and make Prince Clarimant Your General, that being in readiness,
You may prevent any attempt Agenor Or the enemy can make against you. O. K. Be all things ordered by thy faith and judg∣ment, Thy care must be my preservation, I do commit all power into thy hands: Hearken to him, my dearest Clarimant, In what he shall advise thee; my age And griefs, I find, will quickly wear me out. 'll to my chamber: Give order, careful, Faithful Cleon. Exeunt King, Clar▪ and others. Cle. Yes, I shall be careful to take order, An order with you all, Father and sons. Now my designs work prosperously; Only the late discovery that Selina made, Does trouble me; Agenor, not Clarimant My Rival, is by her beloved: but all Do love Clorinda; yet now Agenor's gone, She happily may change her love to Clarimant, Who is opinion now stands fairest for the Crown: Rather I hope by this she hates him As the cause of all Agenor's misery: So far Selina is by me instructed o insinuate, whom I of late have wrought To a belief that I do love her person, But Clorinda's quality and title, As being those steps by which I hope of ascend The throne—See where she comes! speak my sweet Agent; how moves our plot? Enter Selina, with a Letter seal'd and writ out. Sel. Not well, too fast I fear. Cle. As how? Sel. Obeying your directions, my Lady hath con∣tracted o much hatred against Prince Clarimant, he scarcely can endure to hear him named, Resolves never to see him more.
Cle. Is not this well? 'tis all as I could wish? Sel. Thus far 'tis true: but now Agenor's gon She so much apprehends the importunity Of Prince Clarimants affection, that she's resolv Past all perswasion, in a disguise To seek for the Agenor, which if she find, She satisfies her love, however cures her fears. Cle. My cunning hath undone me: Thus chance oft triumphs over wisdom. But what? there is some remedy in every ill— Let me think it what disguise: soft, may she not With you dissemble, as you with her? And she does yet love Clarimant, and not Ageno Sel No, I have that here does assure me She hates Prince Clarimant. Cle. What is't▪ a Letter? O let me see it! Sel. By no means sir, you cannot close it But the Prince will find it hath been broken. Cle. You do not know my skill. Sel. I need not trust it, upon my life I'll tell yo Every word that it contains, she read it to me. Cle. Nay then I fear she did abuse you, All Lovers are dissemblers, and she I fear Is a cunning one. Sel. What she hath done, I know not; But now her sorrows and her passions Are so rais'd, the heart's transparent. Cle. There may be greatest art. Sel. Such broken sighs, and floods of tears, Agenor's name still call'd upon, Gives me assurance of her love to him. Cle. Change but the name, the griefs may still Counterfeit: I sigh and vow Clorinda, Instructed by ambition; but yet my heart Is more Selina's. [Kisses her] Sel. Well, my Lord, you may abuse me.
Cle. Prethee let me see the Letter. Sel. The words are few, and I can write them down: Pray sir do not desire what may undo My credit with my Lady, which truth is, I do only value, as it may advance your ends. [Enter Clarimant.] Cle. The Prince! Make shew as if you only Did of me enquire for him. Sel. My Lord! Cle. There, Lady, is Prince Clarimant, whom you Enquire for—If he do read it here, I shall Observe his action. Sel. From Clorinda this, accompanied with all misfortunes: Clar. How? Sel. Pardon the duty of a servant. Clar. Stay, Lady. Sel. I must receive no answer. Exit. Clar. Since from her hand, however I receive it Thus— [Kisses it.] Cle. Certain she hath abused Selina: He kift the paper, as knowing the inside Differs from the superscription. Clar. reads Of Lovers most injurious, of Brothers falsest, Of all Mankind the worst! Yet know I wish now What before I only griev'd for, that Clarimant Should love Clorinda, may it be to madness; If less, only because the sense of torment May be more, in which alone I can expect A diminution of that grief, which by thy means I suffer.—Thine everlasting enemy, Clorinda. Clar. So long my Saint! O you Gods, do I de∣serve this? Yes, I do, for she like you is just;
And we blaspheme, when we in thought repine, As not conceiving how, though certainly We have offended; my guilt is clear, 'Tis crime enough to be the accidental cause Of misery to her. Cle. This sure is real sadness; Selina, I believe thee now. Exit Cleon. Clar. Let me examine, have I not through am∣bition Or hope to gain Clorinda for my self, Been aiding to my Brothers wrongs? Sure I am guilty: I but think I did My best to appease my Father; yes, the Gods know, And she as being divine, may see my real Love to him, not only as my brother, But my friend; did either want, and could be So supplied, how gladly would I pour this Blood into their empty veins? and yet she Hates me thus, perhaps my brother does so too. What's that? nothing: 'Tis true, if I durst Wholly yield my heart. He meanly does deserve a Lovers name, That can know mixture in his grief, or flame. Exit. Enter Agenor and Lucidor (disguis'd.) Lucid. Though you have lost your Country for the present, All your hopes dasht in the minute of your greatest▪ Expectation; yet sir consider, the hand of fortune▪ That presses you thus low, may as she turns The wheel, raise you agen. Age. Never, oh never! 'tis not the hand of for∣tune But my guilt that bears me down; Justice, The justice of the Gods lies heavy on me, Treason and disobedience, till now I never Found their weight.
Lucid. I know not, sir, what you call Treason: Though what you did intend, succeeded not, hold your fortune to be better now Then in in your Fathers Court; you are safe in this Country, and your own disposer, neither of which take it was allowed you there. Age. Why do you injure truth, and seek to lessen My foul faults? Think not to make my grief Diminish so; rather express your friendship In yielding as I do; so shall you quickly Be inform'd that our crimes are so great, No punishment can be too much; and I have now No joy, but in this burden of my sorrows. Lucid. Nor I in my particular, no grief so great As in the lightness of my purse. Age. We have enough, these Jewels will From want secure us; for I am resolv'd Never to quit this habit and condition, Since justice hath impos'd it as a punishment For my ambition. Enter Two: I. Make haste, make haste; sure we shall come Too late. Age. Let's leave the street. Exeunt. Enter Two! 1. Do you think we shall get neer to see? Sure she'll chuse one of the strange Princes. 2. Troth who can tell? Newstrea affords Handsomer men then they. 1. Indeed she's past fifteen; I'll warrant she has A Sweetheart, some at her age have two Or three. 2. Trust me, she's the wiser to have plenty; When age comes, they'll drop like leaves In Autumn. Exeunt.
Enter (with all the glory can be) King, Austella, three Princes, Lords, Ladies, Sister, and People. King. Daughter, this is the day Wherein you have full power To dispose my Kingdom, nay more, Your self. Austel. This freedom, sir, of choice, which custom And your Majesty allows, is that wherein My bondage will consist; nay, all this Glorious troop appear to me no other Then if they came with joy to see me Put into the grave alive. K. How, daughter! Aust. Many Virgins, sir, that have been forc'd to Marry those they did not love, have rather Chosen death as the less evil. K. I understand you not; call you this force, Where the election's absolutely free? Aust. I grant, sir, I am free to choose; But if I would not chuse at all, does not The same constraint still rest upon me? Pardon, great Princes, whose expectation To enjoy me and a Crown, have drawn you From your Countries: you are all indifferent In my eye, nor does my knowledg of your merits Which I confess is great, perswade that in The choice of any one I shall be happy: And where the wife is discontented, the husband sure▪ If he have real worth, cannot be pleas'd. K. From the knowledg of the liberal power The law allows, and the necessity of a successor, You cannot but have often thought on this dayes Ceremony: Let not a fained modesty,
Or be it real, prevail above your duty and your reason: The ripeness of your years may justly challenge All delight; and here a Husband, and the assurance Of a Crown attend you. [She weeps] If these do make you weep, What can cause joy in woman? Since you are My daughter, I dare not think that you have plac'd Your love on any man you are ashamed to name. Aust. The Gods are witness, sir, I never saw that person Yet, whom I thought worthy to exchange My heart with; but custom, sir, and you impose On me the prostitution of my love perhaps to one, Who, wer't not for the Crown I bring, Nay even with that addition will happily refuse me. 1 Pr. Refuse you, Madam! 2 Pr. He must not sure be mortal, That dare aspire a greater happiness. 3 Pr. The Gods have left heaven for mortals, Then here there never was a greater cause. Aust. Princes, these words do fitly wait upon The action you are now engag'd in: I do not doubt you should refuse me, But I perhaps may choose one whose affection Is already given; how miserable am I then? Since there to be refused, were the less mischief, For his acceptance only grants a perjur'd And ambitious husband. K. How vain are these excuses, since the custom And my age inforce a choice. Aust. Like one condemned I beg for mercy: Cross not the course of nature; even beasts, sir, Do not couple till they wooe. K. Plead not the rights of nature, since those you wrong
By thus refusing marriage: On your posterity Depends the safety of my State, and I nor can Nor will dispence with what custom and law Appoint. Aust. The law doubtless was made in favor of The daughter, to make her happy in a free Choice, which almost never is allowed to Princes; But where like priviledges are, if not demanded, They'r not inforct: Those Countries where the Book's allowed to save the forfeit life For theft, 'tis but if askt; so when a Virgin Saves a life, and gains a husband, Yet have they in those offers been refused, And death embrac'd by the delinquent. Then wonder not that I, a Princess, to miss A husband, which being inforc'd I needs must hate, Do that which common persons have perform'd. My seeming disobedience set against Their forfeit life, Justice will force These Princes, and your sacred Majesty confess That I have reason on my side, however will And custom plead for you. King. Fond Austella, too late I fear thou wilt repent This pride of soul; it is no other cause Makes thee thus peevish: My Lords, your ear. Aust. Ha! what object meets mine eyes? sure there is Somthing like a charm that works upon me; Can this be natural? fie Austella, Consider these Princes had no power; Let not a glance then of a strangers eye Kindle an amorous fire about thy Virgin heart: Age. The Princess eyes are fixt upon me, And they are glorious ones, believe me friend.
1 Pr. Sir, we are all agreed; the honour to be your Son in law, which thus we still may be, Is that we covet. King. Know Austella, since you refuse the priviledges Of your birth, and thus neglect my safety And the State; that reason which you so much plead Invests your sister with all those priviledges Which once belong'd to you. Austel. Ah me! that I had sooner sen, or never. Sist. My sister, sir, will be better advs'id, I know. Austel. I wish, sir, I had not so far transgrest; But do your pleasure. King. My pleasure, dearest Austella, is to make thee yet What nature did ordain thee, if thou wilt chuse A husband. Aust. I shall sir, so you will promise What the law requires upon your part. King. 'Tis vain to make a second promise, With the Crown I took that Oath. Austel. These Princes and all that hear me, know that I Can chuse but one; I hope none will repine Since for my self I chuse. I Pr. None dares be so unjust to question the actions Of a Goddess, such all true Lovers Ever should esteem their Mistress. Austel. Sir, in obedience to your royal will, I am resolved to give away my self— Stay—pause Austella—It is no less: How rash, how fatal may that bounty prove!
Shall the deceitfullest of all my senses Be more powerful then reason, duty, Or my resolution? No, no, my eyes, Though as a woman I receive with joy The beams which you convey, yet as a Princess On whom depends the good of others, Reason and vertue ought to sway me more. Age. Is't not extremely dark upon the sudden? Lucid. Just as it was. Age. O friend, I am undone for ever! K. Daughter, why do you hold us all upon the Rack Of expectation? Aust. In an affair of so high consequence Blame me not, sir, though I advise. Were you to give away A Kingdom, you would do so. I shall not only, sir, Do that, but likewise take from many, Especially these Princes, a Kingdom, and your Daughter; And yet to ballance all these discontents, Please but one person: K. Yes, dearest Austella, your self in your free choice Of him whoe're he be. Aust. You encourage me; but I, sir, from my care Of these your subjects for whom I am to chuse A King, as well as for my self a husband, Humbly desire the Ceremonial part Of this days custom may be dispenc'd with; And where the manner was to praise the Gods For him was chosen son in law, and so successor To the Crown, you now would with more reason And a righter set devotion go to the Temple, And invoke those heavenly powers to inspire me With their wisdoms in my election, which I wil make At my return.
K. I know not how I, or these Princes, or these people Can refuse you a request so just and pious, ending to all our goods.—Set forward to the Temple. Exeunt. Enter people passing over by degrees, (talking.) Enter Austella and a Lady. Are not those strangers I sent for, come? Thom. Madam, they wait your pleasure. Aust. Wait! why did you suffer it? Oh bring them in, Yet stay. Thom. What contradiction's here? Aust. How hard a part necessity hath thrust upon me! Time, till for this cause, I never wisht Thy motion slower; desire them enter. Ex. Lady Enter Agenor, Lucidor. Age. O you Gods, was this the Lady that sent for us? Aust. Noble strangers, for such your looks do promise, I took the boldness to send for you to know A truth, which from our natives, or my fathers Subjects, 'tis not like I shall, since all are apt Still to approve the customs of their Nation: Lucid. Madam, when you are pleas'd to make me and my son Know your demands, so far as our abilities inform, Truth shall not suffer. Aust. Say you the same, sir?
Age. 'Twere alike vain as to dissemble with Di∣vinity, Not to speak truth to you. Aust. What I demand, is, how you do approve Those actions of which you were late witnesses? Age. I must esteem that Kingdom made happy By a custom, where their prosperity And future bliss depends on your election, Who have no doubt the care of heaven to govern What you do, as well as 'tis exprest In the harmonious composing of your person: Aust. This flattery makes me despair to find That truth which I expected, and you promis'd. Yet necessity does urge me to demand A bolder question: What Country do you hold Produces the greatest beauties? Age. Madam, this Kingdom, even this place con∣tains More then the world besides. Aust. These words methinks fall from your tongue, As if you had been taught by Love to speak Hyperboles: You have a Mistress, I perceive. Age. Ah me! Aust. Speak, have you not? Lucid. She loves you, on my life. Aust. Oh I fear. Lucid. What mean you sir? Madam, I know the Prince. Aust. How sir? Lucid. The Prince of Love I mean, Queen Venus Child, Had never any power yet o're my son, The war hath ever been his Mistress. Aust. How gladly would I flatter my desires With a belief of something even above my hopes! The words were strangely broken and abrupt, Is he your father, sir?
Age. Madam, you are the first that ever seem'd to doubt it. Au. I must confess I do: withall, whate'r he says, I must believe you are a Lover. Age. Madam, one truth's in both; the latter I will swear, or seal it with my blood. Au. How sir? Age. That I do love. Au. How long have you done so? Age. Since the first minute that I saw the object Of my passion. Au. I must increase your wonder at the strictness Of my examination: Hath many days past Since your passion first took birth? Age. Though it may seem an arrogance ap∣proaching Madness; yet truth, which you enjoin, And all must reverence, forces me say The sun hath never set, since my affection Rise; a glorious passion sure, if but consider'd From your self the object. Au. Me! Know you to whom you speak? Age. I know you are the daughter of a King, So to be reverenc'd: but I obey a power That aws all scepters; your beauty hath erected In my heart a greater monarchy, and that commands Me, fear cast by, here prostrate at your feet, Acknowledging my subjection. [Kneels] Au. Ye Gods, teach me to husband all my joys: Although encouraged, he that dares thus profess His love to me, must have a soul above the Common rank: why do you kneel? Age. You are my destiny, give life or death: Au. So were you mine; time bars all ceremony now, At once receive all happiness that I can give you.
Age. If this be real, I shall contemn addition; Are we not in a pleasing dream? is all this truth? Lucid. All certainly, if she be flesh and blood: Ere long I hope you'll be resolv'd. Au. Let none take notice of our conference, I must in publique chuse you: If but my Father then my act approve, None ever was so happy in their love. Exeunt. Act. 4. Scaen 1. Enter King, three Princes. 1 Pr. SIr, we are injur'd past all sufferance, And shall return back to our Countries The scorn of all the world. K. Princes, I had no power to force the affection Of my daughter. 1 Pr. Your daughter never durst have made a choice So much to our dishonor, had you not been Before acquainted with it. 2 Pr. Or when she had, would he have given consent, But that it was his plot? K. Let not my patient bearing of your slander Make you believe I fear your angers, Though united; yet that I may give you all Satisfaction possible, the Gods be witness with me I knew not her intent before, nor had I power To hinder when the choice was made: You saw Your selves, the people, as if inspired to his Advantage whom my daughter chose, with strange
Unheard of acclamation did express their joy. 3 Pr. I wonder what they saw to be delighted with, Some of our persons are as promising as his. K. They saw one like themselves, a common per∣son chosen, And that begot their joy and friendship. Know Princes, though in honour I am bound to observe Fairly my promise to content my subjects; Not all your discontents, if join'd, make up one half Of mine: but if you hold your selves disgrac'd By such a Rival, am not I more, both in his present Interest, and future expectation of my Crown? But now to manifest in publike our discontent, Will no ways suit the present joys attending Hymen's rights; but you shall find your honours Something righted by what I shall perform. This musick speaks the Brides approach to bed, We must be wanting in no outward ceremony Custom commands.—Now all retire, and leave This happy man to enjoy a pleasure Which the Gods may envy; these Princes do, I am sure. Enter Agenor, Austella, Sister, Ladies, Lucidor: 1 Pr. This Gentleman deserves so much, he is above our envy. 2 Pr. Some Prince disguis'd, without all doubt. 3 Pr. Most mighty Monarch, we subscribe to your high birth, Fate did ordain us humble vassals to attend your triumph. Age. That this divinest Lady judg'd me worthy,
Does raise me really to what your scorns Do throw upon me; and were this time and place Proper to right my self, the boldest of you I would make seal with his blood, I were in worth His equal, however I do boast no title. Lucid. Well spoke; h'as cool'd the Princes blood. Au. I hope, sir, you'll remember he is my hus∣band, So your son, in that at least an equal to these Princes. But happily their injuries take birth From your exprest dislike: If so, let all Your anger fall where it is only due, on me. Yet Royal sir, remember you forc'd me chuse A husband, and Love instructed 'twas only he Could make me happy. K. Why, daughter, are your joys disturb'd? Do you believe you and my Kingdom Bore so smalll a value with these Princes, That they could part with all their hopes And not be moved? Their murmuring proves but A foil to set you off with greater lustre; So raise your husband to an extasie of joy, Since he a private man possesses that which Princes Grieve to miss: 1 Pr. Madam, the King hath spoken what we had Else alleadged in our excuse. K. 'Tis time all should retire, and leave them To the accomplishment of their full joys: Remember what I injoin'd. Exeunt all but Age. and Aust. Age. Were not my faith strong in your happy Influence, a sadness now might give some little Check to my full joys. Au. It reaches not so high as sadness,
Only some thoughts that crost my fancie. Age. Madam, the Ladies of this Court are ene∣mies To Hymen's rights; else sure they would have staid To undress you; all Brides that I have seen Were in an instant ready for their bed, So many busie hands about them. Au. Perhaps our customs in that point do differ Yet you must grant we are no enemies to Love. Age. If so, you were ingrate, since that great Deity In your fair sex, hath plac'd his glory, power, And all his sweetness: which when you freely do Dispence to those that honour you, you pay To him the proper sacrifice. Au. I do not understand what sacrifice you mean. Age. I would instruct you to bed, bright Queen of Love! All other attributes come short; the zealous ardor Of my heart commands me stile you so. Au. Mine to you enjoins me study how to keep Your flame (in which I glory) pure and high; And I believe that our imaginations Far exceeds the touches of our sense. Age. Be not deceived; if this, and this, beget delight, Which, if you love, it must; can an increase Diminish joy? Au. No more, I must not trust to demonstration, My faith grew by discourse. Age. I find you had a woman to your Tutor; But know, this Logick is the properest for Love, Yet this is not the fittest School to teach it in. To bed; and if you do not there confess Our loves and joys receive increase, For ever banish me your sight.
Au. Neither my love nor duty can admit that, Since you are my husband Age. Not going to bed, both point to it. Au. You willingly mistake; I mean, both do forbid Our separation. Age. Then sure they do conclude the contrary: Come dearest, make me no longer languish; You are an excellence so great, You can no more receive addition by difficulty, Then a rich pendant Diamond by a Foil. Au. But yet a while I must be worn so, You cannot have me naked. Age. I know you will not be so cruel. Au. If there be any, Love be my witness My heart does harbor none but to my self. Age. Take heed; the witness whom you call must As a Judg condemn you; that Deity And Hymen both are injured, you tempt Their power to shew a judgment on you: But they I fear are partial, making me only feel Their rage; no, I blaspheme, and they are just In punishing my pride, that could believe I merited so great a bliss. Au. I melt at this, yielding undoes us both. I must not stay, dear sir good night. Age. An ill and everlasting one, If thus you leave me. Au. What shall I do? Enter Lady. Madam, the King hath sent to see if yet you be at rest. Age. Ha! Au. Tell him I now am going to my chamber... 'Twas well, I had been lost else. Age. Is't even so? this silence speaks me miserable,
From what a pitch of happiness am I faln! Au. Sir, on my knees I beg a pardon for which soever You condemn; never was heart then mine More full of love and duty. Age. I must not doubt it, but yet— Au. Lay by all fears, and let your dreams assure you Of my faith; ere long, by this, and this, reality Shall crown your wishes. Pardon me modesty, I in these kisses only do bestow, Rather but pay interest for what I owe. Exit. Age. There is division in me; if ever any heart Did at an instant feel both joy and sorrow, Sure then I do: No, it is impossible, How near soever they appear (consider'd) there's succession. Though this last instant I enjoy'd much bliss, Yet now I am displeas'd for what I miss. Exit. Enter Cleon, Clorinda, Selina, (disguis'd.) Cle. Madam, the last of whom I did demand, Assured me in two hours we might reach the City; The Forrest is but narrow, as they say, The way not hard to find. Clo. But trust me I am weary, I can walk no further till I rest. Cle. You cannot find a fitter place then this, My sister and I will watch a distance from you Whilst you sleep. Clo. Indeed I find I need it; my grief and travel Hath wasted much my spirits. Yet since for thee Agenor, I should rejoice in't, though my pains Were greater. [Lies down.] Cle. She does begin to fall asleep, Sister, let's walk a little further.
Sel. With you whither you please. Ex. Cleon and Selina Enter Cleon and Selina (agen.) Cle. Hear me, thou fool, with the attention As thou wouldst do a God that should in speech Declare his pleasure to thee. Sel. What means this? Cle. Thou know'st my love unto the Princess, And I know thine to me hath made thee fondly Hinder all those opportunities I had to enjoy her. But now take heed; my passion raised by These delays unto that height, it knows No limits: If thou shalt speak, or call From where I bind thee by all that can be sworn by, Those sounds direct this dagger to thy heart. Sel. O you Gods, can so much cruelty Dwell in your breast? sure Love admits no such Companion; I was a fool that ever could Believe it. Cle. I shall not greatly study to attain Your good opinion: If by perswasion I attain my wishes from the Princess. Then this shall live; but if I must use force, Then she must dye, she has a tongue. Exit Cleon & Selina: [Wind a Horn within: then enter Cleon.] Cle. There's some a hunting in the Forrest; But by the cry, they make quite from us. Clo O save me, save me heaven! Cle. Dear Madam, what affrights you? Clo. I had a fearful dream; My heart beats hard to find a passage out,
As if there were no safety in this miserable Habitation. Cle. What Prince that lives would not receive it Gladly, and give you his to undergo your fears? All I dare say, being your servant, is, Danger shall pierce my heart, before it reach to you. Clo. I know it shall; full well thou hast discharged By thy unwearied care and pains, all that thy sister Promis'd me in thy behalf. Cle. Madam, there's none that serve so truly As where love is to pay the wages. Clo. Love! what do you mean by that? I understand you not. Cle. Nor yet?— [Discovers] Clo. Ha! much less by this; my wonder is in∣creas'd, Shall I believe my eyes, or ears? Cle. Madam, I am to claim a promise: Behold the truest and most afflicted Lover That ever beg'd relief, kneeling before you. Clo. I must confess my promise was to assist you In your love; but then, as now, most ignorant Who was your Mistress. Cle. He is not worthy to be held a Lover, That makes his flame glair in the publike eye, Troubles the world with complaints: Let such a one Reap scron from her he loves, and a cheap pitty From his hearers. If I must fall through your Disdain, (for know you are the Saint of my devotion) A silent grave shall be more glorious in my esteem, If you in private shed one tear, Then all the trophies whining Poets Or repentant love ever adorn'd a hearse with. Clo. Your words alone would vanish into common air, If not made solid by your action. Cle. It is some happiness to gain belief, Add but your pitty.
Clo. My Lord, you have all that's possible for me to give, Since I have but one heart. Cle. But if that heart be sent you back, You may again dispose it: you see the Prince Careless of your commands, hath rashly through Ambition lost himself, but first he forfeited His obedience to his Mistress; for you confest this day, You did enjoin a double temperance Unto his love, and his ambition. Clo. For him, as for my self, I must interpret The irregularity of his actions To grow from his unlimited affection: And though I grieve the sad effects, his flight And my pursuit, I must not love him less; The power he aimed at, was but to make himself More capable to serve me. Cle. The same end, Madam, hath directed all my actions, Which you I hope will grant, when I have set The Crown of Burgony upon your head, Your right, this arm shall prove against the world. Clarimant now, for the old King is dead, Usurps that scepter, the Merchant whom we Travel'd with assured me: Clo. All you discourses have strange wonders in them. Cle. Madam, why are you sad at that which should Rejoice you? What though no subject but my self Allow your claim? when I am known your servant And your General, the Boy will be contened With the Principality of Cyrais, Rather then venture losing all. And certain, Madam, 'tis more glorious,
And should be more content to you to make a King, Then to be made a Queen, at least to wander Seeking one to do it, who happily Hath found another that he more esteems. Clo. I can no longer bear thy falshoods, Even thy disguises do discover thee. Cle. To be the faithfullest of all your servants, Lady. Clo. The falsest that the sun beholds; touch me not I command thee.—Ho Selina, where art thou? Cle. She will not answer you, I am engaged, I read disdain and anger in her eyes, Perswasions will not do, I must try other means. Clo. I was to blame to speak so bitterly, How much his looks are changed!—Selina! Cle. In vain you call: Madam, I see neither my sufferings past, Your promise or present tender of my service, Have power to gain your good opinion. At least consider where you are, give me not cause By your unkindness, back to reflect upon my own Advantage, your happiness forgot. I tender you once more A servant and a husband: Acceptance Makes me equal to a God in happiness; If you deny, 'tis in my power to take A sweet revenge. Clo. Revenge, my Lord! I know not what you mean. Cle. Certain you do suspect, but I'll inform you fully— Sure you forget your sex; else you would rather give Then have me force a pleasure from you. Clo. How, Villain! Offers to em∣brace her.
Cle. Come Madam, you are mine; I must return kisses, Embraces for those frowns; nor art, nor force Can free you from me. Clo. Unhand me: Can you believe to scape hea∣vens justice After an act so foul? Cle. So foul! so fair: Yes, often I do hope to do the same. 'Twas well attempted; but now it shall assist The owner: Yield, or I'll pierce that Unrelenting heart. She offers to draw his sword. Clo. Traitor, thou darest not. [She spits at him.] Cle. 'Tis true, not kill you, had you done me wrongs Above what mankind ever suffered: You cannot move me otherwise then to Infinity of love; yield but consent, And be a sharer in my joy. Clo. Villain, think of the punishment that does attend thee Rather, from the just Gods: yet kill me, And I will pray to heaven for mercy on thee: Cle. Your beauty, and my love, both plead against you; But you may think me cold to talk thus long, We must remove into a thicker place. Clo. Help, help you Gods! murder, treason, help! Exeunt. Enter Agenor. It is impossible this Bore can scape, Having so many wounds; sure I shall track him By his blood. Within, Clo. Help, oh help! Traitor! Age. Ha! 'tis sure a womans voice. Exit. Enter Agenor, Cleon, Clorinda. Age. Rude slave, how canst thou injure so much sweetness?
Cle. I must not speak, but do. [Fights] Clo. O heavens, 'tis he! guard him, you powers. Cle. Hold, oh hold, and hear me! Clo. O my dear Lord, believe not ought he says. Age. Ha! what voice? As Age. turns Cleo. thrusts at him. Villain, and Traitor both! Cle. Oh— [Dyes] Clo. Are you not hurt? Pardon you Powers, whom I so oft blasphemed In my despair, Deliverance! and by this hand! O my joys, you grow too fast upon me.! Age. 'Tis she, the too much injured Clorinda: Why should I know her, that have so much Forgot my self and vertue? O my shame! Clo. Why hang you down your head? these un∣befitting clothes Nor you nor I should blush at, Since love did both provide and put them on. Age. Your love to me? Clo. Ha—My love to you! you cannot think My heart is capable of other love. Age. I wish I could, For then my falshood had been so much less Clo. Dear sir, what is it in me that offends your eys? Age. This face, if it have less of beauty, Yet even that loss, since caus'd by sorrow For your misfortunes, merits from you more love. Age. Nor face, nor habit, dearest Clorinda—but— Clo. But what? strangely unkind! Age. Oh here, receive this sword, rip up my breast, And see what's written in my heart; there, There thou shalt find the cause of this distraction: Clo. No jealousie, I hope, nor apprehension That I have suffer'd rape, my person so Become unworthy of your love: If either way Defiled, I should not dare to approach thus near you.
Age. Then pardon me, divinest Maid, this seem∣ing coldness, That only grows from my respect to injured vertue Clo: How sir I what are you guilty of? Be it an offence committed against me, Pardon your self with promise of amends, And I will seal it on this Princely hand, That gave so late life to my dying honor. Age. O do not touch that hand, It was too active in your wrongs. Clo. Ha! O my fears! I dare not question more And yet I must, my torment cannot well be greater Your hand, this hand; speak, oh speak! Age. What? Clo. This hand which you so often have approach With trembling reverence, mine; this hand Which to your letters set, assured the free gift Of your heart to me, hath not persumed to give it To another sure. Age. O yes, this hand hath instrumentally be∣queath'd My heart unto another, with all the ceremonial Rights of marriage. Clo. Married! Oh me! pain, danger, and disgrace, Fruits of a faithful love; behold your recom∣pence. [Weeps.] O men, false men!—Why then these tears? rather revenge: Such wrongs cry loud, and make a feeble arm Like mine, heavens instrument of justice. Age. Strike where you please; but if you will be just, Here, this is the seat of falshood, here dwels The traitor. Clo. But hear the miserable— Offers to kill herself. Age. O dearest Clorinda, add not unto my breach
Of faith, the guilt of murder; for your sweet inno∣cence Could know no spot, but as by me infected. Clo. Why do you make shews of repentance, And yet persist in injuries? You seem to grieve For having made me wretched, yet force me To continue miserable. Age. 'Tis to prevent your misery and mine, that I restrain you: You had wont to enjoin and teach me temperance, Remember that. Clo. O bid me not remember; 'tis loss of memory Alone can ease my torments; and 'tis a study, Since you will have me live, that I must practise: Age. Live, and live happily, or else I never can do so: Live as my friend, my dearest sister. Clo. That is a title, had nature framed me such, I had been happy in. Your brother now, or kinsman, For I have lost my modesty so far, Ever to take a womans habit; and whilst I so Forget my sex, I likewise may forget part of my grief. Age. Then as my friend, I will communicate my fortunes To you; where you will find, though nothing Worthy of a pardon, yet somthing near a fair Excuse, it Beauty and a Crown bear estimation. Clo. I know you mean your wife: O me, why did I name her? Be not so weak, my resolution: I shall discover who I am; so move her hate Or scorn, and then you will repent my being Near you. Age. I know I never shall. Clo. I am no Rival; 'tis sin with passion
To affect you now, since lawfully anothers right. This temperance I shall endeavour, however I will do no wicked office, or seek to make Appear her vertue, or her beauty less, Since they are your excuse, my satisfaction grows From their excess. Exeunt Act. 5. Scaen. 1. Enter King (reading a Letter) three Princes, Lords, Austella. Au. To force me chuse a husband, yet bar the rights Or marriage! But I must bear it, since my Father And my King esteem it fit. 1 Pr. What is the number of the Kings army, sir? K. Ten thousand Horse. 2 Pr. What Foot? K. None that appears, but doubtless they are coming After: Princes, you may now manifest your love To me and to my daughter, by raising forces To assist me in this need. 3 Pr. You have a powerful enemy, and doubtless By some injury highly incens'd. K. Rather his power far exceeds mine; 'Tis that which makes me crave assistance from you: My daughter, although married, is yet a Virgin; 'Tis possible, in time, that she may prove a widow: These arguments may witness to you I mislike her choice. 1 Pr. Indeed she looks as if she were not pleas'd.
2 Pr. But shall we credit this? Lay he not with her? K. Not by my honor; perhaps he never shall, Though all were carried formally to please the people, Who are enamour'd of him now, more then My daughter is. 3 Pr. Sir, though I cannot think there's likelihood That any of us should ever enjoy your daughter, Yet I will promise what assistance I can give. 2 Pr. The like do I, and for that cause we'll take Our leaves. K. I rather thought you would have writ for forces, And with your personal assistance and advice Help to secure this City. 1 Pr. So we should lose our selves to no pur∣pose: The King will suddenly with his Troops of horse, If his design lie hither, appear before the walls, And close us in: where if we leave you now, We may return hereafter to your rescue. K. I dare not force, although I would perswade you. All 3. Lady, we wish much happiness, Till we return to serve you. Ex Princes. K. Now thou fond girl, thou mayst perceive what Thou hast done to chuse a husband of the common Rank; these Princes might have been a bulwark To defend against the powerful foe: Whate'r they seem, they for thy sake Will not prove enemies, I fear. Au. If you have done no wrong, sir, why should you Fear? This King; whom you believe comes to Invade, hath his dependance from the Gods, And they can change or overturn all his designs▪
K. Thus thou didst ever speak with piety And wisdom, which made me in thy choice Expect a worthy son in law. Enter Agenor. But thou hast brought shame and disgrace upon me. Exit. Aust. The Gods give this allay unto my joy, Lest in possessing you, I should contemn Their happiness. [Weeps] Age. My dearest Mistress, (for by that title I must call you) He that does give you cause to weep, Could have no other priviledge but that of Father, to defend his heart from shedding Crimson drops: But since it is your will, I must with patience hear yours, and my Injuries: Au. Alas, my Lord, consider his years Make him incapable to feel our fires Titles and riches only please old age, And with those favors Princes often die: Age. But yet his memory, methinks, might tell Him by looking upon you, what his desires Were when he married; and certain, Madam, You have little of your mother in you, That can obey so cold a precept, Where heaven allows too, only man forbids. Au. But yet that man's my Father and my King. Age. Remember that my interest in what is just Exceeds both these: pardon the violence of My desires, which makes me urge this truth, Since it arises from your beauties: but haply You do repent your choice, won by your Fathers threats or promises. Au. Although unkind, yet I must grant you Not unjust, in this suspition. Those sparks
Which quickly grow a flame, do oft As hastily extinguish; perhaps you know This by experience, that you so quickly Find my guilt, indeed before it had a being, But what you may instruct me to hereafter By your example. Age. No more, fair soul, I only urg'd it To obtain that which your Father bars me from, Your bed; we must not differ thus, being one: And yet such gentle quarrels only divide us So, as to behold the beauty of each others Love, proving at last the proper cement Of a true affection. Au. Upon a reconcilement, friends (they say) Are ever kindest: What is't you can deny Me then? Age. Nothing that's in my power to grant. Au. Tell me your name and country, my dear husband. Age. When I do really possess that title, By this kiss I will. Au. Are we not married? Age. But I am ashamed to tell my name or qua∣lity, And yet my wife a maid: When I do know you Perfectly, you shall do me. Au. Now you are wanton, and I do not love you: But where's the pretty youth you promis'd me? Age. He will not tell you who I am, believe me. Au. Well, I'll not ask; pray you let me see him. Age. You shall; he waits without,—remember That she knows not who I am. Enter Clorinda. A lovely beauty! what majesty dwels in her eye, How earnestly she looks upon me! He hath not sure betray'd me to her scorn.
Au. I never saw so sweet a Youth; That blush becomes him strangely. Age. Mistress, I here present a Kinsman to you, One that hath given such testimonies Of his love to me, I never shall forget. Au. You cannot speak that goodness, which his looks Not promise; however the tye that is Betwixt you, does oblige me. Clo. I am betrayed, and she does know me. Au. Are you not well sir? Clo. Madam, I have a grief of a sad nature Does oppress me. Au. Of body, or of mind? Clo. Of both▪ and if I not express it, my heart will burst. Age. What can this mean? Clo. Looking upon your beauty, and considering Your happy fortune, ay me! The very posture Your are now in adds to my affliction: Oh I am sick! Age. Fond man, what have I done? Au. Call for some Cordial. Clo. No Madam, now it needs not; the qualm begins To pass, perhaps you wonder, Madam, That the love betwixt you two should move This passion. Au. Indeed I think it strange, unless you do believe That he hath made a choice unworthy of him. Clo. By all the Gods, I never saw a Lady yet That I could think each way so excellent; And for your love to him, no story's known That equals your affection: Aust. What might the cause then be of your distemper?
Clo. I had an only sister, which of all the world I loved, nd she was sued to by many Princes, ne above her far in birth, but more in merit, t least she thought so; such power hath vows nd shews of service. I oft have known them sit s you do now; their hands fast join'd, their eyes xt upon either, their sighs with all the eloquence f love, vowing an everlasting constancie; t O false Agenor! Age. Lost for ever! Clo. So was he call'd; he soon forsook her for another Mistress. Au. 'Twas not the Prince of Burgonia, that loved your sister? Clo. Yes, he that loved, and left her and his faith for ever. Au. It was no wonder, he betray'd his Father; t certainly some heavy punishment attends him heresoe'r he is. Clo. Perhaps he wanders up and down, to make more women retched. Au. He's too much hated, to return back to his Country. Age. Oh misery! Clo. Madam, I by my sister was enjoin'd to seek him hrough the world. Age. Now she discovers all. Au. Whither? Age. I know the story; he hath told it, nd made me strangely sad: Trust me, I am much ispleas'd that you should ear it, for that cause; he King too I know will wonder where you are. Au. Let him, I needs must hear the rest— nd did you ever find the perjur'd Prince? —Sit down again.
Clo. Madam, I think I shall discover him. Age. It were as good he did himself. Clo. I heard what Country he was fled to, Who in his company. Au. What Country's made unhappy by so base A burden? yet I have heard his person Promis'd much, a handsom man. Clo. Madam, trust me my sister had in him All outward arguments that might produce A passion; only you know there was no faith Within; yet there was written in his face All nobleness, which I dare say you will confess, I have his picture. Age. Nay then— Au. What mean you? Age. I would not see a Piece, where Nature Is so much disgrac'd. Clo. Good heavens, what have I done with it? I lookt on it this day. Age. O you Gods, what mercy's this she shews me! Enter Lady. Thom. The King calls for you. Clo. Sure, Madam, I have left it at my chamber. Au. I pray you find it, I must see it. Clo. Yes Madam:—Alas, you need it no that have The substance: Justice commands this should remain with me; True shadow, real misery: Exeunt Enter Clarimant, Clindor, Merchant, Captain, and Soldiers. Clar. If that you have inform'd me be not truth▪ Expect to suffer death; for on your word
I have alter'd my design, given the King Time to gather men into the City; so as if now He will be obstinate, he may endure a siege Some days. Mer. With pardon sir, there can be no great in∣conveniencie By what I did inform; the Herald you have sent Will soon return with answer to your demand. But for your Brothers marriage to the Princess Austella, there were so many witnesses of that, My testimony will ere long be useless. Clar. Good heavens, can it be possible? My bro∣ther married, And not unto Clorinda? False Agenor! Clind. She may be dead, sir. Clar. Ha! what sayst thou, Scriech-owl? That thought Begets a fear that chils my heatt; One way or other there is death sure: Leave me, All leave me! [Exeunt all but Clar.] I see no way for comfort; the least of mischief Is to have a Traitor to my brother: But rather be Agenor false, then she be dead: In him our sex is only stain'd; in her the joy And excellence of both is lost for ever. Heaven could not be so cruel: Vertue and all pure thoughts Now by her happy influence are gathering strength▪ I know it by my self; and should she fall Unripened for the grave, the Gods losing in her Their brightest image, must likewise want Much of their adoration. If she were dead, He that so soon can love again, may, she alive, As well forget his faith: Then she thus injured May reflect a comfortable beam on me. Vain and irrational hopes! his breach of faith
Were equal to her death; and dare I think That she can do an act imperfect, To admit a second love? But powerful time!— No time can make me cease to be his brother. Yet even beyond all these, if I remain my self There is no hope, since her injunction was, That I should never see, or speak to her: And even since that upon mistakes, degrees of hatred Are increas'd; my griefs summ'd up, my miseries Are such, as they do leave no comfort But in their abundance, whose weight must quickly Press me to the grave. These miracles do only grow from love, That grief in their excess should comforts prove. Exit. Enter King. Avarice, thou bane of man, that steal'st into Our souls with promises of happiness, But ever pay'st us with disturbance! The same in its effect is Pride, that sets A gloss upon our selves and actions, And throws contempt on others more deserving. Covetous to keep a treasure, made me detain What I unjustly stood possest of: Ambition made me use with scorn and injury My daughters husband, even whilst he was in birth, Although unknown, that which I wisht, a Prince; And now when I do know his blood and value, Fear of this storm that hovers o're my head Must force me to deliver him up to his brother, Although he be in birth that brothers King. O you just Powers! thus do you make the Breaches of your laws for our own covetous And ambitious ends, the proper instruments To execute your wrath by. Most noble Prince, The injuries that I have done to you and Justice,
mbles me thus low upon my knees o beg your pardon. Enter Agenor, Austella, (severally.) Au. Ay me! This scorn exceeds all former wrongs: Age. Sir, what you do intend by this, I know not; ut well I know the posture cannot suit you: ou are my Father, sir, 'tis not your cruelty Or injustice shall make me fail in duty; he sense of my first breach that way till dwells within me: Rise sir, I do beseech you. K. I would not till you pardon. Au. Alas sir, why do you mock us thus? For all our injuries must be the same, Howe'r you strive for to divide us: K. No, Austella, these tears be witness of My real sorrow: The Gods inspired thee When thou chose this worthy Prince. Au. How sir? K. But found me too unworthy of a beam of light Till now; that knowledg proves my greatest curse, Since our misfortunes are remediless: Au. You have too soon, sir, rob'd me of the joy To know he is a Prince, by this expression Of your fears for something that's to come; But sir, in this you were indeed the faulty person. Age. I fear I shall be found such. Au. Could you conceal such joys from me? But I must pardon you all faults, You are a Prince, I dare not chide you. Age. Upon your hand let me express my thanks: But will you freely pardon for what I have Conceal'd? Au. Gladly I do. Age. You will not sure. Au. Be your doubts clear's by this. [Kisses him]
K. Daughter, you grant what you should beg: Let that inform you who your husband is, [A Letter] My injuries to him, and our misfortunes. Au. Still your conclusions fright me: Good sir read it your self, Or rather in some gentler circumstantial way Inform what it expresses. K. First know, this paper does contain the Kings Demands, who with his Army hath now inclos'd The City, which how we can deny or grant— Au. Pray read sir. K. reads. Your own injustice hath drawn me into your Country; Yet I take so kindly the alliance you have contracted With my brother Agenor— Au. Agenor! K. reads. That if you will deliver up the Isle of Ceris belonging To my Crown, and my Brother to me alive, I will quit Your Country, well satisfied with my charge; but if in Any part of this you fail of an exact performance, To morrow I hope to make my own conditions. Be advised by him, who appearing your worst enemy, May in this councel prove your greatest friend— Clarimant: Au. Oh Agenor! Age. Now can you pardon? Au. Now can I die; O fate, where have you plac'd my love? Age. Do you repent? I ne'r was false to you, Nor ever can be. Au. Let not my Father hear; I must forgive, You are my husband: K. I cannot blame your sorrow; your fortune does command
A plenteous showre, in which I willingly could bear a part, If reason did not tell me councel and advice Better becomes my quality: I mean not councel From my self to you, but that we all advise Since equally concern'd, what's to be done. Age. Methinks justice and reason both chalkt out the way Of your proceeding. K. As how, dear son? Au. Too late, sir, from your heart you yield that attribute. K. Austella, thy reproof is just. Age. With pardon, sir, it is not; all the fault is mine, And justice bids me bear the punishment. Yield sir to all my brother Clarimant desires, Since by his speedy unexpected coming Your forces nor supplies from others can be useful. K. The treasure and the Isle most willingly I will surrender, (Would it pleas'd heaven we all were there! Gainst that no forces could prevail.) But to deliver you, that by your death He may secure himself, first let destruction Seise on me, already ripen'd for the grave. My brother, sir, did ever love me, Perhaps so as his brother; but now you are His King in justice, but self-respects will point you Out the object of his fear, not of his reverence. Age. He cannot be so impious to kill me. Au. You shall not trust him. Age. Consider then what hazard all must run, The lives of thousands, a Kingdoms utter ruine. K. Alas, 'tis true: Age. You may perish too, but in my hazard all
Are safe; 'twere madness to dispute it further. Au. What safety, and you lost? Age. No loss, if you consider truly what I merit: You are a Virgin yet; I freely give you back Your vows; justly you might revoke them As not intended to a perjured person, Such you now find I was. Au. But such I hope you are not now to me: Age. Think me such if I miscarry, 'Twill make your grief the less. Au. But my guilt more in that suspition: Did I not think you loved me, yet duty Does command me share in all that you can suffer. But confident your heart is here, till death, Not then, I must not leave you. K. The glory of the action makes you too partial To your selves; we must dispute this further With my Councel. Au. In vain you will dispute, if you intend to part What heaven hath join'd, which rules both power and art. Exeunt. Enter Philant. and Strato. Phi. Well, I perceive that we shall lose a noble Prince: How happy had we been in his succession! Stra. Without all doubt the King his brother Will soon by police or force destroy him; Possession of a Crown will kill all natural Respects of blood. Phi. But why then should we not resist? Justice hath a strong arm. Stra. Yet in apparent dangers, fear still overcomes Our faith and courage; but here's impossibility: Our City, though great and populous, hath but poor walls:
The Kings army, now his Footmen likewise Are come up, are not without a miracle To be resisted. Phi. But was't not most dishonorable to invade us Without proclaiming war? Stra. To speak to you the truth, it was but justice: Did not our King detain a mass of treasure To which he had no right? Phi. 'Tis true,—but— Stra. But what? Come, come, all unjust actions However they seem profitable for the present, Involve a curse within them; which when we find, We must not lay the blame on others: The best way to appease the Gods When we have done amiss, is to confess; Then mercy follows, or our blows wound less. Exe. Enter Clindor and Soldiers. 1 So. Think you they will surrender the treasure, And yield Agenor to our King, or bide the brunt Of war? Clind. I'll tell thee what I fear, and what I wish; And if thou doest not so, thou art an ass. 1 So. Well, speak: Cli. I fear they will surrender, I wish they would not: O Lads, might we but come to one assault, We should be Lords, we that do venture blows; Where in these Treaties we are sure to have The worst on't: If peace be the conclusion, Would I had been imployed upon the Treaty. 1 So. Why, what wouldst thou have done? Cl. Heard no reason, nor offer'd any: the first condi∣tion Should have been, that all the handsom young Women and maids in the City should have come Stark naked to have known our pleasure; Then the rich men with their jewels and bags Of mony; then the King with a rope about his neck. 1 So. Stay there.
Clind. That may be your period, 'tis not mine Then for the Prince Agenor— 1. What of him? Clind. Nothing but good, I love him well, He was a stirring youth, and bountiful, But yet not like our King: were the people not So base, he should (might I advise) be left Viceroy To govern, and I to govern him. 1 So. In my conscience should our King shew him that favour, Thou would'st perswade him to rebell against hi brother. Clind. By this light I think I should, I love to be in action strangely. 1 So. That love may chance to bring you to a preferment You have courted long, and in my conscience well deserv'd: Others that were less worthy when Agenor fled, I saw advanc'd. Clind. I understand you now, you are a bitter Rascal; And here's my hand, if ere there be more broils, For this thy kind remembrance I'll cut thy throat. 1 So. I thank you sir, I'll look for't. Exeunt. Enter Clarimant, Captains, Attendants, Souldiers. Clar. See all things order'd as I gave command: I long to see the perjur'd Traitor, That I may do a justice To my Fathers ghost, and injur'd Mistress. Enter Clindor. The King, his daughter Austella are coming, With your brother Prince Agenor.
Clar. Traitor Agenor! It seems they mean To bear him company in death; Attend them in— Do all just as I did direct. Enter Agenor, Austella, King, Lucidor. Age. Brother, you see the advantage of your power Forces this visit. Cla. 'Twill prove to you a sad one: Seise the Rebel. Capt. In the dead and living Kings names we do arrest you. Age. And I in my own name, your King In justice, command you hold▪ Au. O sir! [She Kneels.] Clar. Rise Madam; your intercestion must not interpose In this, alone of power to save the lives Of many Princes. Age. Just heaven, he's taken! This was the mischief I fear'd. Cla. No Madam; justice alone commands me to surrender This where it is due. The Captains put the Crown on Agenor's head. Omnes. Long live Agenor, King of Burgonia. K. This is not real, sure. Age. What mockery is this? Clar. O brother, the Crowns of Princes Are things to which we owe a reverence, Not to be us'd in sport; what are their Sacred persons then? Au: Let me fall down and worship What a strange God-like race of men These pair of Brothers are!
Clar. Madam, I must not suffer that which I am Infinitely pleas'd with, since it expresses Your excess of love unto my brother. Age. I am confounded with such unexpected Courtesie, that I am lost in all acknowledgment That may express the power that you Must ever hold upon me. Clar. What I have done, justice commanded from me If not, my love hath still been such to you My brother, that had I been the Monarch Of the earth, your power should have been equal. K. This action is so noble, that it does make Us more your servants then all force could effect, You have subdued our minds. Clar. You set so high a price on Justice, That you confirm my resolution; Though from the actions I must do, Will seemingly arise my proper smart. Age. Command our fortunes, and our lives. Clar. The hazard of your life is that I must demand▪ Age. As how to be imployed? Clar. In taking mine. Age. Yours! what do you mean? Clar. To kill you, if you cannot me: I must not live, knowing whom you have injured. And not endeavor to revenge. Age. You cannot be in earnest sure; If so, look here. Clar. Could you behold the Image in my heart, In the true splendor that it wears; You would not bid me view another object, Excellent I confess, if not compared. Age. Brother, if you thus press me, I shall forget all you have done; Since there's no benefit so great, but may be Cancell'd by the doer.
Clar. I wish what I have done, had in it all That could oblige, that I did love you more, If Possible, that you were nearer to me Then a brother, since all degrees of interest Serve but like steps to raise the glory of my love And justice higher.— Chuse which you please— This; the time and place? He offers 2 swords. Age. Be witness heaven, which what unwillingness: Yet since you, Honour and love engage me: I'll offer to my Goddess (left she suspect my zeal) A much loved Brothers blood. Au. O Soldiers! will you suffer thus the worlds Glories To ecclipse themselves? Cla. Madam, in vain you urge; I did before engage them by an oath, Whatever I commanded, to obey me. Au. Cannot my prayers or tears? O dear my Lord! Your brother's young, and by the glory Of his passion, hath lost much of his reason: Consider what a mischief even victory Must prove to either: Age. Necessity enforces me to accept the combat. All circumstance consider'd, how more then base, Ingrate, must I appear? how dull a sense Shall I express of your perfections, To hear another magnified above you? Au. If I with that dispence, who can com∣plain? Age. Such dispensations makes your value more, And so adds to the justice of my cause. [Enter Clorinda.] Au. To you I turn then: Will you needs end An action so gloriously begun, in blood?
A brothers murder, or your own? What you have done, Shewed you a Demy-god, ecclipsing all That story hath recorded: but such an end As you design, will cast you from the height Of all your glory, and leave you to posterity A hated name. Cla. If so, yet still I stand engaged: Love, and my fate Appoint this way to shew the ardure of my flame, Which by no common action could be witness'd. To that you urge, add this: I know I am Inferior to my brother in skill and strength; Yet what to others have been bars in combats, To me prove arguments impulsive. In short, the Deity that I adore's prophan'd, Contempt and scorn thrown on her: If by a feeble arm she right herself, It more does manifest her power; However I shall fall, since hers, a happy Sacrifice. Clo. Hold! rather a wretch prophane, and most Injurious to that Deity, to whom thy false And counterfeit devotion seems directed. Clar. O you Gods! Grant thy self mad, rather Prove such; or by what's dearest to me, I'll pierce thy heart. Clo. Do so. Clar. Ha! Clo. I shall be known. Clar. Have I not seen a face resembling this? Clo. Does the guilt with which I justly tax you, Abate your rage? let Gods and men hear what I urge, nay, your own conscience be a Judge; And if I then be found injurious, kill me; No hand is fitter to give conclusion To my misery.
Clar. How am I lost! this is no time for talk: Soldiers, remove him. Clo. Hear me! Clar. Away with him. Clo. By what you hold the dearest, I conjure you Hear me! Deny that, and so make good All I accuse you of.—This is some hope He knows me not. Clar. If I consent, by the same power You may command me cease the combat. Clo. I swear the contrary. Clar. Be brief then; and for this interruption, Soldiers, I conjure you by your oath To kill him when the combat's ended, My innocence acquits you from his blood. Clo. Answer me then, you that pretend your self So great a Votary to Love, and friend to Justice: Is't lawful for any who is not A Priest, to offer sacrifice? Clar. None may. Clo. What warrant for your present action then, To sacrifice your brother, or your self? If you alleadg, your love must know No limits, are you not then prophane? But grant your youth and folly this; That love that's so irregular, pays a devotion Sure; but where? Not to a Mistress, but vain-glory And self-conceit. Your Mistress, sure hath no less Power with you, you think, then that of Kings Over their subjects: Who dare make war Without commission from his Prince? You cannot boast one from your Mistress; When if she be that excellence which you pretend, 'Tis not unlike she wishes well to him Whom you would punish as her enemy: Sure she hath cause to hate you for presumption,
Hypocrise and treason: All which, if well con∣sider'd By an impartial Judge, appear to be the Groundwork of your present action. Clar. 'Tis she; for who could else so powerfully Condemn me? Clo. What I have spoke, is in my own defence, Who am ill now unknown, a brother To the injured person; and had there been A wrong resented by those that were concern'd, So far as blood might expiate, my sword Of yours in justice had precedence. Clar. She would not have me know her: I must confess Your former words have made so deep impression In me, by sometime touching upon truth, That here the difference with my brother ends. But what you last urg'd concerning the Precedence of a Brothers sword, I am so far From granting, that if my reason Cannot alter your opinion, my sword shall force you To deny it, when time doth better fit. Clo. Most gladly. Clar. In how poor things does she and Fortune Give me power to server her! K. Most excellent Prince! how much we all do owe You for our present happiness! Age. For me, I hold my Crown, my life, nay more, Possession of my fair Austella. K. Since by the mercy of the Gods, the storm That hung over our heads threatning blood And ruine, is thus removed; let us with joyful Hearts haste to the Temple, and there by
Hecatombs of sacrifice express our thanks: Clo. Whilst I That cause this joy, prepare to die: Clar. O thou great Deity, observe her scorn! What I have done, was fore-design'd by thee: Revenge! but let her punishment prove love of me. Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
Epilogue, to the King. IF what hath been presented to your sense You do approve, thank your own influence; Which moving in the story that you told, Infus'd new heat into a brain grown cold. Thus far our hopes: But now just fears begin, For much that is left out, for more brought in; But since all change was to the better meant, Although we fail, yet pardon for th' intent. Such sweet indulgence from good natures fall, But the strict Critick will for censure call. We would please both; and since we want the art, [Kneels] Sir, stay the sentence till the second Part: Such favour oft your piety lets fall Vpon delinquents no less criminal. Stay! even in policie your grant is fit; Hope quickens, what despair makes dull, the wit: Nay, could our Author some new arts display, Yet this condemn'd, you'l slight the second Play.
PROLOGUE. HIgh labour'd lines you may expect from those, Whose pleasure is their studies: Most here knows This Author hunts, and hawks, and feeds his Deer, Not some, but most fair days throughout the yeer. Such rude dull heavy Scenes expect you then, As after suppers vapours from his pen. Would you not ask, Why then does he write Plays, Since now great Wits strive for Dramatick bays? Pardon what's past: That way now counted wit, Although enjoin'd, he'l deal no more in it: Since dying to the Stage, his last request Is, that you would not like the worst Scenes best. If this desire injurious seem to some, I wonder not: Divers to Plays do come, Not to be pleas'd, unless the Play be bad; So what th' ingenious like, doth make them sad: We tax not here their judgment or their wit, But that so much ill nature's join'd with it. Others there be, which like the Austrian race, Wits empire tyes alone to those they grace: Nay, so opinion'd of themselves they be, They'l praise things most absurd; and when they see Those whose simplicity admires their wit, To do the same, they laugh at them and it. 'Tis not these Bugbears that do haunt the Stage, Should fright an Author; since 'tis plain, this Age Hath more clear Judgments then was ever known: But most Apollo's beams break from the throne, And with a double sweetness doth invite All that have gifts in Verse or Prose, to write. Which he would still, but that his period's past; For sure you'l find this Play worse then the last.
THE Passionate Lover, SECOND PART. Act. 1. Scaen. 1. Enter Cleon and Selina. Sel. MY Lord, be confident, thus chang'd, there's none can know you. Cle. But dare I hope thou hast for∣given me? Sel. The mercy that you shewed in unbinding me, May well assure you; nor am I ignorant How far our passions may transport, aided by hope To attain our ends.
Cle. But now the current of my love runs in the proper Channel, and shall ever center here, a tribute justly due Unto the ocean of thy love: Why did I fondly dream There was a happiness exceeding this? [Kisses her] Sel. Your Kindness was so great, so unexpected, That I am now more yours then ever: I never must Forget the pains you took in coming to unbind me, Creeping upon your hands, all smear'd in blood, 'Twas well you scap'd with life. Cle. aside. Thanks to my privy coat; had I expir'd In such a pious action, yet so I scarcely had Deserv'd forgivenes, much less this sweet continuance Of your love, sure to be valued far above Clorinda's hate, Whose interest to a Crown made her In my ambitious eye appear more beautiful; But now, reason commands her yield to thee Precedence in my heart. Sel. How easily we give belief to what we wish! Cle. Though the Gods know how all my love is cacell'd, Justly turn'd hate to her; yet love and gratitude to thee Commands me to attempt the Crown of Burgonia, Offer'd into my hands. Sel. As how offer'd? Cle. I count it offer'd, when it appears in reason Within the reach of our endeavours: Of ours, I say, Mark me, my Queen, in thee it lies to rule me And a scepter. Sel. It is fit the honor of your love should render me Conformable to your desires: Name me the way To this your happiness, so mine. Cle. The seeming pious Druid here our Host, I have discover'd to have been a Mountebank
Physitian; yet now disguis'd, esteem'd by all This Country a holy and most sacred person, With whom the Gods are conversant here in this solitary Melancholy Grove. By him with gold corrupted, I doubt not to effect revenge against Agenor For this wound most basely given me: Dispatch his brother Clarimant; nay even Clorinda (As witness of my love to thee) shall likewise bleed. This done, and this is in thy power to effect, Is not the Kingdom of Burgonia mine By right of blood? Sel. 'Tis certain, they remov'd, you are the next. Cle. Consider then, my dear Selina, what 'tis to be a Queen. Sel. A Queen! Cle. Take but these thoughts into thy soul, And there's no action difficult or dangerous: But we have only shadows to encounter with, The issue real pleasures. Sel. I must yield; dispose me, sir, which way you please. Cle. That resolution does already crown thee. Sel. I would not have you think it is my ambition, But my love engages me; but yet I fear. Cle. What can you doubt? Sel. Swear sir by the immortal Gods, To make me privy to all your actions; And when you have attain'd the Crown, to marry me, So to remove some jealousies. Cle. I do by all that's sacred; nothing but death Shall part us; this kiss be farther witness— [Enter Druid.] O sir, you are welcome! what news? Dru. I have no leisure now to tell you: I must disguise to entertain some curious And devout people. Exit Dru.
Cle. He every day goes to the City In a several shape, so to enable himself To appear more knowing here: I wonder much None of the Court are so zealous to visit him, At least to know their fortunes, For he delivers oracles as from the Gods. Sel. No doubt there are; but now the present time Affords so much discourse of other peoples Fortunes, that they neglect the knowledg Of their own. Cle. To know the fate of others, Does often give a light to ours: At least let us be diligent, whose industry Can only make us happy: Perform but carefully That which I shall impart, And thou shalt have a Crown to crown thy art. Exeunt. Enter King, Prince, and Attendants. K. Most noble Prince! though you may well believe The forces you have brought unto my aid I shall not use, yet I must ever be ambitious To requite that love which caus'd your diligence; Nay, I shall think my happiness defective, Although great, till fortune point some way Wherein I may express my gratitude to you. Pr. Most royal Sir! fortune hath been to me Auspicious, more then had I proved Austela's Choice; and this expression you have made, Imboldens me to let you know wherein. K. Sir, I beseech you name it. Pr. Know sir, not my ambition to enjoy your Kingdom, Could so far blind my judgment, but that I ever Found your younger daughter Olinda, in herself,
The more deserving love, especially from me. I would not, sir, say more, lest I should seem To boast a happiness which merit never can attain But by infinity of service, and much suffering. K. Indeed I did observe, whilst you were in my Court, You much more did converse with her then with Austela, Who ever was reserved. If Olinda's affability Have gain'd your good opinion, your courtship hers, It is a happiness beyond which I dare not expect. If it be less then this, and that by the freedom Of her humor you believe your interest greater Then indeed it is; yet there will only be Better occasion for my love to shew it self. Pr. My actions shall ever witness for me How I prize your royal favour. Exeunt. Enter Clindor and 1. 1. Did you not lately murmure against peace, Cryed up war as the only blessing? Clind. Yes, I did so. 1. I scarce remember your sword did ever purchase Such gay Caparisons. Clind. I see thou art a very simple Fellow: This is the harvest of the war; the King Whom we did terrifie, made Presents unto us Commanders. If thou canst shew me where Soldiers Are made much of in cold blood, then I will Magnifie thy mouldy mistress, Peace: Till then, Bellona, thou art my Patroness. 1. Thou talkest as if thou hadst done some mighty Matters; and yet I fear thou art a Coward. Clind. I love you, sir, too well to let you suffer Such a grief as fear, for me: Draw. 1. Draw! are you mad? or is your wit so great To spoil Your memory? were not two shot to death that were Seen fighting?
Clind. Very pretty, you grow valiant to abuse me, Because their valor found a punishment. The Prince! Justice, sir, I beseech you. Enter Clarimant and Attendants. Clar. For what, or against whom? Cli. He told me, sir, he thought I was a Coward. Clar. Perhaps you have given him cause to think so. Clind. Better and better! But sir, may men speak all they think? Clar. Why not? I do so, and never will again Dissemble. Clind. But may I, sir? Clar. Yes, so it be not blasphemy or treason. Clind. How, sir, do you distinguish treason? Clar. Look what the Law says, Clind. Pox on the Law! Clar. How? Clind. I cry your Highness mercy; I had forgot the Law was so Near kin to you: This scurvy fellow has made me mad. Clar. You would not live without law. Clind. No, I beseech your Highness grant me the Law. Clar. Most willingly. Clind. The law of Arms, sir, and let him prove me a Coward [He draws] Before your Highness, and see how I will defend my self. Clar. I know not how in justice I can pardon this Unless I do pronounce you mad. Clind. I do beseech your Highness do so.
Clar. Sure you are mad. Clind. Then I may kill this Rascal, and your law cannot ang me. [Offers to strike] Clar. Bind him, to prevent mischief. Clind. Any thing to save my honor; let me not have my hands ose; wear a sword, and be call'd Coward! Clar. He did but think so. Cli. Let him not think aloud then in my hearing. Clar. Come, I will end the difference; I do pronounce ou are no Coward, and him a fool for thinking so. e friends. Clind. Not with a fool; you shall excuse me sir▪ Ex. Cli. &c. Clar. Be gone, and leave me. Why do I give this intermission to my sorrows? lorinda's Pleas'd I should be miserable: nce in no other way, in that I will content her. ut this obedience yields a satisfaction; nd satisfaction fits not perfect sufferings▪ Which she the perfectest of creatures feels. can no more admit to be less miserable hen my Mistress, then I could be content to be More happy; is there no way to change my fate With hers? O no, her torment rises from the alshood of her Lover, where she had plac'd her joys: Mine, in the not attaining of a Love Where I dare not pretend to merit: am a happy man, if by comparison I judge: Enter Agenor, Austella. Age. Still alone, dear brother! Au. Most noble sir, why do you thus retire your self
From those who know no satisfaction Greater then your company? I must pretend The interest of a sister now; you shall not Hide your passion, nor the cause from me, I know 'tis Love. Clar. Madam, it is confest: But since despair Is, and must ever be the only issue of my love, I would not have those I esteem Engaged with me in misery. Au. Can you be so unjust to your own merits To despair? Clar. So just to her perfections. Au. If not a Judge of this, at least make me Your Advocate: yet all my eloquence Will rest in shewing her the happiness That she refuses. Clar. Madam, she is not capable of any increase, She's dead to me and all mankind. Au. How mean you? by a figure, or dead indeed? Age. I'll take her off from this discourse, Lest she discover Clorinda in disguise. Dear Austella, in vain you strive to comfort him, That can know none, his Mistress dead. Au. Rather in vain I strive to know what both Resolve to hide from me: It was not curiosity, sir▪ But a desire to serve you: That belief Will speak my pardon. Exit▪ Age. I fear she is displeas'd. Clar. Reason hath too much power over her fou To be displeas'd without a cause: I hold her Every way so perfect, that I durst make A full discovery, crave her assistance; But then Clorinda would more justly hate. Age. O brother, speak no more of hate; it is im∣possible, If ever she did love me. You have my Intrust,
But much more prevailing must your unequal'd merit Prove. Clar. Merit! dear brother, it is impossible: Since what I have done, or shall ever do, Grows from her influence upon me. Age. I see that I am yet to learn what it is To be a perfect Lover. Clar. Rather you have not practis'd what you know. Age. Brother, I must confess it is my shame, Though not my grief, since my inconstancie Hath made me but more happy. Clar. How! Age. Frown not: I mean more happy, As my inconstancie leaves you Clorinda free; And if she prove averse to your desires, Her constancie to me admits of a just censure, Not applause. Clar. If you believe you have a power in her After your breach of faith, such as may aid me In my love; she is not that perfection That I adore, and by such yielding Could not make me happy. Age. Then you propose a love without a possi∣bility Of satisfaction. Clar. Yes, if it suit not with her excellence: The Gods sometimes appoint us such sad fates, That 'tis our duty to pursue and glory in our misery. Age. I see a miracle must make you happy: Be not displeas'd that I invoke the Deity In your behalf; and Brother, know that those Who would be held the most devout, Esteem things just and worthy, because they do Proceed from a divine power; not that they are Agreeing to our faith, or understanding.
Clar. Brother, what you would undertake in my behalf Becomes your love to offer, but not mine to accept. A person truly humbled by sense of his unworthiness, Sure dares not hope: And to admit an Advocate, Supposes that; nay merit in himself, or in the Intercessor; or which is worse, an easiness To be overcome with words. Any of this Is such impiety my love cannot be guilty of: Her being his perfection, all things great or good, Clorinda nam'd, in that is understood. Exeunt. Enter Prince, and Olinda. Pr. Dear Lady, let me know how I have lost Your favour. Ol. First let me know why you believe you Ever had it? Pr. When I was here a suitor to your sister, You did not then look with such scorn upon me. Ol. Be so again to any other, and I will give you cause To think me every whit as kind. Here you discourse of Love; express a sense Of what you do prosess to suffer by way of Martyrdom, perhaps accompanied with a sad sigh Or two. Pr. And can you yet be crueller? when you your self Have caus'd a nobler passion then what I made But shew of to Austela. Ol. It seems then you can counterfeit. Pr. I must confess; but yet— Ol. Nay spare excuses: As I live, I like you the better For it; and if you love me now, know this to com∣fort you,
We only can agree in being dissemblers. Offers to go. Enter Clorinda and Selina, (as in discourse.) Olind. Most noble sir! methinks my Genius Should have inform'd me the happiness of your ap∣proach; And yet 'tis fit I leave you now, But there does stay my best of wishes. Exit. Sel. She had like to have said, her heart: Alas poor Lady, how love does fool thee! Pr. It must be so; this stranger is the cause Of her neglect to me: With what unwillingness She parted from him! I will not, cannot suffer This second affront; I shall become the scorn Of all men. Exit, and justles Clorinda. Clo. What means this! But why, Selina, when I call'd, Came you not to help me? Sel. Alas, Madam, I was fast. Clo. Could you so quickly be so sound asleep? Sel. Weary with travel. But, Madam, what said Agenor, (The King I now must call him) when he perceived It was Lord Cleon, his trusted friend, That he had slain? Clo. He does not know it yet, nor ever shall: For since his passion to me procured his death, His faults be buried with him: Besides, I know It would have been no little torment to Agenor To find such falshood. Sel. Is it possible that you can yet consider him, Otherwise then to revenge his falshood? Clo. If thou hadst ever truly loved, Thou couldst not ask me such a question: Clarimant! I must not stay.
Enter Clarimant. Clar. Sir, though you have hitherto found means to avoid me, Yet having now the opportunity, I needs must press you to a short discourse, And such a one as will require the absence Of your servant. Clo. I must obey necessity: Leave me. Sel. Is it possible he does not know her? Exit Sel. Clar. I see you wear a sword, and make no question But you know, or think you do, how to maintain With it the assertions of your tongue. Clo. In what? Clar. Is it possible that you can ask? yet since I must, I wil refresh your memory, and whet my own revenge By repetition. You, as a brother, did pretend You had more interest to right Clorinda's wrongs, Then I her servant. Clo. And proved it, did I not? Clar. In part the oratory of your tongue prevail'd, And I condemn'd my self; but honor forc'd me Make appeal unto my sword, and there you must Orecom me too, before I quit so dear a cause. [draws] Clo. Truth told me then, and bids me still maintain That I am most concern'd in what Clorinda suffers: [Draws too] Clar. Your resolution pleases above expression: Which forces me an enemy to beg the favour To kiss that hand, though it may prove to me An instrument of death. Clo. Keep off; I dare not trust a reconciled foe, Much less an enemy profest. Imploy your sword, Whose force I fear less then the impoison'd flattery Of your tongue.
Clar. Then guard your self, your breast lies open. Clo. You shall not find it so, if you dare strike. Clar. Alas it is too true; you have a guard which I Can never force; and since invisible, it is fit I yield; Here to confess my self orecome, is to triumph. But if you hold your victory your shame, which much I fear, Then purge that stain with my heart-blood, A sacrifice most justly due to your disdain. Clo. A Cowards blood can have no vertue in it. [Offers to go] Clar. Stay. Clo. Imploy your sword then, and nobly take revenge Upon your enemy: I swear, that act Will with me raise you to the highest estimation. Clar. O Clorinda! that word pronounc'd, Think what you do enjoin me. Clo. I fear'd before you knew me, But thought it fitter to practise the masculine part I am to play, with you, then with another: Perhaps with some I have to do, where my Discovery is my ruine. Thus much, confident Of your esteem, I dare discover. Clar. What musick's in these words! Clo. Trust me, Prince Clarimant, I am much pleas'd To see you. Clar. Madam, assure me that I do not dream. Clo. Believe me every sense is free, Only your joy is too much rais'd. Clar. Too much! when you speak to me, and not in anger. Clo. Contain your self; for know 'tis in your Power To make me happy. Clar. In mine! witness you God There is no bar betwixt you and your wish. Clo. None but your will.
Clar. My will! That, and my other faculties Were ever yours. Clo. Swear it. Clar. By all that's sacred, it is and ever shall be so; For you can will nothing but what is just And noble. Clo. My will then is, to which yours must assent, That you do kill me. Clar. How! Clo. A miserable life consider'd, death is the hap∣piness Opposed: That you must give me, or be perjur'd. Clar. That Clarimant should kill Clorinda! Self-murder is esteem'd the highest guilt, And yet this doubles it: I am deluded By some spirit; for what proportion Bears this imposition to your excellent sweetness? Clo: It bears proportion to my sorrows. Clar. Could death be granted as your only re∣medy, Yet that my hand should give it! Clo. Those servants are esteem'd the truest, That do the last and greatest offices of duty. Having no love to pay your vows of service, My gratitude proposed this as your recompence. Clar. O heavens! was ever gratitude so cruel! Clo. Will you not then obey me, nor your oath? Is this the fruit of all your protestations? Clar. Is not my will the same with yours? You would not live, nor I then. Clo. Kill me, and then do what you please. Clar. The same say I; kill me, and then do what you please: Clo. Your vow was not to eccho my desire, But to obey what I enjoind. Clar. It is true, in what was just and noble. Clo. Is it not so to relieve a friend distrest? Your oath past too?
Clar. No friend will ask, for shame, The help does refuse to give. Clo. The guilt remains with the first breach, and that was yours. Clar. Alas, you press what no example yet came near, To kill that person that I value more Then all the world. Clo. No doubt brave Brutus servant lov'd his Master; Yet kill'd him, being commanded. Clar. Perhaps he was his slave, and gain'd his Freedom by it. Clo. And shall not you do so? A freedom from the bonds Of Love, the Tyrant-master that I flie. But did not Herod Doom to death in one his Wife and Mistress, Lest any other should enjoy her? And this caused from excess of Love. Clar. Unto himself, as I dare never hope To be so happy to have his interest, So I shall never fear his punishment. [Kneels] This is that posture which my former vows Best suit withall: Nor am I humbled thus, To beg for pitty to my self but you, Divine Clorinda! who ought to be As far from thought of punishment, As you are free from guilt. Clo. False perjur'd man! I can be free from neither, Whilst I stay here. Clar. O misery! was ever man so wretched! In the performing what she should command, I still have plac'd my only hopes of merit. Sure fate did never yet to any Lover
Put so hard a part, To disobey, or pierce his Mistress heart. Exit. Act. 2. Scaen. 1. Enter Austela, Clorinda. Au. COme sir, you must not be so sad: Sure there is some strange sympathie betwixt Prince Clarimant and you. Clo. No sympathie at all, if he have any cause Of grief; mine's meerly natural. Au. I find you dissemble with me: Your griefs have such resemblance, that knowing his Is Love, I am assured yours is the same. Clo. Love! I honour all the sex, yet never knew That passion for a woman. Au. I must confess that you have in your self So much of beauty, that looking in your glass, It is not like you should be taken with anothers form: But yet take heed, the Gods may punish pride. Clo. To be such, is a punishment so great, The Gods can add no more. Au. The interest you have in the King, hath made me Study your content: I find my sister loves you; And what her blushes will not let her speak, I must. Clo. If she herself should tell me so, it were fit for me To think she said it to make sport, knowing My own unworthiness.
Au. How slow soever you are of belief, must make known a Ladies passion to you Every way your equal. Clo. I have not seen that person, sure. Au. What do you think of me? Clo. You! as of the soul of all perfection, And only worthy him you do enjoy. Au. I must not think my beauty worth esteem: For, gaining him, there is a conquest, which obtain'd, Deserves a triumph. That blush shews you conceive me. Clo. Madam, it is impossible I should understand A speech so disagreeing to that character I had received. Au. It will be unjust to value me the less For my esteem of you. Clo: Of me! Enter Agenor. Au. Know, gentle Youth, not all the tyes of duty Have power to bar me the expressions of love, That grows from such perfections as the world Never knew: Hide not that lovely face, Which even the King beholding, must excuse me. Age. Thou lyest, false woman. Clo. O Agenor! I never wisht thee half so mi∣serable. Au. Why do you turn away? What, weep! Is my love Such an injury? Or if some word have past my lips, That mov'd this passion, my lips shall satisfie By taking off these tears. Age. I can endure no more: Just heavens, how my inconstancie is punisht! Exit.
Au. Clear up those Suns, and let them gently shine upon me, Or I am lost for ever! Not moved with all my Courtship, Continue thus unkind, insensible of a Queens love, And I shall think you are no man. Clor. The weakness of my passion hath discover'd me: Madam, such an excess of happiness To be thus favour'd by you, produc'd this passion; Tears are as well the effect of joy as sorrow. Au. A woman, I am confident! Now I can read it In her face, sir. I accept of your excuse, But then you must forgo this sadness. Clo. Madam, all other thoughts but the consi∣deration Of your favour, are henceforth banisht. Au. I yet am something doubtful of your pro∣fessions, You may confirm me. Clo. As how? Au. Sure you have a Mistress, some in the Court That you do love. Clo. None, trust me. Au. Then you do love the King so much, that you hate me For my inconstancie, you may forgive it, I know he will; He thinks it is no vice, rather a vertue, To have choice of Mistresses.—Why do you sigh? This touches; nay, now you break your promise. Clo. Madam, I am not well. Au. Will you rest your self upon my bed? I'll call the King, then you will be well, It is he must cure you, Lady.
Clo. Lady! O my heart— [Swoons] Au. What have I done? ho, some Cordial quickly! Help— Enter two Women. Madam, he recovers. Au. Lay him upon my bed, gently for heavens sake! Exit woman and Clor. In this discovery I my end obtain, But make provision for my future pain. Such fruit our jealousie produces still: Better not know, then know the worst of ill. Exit. Enter Clindor and a Gentleman. Clind. Pray you sir, shall I make bold to ask a question? Gent. A dozen, if you please. Clind. You are courteous. Why was the King sent for by the Queen in such haste? Gent. I must not tell you that. Clind. Perhaps you cannot. Gent. I cannot, sir, be ignorant. Clind. O, wondrous easie; perhaps the King knew not The cause himself. Gent. It may be so; Kings know not all things. Clind. You do, it seems. Gent. Seem, sir! Clind. Nay, be not angry; you promis'd largely. Gent. I promis'd nothing. Clind. 'Tis true; and nothing I expect. So fare you well. Gent. Remember, sir, I only gave you leave to ask. Clind. 'Tis true, I cry you mercy: Then I May ask one question more.
Gent. You may ask any thing. Clind. Do you not think I had ill luck To find a man so overwise for my Informer. Gent. Troth sir— Clind. You need not answer, I am already Satisfied. Gent. I see you know not me, You are a shallow fellow. Clind. And you so deep a puddle, No plummet can find the bottom; You have no ground, sir: So fare you well, My cautious Monsieur. Exeunt▪ Enter Agenor and Clorinda. Age. O dear Clorinda! how powerfully thy beauties Now present themselves, and minute gather strength By these thy sufferings! What cause hast thou and I To curse my base inconstancie? Clo. How sir! are you so ingrate to heaven, That for your sake favour'd that vice so far, To give it the reward of vertue, happiness? And that so great in your Austela, That all men else are poor compared. Enter Austela. Age. My Austela! Au: It is well I am denied then▪ Age. Did she not court you as a man? The heart she took from me, through you could not Receive, your sex denying Entertain, Is yet so tainted in the tender of it, That I for ever must repent the change I made: O Clorinda! would this hand When it was join'd in hers, had rotted off.
Clo. Do you believe to cure inconstancie And breach of faith, by new inconstancie? I see it was a vice dwelt in your blood. Age. It is no inconstancie, to cast an eye back On your vertue, too late instructed By present misery. Clo. It is enough; this does express how miserable You might have been: But know your happiness is perfect. The Queen prompted by jealousie, the fruit of Ardent love, suspected me a woman, And your former Mistress, and took this way of courting me To be assured. Age▪ Your vertue bids you make this fair con∣struction. [Ent. Austel.] Clo. She comes! her sight begets new trouble; Would I had chang'd this habit for my winding-sheet. Au. Sir, I am glad to find my chamber can afford you So good company. Clo. Absence at any rate! I must be gone: Your Majesties pardon. Exit. Au. It seems you have cured him. Age▪ You made him sick; had I not reason? It is fit I remedy your errors. Au. You have so many of your own, It will take your time up. Age. But there's one especially that troubles me. Au. You would change a wife, would you not? Age. Do your thoughts prompt you to that questi∣on? Au. It is time when you deny me. Age. There was a time I might. Au. Had your hand rotted off, the present trouble Had been saved: You are an unconstant man; Which granted, both are miserable.
Age. Both are no less in being jealous, Which you must grant you are. Au. Having such cause, love could not be with∣out it. Age. But having certainty that vertue is gone, Love ceasing▪ ends that trouble. Au. The object of our guilt, shall be our Judge. Age. I doe not understand your riddle: who do you mean? Au. One, that to me cannot be partiall▪ your Mistress. Age. Your servant. Au. Yes, Clorinda. Age. But doe you think that you stand clear in honor. Au. You cannot hope it sure; but there's the more For me to pardon: Come, all your passages of love Are plain; yours, and your brother Clarimants. Perswade Clorinda that I think her still a man, Lest modesty make her forsake the Court, And both use means to make her love your brother. These little quarrels, where the hearts are good, The body of our Love keeps firm, like letting blood. Enter Clindor, and 1. 1. Come. thou shalt lend me ten Crowns; As I am an honest man, Ile pay thee. Clind. Gain that opinion with me first: You see the Money's ready. 1. Why, thou hast known me long, Did I ever deceive thee. Clind. No, for I ever took thee for a Shark: A Fellow too, that would abuse me In my poverty, in words. 1. It was but in Merriment; I swear I ever Loved thee truly.
Clind. Yes, and I wil requite it; I know that mony Would but dull your Wit, spoil Industry: I finde it by my self, that care keeps close My Purse. 1. Refuse a Comrade little Coyn: Iis poor. Clind But yet the custome of the Rich, and things Must be proportion'd to our Fortune. 1. 'Tis well Fortune and you are friends; That makes you proud. Clind. I have a sense of her great benefits, I were a Fool else. 1. Well! I may live to repay this scorn. Clind. Yes, sooner then the Money you would borrow; Which makes me ask no Bond. 1. Come, prethee supply me, and leave fooling. Clind. Spare your own pains, Sir, you have done enough. 1: As I am clad, I am not fit for any honest com∣pany. Clind. Nor cloath'd in Scarlet trust me. 1. You are a base Fellow: the Tide may turn. Clind. O admirable fruit of poverty! Valour in∣fus'd I vow: Yet remember, Friend, quarrels are dangerous. 1. Tell me of danger— Clind. I cry you mercy, Sir; I had forgot you were poor. Nay, if you be outragious, I must leave you. 1. We shall meet agen. Exit. Clind. Yes, no doubt on't; how calm and tem∣perate Will Money make one: a man might almost pull me By the Nose, yet I not angry; such admirable sa∣tisfactions
Here.— [Enter Selina This Youth I have seen oft, had a strange Mind to talk to him; yet still the brat avoids me. Stay my pretty knave, shall I borrow a word or two Sel. On good security you will ask no more. Clind. Why is your Mistress staying for you i the Lobby? Sel. If she were, what would you give to suppl my room? Clind. I do believe what ever it were, she would repay the sum. Sel. O fie! you look not like an Amorist; tha face would fright her. Clind. A martial one: Adonis was not alwaye favourite, Mars had his turn. Sel. Were you that Deity? your reign is out. Clind. But I can prove a Jupiter, and court your Mistress in a shower Of gold; and that, I take it, in all times is powerful More then your face. Sel. Descend, descend, and shew yourself a simple Mortal▪ Else I shall leave you. Clind. Tell me first what Country you are of; My mind gives me I have seen that face. Sel. You have a foolish mind that does abuse you, So fare you well. Clind. And so have you a foolish tongue that does betray you; A certain coy disdainful look too, that stiles you woman. Sel. How sir! you shall find me masculine; take that. [Strikes him] Clind. This cannot hide you; confess your sex and name,
Or by this light I will untruss your points, And then you know what follows. Sel. Sir, you in this restraint preserve my modesty, It was my desire that you should know me: I dare not say you are the cause of this disguise, Yet you may think your pleasure. Clind. Now by this light have I mind to beat thee As a man, for all the scorns thou hast put upon me: For as a woman I am sure thou wilt abuse me, Especially if thou pretend'st to love me. Sel. Your scorn's so just, that I must suffer it: [Seems to weep] Clind. How! let's see; no moisture! spare, spare your Linen, good Selina. Sel. Oh whither shall I flie to hide my shame! Clind. Ev'n to your mask and petticoat: Carry your bum A little out, you will need no Fardingale a while. Sel. Alas sir you mistake, I have no other burden But my sorrows; from those you only can deliver me. Clind. Bar marriage, and I will be your midwife: Where lie you? Sel. As you have honour in you, do not discover me, Hereafter you shall know. Exit Clindor. Enter Clorinda (with a paper) and Olinda. Clo. Madam, having received such testimonies Of your favor, I could not leave the Court Even in civility, till I had kist your fair hand. Olind. What sad things do you utter! It is not possible, You do but fright me sure. Clo. Necessity enforces; for I shall leave behind That which I value far above my self.
Olin. Does the King and Queen know what you do intend? Clo. They must not. Olin Your resolution is full of cruelty; That though you do oblige me by imparting it, Yet I must fail your trust, and give them notice. Clo. For your own sake you must not: this paper, I being gone, will let you know a secret That concerns your happiness, and by my stay You will be miserable. Olin. Alas, that is impossible: To have your company, includes all joys. Clo. Since you esteem it so, if I live I will return. Olin. How soon? Clo. In a short time; but if you read this paper Yet this two days, when I come back you have my curse. Weep not dear Lady, yield me the honor Of your hand. [Enter Prince] Ol. O me most wretched! you shall not go, I die if you thus leave me. Clo. Alas I must. Pr. Madam, I cannot chuse but wonder To see you court a Boy thus. Ol. My wonder is greater at your arrogance And ignorance, to tutor me, and slight a person Then your self more worthy. Pr. What's this? Clo. From him I may receive that death I seek: Defend your self. Ol. Ah me! help, help! oh help Prince Clarimant, The gentle Youth is hurt. Enter Clarimant. Clar. Hurt! O heavens, grant me a little space. Clar. fights with the Prince, beats him off, returns wounded, and kneels to Clorinda.
Clo. Why this to me? Clar. To ask your pardon, that he lives That drew that precious blood. Clo. I grieve your hurt, yet thank you not for interposing. Enter Agenor and Attendants. My Brother wounded! speak, by whom? A sur∣geon, quick. Sel. The Prince of Aquitain. Age. Make after, seise him: Dear Clarimant, how is it with you? Clar. Well; happy to die for such a cause. Au. You Gods extend your pitty: O dear Clo∣rinda! our some balm into his wounds. Age. One word from you may clear his fainting spirits. Clo Heaven knows I wish his life more then mine own. Age. We must do more then wish. Clar. Although my reason tels me that I owe my thanks To your despair, yet the sound comforts me: O there bestow your cure! my cure lies there. Au. Thou soul of Lovers, in thee dwels such truth, Well may thy merit save our faithless Youth. Exeunt.
Act. 3. Scaen. I. Enter King, Agenor. Age. IS there no news? what is become of this rude Prince? K. You need not seek for him; his wounds and his disgrace Are punishment enough. Age. My reason now does tell me so; but had my brothers Wounds prov'd mortal, no corner of the earth Should hide him from my revenge. K. I cannot chuse but grieve the sad accident; Yet know I am oblig'd in honor, he coming To my rescue with such a powerful Fleet, To look with less severity upon his fault: Besides, which happily you know not, I gave him leave to be a suiter to my daughter. Age. His punishment would be so great to see Clorinda, As herself whom he would then have wounded As his rival, that I confess I wish him here. Besides, those of his Fleet, or he scaping to That, may do some sudden mischief. K. He cannot be so base, your fears are needless. Exeunt: Enter Clorinda and Austela. Clo. Madam, in modesty I could no longer Wear the habit of a man, once known a woman: But humbly I beseech you on my knees,
you respect the honor of our sex, When you return, to licence my departure From the Court; since misery and discontent wels here, though I were circled in With all those honors you or the King can grant. Aust. I must confess I am made happy by your misery, And therefore hold my self oblig'd to study always For your satisfaction. But know, besides this tye, have so great opinion of your merit, Hold it so far to exceed mine, that I am confident The Gods reserve for you a greater blessing then Agenor, A person tainted in his faith. Clo. Although your own, I must not suffer Such an undervalue of the King, whose worth is such, So far exceeding all, that it admits of an allay. Here it was not so, rather addition; A change produc'd by such perfection, Is not to be esteem'd inconstancie, but wisdom: Au. It is not now, rather hereafter that I shall return This argument upon your self: Now let us go do What charity enjoins. Clo. That and my duty forces me to attend you. Exeunt. Enter Clarimant and Clindor. Clind. How is it with your Highness? Clar. O too well, Clindor: my outward wounds Heal much too fast, since these within do fester. Clind. Well sir, you little know what service I may do you. Clar. I know thou hast and wilt be careful of my health. Cli. But sir, I mean that I can serve you in your love.
Clar. O Clindor; speak no more; thou troublest me. Clind. Will it trouble you to let you know Clo∣rinda's here? Clar. Here! where? Clind. Not in this room, but in this Country, nay in this Court. Clar. Alas I know it, and so by this does all men. Clind. But do they know Selina's here in habit of a man? Clar. Yes, yes. Clind. But yet they do not know she is in love with me, Most desperately too. Enter two Surgeons. Clar. Nor dost thou know it, fool, she does abuse thee. Clind. She dares not; by this light I will beat her.— The Surgeons, sir, are come to dress you. Clar. Must I be drest? Enter Austela, Clorinda, and Olinda. Clind. The Queen your sister! Clorinda, as I live, sir. Clar. O fool, thou lyest; it is impossible— Can it be she? Au. Brother, how is with you now? Clar. So well, that I could kiss that sword that made these Wounds; for I by them receive a benefit Which I durst never hope. Au. Come, I must dress your wounds; no com∣mon hand Is fit to touch you. I know this Lady will apply One plaister, since for her sake you did receive These wounds.
Clo. Led by your example, I am compell'd to follow. Clar. You Gods, what happiness is this! may they be long A healing, if still this application will continue. Au. Pray not against your self, heaven is offended, Granting your request, I fear; for if I not mistake, They bleed afresh. Fair Clorinda, These drops express his passion, and your power. Clo. I grieve for both, and know no remedy so good As a perpetual absence. Clar. Know dear Clorinda, it was a thankful heart That sent those few drops forth to kiss your hand For so great favours: your cruel resolution Sends them back, their errand scarce perform'd: For see, I bleed no more; but know withall 'Tis the destruction of the fountain; the coldness Of despair must quickly freeze all motion: Au. I owe a reverence to that blood upon this hand; O let me kiss it as a most sacred relique Of the truest Lover the sex did ever boast. Offers to weep. That spot, Clorinda, you may wipe away, But never shall the memory of him Whom you thus cruelly do murder By disdain. Clo. Madam, free from that guilt, I cannot appre∣hend A punishment. The Gods are just; they be my wit∣ness If I had happiness to give, I should prefer This Prince before my self; But I am such a peece Of earth, so sunk beneath all joys, That should I yield what he can ask, Yet I must lie like lead upon his heart. Au. Yet for the present, sure,
It is fit you speak comfort to him. Clo. Comfort from me! 'tis contradiction To my being, who am made up of misery. Au. Pray come near, and speak to him. Clo. I am so careful, that I would not hurt him. Au. Brother, be confident her rigor cannot last, I shall perswade her to relent. Clar. O Madam, you mistake; she only hath the beauties, And not the weaknesses usually depending on her sex: Her resolutions have their ground from reason ever, And know no change till it command. How can she then esteem the less deserving brother Worthy her love, when he that most deserved Foully betraid her? Life could only prove No curse, if I might be assur'd she would Forgive the injury she suffers by the trouble Of my love; to hope her pitty of my torments, Is much above my faith. Clo. Madam, too long we have disturb'd the Prince; Our absence would be more conducing to his health. Au. There is a care his merits methinks should command Over your gratitude: which that you not apply, Too late you may repent. Clo. I so much wish his health and happiness, That I will ever pray that he may never find Disquiet thought, and to my prayers likewise add My latest counsel: Forget Clorinda, and make her happy. Clar. Forget Clorinda, and make her happy! How can I understand this cruel sentence? Au. Waste not your spirits, sir; I think I under∣stand her, And it shall not be long ere I procure her To explain herself.
Clar. You are the comfort of my love, and life. Exeunt. Enter Prince Cleon. Pr. What do I owe my stars that did direct me To this place, where I find safety for my person, Cure for my wounds, and such a friend who chalks me Out a way to all I can desire on earth! Cle. Follow my counsel, and be constant in it, You are the master of your wish▪ Pr. Constant! can there be other ends propos'd Powerful to change me? Revenge for my disgrace; And the possession of that Kingdom I aim'd at In Austela, now to prove mine with one I more esteem, The fair Olinda. But how when this is done, I ever can requite your pains? Cle. It pays it self; and to secure you more Of my intention and performance, Know I am not the man I have appeared, But one whom both revenge and love does likewise Animate.— [Enter Druid.] My Instrument returns: When we have heard what's his intelligence, I will lay my self more fully open, And we'll conclude how to pursue what we design. What is thy news, good? Druid. As you could wish. Cle. We'll hear't within. Exeunt.
Enter Clorinda and Selina▪ Clo. A man so holy and so knowing, sayst thou, That can give comorts to all griefs, Call back the peace that is fled from any mind? Sel. Certainly, Madam, the spirit of the Gods Dwels in him, or rather he is a God descended To the earth to comfort the distressed world: I am confident, had you but once discours'd with him, You would not be thus sad. Clo. O fool! the Gods themselves have not a cure for me But death: If he their substitute would give me that, Then I would visit him most gladly. Prethee leave me. Sel. Well Madam, I grieve you have not faith To trust my words. My words! nay, all the City Speaks him Wonderful for sanctity and knowledg. Clo▪ Well, perhaps I will see him: Prethee now leave me. Sel. Alas Madam, I cannot, whilst you are thus sad. Clo. I am not so, thou but deceivest thy self; Or if I be, company makes me worse. Sel. Madam, since I must, yet still my duty Presses you to receive this comfort. Clo. Well, be gone, I will think on it. Ex. Selina. Why do I trifle time out thus, when every hour I feel a torment more then death can be? Besides, if I were gone; from the impossibility To enjoy me, Prince Clarimants affection Might abate; and yet when I consider, His love appears none of those sickly passions Which time can triumph over, since I believe it such, Where is my gratitude to see him languish? Nay, to see him die? die of those wounds
That he for me received? I never can forget His blood fresh streaming from his wounds At my approach; that faithful witness of his joy, More worthy of belief, then if a thousand tongues Or pens should be imployed: I find my self More wretched now then ever, fitter to die; For if I live, I to my own shall add His sufferings too: And yet methinks that should be Pleasing: To grieve for him, is to discharge Part of that debt I owe; I would not be ungrateful: Live then Clorinda, till thou find'st some way To make him happy. No, it is impossible, Since I cannot e so; yet I may seem content, And by that seeming give him real blessing: And see, fortune presents an object that confirms my hopes It may be done, at least I will endeavour. Enter Olinda. Olind. Dearest Clorinda! not less dear, because a woman; For such perfections in a man I solely could not Have possest, my own defects barring that happiness: But as a woman sure, none can pretend With greater merit to your favour; All my wants supplied by my firm love, Which cannot know another object then your fair self. Clo. I must esteem my self most happy In the continuance of your love, Rather your friendship; for all affection Is from us proper to the better sex. Olind. Which sure is ours, you being a woman. Clo. Your sister will not grant you that, Whose example you ought to follow, in acknowledg∣ing
Love and superiority due to the men, Especially such men as the King Agenor And his more worthy brother Clarimant. Olind. These words of Clarimant, if heard, Would cause a general joy through all the Court: But he himself must know his happiness by degrees, Lest the excess again disturb his health; Since your last visit he is miraculously recover'd. Clo. You attribute to me what is more justly due Unto the King and Queen's, nay your sweet con∣versation. Methinks you four would be most aptly join'd; Two brothers and two sisters, whose perfections All the world cannot equal. Olind. Dear Clorinda, I must not understand you; Or if I do, you have a mean opinion Of my Judgment, less of my Constancie, Which did but now profess my heart for ever only yours: Clo. I take for granted that your heart is mine, Which I express in that I would dispose it, And so I would do my own, if I had any: But know that what I once do give I never reassume; Or if I had a heart, could that be worthy Clarimant Another had despised? Olind. What now you speak to me, expresses your respect to him, And so must not displease; for I confess His merits are so great, that in his happiness All that love vertue must be sharers: But I beseech you do not entertain a thought That you can breed a change in him or me. Dear Clorinda, your vertue and your beauty Is the object of our Loves; such a conformity As may arise from that, betwixt Prince Clarimant And me, is only fit.
Clo. I for my part do ask no more, but that your lines Of love do meet in me: But reason in him, Friendship in you may give me power in time To tie a happy knot; this hope the Gods inspire me with. Olind. Take heed, they needs must be offended with you For a hope that is so unjust. Clo. Dare you refer your self unto their sentence? Olind. I dare do any thing that you think fit; But this I know you cannot. Clo. Heaven knows that I desire it. Olind. But do not hope it, when two wills oppose you. Clo. Yet when the Gods shall give their sentence, Your will and Clarimant's, it all your vows be true, Must then submit to mine. Olind. Should we grant our obedience, how have the Gods, Or can they unto us declare their will? Clo. That great Deity that did infuse A reasonable soul into us mortals, Inthron'd that Reason as a King to govern All our actions. But beyond this I am inform'd, Nor is it possible but you must know it, That here without the City in a sacred Grove, There lives a man so pious, and so knowing The will of heaven, that all men in distress Or doubt repair to him, and find a happy issue Of their troubles. Olind. It is most true, his fame is great: If curiosity do move you to go visit him, I gladly will attend you; but since I have resisted What you commanded, dear Clorinda, No mortal man must change me. Clo. I love this firmness in you; the fitter you Will prove hereafter for Clarimants affection.
In hearts of wax, Love easily impressions make, But those of diamonds hardly new forms take. Exeunt. Enter Agenor and Clindor. Age. Clindor, I make no doubt your joy is not the least To see your Master thus recover'd of his wounds. Clind. Faith sir, his outward wounds are pretty well; But there's a foolish shaft sticks in his heart. The little Archer should be whipt for shooting Sol∣diers, What has he to do with us? Age. He aims still at the noblest marks. Clind. But those, sir, that are wise, wear privy coats, And then his darts prove but burbolts, and drop down At our feet: And is not that, sir, better then by our whining Or in verse or prose, make these she-gossips think themselves Our Deities, who by creation rather are our slaves. Age. I see thou art an enemy to Love. Clind. Just as to Idleness: why are we not in arms? Methinks there is now a brave occasion. Age. How? we have no enemies▪ Clind. Let's make some then: But sir, you have a cause Of just revenge against that base Prince which hurt your Brother: Let's fall upon his Country, they say a rich one, And he no doubt lies here obscured to do some mis∣chief:
At least let us seise upon his ships here in the road. Age. It were dishonorable: He came to the assistance of the King my father, And for his sake I rather do desire his friendship, However he appears not to receive it. Clind. That shews his hatred; he may be in his Country Raising forces to invade your Kingdom in your ab∣sence: Prevent him sir, and seise on his; it is a shame, sir, To lie here hugging a wife, wasting your best of youth On poor delights. Age. Thou knowst not what it is to be rich in pleasure. Clind. Yes▪ to have mony purchas'd by my sword. Age. Is it not as well to have it without blows? Clind. Not by the half: If your Majesty should give me now A thousand crowns, in the mind I am in, I swear I scarce would give you thanks for it. Age. Well Clindor, I had such an intention; but since I see It will be no more acceptable, it shall be reserv'd for some other. Clind. Your Majesty, if you please, may lend me such a sum: At the first City taken by assault, I shall pay it. Age. The war is so distant from my thoughts, So long I cannot spare it. Clind. Nay, as you please sir, I am full. Age. Able to lend me, are you not? I am a stranger here, And may need gold. Clind. Make haste, sir, back to Burgonia, your credit's good there:
And to say truth, I wonder why you stay so long; Your subjects will believe you have forgot them, Your fathers death, sir, left things much unsetled. Age. Clindor, I thank you for your care; 'tis worth my thought, And shall be worth to you the thousand crowns we spake of, Nor shall you pay so much as thanks to me: Only be careful of my brother; he is full of melan∣choly, For which I know no better cure then your com∣pany. Clind. He shall not stir a foot without me: But this same foolish Love does trouble us; A little Bout, sir, In the field, War, war would cure us all. Exeunt. Enter Clarimant and Clorinda. Clar. Divine Clorinda! how quickly is my joy To see you here, lost by the cruelty of your com∣mands! All your neglect was just; but now to bid me Cease to love you, nay to impose a new affection, It is such a studied tyrannie, that I in this particular To Gods and men may justifie my disobedience To Clorinda. Clo. I must not hope that any argument That I have used can be of equal force With her perfections; if they want power, 'Tis vain to plead it further: but henceforth Be assured I never shall impose any command Upon you, nor will I ever see you more, If with convenience I may avoid you. Clar. Stay, you cannot think it is possible I should obey you.
Clo. I think you will not rather; so fare you well. Clar. O stay! was ever man so wretched? May I not be allowed some time to try If I can be unconstant? Clo. Yes. Clar. How long? Clo. Two or three days. Clar. Oh! years, years will not do it, sure not an age, I cannot suffer such a thought: To pierce my heart Is much more easie; O give me leave to do that Rather; then you shall see your character So deeply printed there, that not Clorinda's self Can ere deface it, not by this injury, Although the greatest that ever yet was offer'd To a faithful love. Clo. Tears from those manly eyes! it is not fit I urge it more: But know withall it is impiety in you To hope I ever can be yours: For though no contract past betwixt me And the King your brother, I hold my self Unfit to be anothers wife; my vows of being Ever his, are sure in heaven recorded. Think seriously of this; but withall be assured That person does not live to whom I hold My self so much obliged as to Prince Clarimant: The Gods grant you much peace, Nay greater happiness then they permit me to be∣stow. Exit Clo. Clar. Thunder and musick in one voice; despair and joy! et reason bids me hope from her last word: The heart that pitties once, may love afford. Exit.
Enter Clorinda, Selina. Clo. Selina, I am now resolved to see this Holy man; and if he be what you relate, Hereafter I shall credit you. Prince Clarimant And fair Olinda too will go along: Let it be order'd so, if possible, That none take notice of our going. Sel. That may with much ease be effected: Some houres As in the morning he wholly dedicates To his devotions, and does admit of none to visit him: But persons of your quality are not obliged to any rule. Clo. It fals out happily; be ready then to guide us. Sel. Madam, I shall not fail; and if you find him not above What you expect, for ever banish me your favor. Exeunt. Enter King, Austela. K. Austela, I much wonder why this Unhappy Prince appears not. Au. Doubtless, sir, he is shipt; the sense of his disgrace Will hinder him for ever appearing in this Court. K. Why shold you think so? his action was not such As you would make it; although Clorinda Were a woman, he knew it not, but as a rival In your sisters love did wound her. Au. That is true, sir; it is not that which I alleadg In his disgrace, but that he with such odds Could not defend himself from Clarimant. K. It was his misfortune, and not want of courage,
Nor can I think that he consented To that assistance which his servants gave: However I must value him a friend, For such he shewed himself in my distress; Nor shall he suffer in my Kingdom, if it lie In my power to serve him. Au. I am not, sir, to counsel you: but for my part The little knowledg I had of him, does make me wish Never to see my sister married to him; And I am confident, if not inforc'd, She never will receive him for a husband. K. It is not come to that: I rather fear His wounds were mortal; and should he thus be lost And no accompt given of his life or death, It might be prejudicial to my honor, All neighbour Princes would avoid my Court for ever. Au. It were no loss, if they were all like him. K. Daughter, I find you are so partial for your Husbands brother, that you forget my interest quite: Au. I cannot be so severed by a husband, As to forget a loving father: My sisters good Obliges to speak thus much, for whom I must believe Prince Clarimant would prove A nobler husband then this Prince You so much seem to favour. K. It is true; but his affection's setled on Clo∣rinda sure, Never to be altered. Au. You know not, sir, what time may do; Clorinda's self labours to make Prince Clarimant Change his affection to my sister: For her, She vows never to marry, as having lost Agenor Whom she loved. This I both gather by mine Own observance, and likewise know it from my sister, To whom Clorinda hath in part exprest as much.
K. Things standing so, I must confess, if honor And my word engag'd permit, I quickly should con∣sent. Au. You would have reason. I know Agenor So much loves his brother, that he might be per∣swaded After your death to live here, and leave the govern∣ment Of Burgonia to Clarimant. K. It were a high point of state, could it be so, And we should aptly pay the care we owe Unto this Kingdom. That State is much more happy Where the Prince himself remains, Then howsoever govern'd by a Substitute. Au. Add to this, what happiness it were for me To live here in that Kingdom, which I By your favour brought my husband. K. My dear Austela, I rejoice in thy instruction: My daughter and my Tutor, to thy cleer Judgment I leave the managing of this affair. Exeunt Enter Cleon and Druid. Dru. Will you not let them see my art? Cle. No, no, it were loss of time. Pr. On peril of your lives keep close, till you be call'd. Enter Prince and Sailors. Cle. Speak not of calling; As soon as you perceive them once entred This thicket, break forth and seise them: If any men come in their company, Unless they yield, kill them; whilst we convey Away the Ladies to the ship. Where lies the Boat? Who guides to that? Sail. Fast by here in a Creek. Pr. But why should not we rather let them come
Unto his Cell? then we might better seise them. Cle. Oh by no means! he must remain here still In the same reputation, untill by poison Or some other way the King Agenor be dispatcht; And then come to receive a Dkedom For thy recompence,—or else a halter. Dru. Doubt not, I will deserve it. Pr. My mind misgives me that they will not come. Cle. Oh fear it not; both love and curiosity Advance their steps, either of which Hath power to make young people run: The boy that brings them, hath his interest too: I judge it near the time. [Ent. Sailor] I see them coming. Cle. Stand close. Enter Selina, Clorinda, Clarimant, Olinda, Clindor. Sel. Madam, it is but a little farther Within the Wood. Clind. Whilst they enquire for Oracles, I'll talk with you: It is a notable witty rogue— The place methinks invites: [Ent. Sailors] Clar. Traitors! Clo. Help, help, you Gods! Pr. Make good 'gainst them. Cle. Lose no time. [Ex. Pr. Cle. Clor. Olind.] Enter Clarimant and Clindor. Clar. O Clindor, that we had wings! In the fight Sail∣ors are kill'd. Exeunt.
Act. 4. Scaen. 1. Enter King, Agenor, Austela, and Attendants. K. 'TIs strange that they should be so long re∣turning, It is not a mile without the City. Age. It seems they find a pleasing entertainment. Enter Clindor (wounded) Au. O my heart! what object's this! Age. Clindor, what mean these wounds? Clind. To kill me, sir, I think; and if they do, It matters not, life hath with me no value: Your Brother's lost. Age. How lost? Clind. Surpris'd by the base Prince of Aquitain, As they were going to see the holy Druid. Au. O heavens! and whither carried? Clind. To his Fleet that lies here in the Road. Prince Clarimant and I, when we had kill'd Those that opposed us, pursued to overtake them, But came just as they put their Barge from shore: The Prince not considering his wounds, Transported by his passion, leaps into the sea, And swam after the Boat; but you may think In vain, although he could have reacht it. Age. And so was drown'd! Clind. Not drown'd, but perhaps worse: Whether moved by the Ladies prayers, or that they might not
Lose the profit of his ransom, or with more cruelty To make an end of him, I know not which; I saw them take him up into the Boat, Having disarm'd him first. Age. He's lost, he's lost! Just Gods grant me revenge upon the Traitor, And after punish me which way you please for all my ills. Clind. The hope of that revenge is my excuse to outlive My master: Think what you are to do. Age. Thou counsell'st well. O sir, your help! what is to be done? K. I am so distracted with the accident— Age. Lend me your power. K. Most willingly. Age. Furnish such ships with all speed possible As are not so; such as be ready, clap men aboard Them strait: For me, were there but one, By all the Gods, with that I will attempt their rescue. Au. Then I must go along. Age: You! Au. Yes, I. Age. Let some watch on the shore, and see if the Admiral Hoise sail, what course he holds. I. That shall be my imployment; but be assured sir, Whilst the wind keeps where it is, They cannot pass into the Main. K. Age. Continue good heaven, and grant your aid! Exeunt. Enter Cleon: Fortune! thou enemy to wit and industry, How I could curse thy deity, and this same giddy Prince,
That by his new affection gives thee power To ruine my well-laid plots! But I unjustly Do complain of both: Clorinda's beauty Is my fate, all my disasters take from her Their being; I will forget her, tear her from my heart: But then I overthrow the groundwork Of my great design; no Kingdom, Nor no happiness without Clorinda. Enter Selina. Sel. How! no happiness without Clorinda! Cle. No happiness without Clorinda dye, You know her title to the Crown of Burgonia Takes place of mine. Sel. And why then does she live? Cle. It is a question I may better ask, I gave you poison to dispatch her. Sel. Rather a Cordial to comfort her,—see, I dare take the rest. Cle. Hold, dear Selina! Sel. Dear Selina! False perjur'd man, have I from love To thee, attempted wickedness so great, That horror strikes my soul to think upon it; And after all cast off like a scorn'd property, Your work perform'd? Cle. This jealousie does set a greater value on thee: Come, I will open to thee all my heart; To make my title strong, I must be married To Clorinda. Sel. You must! Cle. Hear me with patience, I mean in policie it were fit:
But to secure your fears, before that pass, The Priest shall secretly joyn us together, Which disanuls a second marriage. Sel. If this be real that you speak, Perform it now betwixt our selves, And call the Gods to witness. Cle. Our hearts already have consented, What needs there more? Sel. Is it even so; I left nothing undone To the last circumstance, that you desired; Gave Clarimant, Clorinda, and the Princess Olinda into your hands. But I perceive Where your heart's fixt, and I was strangely fool'd, That ever could believe again. Cle. I like not this, dear Selina, If you consider well, you have no ground For jealousie from me. The Prince, within whose power We for the present are, neglects his former Mistress, Makes all addresses, in my judgment, to Clorinda. Sel. In this you more confirm me, that you still Do love Clorinda: since jealousie makes you Imagine that for which there is no ground; Or if this Prince like you should prove unfaithful, Can it be thought Clorinda can be moved To love again, that had no sense of all Prince Clarimant hath done or suffer'd for he sake? Cle. But she is within his power; and what time Or force may work! nay, if you will observe, You'll find she shews no great aversion to him. Sel. Lend me your eyes, I cannot see it else: Cle. No more; be confident, Selina, I am what I was: Sel: Yes, I am confident, False as the Fiends, too late I find it.
Enter Prince, Clorinda, Olinda, Attendants. Pr. Most noble Cleon! Clo. Ha! Cleon? Pr. Lend me your help, to let these Ladies know Nothing but service is intended. Cle. What mean you sir? she must not know me. Clo. Cleon: Did you not call him Cleon? Pr. No, Madam. Clo. Sure you did. Pr. Then I mistook. Cle. Cleander is my name, a servant to your beauty Lady, and this fair Princess; whose merits Are so great, that by your selves consider'd, May well assure of all observance, Especially from this noble Prince your servant. Clo. I must confess sir, I believe him every way So worthy, that I much grieve fortune allotted Him no other way then force to gain Possession of his Mistress. Come, Madam, be not sad; A noble husband makes a large amends For loss of friends or country; nor are they lost But for the present. Olind. I know not how (Clorinda) you may value him; But I must tell him plainly, his actions Speak him base and treacherous. Pr. Madam, I shall not so much grieve to find you Cruel; since this fair Lady not condemns me. Clo: You shall in nothing, sir, oblige me more, Then by your using Clarimant with courtesie: Although your enemy, he is my friend; A nearer interest tho' he most deservingly Hath sought, my inclination never could allow him.
Pr. I shall forget my wounds receiv'd from him; Neglect all opportunity to take revenge, If it may be to you a satisfaction. Clo. Your noble usage of him whilst he is your prisoner, At last may turn to your advantage: Your peace will be the easier made with both the Kings; Nay, without doubt this fair Princess Would easily be granted to you In exchange for him. Olind. Me in exchange! first I will be wedded to my grave. Pr. Lady, I shall not press you much: Your pride and scorn darkens your beauty, Whilst courtesie sets off what in this Lady Needs no foil. Cle. It is so. Clo. I see you are a Courtier, sir, and know how To oblige those who have power to assist your wishes: Your favorable opinion of me, engages my Best performance with my dearest friend To make her yours; this coyness shall not last, Leave me to win her for you. Pr. If you be pleas'd to hold me worthy, I shall not Study to maintain a meaner happiness. Cle. He is taken past recovery. Pr. Ladies, we dare not longer bar you The happiness to enjoy your selves. Dispose of all things freely in this ship, Were it the Empire of the world, most Excellent Clorinda, your power were still the same: Clo. I know you borrow but my name, The power intended here; and so she ust Conceive it.
Pr. Sir, let me crave some conference with you: Cle. Command that boy straight from them, As you respect your happiness: I'll give you reason for it. [Ex Princes, Cleon] Sel. O Madam! Whispers I. Sir, you must go with me. Sel. What mean you? Exeunt. I. The Prince would speak with you. Enter Clarimant. Can I yet live, and know Clorinda prisoner, Subject to all the injuries of power, And I incapable to serve her? I am not so; My hands are free, only my heart is slaved Under misfortune. Were my love such as justly Might arise from so miraculous a cause, The ardor of my flame would prompt my heart And hand to find some way to set her free, And take revenge upon the treacherous Prince▪ But I do find the cause of all this deadness: My thoughts are active, but there wants Her favorable influence upon me. O me! what do my fears suggest! My eyes and ears, those traitors to my peace, I will not trust your base intelligence; You are but the servants of my fear, and not my reason: Can injuries or importunity prevail To make her love this Prince; where love and service On my part procured but frowns? O yes, It may be so; there is a cruelty in Love, By which that Deity does magnifie it self: Reason or merit must pretend no share In the free bounties of a heart that Love inclines.
Enter Clorinda. Prince Clarimant! Clar. Ha! Clo. Why are you so amazed? Clar. What light breaks from that cloud, And with the sudden brightness dazles my sense! My happiness is such, O speak agen, That by two witnesses my joys may be confirmed▪ Clo. Why are you thus disturb'd? you oft have seen me. Clar. But never thus, never thus unexpectedly, When I despair'd the happiness. Clo. Had fortune been so envious to deny an opportunity, As I confess this hardly was attain'd, To give you thanks for the last testimony of your love; Yet reason, and the estimation you do hold of me, Might well assure you I could not but resent it Highly. Clar. O heavens! Clo. You are sad; does this acknowledgment offend you? Clar. Offend me, dear Clorinda! 'tis such a joy As justly might transport me from my self: But when I do consider all my merit was but intention And that I can do nothing real in your service, The sense of my misfortune sinks me down low as despair. Clo. The Gods themselves in what we owe to them, Do not require above what they inable us To act: much less is due to me, Who rather am your debtor; which to acquit in part I chiefly came to clear any suspition You might have conceived from my kind usage Of this traitor Prince; yet know if you believed me Guilty, it was a crime I can as hardly pardon As your too much love.
Clar. The last is such a guilt as every minute mul∣tiplies; And though you cruelly condemn it, such is yet The riches or my soul. Clo. But if you wish, as you profess, my happiness And satisfaction, temper it so, that I may pay the like; The affection of a brother to a sister I will allow you. Clar. In this you do so far exceed my hopes or merit, That it were ingratitude not to acknowledge A bounty infinitely great: But since that Sisterly affection does not debar you From conferring a greater happiness upon some other, A happiness which I must burst with envy to behold: Nay, curse whom you so bless, you do but raise me high, To throw me down with greater violence. Clo. To cure this fear, the Gods be witness, No others interest ever shall exceed Prince Clari∣mant's. Clar: Nor shall their happiness then, by this fair hand. Clo. But if beyond this you but hope, you in∣jure me And vertue.—So peace dwell with you. Clar. Alas, already you forget your promise; You wish peace, and remove it from me, Would any sister do so to a brother? Clo. Yes, to preserve herself and him: Were we discover'd, you were lost. The Prince which my unhappy beauty hath surprized Neglects Olinda, and certainly does fix his thoughts On me: With him, as far as honor would permit, I have dissembled, entertain'd his flame With no dislike; by which you are preserv'd as yet▪
And not ill used: But this stolne visit Would to him express more kindness Then he must think I have for you— I hear some entring the Cabin— Enter Prince, Cleon, and Sailors. Heaven! it is the Prince: Who have we here? Death seise him, And throw him overboard. [They seise him] Clo. O heavens! what art can save him? Clar. O for a sword! Clo. Dare you presume to speak of love to me, And do an act so base? The meer intent, Were you not rooted here, would cancel all your interest. Pr. My interest! Clo. But if you value my respect so little, And your own promise for his noble usage, Yet wisdom bids you not forget the advantage That his life may bring more then his death. Cle. She tels you true; remember why we did at first Preserve him to make our peace, should not our plot Take on Agenor. Pr. Take him away and bind him. Clo. Why sure he cannot flie: To leap into the sea, Were to perform himself that which you threaten. Pr. Remove him hence however. Clar. Fortune! that gives this man this power. Pr. I look upon him as a hated Rival, away with him. Exit with Clar. Clo. Come, I forgive this passion, the cause That it proceeds from being love to me, The error too that you are in is punishment enough. Pr. Though I suspect all for dissembled, Yet I am pleas'd to hear her; what was my error? Clo. A gross mistake of this stolne visit, And yet love was my grand errand.
Pr. Where's my mistake then? Clo. Patience, and hear me: You thought Olinda Once did love you, and you were not mistaken; She did so till she knew the Prince: You found her alter'd; and of me mistaking The true cause, were jealous. Now by the Gods, If I have truth, she loves the Prince. Pr. And so I fear do you. Clo. By way of gratitude; but for affection, Heaven witness with me I loved another: Yet where I find distrust and disrespect, Such as you have exprest, I am no longer bound. Cle. Infinite cunning! Clo. But to proceed: Finding this Ladies passions Strong to Clarimant, my obligations great, By way of gratitude, I thought my self obliged To make him happy in Olinda's love, And doubt not to effect it, though I must blush to say so. I found some arguments besides that prest me To this undertaking; for were their hearts so fixt On other, your peace with both the Kings were quickly made, And you stood free to make a new election: Yet were all women of my mind, You should stay long enough without a wife, you are so passionate. Pr. Most excellent Clorinda, pardon the rashness of your servant, Who henceforth yields himself for ever to be dispos'd Of by you. Clo. Well, if I find so, I never was ungrateful. Ex Prince & Clor. Cle. How with a twin'd thred does she ride the Ass, And turns him how she please! but when I consider,
It is no wonder, she hath a depth of policie Which all my art could never fathom: True, Blinded by my love, I could not reach her aims: But stood I free, she wanting the advantage Of loves power upon me, how poor and shallow Were the arts of all the sex? But as it is, Fortune hath given this silly Prince The power to crush me into nothing; Breaks his contract with me touching Clorinda, Which was the soul of all my undertaking. Is there no way to right my self? yes, This could revenge my wrongs on him, But then I perish in the act, and leave Clorinda To be enjoy'd by Clarimant: that must not be, No, ere my Rival shall so happy prove, I to my hate will sacrifice my love. Exit. Act. 5. Scaen. 1. Enter Cleon, Clorinda, Prince (following.) Clo. SIr, pardon this disturbance of your thoughts. Cle. Your presence rather, fairest Lady, May rectifie any disorder, Since you are all a harmony of sweetness. Clo. Sir, I perceive your power great with this noble Prince, And I believe so much a friend to him, That he would hearken to your councel: If you would join with reason, and so perswade him To set Prince Clarimant and the Princess at liberty, I think it were an act would shew much friendship To him, and for your self gain what reward You would desire from both the Kings.
Cle. I have observed, most beautiful Clorinda, Such an excess of nobleness in you, I scarcely dare express what I would undertake To serve you: but then you really Must let me know all your desires. Clo. It is Cleon. Cle. Lady, dare you adventure to speak your wishes? Clo. I have done so. Cle. That Clarimant and the Princess should be Delivered, I do believe is your desire: But is that all? are you pleas'd to be here? Clo. Why should I not? am I not nobly used? Cle: I know those who are wicked fear not To break an oath; but such whose heart Is fill'd with vertue, as, I am sure yours is, Would not be perjur'd for the world. Clo. To what tends this? Cle. That you do swear not to discover What I shall propose touching your service. Clo. You need not doubt, if it do suit With what I have exprest is my desire. Cle. My end shall be the same, their liberty and yours, Though happily our ways to that may differ. Clo. My liberty! Cle. Yes, yours the most desired: Swear, and then hear what I propose. Clo. I do, so far as vertue binds. Cle. That tye all men have on you. Clo. If your intents be fair, why will you ask A stronger obligation then? Cle. I dare not speak my thoughts without an oath. Clo. What can he mean?—I swear never to speak Of that you shall propound; nor need I, Since the Prince does overhear.
Cle. Then know, I am not ignorant how you dissemble With this treacherous Prince, whom you And all the world must hate. Clo. This will undo me; I hate the Prince! Cle. Yes, Lady, deadly; yet less then I. Pr. 'Tis well. Cle. All for your sake; and for that noble Prince, If you consent, this hand, if Clarimant's Be not more able to effect it, Shall take revenge, and right our general wrongs. Clo: I do complain of none; If I did, how could this be effected? Cle. With ease; nay more, it is not impossible, The deed done, to escape to shore in the ship-boat, Into which the Prince and you, the night assisting, May get before. Enter Prince. It is impossible; you are deceiv'd— A Guard there! [Ent. Guard and Sailors] Seise the Villain. Cle. How? what mean you sir? All that I spoke Was but to let you see how she abused you, And this the plot that Clarimant and she had laid: You know, upon your life depends my happiness. Pr. Mine in thy death: This cunning cannot save you, Cleon. Cle. Nor do I wish it should, If you indeed believe me guilty. Pr. Bind him, I will have thee tortur'd limb from limb, Till thou confess all truth. Clo. Let me intreat, sir, for his life, However I am by him accused. Pr. For hating me; which I have too much reason To believe is truth.
Clo. How can you think so? Did I not place you to overhear him? Pr. But knew not what he would deliver. See Clarimant fast bound; and (Madam) My cabin this night shall be your chamber. Clo. Perhaps my death-bed; Lost for ever! Exeunt: Enter Selina (bound.) O you just Gods! how all my treasons Against my sweet and innocent Mistress are return'd Upon my head! Prince Clarimant, I am thy mur∣dress, To the fair Olinda, by my means betraid: O horror! what will my torments be for this Hereafter in the other world? All this For love of thee false Cleon have I done, Thy cursed brain gave birth to all my plots: Is this the Crown thou mad'st me fondly hope for? And shall I die without revenge? revenge! My hands fast bound, there's nothing left that I can Reach thee with but curses, fruitless curses. He shall live happy, gain a Kingdom and Clorinda, By her a Kingdom: why should I pitty her then? It is she that is the ground of all my misery, His love to her makes me thus wretched: For Clarimant, he may hereafter marry with Olinda, All but my self may yet be happy: Must I alone die wretched, contemn'd and scorn'd? Why do I longer live, my guilt and miseries so great? You Gods, or Fiends, remove me from this miserable Earth, and let me feel new punishments, If punishments there be hereafter, These they cannot exceed: how sweet were yet Revenge! O for revenge, that Cleon's heart Were in my hand! false Cleon's!—no way. Exit.
Enter Clorinda, Olinda. Clo. O dearest Olinda, what are the miseries That we are faln into! Thinking to rid my self Of a false Vilain, I have brought ruine On us all; no art can help us now. Oh the hard choice! to marry with this traitor Prince; or Clarimant must die. Olind. It were better you consent to marry with the Prince, Then that Prince Clarimant should suffer; Let not him die however. Clo. I know your love to Clarimant Makes you perswade me thus: and I would quickly yield, Did not my oath to Clarimant forbid; But would kill my self ere go to bed. Olind. I must confess I love the Prince, Be not offended that I say so; It was your perswasion first: since, I have seen Such noble actions, as raises him so far Above all other men, that they appear Not worthy of a thought: And yet my love And estimation of your vertue's such, I gladly would submit, nay much rejoice To see such merits join'd. Enter Prince, Clarimant (bound) and Guard. Pr. Clarimant, behold your Judge: for know, Clorinda, This minute you must give consent to marry me, And go to bed; or else immediately his head Goes off. Clo. A cruel choice! Olind. Base man! canst thou expect to scape the hand Of justice, after such cruelty?
Pr. It is not from you, Madam, that I expect An answer: Speak Clorinda, give your sentence; For by the Gods there is no way but one of these. Clo. O Clarimant! Clar. Heavens, can you suffer What you have made so excellent, to be thus Miserable? Pr. These lamentations boot not: Speak Lady, I can admit of no delay. Clo. What can I say? Pr. No! strike off his head then. Clo. Oh hold! Pr. Speak, are you mine? Clo. Say, Clarimant. Clar. Madam, to me death will be ease, Since I have liv'd to see you injured thus, And have not power for to revenge it. Pr. Are you resolved? Clar. To suffer what thy barbarous nature can inflict. O help! fire, fire! [Within] Pr. What cry is that? Quench, quench the fire. [Within] Enter 1. O sir, we are all undone! the fire hath taken Amongst the Cabins, past all hope of extinguishing. Enter 2: Flie, flie! the ship, the cordage is a fire: For all the water we can bring, it still increases. Pr. What, burn in the sea! slaves, quench the flames. 2. The Sailors, sir, descend into the Boat:
Make sure of that, and reach your other ships, The only means of safety. Pr. Hell and confusion! 2. There's none obey command; but each man looks To his own safety. Clar. O heavens! must then Clorinda perish! Pr. Make sure of the Long-boat for me: Some one kill Cleon, Or rather let him perish in the flames. My wounds receiv'd from Clarimant, I Will revenge My self. [Offers to kill] Clo. O sir, if you have hope in me! Pr. It is true; he shall not die yet, But the Gods hereafter shall not save him, Though they thus crost my wishes now: Come Lady, I will take care of you. Clo. We must not part. Pr. I mean it not; there may be use of her, Nay for your sake bring Clarimant along. Clar. 'Tis for thine own, false Prince. Pr. But look well to him. Clar. You Gods! Your powerful justice in these flames is shown, Preserve Clorinda, and your mercy's known. Exeunt. Enter Sailor (with a casket.) Gramercy fire! the element of water never yet Afforded me so much: this I can swim to shore With; yet the wind blows high; but to the Shoreward I may escape; if not, why so Whoever finds my body, shall give me thanks.
Enter Selina (her hands bound.) Sel. O gentle Sailor, untie my hands! Sail. A pretty boy; come,—It will not do, My knife: so, canst swim? Sel. Oh no. Sail. Then get some board or pack: I fear I shall be Drown'd, I am so well natur'd on the sudden. No use of this— Exit. Enter Cleon (hands bound.) Cle. Just heavens! Sel. True, Cleon; never so manifest, Cle. Gentle Selina, unbind my hands: Sel. I were ingrate else, Cleon: you did as much for me. Cle. And would do more; any thing; unbind me, Sweet, I'll swim with thee upon my back to shore. Sel. You cannot swim, I am sure you shall not. Cle. No creature living better; I oft have swam two leagues For pleasure: O delay not, the fire approaches. Sel. But will you marry me, and make good all your promises? Cle. By the Gods I will. Sel. Sure you will agen deceive me. Cle. Never, by my hopes. Sel. The only time you ever yet spoke truth— You shall not: yet still thy heart is false: Cle. It is not; quick unbind me, gentle Selina. Sel. Well, for once I'll try what your heart holds. Cle. Blest Selina! O cruel! yet spare me She wounds him. Dear Selina. Sel. Yes, when I see your heart, or blood come from it. Cle. O witch, devil▪
Sel. I am to thee so: What policie can now defend? Know to thy greater torment, I set the ship On fire, only to be reveng'd on thee, Not hoping such a happiness as this, With these to behold thy false heart blood. Cle. O that my eyes could look thee dead! Sel. I will see them closed, my dearest husband, It is my duty. Cle. First we'll to sea together. Sel. Since we must— Exeunt, fall as into the sea▪ Enter Prince, Clarimant, Clorinda, Olinda, Sailors. 1 Sail. It were best to enter further within the wood: A Boat made after us when we forsook the ship: 2 Sail. Some Fisherman, that to avoid the storm, Put to the shore. Pr. Let the winds blow and split, since we are Here: Fire, air, and water have oppos'd my wishes; Kind mother Earth grant what they have denied. But why should I intreat, that may command All my desires? Once more, Clorinda, I propose the choice; say, shall he die, Or will you make me happy who loves you More then he? Clar. Traitor thou lyest: He that truly loves Clorinda, Would give some noble testimony: Unbinde my hands, And by my death, as a worthy Rival, Win her from me: I ask no sword, Only the freedom of my hands; but if thy coward heart Think that too much, take all these to assist: Pr. You need not pull death faster on you By injurious words; it is ready, Speak Clorinda, or he dies.
Clo. Hold, and give me leave to speak a few sad words. Dear Clarimant, I know to save your life, And yield my self anothers, were such a choice You never could allow, since to the miserable Life is a burden: Could my death Make you happy, the Gods be witness I would lay it down with joy, Our fates I find are one; the merit of your love And sufferings for my sake is such, That I should hold my self ingrate, Did I not grant you any thing That I might think might comfort you in death. Clar. But shall I dare to speak wy wishes? Clo. More then dare; I do enjoin it. Clar. There is a happiness would make my death My triumph. Clo. I understand you. Here! alas that I should give My hand to Clarimant, and he not able To receive it 1 Our hearts may yet be join'd For ever, and only by these miseries They could have been. Pr. Is this the fruit of my delay. To hear my Rival courted? Offers to kill Clar. Clo. steps between, and O. hinders it. Clo. Know tyrant, 'tis the same, One stroke dispatches both. Clar. Strike here then, vilain. Olind. Devil, dost thou believe there are no Gods? Enter Agenor, Clindor. Age: Clindor, this way I saw them enter. Clind. I am out of breath, sir. Pr. Ha, who are these? Clind. See sir, the traitor Prince.
Clar. Unbind me, dear Clorinda. (Agenor and Clindor fight with the Prince, then drive off the Sailors and follow them: Clar. kills the Prince. Then) Enter Agenor (wounded) and Clindor. Clar. O dearest brother, how is it with you? Age. Well, Clarimant, never so well. Clo. By all that's good, you never in my eye Lookt half so lovely as now: yet till this day I never could have said I lov'd another better Then your Majesty. Age. If it be Clarimant, my joys are then com∣pleat. Olind. It is he, sir; who could else deserve it? Age. How favourable are the Gods unto the vertuous! How just to wicked men! How glad will my Au∣stela be Of this, who with the King will straight be here? They from the shore beheld your ship, when it Took fire, saw you put off from it, And watcht your landing certainly. Clar. Know you what Bark it was That follow'd us at sea? Age. I was in that, and Clindor, Some twenty with me to watch the ship, Till other Vessels were prepared: So swift she was of sail, that all the Fleet Could not have hurt us.—See, the King! Enter King, Austela, Attendants. Au. What happiness? all safe? K. Welcom again, my dearest.
Age: Let's lose no time; delay were now ingra∣titude: See, a Temple close by prompts us To the performance of two duties: The burial of this unhappy Prince; But chiefly to render thanks unto the Gods. Deliverance so great, alacrity commands In giving thanks: that done, we'll join your hands. Clo. It were folly now to deny the ceremonial, The real part already past. Clar. O dear Clorinda! 'Twere vain to think words could my joys express, Rais'd from despair to such a happiness. Exeunt. FINIS.
Epilogue. FIrst, Ladies, unto you I am addrest; As those who judge of Lovers actions best: If Clarimant your suffrages hath gain'd, Our Author hath his chiefest end obtain'd: Now Sirs to you— Sure here's no Lover will Clorinda blame For gratitude, since you must hope the same: Perhaps you rather think she was too nice, That such a flame no sooner thaw'd her ice: Our Author hopes she did but her just part; He nobly woo'd, she timely gave her heart: To both the sexes we prefer this sute; Ere you give sentence, with your selves dispute: If then condemn'd, to whom should we appeal, But to that Prince that pardons faults of zeal? If then condemn'd, 'twere pride to make appeal, Yet there remains a pardon in our zeal:
