C6622 R4524 11889831 50409
THE COVENANTERS CATECHISME: OR, A brief and familiar Analysis and Exposition OF THE COVENANT. First Delivered in sundry SERMONS to a particular Congregation: And now Resolved into Questions and Answers for the more Publike good. BY THE SAME AVTHOR. Imprimatur Ia. Cranford. Iuly 22. Printed at London by John Raworth. 1644.
THE COVENANTERS CATECHISME. Q. IS it lawfull to make or enter into a Covenant? A. Yes, and many times necessary, especially if the glory of God, and the common good be interessed. Q. How can ye prove it? A. By many Examples of Gods people as well as of Gentiles, which upon severall occasions did binde themselves together in a covenant for their mutuall good and preservation, Gen. 21.27. and 26.28. and 31.44. Jos. 9.15. and 24.25. 1 Sam. 23.18. 2 Sam. 3.13. 2 Reg. 11.4, 17. 2 Chron. 15.12. and 29.10. and 34.31. Esr. 10.3. Nen. 9.38. let. 34.8, 9, 10. and ma∣ny like Examples more. Q. VVhat Reasons have you for it? A. Besides divers other Reasons, there are two especially, which do evidence the lawfulnesse of it; the first whereof concerneth Man, the other God. Q. VVhich is the first Reason from the regard of Man? A. To explain this reason more cleerly, we must observe, that Man may be considered three wayes: For either he is willing and forward of him∣self to the performance of the duty required in the Covenant, and by this form of covenanting more confirmed and encouraged in his resolution, 2 Chron. 15.9, 15. Or he is weak and timorous, and by this means more engaged and tyed to the duty, which otherwise he might have deferred or neglected, Esr. 10.3,-12. Or he is rebellious and obstinate, and by this means either discovered or terrified. It will be a Shibboleth to discern, or a thunderbolt to affright him, when he seeth so many bent and united in a Covenant against him, Nehem. 6.16. Esth. 8.17. Q. VVhich is the second Reason taken from the respect of God? A. Because by this means the Lord himself is engaged to help and fa∣vour those, which thus engage themselves for his glory and service, 2 Chr. 15.2.15. 2 Reg. 11.17, 20.
Q. VVhat is then the nature, grounds, manner, ends of a Covenant, what is to be observed in or about it? A. To speak distinctly of this question, which hath many branches, we will consider: First, the nature of a Covenant generally: Secondly, the na∣ture of this our Covenant particularly: Thirdly, the nature of every Article severally. In these three particulars we will observe the same method alike, and in every one of them these four things, a Quid, a Quare, a Quomodo, and a Quaere: that is to say, the matter in it, the motives to it, the manner of it, and the motions or questions about or against it. First, what is required in it, then why we shall be bound to it, afterwards, which way we ought to fulfill it, and lastly, whether we may lawfully do it. All which will fully discover to us the nature of it. Of a Covenant in generall. Q. VVHat is the Quid or the Matter of a Covenant? A. A Covenant in generall is a solemn agreement of two or more parties, engaging themselves to the mutuall performance of cer∣taine duties one to another, upon certaine grounds and conditions. Q Are all such agreements of the same nature? A. No; for we find in Gods Word three kinds of Covenant, whereof the first is meerly civill, with man alone; about certaine outward duties, mutually and reciprocally to be performed by one to another; of which we find many examples between Abraham and Abimelech, Gen. 21.27, Iacob and Laban, Gen. 31.44. Ioshua and the Gibeonites, Ios. 9.15. and others. The second kind is meerly spirituall, with God alone, promising obedi∣ence to his Will in all things. And though this Covenant be made by eve∣ry child of God in his Circumcision, or Baptisme, yet it may afterwards upon certaine occasions be renewed in a more solemne manner, to tye us the faster to it; of which we have an example in Hezekiah, 2 Chr. 29.10. and in Iosiah, 2 Chr. 34.31. The third kind is mixed with God and man, promising certaine duties to both. Such a Covenant was made by Iehoiada between the Lord, the King, and the people, that they should be the Lords people; between the King also and the people, 2 Reg. 11.17. Q. What is the Quare, or the Motives and grounds of a Covenant in generall? A. We doe find in Gods Word three grounds, upon which Gods peo∣ple entred into Covenants. 1. For sinnes committed. When a Nation or a people was guilty of an
extraordinary hainous sin, they made a Covenant to bind themselves a∣gainst it, to forsake it in their owne persons, and to hinder and punish it in others, Esr. 10.3-8. 2. For Iudgements inflicted or threatned. When God did threaten or vi∣site his people with extraordinary or generall plagues and judgements, they tooke this course, and made a Covenant of humiliation and repen∣tance before God, to prevent or remove evills, 2 Chr. 29.10. & 34.31. 3. For mercies received. When God did blesse the people with extra∣ordinary mercies and favours, temporall or spirituall, they entred into a Covenant of obedience with God, and offered themselves to the service of God, in testimony of thankfulnesse, 2 Chron. 15.9-15. Q. What is the Quomodo or Manner of making a Covenant? A. Covenants in generall are made and taken in forme of an Oath. And here is the difference between a bare promise and a Covenant, that the for∣mer doth engage mans truth and justice onely; the other Gods Truth and Iustice also: The former by way of a bare enunciation, the other by way of a religious invocation. But more particularly in a Covenant we ought to observe, the Jnternall or inward, and the Externall or outward forme of a Covenant. Q. Which is the Internall forme of a Covenant? A. It must be made or taken 1. in Domino, in the Lord, or in the feare of the Lord, with reverence due to His Majestie, and all His Attributes; and more particularly, His Omnisciencie, Power, Truth, and Iustice. Gen. 31.53. 2. Per Dominum, by the Lord, not by the Creatures, which cannot beare witnesse of the truth and falshood of the heart, but onely by God, the Maker and Searcher of the hearts of men, Deut. 6.13. Q. But when and how doe men thus sweare in, and by the Lord? A. If according to the direction of God, they swear, in truth, Iudgement, and righteousnesse, Ier. 4.2. that is to say, 1. Truly, in regard of matter and manner, and indeed an Oath will make us speake truth. Though men are liars by nature, Rom. 3.4. and will lie: yet they are loath to for∣sweare themselves. There is a naturall principle in us, that maketh per∣jurie hainous, Psal. 15.4. 2. Vnderstandingly, with judgement: neither lightly, for every triffle, nor rashly upon every occasion; but when the matter is of such concernment, that it requireth an Oath. Not like Herod, for a litle dancing, Mar. 6.13. nor like David in his passion, 1. Sam. 25. but as those, Esr. 10.5. 3. Legally, in righteousnesse or Iustice, when they are lawfully called to it, by those that have authoritie to doe it. An Oath is not of Privat disposition. Matth, 5.37. We may promise but not sweare one to another, as privat men; unlesse the publick good be interessed, as
in the Covenant and oath of the spies. Ios. 2.12. and of Ionathan and David, 1. Sam. 20.16, 17. The Magistrates are invested with, and have alwayes exercised this power to tender an Oath, 1. Sam. 24.21. Esr. 10.5. 1. Reg. 2.42. Thus the first act is actus conscientiae; the second actus prudentiae; the third actus justitiae. Q. Which is the Externall forme of a Covenant? A. It doth consist in certain outward rites and ceremonies, which were used in the making or taking of a Covenant, wherby we have divers kindes mentioned in the Scripture. Sometimes they gave gifts one to another, 1. Sam. 18.4. they feasted one another, Ios. 9.14. they set up pillars or stones, Gen. 31.44. Ios. 24.26. But most commonly the hands, or certain actions and gestures with the hands were used, to testifie the sin∣ceritie of their action, their Hearts and Hands did goe together. Q. What were these actions or gestures? A. We doe find in Gods Word three kinds of such Ceremonies or ge∣stures with the hands. 1. By laying the hand upon something in a solemne manner, as upon or under the thigh of their superiours, Gen. 24.2, 9. Gen. 47.29. in signe of their submission. Or upon the Altar, 1 Reg. 8.31. to shew their devotion. And here in England we lay the hand upon the Bible, and kisse it, as it were to keepe touch with the Truth. 2. By giving of hands; in signe of a firme union and conjunction, as it is used amongst us now and then, especially in Germany. This gesture we find, Ezech. 17.18. Gal. 2.9. 3. By lifting up the hands to heaven, as it were by way of asseveration, and attestation before the most Highest, to be faithfull and true in the Co∣venant, Gen. 14.22. Q. Which of these gestures now was most significant? A. The lifting up of the hands seemeth most significant and binding. For it doth imply, we sweare; 1. Before God, in the presence of Him who is above, and doth behold all things upon whom we point with our hands, to beare witnesse with us, Psal. 119.122. This is implyed, Eccles. 5.2. 2. Vnto God, not onely to man; because God commandeth the true per∣formance of things promised in his name and presence, and we must give an account to him for it, Gen. 14.22. For God, and his glory, which we promise to advance by our Oath, or desire God to punish us for our Oath, if we neglect it. In one word, that Gods hand shall be either for us, or against us, according as we lift up our hands for or against him, by Truth, or Deceit. This is to enter into a curse
and into an oath, Neh. 10.29. in as much as every one that taketh an oath, doth bind his soule either to the performance, or to the punishment, Num. 30.2. In the first sence we make God our Witnesse, in the second our Party; in the third our Iudge. Q. What other grounds have you for the extellency of this gesture? A. Because this forme of swearing is not only very ancient, but used by God, by Angells, by Men; which you shall never find of any other such Ceremony in the whole Word of God. It was used, 1. By God himself, Deut. 32.40. Ezech. 20.5, 6, 15, 23, 28.42. 2. By Angells, Rev. 10.5. by which Angells some understand Iesus Christ. 3. By Godly men, Gen. 14.22. ergo most divine, heavenly, godly. Q. What is now the last thing to be observed in a Covenant in generall, the Quaere, or the Motions and questions about or against it? A. Many quaeries may be made, and are made; give me leave to consi∣der some few with you. Q. What may be the first Quaere? A. Whether a man be bound alwaies to keepe his promissorie Oath in a Covenant, or whether he may upon certaine occasions breake it againe, and be freed from it? Q. What is the answer hereof? A. Distinguish between a partioular Covenant amongst private per∣sons, and a more generall Covenant of a whole Nation, or body of a State and Common-wealth. In the former a man is bound no further and longer to keepe his promissory Oath, then as long as the conditions remaine and continue. An example in Abrahams servant, Gen. 24.5, 8. In a Nationall Covenant we are bound to continue in it, though others swearing with us revolt from it; because we have entred into the Covenant with the whole body, not particular members, and for the publick good, which we cannot neglect. Thus Josiah made his people to stand to the Covenant, 2 Chron. 34.32. Q. VVhich is the second Quaere? A. Whether Magistrates cannot loose and free their inferiours from such a Covenant, when they see occasion? Distinguish againe the matter of the Covenant, that we are sworne unto; which is either meerly civill, or meerly divine and spirituall, or mixed of both. In the first respect, that Magistrate which hath bound us to certaine duties for the good of the Common-wealth, may free us againe from that bond, if upon mature deliberation they doe find, that the omission of those duties would be more advantagious to the publicke good, then the conti∣nued performance of them. In matters of State men may erre, and that
which is good at one time may be prejudicious at another time. Thus one Parliament may revoke Lawes and Orders established by the same or o∣ther Parliaments, as they see occasion. But in regard of the second and the third respect, Magistrates cannot free us from our Oath and Covenant, if order perceive that the neglect of the duties promised in the Covenant doe annoy and prejudice the glory and service of God, which we have pro∣mised to advance. So no Magistrate can free us from our duty to set our selves against all, that may hinder the purity and power of Re∣ligion; or to free us from our Repentance, and Reformation which we have promised. Our duty in such a case is rather to suffer, and to undergoe all danger and punishments, then to forsake our Covenant. Men may be deceived in their humane policy, but Gods Word cannot deceive us, which is the Truth. Q. VVhich is the third quaere? A. When a Covenant is taken by a whole Body of a Nation or Con∣gregation, whether every one is bound to it that belongeth to this Nation or Congregation, though he hath not sworne Personally, or by a kind of reall or verball elusion and equivocation laboured to put it off? Q. VVhat is the answer hereunto? A. We answer, 1. Yes, that every one is bound to it, because it is an Oath of the Body, which freeth no particular member from it, unlesse he cease to be a member, 2 Chron. 34.32. Nay, it doth bind those that are ab∣sent; therefore Ionathan was taken after the breach of it, 1 Sam. 14.42. It doth bind our very posterity; an example in Ioshua's Covenant with the Gibeonites, broken by Saul, and punished in his children, 2 Sam. 21.6. much more doth it bind the living, though absent, or deceitfully present. 2. Yet with this exception, unlesse a man doe publickly protest against the Covenant, in which case he is freed from the observation of it, though perhaps not from the punishment annexed to it, Dan. 3.16-18. This might be a warning to many, which in the taking of this our Cove∣nant will be present for feare, but thinke to shuffle it off and to elude it; either in hope not to be seene or taken notice of in a crowd, or not lifting up their hands, or not so high as the rest, &c. Let not them deceive the State and their owne soules; their presence maketh them liable to the per∣formance, unlesse they protest against it. God is not mocked. I wish them rather to consider what a Vow, an Oath, a Covenant is; what lifting up of hands is, what subscribing is, lest they make themselves guilty of perju∣ry, the greatest sin they can commit in such a solemne action, whereby they doe betray the Truth and Iustice of God, whom they call to be their Wit∣nesse and Iudge.
Q. Which is the fourth Quaere? A. Whether a man may be forced and constrained by Authority and Power to take a Covenant? A. It seemeth 1. Men may be forced by Authority, if it be for the publick and their particular good. Thus Physitians may force phy ck upon their stubborne patients in time of extremitie; and the examples of Asa Esra, and Iosiah seeme to implie it, 2 Chron. 15.12.13. Esr. 10.7.8. 2 Chron. 34.32. 2. It seemeth a∣gain not lawfull, at least not convement to force men to such a duty, whereunto the Freedome of will guided by the last dictate of the understanding is neces∣sarily required, if it shall be a mans proper action: much lesse to force men to a dutie of pietie, as an oath is, an invocation of God to be our witnesse and judge, seeing that in such performances God loveth a cheerfull giver, and hateth com∣pulsion and constraint, 2 Cor. 9.7. Yet 3. Magistrates may by informations and perswasions endevour to bring men to such necessary duties, and punish them for the wilfull neglect of them, 2 Chron. 15.13. nay force them to declare themselves, whether they will submit or not, that the enemies may be discove∣red and knowne. Thus much is likewise intended by Esraes and Iosiahs Pro∣clamation. Thus much of a Covenant in generall. OF OUR COVENANT IN PARTICULAR. Q. VVHat is the Nature of our Covenant, that wee have taken or to take? A. It is neither meerely civil nor meerely spirituall but a mixed Covenant as that of Iehojada was, 2 Reg. 11.17. Wherein we doe promise certaine duties to the State and Church, for the maintenance of both against Tyranny and Here∣sie: And to God to maintaine his Truth and Gospell against our common ene∣mies, and to reforme our lives in time to come. Q. What is the Quid or Matter contained in it? A. It may be seene in the title of it: A solemne League or Covenant for Re∣formation and defence of Religion, the honour and happinesse of the King, and the Peace and safetie of the three kingdomes of England Scotland, and Ireland. Q. What is the Quare or Motives and grounds of it? A. We mentioned above three grounds, upon which Gods people usually founded their Covenants. If one of these grounds was sufficient to justifie their Covenants: how much more warrantable is then our Covenant, that hath all
these grounds together. 1. For sinnes committed. Esra's ground in his Cove∣nant, the strange wives Esr. 10.3. Wee also have taken and cherished strange wives, I say not onely Papists in our beds, but strange wives in our Church, I∣dolatrie and superstitions: in our state, illegall wayes of oppression, and bring∣ing in an arbitrary government; strange wives in Citie, Countrie, Unvie sitles, our families, persons, hearts, millions of strange wives &c. 2. For judgements inslicted or threatned. Is not gods hand stretched out against us, and we suffer as much in our bodies, estates, liberties, as those, Neh. 9.36 37. 3. For mercies received; not onely that we are not yet wholly consumed, Lam. 3.22. but that God hath preserved us hither to in the enjoying of his truth against such insinite oppositions; hath so often disappointed the plots of our adversaries; blest the endeavours of Parliament; the Armies, hopes, prayers of his people, with such successes, deliverances, victories, and continueth still his blessing to us. But wee will not stand upon these grounds, and rather consider what motives are men∣tioned in the Preface of Introduction prefixed before the six Articles, where wee shall clearly see the lawfulnesse, necessitie, and equitie of this our Covenant founded upon foure grounds. Q. Which is the first ground? A. It is taken from the Essicient cause, the Persons Covenanting; We the Noble men, barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of the Gospell and Commons of all sorts in the kingdomes of England, Scotland, and Ireland, living under one King, and being of one Reformed Religion. These persons have not onely power and right, but are bound and obliged thus to unite and knit themselves together for their mutuall preservation: in asmuch as the care of the publick good belongeth to the body and to those that are the Kingdome eyes, eares tongues, hands; the Nobles. Knights, Ministers, Commons. When God made a Covenant with the people, he called not onely for Moses, but for Aaron and his sonnes, and 70. of the Elders of Israel, the representative body of the State, Exod. 24.1. In Nehemidh's Covenant, Princes, Priests, People, Neh. 9.38. Ergo, our Parliament may tender this Covenant, to whom the care of the Kingdome is committed. Q. Which is the second ground? A. From the finall cause: Having before our eyes, the glory of God, the ad∣vancement of the Kingdome of Iesus Christ, the honour and happinesse of the Kings Majestie, and his Posterity, and the true publick Liberty, Safetie, and Peace of the three Kingdomes, wherein every ones private condition is included. Now whether these be not good grounds, judge you. 1. Gods glorie ingenerall. 1 Cor. 10.31. in particular. 2 Chron. 15.12 13. 2. Religion, 2 Chron. 29.10.3. The Kings prosperitie, Psal. 20.1. seq. & 7.21. 4. The publick good, 2. Chro.
24.16. Psal. 122.6. 5. Our private welfare. Esth. 9.2. Publike and private together, Ier. 29.7. Q. It is true, men will pretend faire, and professe they have such ends, but how shall I know, whether this be their end indeed? A. It is true, first, God knoweth the hearts of all men alone, and will judge every one according to his heart, 1 Reg. 8.39. We doe not know mans inward parts. But secondly, if it be true what Christ saith, Math. 7.14. seq. then we judge of the Parliaments sinceritie by their fruits. How many evi∣dent, undeniable arguments could we alledge, to evidence their sincere and faithfull intentions in all their actions, if we doe but consider; All their pro∣ceedings from the beginning, the substance of their Petitions, the manner observed in their proceedings, by such submissive, humble supplications and Remonstrances; their patience and willingnesse to passe by so many disgra∣ces, repulses, threatnings, assaults publick and private, in their persons, e∣stares, studies, writings grand and grosse breaches of their priviledges, and many injurie; their forced arming, when the adverse partie was already in armes and action, and had besieged places, and plundered well-affected; their care to prevent shedding of innocent blood, by tendring humble sup∣plications to the King, in imitation of our brethren the Scots, though not with the same successe; their care and providence to hinder all excesses and insolencies of souldiers, oppression of Subjects, and to maintain and establish Truth and Peace amongst us; their readinesse to hearken to any motion of accommodation from strangers, notwithstanding that they were so oft de∣ceived by feigned Treaties; their gentlenesse and willingnesse to receive to mercy, & to pardon such as were misled, to invite all so lovingly, to them give so much time and encouragements, and to deale so favourably with undeser∣ving malignants, and professed enemies; their indefatigable paintes to conti∣nue in this worke, notwithstanding all oppositions and discouragements; their inevitable hazarding and venturing the losse of their estates offices, li∣berties, lives in this quarrell, so that nothing is too deare to them for the common good; the little appearance of any private by-end, or by-respect, that they could aime at, proportionable to their paines, charges, dangers, which now they undergoe. Besides, nay above all this, I hope, this very Covenant will take away all suspitions of deceit from them, seeing they en∣gage themselves to the performance of these ends, by an oath under a curse, before the Almighty God. I hope you will account them of so much hone∣stie, and conscience at least, as to believe, they would not so grosly mock God in the Covenant, and forsweare themselves so fowly, and hazard their owne salvation, for some few uncertain by-ends, and by-respects. Christian
charity should teach us, to have a better opinion of those, of whom we doe not know any thing to the contrary. Q. Which is the third Ground? A. It is taken from the impulsive cause: calling to mind, 1. the trea∣cherous and bloody plots, attempts and practises of the enemies of God a∣gainst the true Religion and prof ssours thereof, in all places, especially in these three kingdomes, euer since the Reformation of Religion. Remember the 26. or 28. Plots in Queen Elizabeths dayes; many plots in K. Iames his dayes, and the Popish Gun-powder Treason above all; divers plots in this Kings time against Religion and Libertie; the plets a little before, and during this Parliaments, so mans, cunning hainous, close, dangerous neere the execution, that they doe parallel, if not sur nount, all former plots, conspira∣cies and treasons of former times, though by Gods mercy all discovered and disappointed. The snare is broken, and wee are delivered. Blessed be &c. Psal. 124.7. 2. How much their rage, power and presumption, are of late, and at this time increased and exercised. Winesses every where, Papists, rebels, ill counsellours, roclaimed traitours, are the chiefe Counsellours of the Closet, not onely countenanced, but trusted: Priests Jesuites entertained: Irish rebels employed: supplyes of money collected in France, Italie, Low-Countries, for the advancement of the Roman Catholick Religion in Eng∣land: Masse and Popery publikely suffered, the truth suppressed: the pro∣fessors of it persecuted: the Parliament charged with treason all confounded. 3. The deplorable estate of the Church and kingdome of Ireland, the di∣stressed estate of the Church and kingdome of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and kingdome of Scotland, &c. Is not this ground and warrant enough, to helpe dying Ireland, bleeding England, threatned Scot∣land, against such bloody murtherers, which have massacred so many thou∣sand innocent Protestants in cold blood, and without any cause? Those ene∣mies are worst, because in our owne bowels. Matth. 10.36. 4. After other meanes of Supplications, Remonstrances, protestations, and sufferings. They have used all faire meanes they could. Whatsoever any meere subject could have done, they did: though more then meere subjects, in this notion of a Parliament not onoly subordinate Magistrates under, but corrdinate Magi∣strates with the King under God; and yet all to no purpose. So that now they are forced to make such a Covenant for the glory of God, and the com∣mon good against common enemies. Q. Which is the fourth ground? A. From the formall cause in severall particulars. 1. According to the commendable practise of these kingdomes in former times. In King Iohns
time, a.c. 1214. In King Henry the third. Edward 2. Richard 2. Edward 4. Richard 3. and other King times, as the Annals and Histories doe clearly manitest. 2. According to the Example of Gods people in other Nations; nay, even since the Reformation: Witnesse the Smalcaldian Covenant or League of the first Protestant Princes against Charles the 5. Emperor, Sleidan. The League of Protestants in Franced oft renewed. Thuan. The late Union of Protestant Princes in Germanie entred Anno Dom. 1610. Metteran. And especially the example of the United Provinces in the Low-Countries, be∣sides divers others. 3. After mature deliberation, not rashly, lightly. It was not one dayes, weekes, or moneths worke, to frame, and make, and take this Covenant. Great consultations about, great wisdome used in it, a great deale of preparation towards it. These now are sufficient grounds for the lawful∣nesse and necessitie of this our Covenant. Q. What is the Quomodo or Manner of taking this our Covenant? A. In the manner of taking this our Covenant, we must observe the in∣ward or internall, and the outward or externall forme of it. The internall forme is in Domino, and per Dominum, in and by the Lord. The externall forme is with lifting up our hands to heaven, and Subserthing the Covenant. The former is required of us in the Conclusion of the Covenant, where wee doe declare and engage our selves to the duties of Repentance and Reformati∣on, and dependance on God for grace to performe it: The second in the last clause of the Preface or Preamble prefixed before the six Articles. Q. What doe we declare in the Conclusion? A. Foure things are observable in it, Our Humiliation, Reformation, Adjuration, Supplication. Q. What meane you first by our Humiliation? A. Because these Kingdomes are guilty of many sinnes, and provocations against God and his Sonne Iesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present di∣stresses and dangers, the fruits thereof: We professe and declare before God and the world our unfergned desire tob e humbled for our sinnes. I. In Generall and that partly for our owne sinnes, because till our sinnes be taken away, God will not admit us into his Covenant Esa. 1.16. The Jewes first separated themselves from their strange wives, Neh. 9.2. and then entred into a Covenant ver 38. Partly for the sinnes of these Kingdomes, our Nationall sinnes; else we are unfit to make a nationall Covenant. So did hezekiah, 2 Chron. 29.10.16.20. and Iosiab, 2 Chron. 34.3.4.31. especially seeing we all contribute to the common stock of nationall sinnes and make our selves guiltie of other mens sinnes and plagues, if we doe not thinder and mourne for them, Re. 18.4.
Dan. 5.22. wheras private mourners for publick evils are marked Ezek. 9.4. II. In particular, for divers branches of Nationall and personall sinnes, and more especially. 1. That we have not, as we ought, valued the inestima∣ble benefit of the Gospell. We grew weary, had too much of it, preferred our case and estates before it, began to corrupt and oppose it; like the Gada∣rens, Luk. 8.37. young man. Math. 19.22. Jewes, Acts 17.5. High Priests, Act. 4.2 3.40. 2. That we have not laboured for the puritie and power there∣of. Many of us were as those, 2 Tim. 3.5. It was indifferent to us, whether we had the Gospell at all, at least in puritie and power: we began to hate pure, powerfull preaching, Am. 5.10. Ier. 5.30, 31. had icthing eares, 2 Tim. 4.3. Esa. 30.10. 3. That we have not endeavoured to receive Christ into our hearts, though perhaps in our eares, or tongues. Many like those Math. 7.22. Ezech. 33.31. Few like Lydia, Act. 16.14. 4. that we have not walked worthy of him in our lives. We were most part Christians by profession, but did shew little of Christ in our conversation. The Papists could cast it in our teeth, nay the Atheists; These are our pofessours, that boast so much of faith, shew me thy faith, &c. Iam. 2.18. 5. Besides many other sinnes and transgressions, which did so much abound amongst us. If men doe not prise the Gospell, and receive Christ into their hearts, they will be apt to fall into any sinne; because nothing will or can keep them in awe, or restraine from sinne, Eph. 4.18.19. Tit. 2.15. Q. What meane you secondly by our Reformation? A. We doe professe and declare before God and the world, to amend our lives, and that in a twofold respect. 1. For our selves, in our owne persous, where we engage our selves to a true and sincere reformation in every parti∣cular marke and signe of it: to doe it first, throughly and generally, in all duties we owe to God and man, without picking and chusing, Psal. 119.6. Phil. 4.8. and good reason for it, because Iam. 2.10. Here the ruler failed, Luk. 18.22. 2. Constantly and every where, in publick and in private. Some will be conformable in publick, but doe nothing in private, like those, Matth, 6.2.15, 16. others will doe something at home, but are ashamed or afraid of it abroad; nicodemusses or like to Ioseph of Arimathea, Ioh. 19.38, whereas we should be like Ioshua, Jos. 24.15. or like David, who ser∣ved God in publike, Psal. 119.46. 2 Sam. 6.20. and in private, Psal, 63.6.3. Earnestly and jealously, each one to goe before another in the example of a reall Reformation, to be ringleaders to pietie, 1 Cor. 11.1. not tyred jades, or Beares drawne to the stake, but running, Psal. 119.32. Phil. 3.14. Matth. 11.12. to give example to others Ministers, 1 Tim 4.12. All Christians, 1 Thess. 1.7. 4. Really, and effectually, not onely to purpose, desire, but to en∣deavour.
We must not be men of good wills onely, but make good out promises and resolutions, 2 Pet. 1.10. Iam. 2.12. Where you have been most remiss, there you must be most active: what you did drowsily, you must now doe cheerefully; where you have given an ill example, you must give good example: where you have enticed others to sinne, you must provoke them to pietie, Esa. 2.3. 2. For all others, that are under our power and charge, to see them like∣wise conformable in the duties promised to the Covenant. Good reason for is because God hath committed their soules as well to you, as their bodies, Eph. 6.4. Gen. 18.19. You must give an account for them at the last day. No Minister hath a greater charge lying upon him in regard of his people, then a Father in regard of his familie, and children. God will require their blood at the parents hands, 1 Sam. 3.13. therefore good Parents and Masters were carefull for their families in this respect, Ioshua 24.15. David Psal. 10.1.4. and many others. Q. What meane you thirdly by our adjuration? A. We doe adjure and bind our selves to the true and reall performance of these duties, professing and declaring publikely, that we make this Cove∣nant in the presence of Almighty God, the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to performe the same, as we shall answer, at that day, when the se∣erets of all hearts shall be disclosed. This is the curse we bind our selves un∣to in this Covenant. The Lord of heaven be mercifull to all, that have ta∣ken, or shall take this Covenant, to remember these words for evermore. We take this Covenant upon our salvation, or damnation, if we keepe or breake it. Doe not say, we are forced to it, else we lose our estates. We doe not force you but leave it free to you: as for the consequences, you may an∣swer for your selves. If thou hast no mind to it, or thy conscience be against it, doe not take it: for thou wilt incurre Gods judgement in swearing falsly, Zach. 5.4. Is it not better to hazard thy estate, then thy soule? Neither doe say, I shall not keepe it; for when the other side commeth, they will make me sweare the contrary? For if thou dost take this Covenant really, thou must not suffer thee to be forced to the contrarie, but persevere in it against all force and oppositions, which thou promisest in the sixt Article. Q. What meane you by the fourth particular, the Supplication? A. We doe humbly beseech the Lord, first, to strengthen us with his holy Spirit for this end, that we may be able to performe these duties. For of our selves we can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5. 2 Cor. 3.5. but all things through Christ, Phil. 4.13. Our duty is, to intreat God to strengthen us to it or to make us willing to suffer for it. 2. To blesse our desires and proceedings with such
successe, as may be deliverance and safetie to his people, and encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of the yoke of Anti∣christian tyrannie, to joyne in the same, or like Association and Covenant, to the glory of God, the enlargement of the kingdome of Iesus Christ, and the Peace and tranquilitie of Christian kingdomes and Common-wealths. Which end the Lord grant we may obtaine. Q. Which is the outward forme of taking this Covenant? A. It is to be manifested by lifting up the right hand bare, and by sub∣scribing our names to the Covenant. How significans the lifting up of hands is, we have explained above; and this indeed is the outward signe and argu∣ment of the oath. The subscription doth shew, that we have taken the oath truly and willingly. And thus it was used, Neh. 9 38. which will be an e∣vidence against us, if we breake it. By lifting up of our hands we sweare to Almighty God; and by subscribing we doe professe and declare, that we have sworne, and intend to keepe it. All dissembling, equivocations, and elusions are hereby cut off. Q. In the last place, what are the Queries and questions obout or against this our Covenant? A. Many questions and objections are made against it. whereof some are of no consequence, others most fully answered by the Assembly of Di∣vines in their Exhortation, to which I doe referre you. Onely to give you further content, let us consider some few of them. Q. Which is the first quaere? A. Whether this our Covenant doe not crosse the oathes of Supremacie and Allegiance? Q. What is the answer to it? A. No: it doth not crosse, but rather establish them: because by this Co∣venant we are bound to preserve the Kings Majesties person and Authoritie, in the preservation of the true Religion, and Liberties of the kingdomes. This appeareth more particularly. 1. In the oath of supremacie, which is confirmed by the Covenant, inasmuch as by it we doe a scirbe and restore to the Kings Authoritie, the Power of governing and reforming the Church ac∣cording to Gods word, which power the Bishops had denied and stolne from the King, by maintaining their Episcopall Diocesan power to be jure divino, contrary to the knowne lawes of the Kingdome. 2. In the Oath of Allegiance, which is likewise confirmed by this Covenant binding us to preserve the Authoritie of the King, which lawlesse Rebels, unfaithfull Coun∣sellours, bloody Traitours, and godlesse Papists sought to deprive his Maje∣stie of, and to ranslate it into the hands of some few ill-desposed instruments.
In one word, this Covenant doth no more prejudice the oathes of Suprema∣cies and Allegiance, then the Protestation we tooke heretofore, whereof this Covenant is but an Explication and Confirmation. Q. Which is the second Quaere? A. What need was then of the Covenant, when it is the same with the Protestation? Q. What may be answered hereunto? A. The Assembly answereth thus: There is nothing almost in this Co∣venant. which was not for substance either expressed, or manifestly included in the Protestation, &c. But the sinfull neglect of it, doth, as we may justly feare, open one floudgate more to let in all these calamities upon the King∣dome, and cast upon it a necessitie of renewing that Covenant, and entring in∣to this. Give me leave to adde one thing more, that though the Protestati∣on and Covenant be of the same Substance, yet is this Covenant in some re∣spects of more weight and consequence, and doth bind us more firmely to the observance of those duties. 1. In regard of the persons that take it: The Protestation was taken by England onely: The Covenant in the three Kingdoms. 2. In regard of the matter: what the Protestation did express more generally, this Covenant doth more particularly, especially in the point of Church-government, &c. 3. In regard of the end: The Protestation did u∣nite us all together in this Kingdome: but this Covenant doth unite three Kingdomes together; Now a threefold cord is not easily broken, Eccles. 4.12.4. In regard of time: The Protestation was taken, before dangers brake out into pen warres, where Bishops, Prelates, Malignants, Newters, all made no scruple to take, and to breake it. But now times are altered, the breach is greater, much blood is spilt, mens affections are divided, Religion and Liberty is in more danger, the State must be sure of mens dispositions, whom to trust and conside in, lest secret Malignants doe more hurt by un∣dermining, then open enemies by assaulting. This therfore is Great Britaines Shibboleth; whosoever can or will not pronounce it, is an Ephraemite, and must looke for his reward, Iud. 12.6. Q. Which is the third Quaere? A. The Protestation, they say, was taken by the Kings conivence and generall permission, but not so the Covenant, which is commanded without, nay. against the Kings consent. Ergo, unlawfull. Q. What is the answer hereof? A. The Assembly answereth most fully and satisfactorily, to any ratio∣nable man. 1. That it is no new thing for a State or people to enter into a Covenant without their Princes consent. Ezra and Nehemiah did so, without
the Kings of Persia consent, though they were no such free subjects, as wee are by Gods blessing, Ezra 10.3. Neh. 9.38. The States of Holland entred into such a Covenant without, nay. against their Prince the King of Spaine, which League was countenanced, defended, and approved of by our King as lawfull, and the united Provinces accounted Free Sates. Our King by his expedition for Rochel doth confirme the same. 2. The Scottish Covenant was taken without, nay, against the Kings consent, and made so odious to his Majesty, that he sought by force of armes to dissolve and suppresse it: but when his Majestie was rightly informed of it, Peace was made, our Brethren the Scots cleared from all aspersion of rebellion by an act of Parliament, publikely read in all Churches, and the Covenant still in force. Why shall not we hope the like blessing from God, and favour from the King, in Gods due time, seeing our Covenant is the same in substance with the Scottish Covenant, and we of the same relation to the King? But what if I should adde to these answers, that this our Covenant was not taken without the Royall Authority of the King, though it be condemned by his Personall command? For as long as this Parliament of England continueth, the Royall Authoritie and Power is annexed to it, by vertue of that Act of Continuance: so that the King of England in his Power may still be at Westminster, though King Charles in his Person bee at Oxford or else∣where? And this is nor treason nor absurditie to avouch, when we know, that the Kings Power and Authoritie is in the Kings Bench, Court of Wards, or any other Court of Justice, though the Kings Person be hun∣dreds, nay, thousands of miles absent. And why should this Power and Authoritie be denied to the Supreme and Highest Court of the Kingdome, that is granted to other inferiour Courts under it? And thus much for our Covenant in particular. OF THE SIX ARTICLES SEVERALLY. OF THE FIRST ARTICLE. Q. VVHat is the summe or substance of the First Article? A. Three duties are required of us, that we shall en∣deavour. 1. The Preservation of Religion in Scotland. 2. The Reformation of Religion in England. and Ireland. 3. The Confirmation of all three
Kingdomes in the neerest conjunction and uniformitie in Religion. Q. What doe we promise concerning Scotland? A. Observe here distinctly. 1. Quid, or matter contained in it: That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God, endeavour in our severall places and callings, the preservation of the Reformed Religi∣on in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, worship, discipline, and Govern∣ment against the common enemies: That the Papists or other Sects doe not alter, or hinder or corrupt their Religion now professed. 2. Querae, or Mo∣tive, why we shall be bound to it. Reasons. 1. Because they are our bre∣thren, in civill respect, living under one King, fellow subjects; and in a spirituall respect, of the same Religion. fellow members of Christs bodie. Ergo, bound to help one another, Ios. 1.14. Neh. 4.14.1. Cor. 12.25.2. Because they maintaine the same truth, against the same common enemies, who will undoubtedly set upon us, if they be overrun or overcome, 2 Sam. 10.11.17. 3. Quomodo, or Manner, how to performe it; we shall not plot or con∣trive, joyne or give consent unto any alteration in their Religion, lesse en∣deavour to trouble them in or about it; but rather discover the Plot, if we know it; hinder the attempt, if we are able to doe it; disapprove of it, if we heare any thing concerning it; help and assist them, if required to it. 4. Quaere or Motive, and question about it. It may be objected: I know not what their Religion is; How can I with a good conscience defend an unknown cause. Reas. 1. Informe thy selfe of it. Ignorance doth not free thee from the duty, but rather doubleth the sinne. 2. Thou art required to maintain our brethren in the enjoying of the priviledge, which they possesse legally by authoritie of Xing and Parliament, in regard of their Religion and Church-government, which thou art bound to doe for civill respects, though thou shouldest not understand their Religion. A dutie Ioshua per∣formed to the very heathen, the Gibeonites, when they were oppressed in their lawfull liberties, Ios. 10.6. much more due to our Brethren. 3. We are not bound to maintaine them further then according to Gods word neither doe they desire it. 4. Whatsoever men pretend, they know well what reli∣gion our brethren professe, or may know it out of their publick Declarati∣ons. Therefore this is but a fig leafe and vain excention, Q. What doe we promise concerning England and Ireland? A. Observe againe, 1. Quid, or Matter contained in it: That we shall sincerely, really, constantly endeavouring, &c. the Reformation of Religion here in doctrine, to purge it from errours: in worship, to clense it from popish and humane traditions: in discipline and spirituall censure, to be executed
with more zeale and conscience: in government and order, according to the word of God, and the example of the best Reformed Churches. 2. Quare. or Motives to it. 1. because this Reformation is generally con∣fessed to be most necessarie, and many things to be amisse; In Doctrine, in regard of many of the 39. Articles, which need more explanation, and better expressions, and particularly in the point of Predestination, Christ de∣scending to hell, the Church, &c. In worship, by reason of many Popish, superstitious, unnecessarie Ceremonies left amongst us: In Discipline, and that great abuse of the Power of the keyes, and other enormities committed in the Bishops unspirituall Courts, in the suppressing of sinne and sinners: In government by that illimited and tyrannicall power of Bishops and their dependants. 2. Becausd this Reformation would be most comfortable, profitable, honourable, to have all things setled according to Gods word, Psal. 87.2.3. for as many as walke according to this rule, have peace, Gal. 6.16. and safetie, 2 Chron. 11.17. 3. Quomodo or Manner how to performe it: We must with and long af∣ter such a Reformation: earnestly pray for it; contribute towards it, what∣soever meanes or grace we have, by our advise, estates, persons; counte∣nance and assist those that are employed about it; resist those that will hin∣der it; if brought to passe, rejoyce of, be thankfull for, submit unto, perse∣vere in it, 1 Tim. 6.11. Rev. 3.17, 18. 4. Quaere, or Motion about it. Many do object and say, Why was it not done long agoe? what harme do these things in the Church? why have our former Kings not undertaken is? These things have been good all this while, how come they now to be Antichristian and superstitious? Reas. 1. In Gods service it is not enough for an order or observation to be harmlesse, but it must be usefull. 1 Cor. 14.26. 2 Cor. 12.19. Now, what good do these reliques? 2. Antiquitie or toleration doth not make a thing good or lawfull, else the Masse and images were good, because very ancient. 3. It may bee things be not absolutely sinfull, but burdensome: if we can ease our selves from them, why not? But these things are superstitious and sinfull withall. 4. Former Kings did not resorme them, because they could not conveniently. They did what they could, and left the rest to their successours. It is no good consequence: Former Kings did not fully reforme the Church. E. their successours must not doe it. Iehoshaphat left the high places, because the peoples heart was not yet prepared, &c. 2. Chron. 20.33. shall therefore He∣zekiah and Iosiah leave them still, and not destroy them? No, God forbid, but they brake them downe, because they had power and occasion to doe it, 2 Reg. 18.4. & 23.5. seq. Our former King did not abrogate these reliques.
Why? King Edward durst not, by reason of his minoritie, and because Re∣formation was but newly begun, and he was in hope to doe for the present more good by the Power and Authoritie of Reformed Bishops, amongst a people, that did looke much upon outward pompe and power, and whose heart was not yet prepared for the simplicitie of the Gospell; and who knoweth what he would have done more, if he had lived longer? Queene Elizabeth had worke enough to maintaine and settle the truth of the de∣ctrine, and had not much time left her to settle the government of the Church, in those dayes where this Kingdome was so much infested by do∣mestick and forraine enemies, and seditions. King Iames seemed to have been avers from this alteration, and would not change this government, because by false informations he was perswaded, that No Bishop, no King: and so for politick reasons did maintaine that order, and in them the rest of the reliquess. For as many Bishops, so many Votes for Him in Parliament, a great advantage of 26. in that small number of Peeres, that then was. Thus you see the groundlesnesse of this consequence; Our former Kings did not. E. we should not. But rather this to be the true consequence: king Ed∣ward durst not, Queen Elizabeth could not, King Iames would not: Wee dare, We can, We may: Ergo, We ought to doe it. Q. What doe we promise concerning all three Kingdomes; A. Observe againe. 1. Quid, or Matter contained in it: We doe promise to endeavour, &c. to bring the Churches of God in the three Kingdomes to the neerest conjunction and uniformitie in Religion, Confession of faith, Forme of Church-government, directory for Worship and Catechising. 2. Quare or Motives to it. 1. That we and our posterie after us may as Brethren live in faith and love, Psal. 133.1. No sweeter harmonie, then that of hearts and affections. Act. 4.32. 2. That the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us, Psa,. 133.3. God hateth differences every where, especially in Religion, 2 Reg. 17.29. There∣fore Christ prayeth for this Unanimitie, and uniformitie, Ioh. 17.21. seq. 3. Quomodo or Manner, how to performe it. Even as we ought to labour for a totall Reformation, in our unfeigned desire, hearty prayers, and ear∣nest endeavours for it, with an irreconcileable hatred of, and opposition a∣gainst all those which will hinder us in, and deprive us of this blessing, by craft, or force. Neh. 4.6.9. 1 Cor. 1.10 11. 4. Quaere, or Motion, and question about it; It may be objected, that it is almost an impossible thing, to reduce so many Churches of such King∣domes, to such an Uniformitie, seeing that in the Apostles dayes it could not be obtained, but there were divisions and differences of opinions, even
among the Apostles themselves, Gal. 2.11. and other Christians Rom. 14.2.5. Resp. 1. There may be an uniformitie in the generall, though there be diffe∣rences in some particular circumstances. 2. Our dutie is to bring the Churches in the neerest conjunction, as neere as we can; If it be not possi∣ble to conforme them in every particular, let us goe as farre as we may. 3. The differences of opinions among the Apostles and primitive Christians did not cause any difference in affection, which is the chiefest to be conside∣red in one dutie, to have our affections knit and united together, though there should be difference in judgement: in which case we must beare one with another, Rom. 14.3.19. 4. if we cannot agree in circumstances, let us agree in the substance and maine end; in the fundamentall points of Re∣ligion, to advance the kingdome and Gospell of Jesus Christ. Divers Phy∣sitians meeting together about one sick man, may be of different opinions concerning the cause and cure of the disease, yet have the same end, the re∣coverie of the sick partie. Let the same mind be in us. 5. Though it be hard, yet not impossible. Magistrates may with the advice of Divines agree about a certaine forme or method in generall, to be observed by all, without any hurt to mens consciences, if thy see time and occasion. To which great worke the Lord grant them the spirit of wisdome, pietie, moderation and courage. Amen. OF THE SECOND ARTICLE. Q. Which is the second Article? A. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavour the extirpation, &c. Q. What is the summe or substance of it? A. Observe againe. 1. Quid, or matter contained in it. We doe pro∣mise, 1. in generall, to endeavour the extirpation of whatsoever shall be found in our Church, to be contrarie to sound doctrine, and the power of godlinesse. 2. In particular, and that partly in points of doctrine, Popery, Prelacie, Su∣perstition, the mother, daughter, and their attire on one side: Heresie and Schisme, mother and child on the other side: Solomons two harlots, that our Church may be brought home to the true Mother, the truth of the Gos∣pell. We promise the extirpation of all errours, on the right and left hand, and that we will neither goe too farre on one side towards Rome, nor fall too farre off on the other side to Babell, but hinder both: partly, in points of practice prophannesse, the sister, or rather the dughter of errour and un∣sound doctrine. For when our judgement is perverted, our practice cannot
be sound when the head was leprous the whole body was ponounced ut∣terly unclean Lev. 13.44. Tit. 1.15. 2 Quare or Motives to it. 1. least we partake in other mens sins 1. Tim. 5.11.22. Which we doe many wayes, especially if we doe not hinder or sup∣presse them, when we right doe it. 1. Sam. 3.13. nay if we doe not mourne for them. Dan. 5.22. Ezech. 9.4.2. P. 2.8. 2. Least we pertake of their plague. Rev. 18.14. the effect of pertaking in their sins. 3. that the Lord usay be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms, and we all may serve the same Lord, in the same manner, with the same heart, to the same end Eph. 4.3.6. 3. Quomodo, or Manner, how to performe it; our duty is to be fully informed of all these perticulars, what they are in their Nature, Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresie, &c. to be fully convinced of the sinfullnesse and dangers of them, and trie them by the word of God, whether they be of Gods planting or Satans imping. 1. Ioh. 4.1. 2. to mourne and be asha∣med, that we have so long beene abused by them contrary to Gods word, and that so many of us are still so much enclined to them in their affections, being so loath to forsake the sacrifice to the Queene of Heaven, least the power of the Gospell deprive us of our licentiousnesse; like unto those Ier. 44.17.18. 3. to intreat the Lord, not onely to weed and to roote out these hellish plants, but to encline our hearts to a desire and longing after it, to have his truth established among us in purity and power Psal. 119.36. 4. to hate, detest, oppose and in our severall places and callings to exterpate and suppresse them. Psal. 119.104. Deut. 7.26. 5. to helpe and assist all those, that are now employed about this worke of Reformation, that it may come to perfection. 4. Quere, or Motions, and questions about it. Generally there is but lit∣tle obiected against this article in reguard of Popery, Heresie, Schisme, Pro∣phanesse. None so superstitious, but will professe to hate Popery. None so fantasticall, but will seeme to abhorre schismse. None such an athiest, but will speake against prophanesse. The whole diffiiculty is about Prelacie. All plead for it. The superstitious knoweth, that in maintaining Prelacie, Superstition is maintained. The Athiest knoweth his licentiousnesse will stand or fall with Prelacie. The Hereticke that as long as the controversy lasteth between deformation and Prelacy, the state hath no leisure to take an other with him, therefore he doth in some respect disaffect Reformation and Covenant. But especially our Prelaticall party doth plead hard for it selfe. Some of their obiections were most sadely answered by the Assem∣bly the rest may easily be refuted.
1. Obiect. Prelacy is confirmed by Act of Parliament, and is not yet re∣voked. Ergo still in force. Res. 1. It was never formerly established by any law of this kingdome at all. 2. If it were then the life and soul of it is taken taken away from it, by an Act passed this Parliament concerning their power and dignity: and nothing of their Iurisdiction remaineth, but what is pre∣carious and voluntary in those, who submit themselves to it. 3. Their whole government at the best is but a human constitution, and consequent∣ly may be abrogated by men. 4. That forme of Governmentj is found and ad∣iudged by the Parliament preiudiciall to the state, destructive to the power of godlines, and the pure administration of Gods ordinances. Ergo a plant, which God hath not planted, but should be rooted out and destroyed. Math. 15.13. He that will have a more particular monstrationof all the hirarchicall disorders & enormities, let him read a treatise intitled the Beauty of Holiness, where he will find more particularly proved that this Prelaticall Church-Government is truly preiudiciall the State and power of Religion. 1. To the State, when we consider, 1. their tyrannicall power over his Majesties Subjects, to cite, examine, sweare, iudge, fine, imprison them pro placito, according to their Canons, and Canon law, not the word of God, or the knowne lawes of the Kingdome, they had or tooke upon them more power, then the King had himselfe over mens purses, bodies, soules. 2. their many unnecessary, unchristian attendants and instruments, which were for noe other use, but to uphold their tyranny, and to such out the blood and sweat of his Majesties poore subjects 2. Archbishops, 24. Bishops, 26. Deans, 60. Archdeacons, 544. Prebends, The Archbishops severall Courts, Vicar Generall, Deane of the Arches, Court of faculties, audience, Preroga∣tive Court, delegates, confistory at Pauls, High Commission, the 26 particu∣lar diocesan Bishops Courts, and in all these Courts their Chancellours, Commissaries, Surogates, Advocates, Proctours, Registers, Pursevants, Messengers, Apparitors, &c. with swarves of household servants, chap∣lains, and other attendants, the number whereof they say did amount at least to 10000. persons; besides the ministers of the Cathedrall Churches, Vicars, Peticanons, Singingboyes, Choristers, Organists, Gospellers, Epist∣lers, Vergers, &c. which belong to this fraternity, and did no good but hurt rather to the State and Churcch of God. 3. their immens and huge masse of money, which they gathered yearely in rents, leases, fines fees, &c. It is observed, that if their number amount to 10000. only which is the least that belong to the Bishops and we allow them but 20. l. 2 man per annum one with another notwithstanding it be known, that some have 1000. l. others 500. many 100. l. few under 50. l. a yeare, that there will be requi∣red
at the least 200000. l. per annum, to maintain them all, which imment expenses must needs preiudice the state, and might be farre better employed, and his Majesties Subjects better righted. Besides the revenues of the Ca∣thedrals and their Ministers which are said to rise to 3. or 400000. l. a yeare, And could not Iesus Christ be better served, with lesse cost and better pleased. 2. To the truth and power of Religion, which was hindered by Prelacy many wayes in that it kept up Romes Hieraichy, from whence it came and whither it would returne. It did uphold ignorance and prophanesse by suppressing lectures, afternoones sermons, catechising, &c. and not suffering people to have abroad, if they had no meanes at home: It maintained idle∣nesse in Ministers; never any Minister questioned for not preaching all the yeare but many for preaching twice on the Lords day; How many snares did they lay to trapp godly men, subscriptions, ceremonies, booke of sports oaths ex officio. new oath, &c. They suffered Papists, Arminians, Atheists in the bosome of the Church, when good and orthodox men were silenced, isusteined, deprived, banished, maimed, disinembred, pillored, imprisoned, murhtered. Let any impartiall, conscientious, rationable man judge, whe∣ther these evils be not of such consequence, as should move us all to endea∣vour with our utmost power the exterpation of them, roote and branch, to be freed from these uniustifiable courses, and to have such a government setled, which might advance the glory of God the Kingdom of Iesus Christ, and the true peace and happinesse of the Church. 11 Object. All these faults and crimes are personall, which doe not hin∣der the calling to be good. Let delinquents be punished, the evills refor∣med, and the calling not suffer for it. Res. I. Many times the substance of a thing or ordinance may be ab∣olished though never so good in it selfe in regard of its principle and in∣stitution, if it be abused to Gods dishonour; as the brasen serpent by Hezekiah 2. Reg. 18.4. and the order of the Templers for their person all wickednesse though that order might have had a good end in the first institution. 2. But we say more, that these crimes are in a manner annex∣ed to the very calling, I say not, of a Bishop but a Lord Diocesan, Me∣tropolitan Bishop which could not subsist in their grandeur without such extortions. Great pompe upheld the dignity of Bishops: great reven∣ues must maintaine great pompe: great oppressions must bring in great revenues great officers must favour great oppressions, else they should get nothing for their Bishops, nor themselves. It was all most impossible for them to subsist without these illegall courses. 3. You know who it was
that said in making a Bishop of, &c. I have to day spoiled a good preacher: as if Bishops seats were infectious and made them proud and idle. 4. sup∣pose all these things were not so yet we may answer, that their calling it self is unlawfull, and not jure divino therefore may and ought to be a∣bolished. III. Obiect. We find Bishops in the Bible E. they are jure divino. Resp. The vulgars commit but silly aiguments, We doe not deny Bishops, but Lord Diocesans. Metropolitans. You know the ordinary distinction of Episcopus, Pastor, Preses, Princeps. The first we acknowledge: The third we deny: The second we limn. All pastours are Bishops: No Bishop a Prince: Some Paflours may be Presidents in publike meetings, for order sake a certain time. Let them prove Lords, Diocesans, out of the word, and I have done: else I know not, of whom to interpret the places, Mar. 10.42.43. 1. Pet. 5.3. but of them. Sure we find no such difference be∣tween a Bishop and a teaching Elder in Gods word, as they would make I leave this controversy to those that have written of it Ex professo. I thinke they may well say with Bildad Iob 8.9. We are but of yesterday, and know nothing. Indeed they know not, how old they are. But I know they are not elder then Antichrist. OF THE THIRD ARTICLE. Q. VVHat is the substance of the Third Article? A. Observe again. 1. Quid, or Matter contained in it: which is to preserve 1. The Rights and Priviledges of Parliament, the representative bodies of Kingdoms. Take away Parliaments, take away all. Therefore are our enemies so eager to hinder them. 2. The liberties of the Kingdoms of the whole body, and every particular member of it, without which we are no better then bondmn and slaves, Esa 10.2. This Ieptha maintained, Iud. 11.12.28. 3. The Kings Person and Authority, in the pre∣servation and defence of the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms. Which duty is confessed on all sides to be necessary. 2. Sam. 18.3. and 21.16.17. 2. Quare or Motives to it: 1. Our engagements by Gods and mans law, Psal. 122.6.1. Cor. 12 25. 2. Our owne privat good. Ier. 29.7. 3. toi cleare our intention to the world, that it may beare witnesse with our con∣sciences of our loyalty, and that we have to thought or intentions to diminish His Majesties iust power and greatnesse.
3. Quomodo, or manner how to performe it. 1. In regard of qualities sin∣cerely, without equivocating and reservations: really, not in word onely: constantly, not onely now, when we may doe it fafely, but alwayes without feare of offence or danger, Iud. 5.18. Neh. 6.11. 2. In regard of the extent, in our severall vocations and places, avoiding busie bodinesse, 2 Thess. 3.11. Prov. 20.3. Art thou a States-man, advise: A minister, encourage and stirre up other: A souldier, fight and defend with thy person: A private man, contribute according to thy abilitie: All of us pray, Psal. 12.2, &c. 3. In re∣gard of meanes, with our lives and estates, Neh. 4.14. & 7.70. seq. 2 Sam. 10.12. Iud. 5.18. Nothing should be more deare to us then the publike. 4. Quaere or Motion, & questions against or about it It may be asked here. I. Object. Why is the King put in the last place, which savoureth of some contempt, or undervalning his Person and Authoritie, whereas he is worth ten thousands of us, 2 Sam. 18.3. Resp. 1. If he be put here in the last place, He is put in the title and preamble immediately after God and Religion in the first place, and doth nothing de∣rogate from his Authoritie. 2. We might say, He is included in the word Parliament, of which he is the highest Member, for we know not how to sever King and Parliament, so that he is rather twice mentioned, as a King and a Person, in his body and soule. 3. Or, that the whole body might in some respect challenge place of one, though the Highest member; if Princes be for the people, and not the people for the Prince. I dare not to allude to that which Christ saith, Matth. 5.3. because it is to be understood in a spi∣rituall sence. But I dare say that good Princes were alwayes willing to preferre the peoples good, before their particular welfare and interest, 2 Sam. 24.17. 4. The place alledged out of 2 Sam. 18.3. speaketh of an un∣necessarie hazarding of Kings persons in battells, and that it is lesse losse to a State when thousands of the common sort perish, then when the King should miscarry: so that the comparison is between the King and many thousands of his private subjects; not between a King and his whole king∣dome. The text saith, Thou art worth ten thousands of us; not, Thou art with all the Kingdome. And so we say from the bottome of our soules; The King is worth ten, twenty, nay, hundred thousands, nay all those, with and for whom he doth fight. And our most humble request to his Majestie is, not to goe to battell with or for those Rebels, Irish, Papists, Trairours, that are not worthy of such a Head, Leader, King, lest he quench the light of Israel, 2 Sam. 21.17. 5. The queston is not about the place but the du∣ty. Let us labour to defend the King in the preservation and defence of Re∣ligion and Libertie, and his Person will be well and rightly defended. No
better defence and strength for a King, then Religion, 2 Chron. 11.17. 1 Sam 12.14. II. Object. How can we promise and performe this dutie, when we are in open warre, and beare Armes against the King, where his owne Person is oft endangered, as they say? Resp. 1. We beare not armes against, but for the King, against His and the Kingdomes enemies, This we may doe, by order of Parliament, which hath a coordinate, or subordinate Trust committed to it with the King, to maintain the Lawes against the open Enemies thereof. Father and Mother must concurre to the begetting of a child: So King and Parliament to the making of a Law. Father and Mother by the law of God and Nature, have equally and indifferently the care and custodie of the child committed to them joyntly and severally: So King and Parliament the defence of the Lawes. Suppose the Father should offer violence himselfe, or suffer violence to be offered to the child by his drunken pot-companions; Hath not then the Mother power, nay, is she not bound in conscience, to helpe and rescue the poore child, and to call for the assistance of her friends and neighbours, to preserve the child from ruine and destruction? And are not neighbours bound in conscience to helpe the Mother against those murtherers, though the Father should countenance or connive to them? I need not make appli∣cation. 3. If the King venture into battell, and hazard his Person, we are sorry for it; and he hath been most humbly requested by the Honourable Houses of Parliament, not to expose His Royall Person unto such extremi∣ties. But if His evill Counsell prevaile more with him, then the good ad∣vise of the Parliament, we wash our hands in innocencie, and plead not guilty of any evill, that may befall his Majesties Person in the like occasi∣ons. In the meane while we must not forbeare to defend our Religion and Liberties against our bloody enemies but goe on couragiously, and play the men to fight for our people, and for the Cities of our God. And the Lord do that which seemeth him good, 2 Sam. 10.12. Had Saul come upon David, and forced him to fight, he would have defended himselfe, 1 Sam. 26.10. OF THE FOURTH ARTICLE. Q. VVHat is the substance of the Fourth Article? A. Observe again. 1. Quid, or matter contained in it: We doe promise to discover all Incendiaries, Malignants, or evill In∣struments, to bring them to condigne punishment.
2. Quare, or Motives to it. 1. Because such persons ar dangerous to the State. They are like Fauks in the Gun-powder plot, and doe lay wild fire to blow up the State 1 Sam. 22.9. Neh. 6.10.17. Amos 7.10. 2. Else we make our selves guiltie of their sin, if we conceale it: as it was proved a∣bove. 3. We do shew our love too, and endeavour for and with God, to purge the land from such wicked persons, Ezech. 20.38. 3. Quomodo, or Manner how to performe it: If you knew any such in∣cendiarie, that hath secretly laboured, or shall labour, to stirre up the peo∣ple against King and Parliament, and doth dishearten men from the good cause: or if you know any malignant, ill-disposed person, that beareth no affection to the common cause, but speaketh evill, raileth, slandereth, or doth any thing in prejudice of King and Parliament: or if you know any evill instrument, that seeketh to hinder Reformation, or to divide the King from his Parliament and people, or one of the Kingdomes one from another: or that doth make factions, or a partie amongst the people, contrarie to the League or Covenant. Then your duty is to discover, and to informe against such persons, and acquaint the Committees or Officers of Parliament with it, that they may be brought to triall, and receive condigne punishment, as the degrees of their offence shall deserve, Esth. 2.21.22. 4. Quaere or Motions and question about it. Many will object and say; What? shall I be an Informer, a Promoter, to betray other men? This is a disgracefull office. Resp. 1. Private informations against offendors is no disgrace, but com∣mendable, Gen. 37.1. 1 Cor. 1.11. 2. It is so farre from a disgrace, that it is a duty, and commanded, Levit. 5.1. and cnmmended, Prov. 28.4. 3. But in publike offences most necessarie, if the State should be endangered. It is treason by the Law, if you heare any speake or plot treason, and do not re∣veale it within 24. houres. 4. God threatneth judgement to such, as know and do not reveale evill, Prov. 29.24. We know not how much mischiefe we may cause, if we conceale it: how much good we may do if we reveale it London might have been at this time an Akeldama, if plots had not been discovered. OF THE FIFTH ARTICLE. Q. WHat is the substance of the Fifth Artible? A. Observe again. 1. Quid, or Matter contained in it. We promise to endeavour, 1. That the Peace between the two Kingdomes of
England and Scotland may be maintained. 2. That Instice may be done upon all wilfull opposers thereof. 2. Quare, or Motives to it. 1. Because in it selfe it is a good thing to make peace Math. 5.9. 2. Because it is a happinesse to us, which was de∣nied to our Progenitors in former times, and now hath of late been concluded between both Parliaments. How much blood was shed in former ages in those unhappy wars between England and Scotland, which now by Gods mercy is stopped and stayed by this mutuall Covenant. Compare 2 Sam. 2.1. & 5.1. seq. 3. Because it is for our profit. A threefold cord is not easi∣ly broken, Eccl. 4.12. Vis unita fortior. 3. Quomodo, or Manner, how to performe it: We must endeavour to give no occasion of breach between the two Nations, by any verball or re∣all offence; observe all the articles of Peace agreed upon: disavow, hinder, discover all such, as speake or doe any thing against it; if you heare any body speake evill of, or raile at our brethren the Scots, our dutie is to disco∣ver them to be punished accordingly. 4. Quaere, or Motions, and question about it. Some will say, what can I doe towards it: I am a poore private man, of no consideration. To main∣tain peace, belongeth to Princes and Magistrates? Resp. Yes, every one of us can doe something towards it, and we are bound in our places and cal∣lings to further it. Our interest is great, in publike and private respect. if thou canst doe no more, practise the duties above named in Quomodo: and by thy earnest prayers commend this Union to God, to knit us still faster and faster together, in civill, ecclesiasticall, and spirituall unitie for ever∣more. OF THE SIXTH ARTICLE. Q. VVHat is the substance of this sixt Article? A. It requireth of us a twofold duty, to assist our fellow Cevenanters and to persevere in this Covenant. Q. What is required of us in the first particular? A. Observe again. 1. Quid, or the Matter contained in it: We doe pro∣mise to assist and defend all those that enter into this League and Covenant in the maintaining and pursuing thereof. 2. Quare or Motives to it. 1. Because it is a common cause of Religion, Libertie, and peace of the Kingdomes, wherein every ones particular inte∣rest is included, 1 Cor. 12.26.
2. Because good men ought to helpe one another to further the publike good, Iud. 5.18.24. 3. Because we may need the same helpe from others, Iud. 1.3. 3. Quomodo, or the Manner how to performe it: In regard of the meanes, according to our places and callings: in regard of the ground or ex∣tent, in maintaining and pursuing this League and Covenant. We must not goe beyond our Callings. neither further then for the defence of this Cove∣nant. If any one of our fellow Covenanters be evill spoken of, plead for him; if threatned, warne him; if in danger, defend him; if pillaged, relieve him; if he doth undertake any thing for the defence of the Covenant against the common enemie assist him with thy advise, purse, power, person. 4. Quaere, or Motion about it. Some will say, this seemeth to contra∣dict our Saviours speech, Math. 5.39. where he will have us rather suffer wrong then to resist? Resp. 1. Christ doth speake of revenge, not defence: of private revenge, not publick: of revenge by ill meanes, not a legall defence. Christ willeth us rather to suffer wrong, then to revenge our selves for private offences by ill meanes, as the Apostle cleareth it, Rom. 12.10. He doth forbid Magi∣strates to revenge the evill, because it is their dutie, Rom. 1 3.4. Neither doth he inhibit private men to defend themselves in a lawfull way, else wicked men would be made more presumptuous and strengthened in their malice and violence against Gods children, if they durst not defend themselves: nay, Christ had broken this command himselfe, Ioh. 18.23. 2. But our Covenant speaketh of a more publike defence, in the main∣taining and pursuing of this Covenant, and the severall Articles thereof, where it is not onely lawfull but our dutie to helpe. Q. What is required of us in the second particular? A. Observe again. 1. Quid, or the Matter contained in it: not to break or fall off from this Covenant, but to continue and persevere in it all the dayes of our life. 2. Quare, or Motives to it: 1. Because it doth so much concerne the glory of God, to be served according to his will in puritie and power by all that professe his Name: the good of the Kingdomes, because Truth and Peace commonly goe together, Esa. 39.8. Psal. 85.10. And the honour of the King, whose throne is established by Pretie and Justice Prov. 20.28. 2. Because a great sinne, and mark of a wicked man to fall off from a Covenant especially in so good a cause Dan. 11.32.35. Many times such as fall off from their Covenant, speed no better in extremities, then those that persevere in it, Ier. 39.9.
3. Quomodo, or the Manner how to fulfill it. 1. Negatively, not to suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, perswasion, r∣rour, to be divided or withdrawne from this blessed Vnion and conjunction; neither to make defection to the contrary part: or to give our selves to a de∣testable indifferencie or neutralitie in this cause. We must be neither runna∣gadoes nor neuters. 2. Affirmatively: but all the dayes of our lives zea∣lously and constantly to continue in this Covenant against all opposition, and promote the same, according to our power, against all letts and impediments what soever: and what we are not able to overcome our selves, or to suppresse, wee shall reveale and make it knowne that it may timely be prevented or re∣moved. And both these and all other duties, we promise, as in the sight of God, who is both Witnesse and Judge, and will either reward our faithful∣nesse, jor punish our falshood. 4. Quaere, or Motions about it. 1. How can I promise this perseverance, when I may be forced to the contrarie, by the adverse partie? Resp. It is answered in this Article, Thou must not suffer thee to be forced; but one of these two thou must doe, either not promise, or not breake it: but rather suffer for it. 2. But some will say, we have taken an Anticovenant, and an oath contrary to this, when the other side prevailed over us. How can we sweare and answer the same things with a good conscience. Resp. 1. If thou hast taken an ill and sinful oath, thou hast cause to repent of it, whether thou didst it freely or ignorantly or by force. 2. Now God ten∣dreth thee an occasion to manifest thy repentance, by this Covenant, en∣brace it. Repaire the breach thou hast made in thy conscience, by a greater measure of care and zeale for Gods glory and the Churches good, which thou promisest in this Covenant. FINIS.
