D2018 99826698 31103
THE VVORD OF GOD, To the Citie of LONDON, from the Lady ELEANOR: OF THE EARLE OF Castle-Haven: Condemn'd, and Beheaded: Aprill 25. 1631. &c. LUKE, 21. And some of you shall They cause to be put to death, &c But there shall not a haire of your head perish. Printed in the yeare 1644.
THE VVORD OF GOD TO The Citie of LONDON: Luke Evangelist the 19. From The Lady Eleanor: 1644. TO confirme it out of the mouth of two witnesses: The time of your Vissitation, as for∣merly out of the Old Testa∣ment. (2 of Kings 20. &c.) A signe gi∣ven of the Resurrection at what time it is re∣veald by the times paraleld. So here is one out of the New from a Parable: (Luke the 19.) witnesses the same, con∣cerning when our Saviours returne not fare off. As when thought then the King∣dome
of God was neere: or immediately should appeare. VVherefore of the very yeare of God 1631. April 25. thus what then came to passe no inferior token or signe of it, as witnesse such a one, &c. And he said therefore a certain Nobleman went into a far Country to receive a Kingdome, and to returne. And cald his ten servants and gave them ten pounds, &c. As moreover in what reign followed that, needs no more date but this. But his Citizens hated him, and sent a Message after him saying. We will not have this man to reigne over us. And thus proceeding on, as it were with the ten Commandements, then came the first saying, Lord thy pound hath gaind ten: and said have authority over ten Cities: And the second came saying, Lord thy pound hath gaind five: and he said also be thou Ruler over five Cities. And a∣nother
came saying, Lord behold here is thy one pound, that wrapt up in the hea∣vie Handcherchifeor Napkin, which amounts to Anno Dom. 1631. Aprill 25. And so THREE of them come to their Last account too, the EARL of Castle-Haven first: One as evill requited by his family, As reputed free to his followers, and accounted just to all and charitable, &c. So farther for explanation of this peice of Substraction and Addition, say∣ing Lord he hath ten, whose reply was: That unto every one that hath shall be given and from him that hath not, shall be taken a∣way that he hath. VVhen he said or gave command, take from HIM the pound and give it to him that hath ten, where besides the aforesaid yeare of God the mistery thereof as manifested, also re∣fers to a certaine principle so distastfull
to his Majestie, the Parliament saying he can receive no losse: That hath no∣thing of his owne, or to that purpose. And so much added concerning these words, how he shall be recompencd so evill a steward of his Lords money: That from him that hath not: (Notwith∣standing) shall be taken away that which he hath. Accompanied with that voice of the present reigne: Bring them forth and slay them before me mine ene∣mies. And farther more to bring this home to the time: though in no small hast pas∣sing on with great Brittains progresse or story in this of the 19. of Luke &c. When he wept over that hard harted Citie vis∣sited in that manner, comming neigh Bethphage and Bethania, &c. which also drawes neere great Brittaine, as shewes the things belonging to their peace hid∣den
from their eyes, saying withall. Jf these should hold their peace when peace in Heaven proclaim'd and his comming, very stones would not be silent, but liken'd to a womans travell, would immediatly cry out. And thus having denounced their heavie sentence vissits the temple, to pu∣rifie it, casting out those making their mar∣kets there, as no newes is refullfild with us. And as this cleare and out of questi∣on this parable or portion of Scripture, directed to our dayes where the faithfull re∣warded with so many Cities; and the like, so evident likewise where that Publican pardond, (Luke 19,) Saying salvation was ome to his house, bidden to make hast, &c. The very true Portrature of him, his astie departure or death. The sonne of ld ancient Abraham also: The house of Audeley no obscure one, though one much
envied, and such a one then come of no Sodome seed, but like Isaack rather sacrified, who as he sufferd for the misdemenors of an unrulie houshold sufferd by him, laying on him their faults, so had the honour to have this added. To suffer between those two the one cleering him at that houre, affirming for that fact whereof the Earle of Castle-Haven was accusd by his wife (such a wicked woman) He was as innocent as the child new borne. Though by the other an Impudent Idolater not cleered, cal∣ling out upon Saint Bennet, but cursing the said Earle, wishing him and all his Generation except his sonne hangd and damnd. And now Sirs you of this Honoura∣ble Citie as you have heard these: Shal adde a word of His Majesties Atturney generall that day after they had heard the
examination (falne to a low ebb of what was expected (saying my Lord. You see this odious crime, and therefore you must be curious you admit of no Mittigation, who came short of this first promise. That His Majesties intent was like God to shew mercy, who from fifty did come down to ten when he interceeded for Sodom. And so what the prisoner answered to them: when his Majesties Chaplins came and told him the King had a gracious purpose to alter the manner of his death. And that he should be beheaded like a Noble man: Replyed he should esteeme that Haulter which should draw HJ M to Heaven before a collor of pearle or the like. And for the Gallowes likewise that should bring him to his Saviour and Redeemer that dispised not the crosse for him; and so much for him a
man of a meane stature too, who clm∣bed that tree at Tower-Hill, when as a like no little throng or presse: A Peere of two Kingdomes a Noble man here, a Prince or Earle in Jreland, whose estate sometime inferior to none. And thus stands forth like that Noble Za∣cheus cal'd by his name to come downe.
The EARLE of Castle-Havens Confession. In the name of God Amen. I Mervin, Earl of Castle▪ haven being in my full strength and memory thankes be given unto my maker, having been branded and openly accused for chang, alteration, and doubt∣fullnes of my Faith and Religion. I thought fitt like a Christi∣an man to give satisfaction upon what grounds I stand for my beleife, and to expresse it under my band for the satis∣faction of all charitable people and Christians. First, I doe believe in the blessed and glorious Trinity, three persons, one eternall and everliving God, God the Fa∣ther, God my Redeemer, and God my Sanctifier. I doe relie upon the merit, death, and passion of our blessed Saviour Christ Jesus, and upon his Mediation for the remis∣sion of my sins. I doe believe and use with most humble reverence our Lords prayer, the Creed of the Apostles and the tenn Commande∣ments, as they are set downe and allowed in the Church of England. I doe believe the Canonicall Scriptures and that they are written by the inspiration of the holy spirit.
I doe beleive the Booke of Common Prayer, as it is allowed in the Church of England, to be a good for me in those dayes for the service of God and to use the same, and for the rest of my beleife I doe referre it to the true Orthodox faith of our Church of England. And from the Articles received at this present in the Church of England, and confirmed by authori∣ty of Parliament, I doe not differ in any point, renouncing all the superstitions and errors taught or beleived in the Church of Rome or any other Church, in which faith I will, God willing continue to my lives end in Testimony whereof I have hereunto subscribed my hand this first of May 1631. Castle-haven. LJkewise of whose Letter, makeing bold to shew the beginning thereof: When with∣out MERCY Castaway: how well resolv'd He was, who had such ill luck at one and Thirty. (Anagram. Eleanor Audeley.)Reveale O Daniel, J send thee 1631. farewells with thankes for thy letter and ad∣vice. But J am bound for Nineveh: And having bidden Tarshish farewell. Not fea∣ring death, J doe not desire life. CASTLE-HAVEN
ANd for more manifestation of what nature this unnaturall strange trespasse. Whereof this man Mer: Lord Audeley was accusd, his undeserv'd death is referd to Geneses 38. Judahs sonnes Er: his eldest, and O N an his trespasse: And how the Lord slew them both: with her dis∣guising: putting off her widowes garment, with child by whoredome, Tamer tra∣valing with twinns those sonns: with that ominous Scarlet, or Red thread bound, &c. And therefore shall but name them, the contrivers of it. Ann his wife, and his brother Ferdinando: the one for envie, she being an Heire, and such a notorious one,
(O Ann) The other a perverted Papist wanting no malice: wherefore to cut him off, some time gone that way astray too: but recald himself, no aspertion was held too soule for him. And for saving her ho∣nour an adultresse by promisd prefer∣ment, a Page and a fot man was brought forth: Those VVitnesses rewarded in their kind, condemned out of their owne mouths, like sillie Sheep for their labour: Who came against a Peere of two Kingdomes, as Broadway by name, char∣ged with that breach made on her: The other one Fitz Patricke, or O Donel a very Vagarant: Accusing him∣selfe of O Nans uncleannesse or trespasse with his LORD. Vpon his Oath be∣leev'd, which had never received the Sa∣crament, or at least but one kind before him; that thrice tooke it upon his death
And one never heard to have an Oath come out of his mouth, That in that kind he was not guilty, never intending to re∣serve oathes to that purpose to make himselfe forsworne before his death. And so much for those twinns or fellow-servants. Themselves falling into the pit dig'd for another, though guilty of that: as much as those Babes Then born; Yet worthy of no other, witnes out of their owne mouths. Therefore the Executioner, or Man-midwif, as the one helps them into the world, be others out of it: This work though sooner dispatched, where Jrelands hea∣vie blow at hand inclusive in these. And after came his Brother with the Red thred, &c. Also farther for the time of the yeare, a∣bout sheep-shering time or S. Georges feast:
as Times circumstance requisit, when it came to passe of the LORD Keepers giving sentence; Keeper of the great Seale, made Lord high Steward. That Judge, Judah like in this, though not ac∣knowledged, condemned one, more righteous then himselfe. Yet discerne J pray you whose are these, the Signit or Seale, the Staffe, or white Rod, and Bracelets or Color, of what office these are the En∣fignes. And more over how it came to passe with him, behold his own brother Sir Fer∣dinando Touchet what end he came to, That day twelve moneth in the morning at the same houre his brother was condemn'd, how he dyed suddainly, which had pollu∣ted his owne Nest or House, the just hand of God displeased: This unnaturall brother, in a House of Office or the like, stroke
dead coming but from the Tennis on Hol∣born Hill, without any servent with him. This O Nan ready to be torn in peices before the breath out of his body: some their hands in his pockets; Others for his Clothes, was found thus by His Servants which came to aske for HIM. Thus re∣warded as They no other deserved: JƲDAS-like, rather then of Judahs Race or Kind, (Luke 21.) in be∣traying HIM betrayed by Friends and Bretheren so openly: Mervin LORD AVDELEY, of the Manor of Straw-Bridge, which never suspected or did know that the VVord to be of his house, or appertaining to Parsona∣ges and Tithes, that Mat. 25. Thou knewest J reap where J sowed not, and gather where J have not strawed. VVhere al∣though the Arch B. of Canterburies bu∣rying his Lords money (as it may well be
no little or hidden of that kind in the earth) with the loosing of his head also tyed up with that Napkin or Kircheife: the one gone to his owne place, Little-Ease or E∣saus Rest. The other a cheife Peere, though his hard hap to loose his Head first, yet neverthelesse in Abrahams bosome or Paradice, as his Saviour saying I come to save that which is lost, Luk. 19. As when the ancient of dayes his returne shewed there, so referd to Malachi, shall come as a swift witnesse in judgement, against adulterers, & adultresses and false swear∣ers, and for Tithes that robery and the like. For yee have Rob'd me, &c. So come LORD, and cut off such an evill time, deferre us not. FINIS.
AS these farther the summe and substance of the matter, shew'd in Luke the 19. and Mat. 25. When the day of judgement immediately followes, like as those servants three of them, no obscure ones doubtlesse to their ac∣count called then. So lastly with the Earle of Castle Haven betrayed, and his sentence: follows theirs as slow. The Earle of Strafford Deputy, &c. And the Arch BB. VVhich could plead no Ignorance, as referd to his own mouth. those Traytors, for evidence of the end so long waited for.
