D2474 11778778 48960
THE FURTHER INFORMATION OF Stephen Dugdale, GENT. Delivered at the BAR of the HOƲSE of COMMONS. Pursuant to an Order of the said HOUSE, On the 30th of October, 1680. Novemb. the 24th. 1680. By vertue of an Order of the Honourable House of Commons, I appoint Tho. Parkhurst, and Tho. Simmons, and no others, to Print my Informations, Given at the Bar of that Honourable House. STEPHEN DUGDALE. LONDON: Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside: and Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms in Ludgate-street. M. DC. LXXX.
THE FURTHER INFORMATION OF Mr. STEPHEN DƲGDALE, Given to the HONOURABLE the HOUSE OF COMMONS, Pursuant to an Order of the said HOUSE, On the 30th of October, Anno Dom. 1680. as followeth: (Viz.) THAT about the 21st of Sep∣tember 1678, I being in Com∣pany with Mr. Evers and one Hobson; in Discourse had a∣mongst us, they both then de∣clared, That their Design in Carrying on the Plot, was to kill the Duke of Monmouth as well as the KING; which Horrid Acts the
Lord Stafford about the same time proposed for me to do: And that one George North (who was Nephew to Pickering, and Servant to my Lord Aston) declared to me, that they had lately taken his said Uncle (who was like∣wise one appointed to kill the King), and put him in Newgate; which if true, he said he thought the King deserved an Execrable Death, as was intended him, by reason of his Whoring and Debauchery. That in September 1678, Mr. Evers told me, That Mr. Beningfield had a Pacquet of Letters delivered to him from the Post-house, which he feared the Lord Treasurer Danby had notice of; therefore he delivered them to the Duke of York, who delivered them to His Majesty, who was pleased (after he had read them) to give them to the Treasu∣rer, not much Crediting them, for that they had after such manner been transmitted to him; by which unwariness the Design was undiscovered, which the said Pacquet of Let∣ters wou'd have Confirmed of the Plot. That I have received many Pacquets of Letters for Evers, some of which I have broke open, and found them to be, and tend to the Establishing of the Romish Religion here: As also several Sums of Money, which by several persons imployed to put forth, was for
the Use of the Jesuits to carry on the Design. To which end Mr. Evers told me, That there was several Gentlemen in the County of Staf∣ford had Monies in their hands, though they were shy of being so known; but neverthe∣less had entered into Covenant to do it at St. Omers: To confirm which, I received a Letter from Mr. Warner a Jesuit, that the money should be speedily returned to Mr. Harcourt the Jesuit here. That in another Letter directed to Mr. Evers, which I broke open, and found the same to be my Lord Stafford's hand-writing: The Contents of which was, That things went well on beyond the Seas for carrying on the Plot, and hoped it did so here in England; and for the Pardoning of those that were concerned there∣in, Mr. Evers told me, That there were seve∣ral Indulgencies, which he believed came from Mr. Ireland, to whom they were transmitted from Rome. That the night before I went away from my Lord Astons upon Discovery of the Plot, I took several Letters and Papers which related thereunto, and burnt them, fearing the same wou'd detect me, if found; not then having thoughts to discover my self; which if I had happily kept and preserved, wou'd have much more Evidenced the whole Design in carrying
on the Plot: In several Letters relating to the same, I have heard the Names of Oates and Bedlow, named as persons therein imployed; but I did not then know them. That I very well remember, that the Je∣suits had a Meeting in London, in April 1678. for that Mr. Evers, and other Jesuits went up from Staffordshire unto it, who desired me when I went to escape, to be secret; and that I should, if I were ever brought to Examina∣tion, deny my knowledge in every particular, which I then, and when I burned my Papers, was resolved to do: And the said Mr. Evers at several times told me, That the Pope out of his Revenue had granted several Sums of mo∣ney, in order to put the Irish into a Condition of opposing the now Establish'd Government; for it was his Gracious pleasure, to consider what a Tyrannical Government they lived under. To which purpose I opened a Letter from Paris, which was directed to Mr. Evers, the persons Name I have forgotten; but it was to this purpose, That he had lately re∣ceived a Letter from Rome, to confirm, that the Pope did still hold his good purpose, for the relieving the poor Irish, and that they were considering how to procure them Men as well as Money: but as to that and other things, there wou'd shortly be an Express
from thence to England, which wou'd be a∣bout the latter end of March 1677/8, as I best remember; and that Mr. Evers company, with Mr. Cottons, Mr. Vavasors, Mr. Gavens, and Mr. Peters, were requested to be at Lon∣don, whither Mr. Evers and Mr. Peters went; and when Mr. Evers came home again into the Countrey, he told me, That Mr. Ireland and Mr. Simons wou'd be in the Countrey the latter end of June, for consi∣dering the best way and means, for the carrying on the great Work, as they called it. That it was always agreed at our Meet∣ings, That to disturb the Peace in Ireland and Scotland, wou'd be a means to weaken England so much, that their attempts might be easier managed, which cou'd not be done without a good Assistance beyond the Seas, which Mr. Gaven said, we needed not to fear; for though they had great troubles with them both in Flanders and France, and those Countries, yet there wou'd not be men or money wanting to carry on their Design, for the Glory of God: And if so, their Endeavours shou'd be no ways want∣ing here; which was not only to kill the King, but the Duke of Monmouth also,
but to lessen the power of the rest of the Protstants: To which Mr. Peters asked, If they were assured, that the Gentlemen were all true to them in Assisting them with money? for if that should fail, our own Stock will serve us little. Upon which I told them, I wou'd give them One hundred pound more, to the Four hundred pound I had before setled on them, which was ta∣ken very thankfully, with promises that I needed not to fear to have a free Pardon procured for my Sins past, and to be a Saint in Heaven, placed to all Eternity, for that I had been so much Instrumental in so Pious a Work: and Mr. Vavasor said, That the monies which was out at Use to carry on the said Design, for that there wou'd be occasion for it speedily; and to that end, one Mr. Jackson was Chosen by the Jesuits, as likewise Mr. Evers, to gather in the money about him, who in his place appointed me to go to Mr. Dracott, Sir James Simons, Mr. Heveningham, and other per∣sons that were Contributors thereabouts. Mr. Peters was appointed to receive of one Mr. Gerrard his Contribution-money; but being the Priest of the House, Mr. Evers was willing to do it for him. Mr. Gaven
undertook for several private Gentlmn about Wolverhampton (viz) of Mr. Gifford of Chillington, Mr. Fitz-Herbert, Mr▪ Gra∣vener, Mr. Winford, Mr. Humphrey Elliot, with several others; of which money I received Five hundred pound at Wolver∣hampton of Mr. Vavasor and Mr. Gaven, which Sum of Mr. Evers, with other mo∣nies, returned here to Mr. Harcourt; and it being then asked, Who was to speak to Mr. Howard for his money? It was answered, Mr. Broadstreet, though Mr. Evers said, he wou'd do it himself: but for Mr. Herbert Aston, who was also a Contribu∣tor in the said Design; and being in debt, ought to be looked on accordingly: To which Mr. Vavasor replyed, That it was for a good and Charitable Use, and God wou'd the more encrease his store; or to that purpose: which monies so Collected and Received, or should come in, should be returned to Mr. Harcourt and Mr. Ire∣land, who should receive Orders how they should dispose of the same; and if any doubt should arise, they should repair to Mr. Benefield, who wou'd resolve the same. That at another time Mr. Ireland told
me, when I came to London, he wou'd give me Instructions, and order how I should proceed in my Undertakings. To all which I did seem very content; and told me he wou'd speak to Groves, that I might have notice how the Design went on, for then he cou'd not tell, till he had spoken to my Lord Bellasis, and my Lord Arundell of Warder, who would prove the Loyal'st men of Trust and Council of any persons in the World; but before I received my Letter from Mr. Ireland, the said Groves was in Newgate. That I saw a Letter from Mr. Harcourt, who told Mr. Evers, That he had lately re∣ceived a Letter from Mr. Warner; wherein was mentioned, That Mr. Warner had used all care imaginable for the helping on the design in hand, and that there was Four hun∣dred pound of the said money in Mr. Ire∣land's hands for that purpose; and I heard Mr. Peters tell Mr. Evers, that he was very glad that Mr. Whitebread was made Provin∣cial of the Jesuits, for that he wou'd be very careful in carrying the design on, and a close man in his business; and they then agreed that my Lord Arundell of Warder was the only man we had to trust to, being a Wise man, and much in favour with the Duke of York.
That in a little time after this Dis∣course had; I received in a Letter of mine, 3 Letters inclosed from Mr. Be∣ningfield, one from Paris, and one from Mr. Harcourt; that from Mr. Beningfield, was to let Mr. Evers know, that he had spoken with my Lord Arundel of War∣der, and that my Lord was very willing to assist in what was requested by Mr. Evers and Mr. Vavasor, which Letters I intercepted, and I never let Mr. Evers know, to whom they were directed, that I had received them; but being not long after in Discourse with him in his Chamber, I asked him what Persons of Quality or Note did (be∣sides those he had mentioned to me) countenance our Design, to which he answered, that there were several in o∣ther places, where the business went on aswel as here, and at the same time told me, that he had Writ to Mr. Bening∣field, to request my Lord Arundel of Warder to be assisting in the matter which then was in hand, and I desiring to know of him whether my Lord was concerned in their Design, he told me, that his Lordship was to under∣take the most part of the Design, and with my Lord Bellasis to give Order,
both as to the taking the King's Life away, and the Duke of Monmouth's; and for the Establishing the Romish Go∣vernment here. That about the middle of September 1678 a Letter came to my hands, of Mr. Evers (which I opened) the Con∣tents whereof were to this purpose, that he had been with my Lord Arun∣del, and my Lord told him, that he spoke to the person he was requested, and it was both their Opinions, that it was the best way to speed their De∣sign. The persons name, which sent the Letter I know not; for there was two Letters for his name, which were I. W. That when the Design was set on foot, it was not for the taking the King's Life away, but to provide for themselves Money and Arms against the King died, for it was always thought amongst us, that the D. of M. would stand for the Crown after the King's Death; and then our hopes would be frustrated for ever having here the Romish Religion established. But the perceiving and seeing it was his Majesties whole Endeavours, to Establish and secure the Protestant
Religion so firm, that it should not be removed for the future. It was by De∣crees thought fit, that this way that is now designed and endeavoured to be carried on, would most answer their wicked ends, and for those that had bin active therein, they agreed should have Rewards, and thinking that I (amongst the rest) had deserved som∣thing, Ordered I should have an e∣qual share with one Captain Aderley, who was an Agent in the said Plot; but how much it should be, and in what, after the Design took effect, was not then declared, but was to be de∣termined by the D. of Y. and my Lord Arundel and some other persons; but it should be such a share, as should make me, and my Posterity happy. Which I accepted with great thank∣fulness to Mr. Evers, Mr. Gavan, Mr. Pe∣ters, and Mr. Leviston, who then pro∣mised to see it fulfilled to me, alledg∣ing at the same time, that there would be lands enough of the Protestants, to reward every one, that had been active in the said Design. That in the Summer 1678, I met with one Humphry Elliot, who fell into Discourse with me about Mr. Ireland,
who, said he, had told him, that I was to go up to London, upon an occasion that would also oblige him to come up, which Discourse something start∣led me, which he perceiving, told me I need not fear him, for if I suffered, he was like to suffer as well as I, and begg'd of me not to impart my mind to any one except my Lord Stafford or Mr. Evers, or whom they should ap∣point. That for the carrying on the whole Design in several other Counties, Mr. Peters, Evers and Pool told me, that there was for a part of Worcester appointed one Mr. Turner, and three more whose names I have forgot: and for a part of Darbyshire, and a part of Nottingham∣shire was appointed one Mr. Turner, Mr. Bennet, and Mr. Pool of Spnikehill, and one Mr. Heaton, which were to take care of their several Liberties, as well for engaging persons in the Hellish Design, as for raising of mony of the Gentlemen to carry it on, and to give in their several accounts to the Pro∣vincial, who was then appointed for that purpose, to see which was the best Benefactor, though at the same time Mr. Pool told me, that he thought
Mr. Turner was no ways fit for such an Employ for that, though he was a Priest he was given to Drinking. That being sent to Dr. Richard Need∣ham with a Letter, and discoursing him, found him very Zealous to promote the Plot, who told me he had been 200 Miles about it, and that his pains he thought were well bestowed in so good a work, and that it should fall out in his days, that might be spoke of in after Ages: That honest Dick Needham was a Promo∣ter, and one Entrusted for the Establish∣ing of the Romish Religion, and the Sub∣version of the Heretical Government. And being sent at second time to Dr. Needham's and Mr. Pool's, and going first to the said Mr. Needham's at Satton in Scars∣dale in Darbyshire with letters, in order that Mr. Needham might transmit them from place to place, according as he was thereby directed to the Gentlemens houses near adjoyning, the purport of which letters were for the promoting and carrying on the Design of subvert∣ing of the Protestant Religion. And Mr. Pool being there, I dispatched my business with him, which was to the same purpose, and Mr. Needham being to receive orders from Mr. Pool and Mr. Bennet, Mr. Pool
after Mass gave him further Instructi∣ons, as to what business he was to under∣take, who made this reply, that both he and his Son should be at their Com∣mand, to serve in so good a cause, in the destroying of the Protestants, and introducing their own Religion, and having received his letter from me, and what I had to Communicate to him by word of mouth, the Content of which Letter was, that he should go to West∣hallam to acquaint Mr. Pawdrels, that Mr. Evers, Mr. Vavasor and Mr. Peters would be at Westhallam, within a short time, and desired that one Mr. Busby might be at home, for they and some other Gentlemen would be sure to be there at the time appointed about the great work they knew of which so much concerned them all. That I have Intercepted several Let∣ters that came to Mr. Evers from St. Omers, and Paris, wherein was mentioned, that they were in good forwardness, and that they had disbursed 500l. upon Ac∣count for Arms, as also 700l. was men∣tioned in other Letters to be laid out for the same purpose, in some of which Let∣ters, it was pressed to Mr. Evers for return of Monies for discharging those Ac∣counts.
And I have likewise seen Letters to Grove, Ireland, Beningfield and Harcourt, for the sending mony over to those Per∣sons, and that Mr. Ireland, and Mr. Vava∣sor differed in their accounts about the same, the last time Ireland was in the Country. That about July 1678 a Pacquet came directed to me from Mr. Evers, which came to 2 s. 6 d. which I open'd and there it was expressed, that all things were ready which were bespoke, and all paid off, but how it was Ordered I never knew, and when I have been in business with them, it hath been often given out, that the King of France did know of this Design, and would be Aiding and Assist∣ing therein, which I was ever of another opinion, and they then declared that there was in England above 200000 men, which would prove true, if occasion were, with some supplies, which they said they were sure of from other parts beyond the Seas. That about August or the beginning of September 1678 Mr. Peters and Mr. Va∣vasor told me that there was to be a great meeting of the Jesuits and Secular Priests at Boscobel, besides several private. Gentlemen that were to be there, to
receive the Oath of Secrecy▪ which Mr. Gavan was appointed to Administer to about forty persons, particularly at that time, it was given to Sir James Si∣mons, Mr. Gerard, Mr. Fitzherbert, Mr. Va∣vasor, Mr. Lewson, Mr. Broadstreet, Mr. Tur∣ner, Mr. Manley. Mr. Francis Lewson, and several others, the said Mr. Gavan at the same time publishing an Act of Indulgence, which he lately received from Rome to those that were active in promoting the wicked Design of killing the King, and the Subversion of the Pro∣testant Religion, I promised to be there, but went not, for which they were an∣gry, and Mr. Peters and Mr. Vavasor both told me, that the occasion of their meeting was to Consult means how to carry on the Plot. That presently after I had made my Discovery to the Justices of the Peace, they Issued out their Warrants for the apprehending of George Hobson and George North beforementioned, who were both thereupon apprehended, which my Lord Aston hearing of, it was Reported that his Lordship should say in great Passion, That he was sorry he did not run me through before I went out of his House.
That about the beginning of September 1678. Mr. Evers told me in great secret, that my Lord Aston was to go in October next following to St. Omers, and probably from thence to Paris, which my Lord afterwards told me, he was to go over, in order to dispose of the Arms, which were provided there; the number whereof were as my Lord and Mr. Evers told me 30000. which were to be landed here and in Ireland, and fur∣ther discoursing Mr. Evers in that Affair, he told me, that some out of caution to themselves, would have their names entred at St. Omers, as it had been before, the better to disguise their De∣sign, and that about two years last past, he with Mr. Cotton went over to enter their names, and that several of them had continued to do the like in this Affair and Design: But after the news was, that the Plot was discovered, I never heard my Lord Aston speak to me more of his going over. That in addition to what I have already de∣clared concerning my Lord Stafford, is, That his Lordship in September 1678. in the great Parlour at Tixal discoursed Mr. Evers and me, and told us, That the reason of his dissatisfaction against his Majesty, towards whom he had always car∣ried himself with all sort of Loyalty, as he had done towards his Father, whereby not only he, but others and their Families had been hereby ruined, and that in particular, of the old Lord Aston, who had been a great Sufferer, and his Father the Ambassador had spent 30000l. out of their own Estate, was for all this no hopes of any Recompence, for he plainly saw, as any thing fell to be given, it was rather disposed of to Rebels and Traytors, than to those that had served him, and that were Loyal; And there∣fore these things had wrought with him, and
were sufficient to change his mind against the King, if there were not the matter of Religion in question, which was a Consideration above all others; And his Lordship also took notice, that at any Sessions of Parliament when there fell out any thing to the prejudice of the Catholicks, the King was always willing to expose them to the Parliaments mercy, both in Estates and in any thing else, that might befal them. That at a general Meeting in September 1678. had at Tixal aforesaid, where there was present the now Lord Aston, Lord Stafford▪ Sir James Symons, Mr. Hevennigham, Mr. Howard Mr. Gerard, Mr. Vavasor, Mr. Lewson, Mr. Peters, Mr. Symonds, Mr. Herbert Aston, Mr. Fitter, Mr. Broadstreet, and to the best of my remem∣brance Mr. Dacot; upon a full debate had of all their precedent Transactions and Instructions in carrying on their Design; It was then by them severally agreed and resolved upon, to perform the Oaths they had severally before taken, which was to Kill the King, and to Establish their Ro∣mish Religion here in England; and they did there also severally promise to Aid and Assist me, in what I was to undertake, as well for Money, as other Necessaries: and then my Lord Stafford promised me, to make good his promise for∣merly made me, both as to Money and other Necessaries. Stephen Dugdale. Jur. 15o Novembris 1680. coram, Tho. Stringer. Will. Roberts.
The Gentlemens Names in the Plot, viz. LOrd Stafford. Lord Arundel. Lord Bellasis. Lord Aston. Sir Francis Symons. Mr. Hevennigham. Mr. Howard. Mr. Fowler. Mr. Gerard. Mr. Gifford. Mr. Baz. effits Herbert. Mr. Elliot. Captain Atherley. Mr. Dracot. Mr. Richard Needham. Mr. Grove. Mr. Hobson, and Mr. North. Jesuits Names in the Plot. Mr. Ireland. Mr. Bedingfield. Mr. Harcourt. Mr. Vavasor. Mr. Evers. Mr. Catmer. Mr. Lewson. Mr. Peters. Mr. Broadstreet. Mr. Poole. Mr. Turner. Mr. Anthony Turner. Mr. Gavan. Mr. Heatne. Mr. Fitter. Mr. Pearson. Mr. Whitebread Provin. Mr. Busby. Mr. Arthur. Mr. White. Sir John Warner. Mr. Clifford. Mr. Worstley. Father Mumford. Mr. Godwin. Mr. Winford. Father James. Mr. Symons. Mr. Charles, and Mr. Peters.
Priests Names in the Plot. SIr Francis Luson. Mr. Tomers. Mr. Fitter. Mr. Smith. Mr. Atkins. Mr. Morley. Mr. Cunney. Mr. Thompson. Mr. Sheppey. Mr. Dowdell. Mr. Fitzherbert. Mr. Trill. Mr. Fanford. Mr. Weeden. Mr. Bennet. Mr. Gravener. Messengers Imployed in this Design. MR. Oates. Mr. Bedlow. John Carrington. Joseph Tarbox, and Mr. Needham. Persons Imployed to get Company together. WIlliam Hanson. Rob. Pullinger. John Harker. Gerard, and Briscoe. FINIS.
An Advertisement. HAving given in this Information, by Memory, at the Bar of the Honourable House of Commons; which when I perused, as it was taken in Writing from my mouth, I found that I had misplaced many Para∣graphs as to Order of Time: For instance. I begin with Sept. 1678, and afterwards give an Account of things done in March 1677/8, and in April and July 1678: it was not thought convenient to alter it in the Printing, but to Publish it as delivered. Of this I thought good to give the Reader notice. Errata's in the Transcriber and Printer. PAg. 6. Line 17. next to the word Design, add should be called in. Pag. 7. Line 8. dele of. Pag. 18. Line 17. read Dracot. Pag. 19. Line 5. read Sir James Si∣mons. pag. 20. Line 2d. read Mr. Francis Luson. Line 3d. read Towers.
