E241A 13142955 98017
Christian Reader, I Have lived an unworthy Minister in the same town with the Au∣thour of this Treatise these six and twenty years, and have been a constant observer and admirer, as of her other eminent gifts, so espe∣cially of (those which give the highest lustre to them all) her hum∣ble piety and charity. And (if I mistake not) this Deborah doth here present unto thee in these her labours Bee-like a sting and hony con∣joyn'd. Hony-sweet instructions, counsels and exhortations gathe∣red out of severall flowres growing in Gods Paradise, tending to all sorts of good husbandry, and also sharp stings of reproof against all kinds of unthriftiness, not sparing the worst of them, our Church▪ dividing Errours in these times. Who knows, but that, after the lightnings of so many worthy Barak's, and thundrings of om powerfull Boanergesses both from the Pulpit and Presse, against th Troublers of our Israel, the Lord may be pleased to make so man  these Sisera's fall by the hand and pen of a woman? First read,  judge: a (as Barnabas did at Antioch, Acts 11. 23.) when  hast seen the grace of God, be glad and say, The Lord be magn who (as he may do what he will with his own, so) hath given  gifts to a woman, the fruits whereof shee here by her private  sends forth with her earnest desire for the glory of God, and  publike good. Which is also the hearty prayer of Thy Christian friend and well-wisher in the Robert Cade. REader, in this Tract as in a former by her written, thou m find verified, eminency of gifts, humility of spirit, elegan  style, soldity of matter, height of fancy, depth of judgment ∣nesse of apprehension, strength of reason, all sweetly met  and truly (as well as piously) improved for the mayntenance  old uths of Jesus Christ, against the new errours of these i the Phoenix of this age, this rare and precious Gentlewoma  envy and glory of her sex.
A Warning to all the Inhabitants of the Earth where this shall come; but especially to those that are called Magistrates, or Rulers, and so pre∣tend to bear a Sword of Justice, for the punishment of Evil-doers. These are those things which hath been laid upon me from the Great Jeho∣vah, as His Commands to you; and they are as followeth. First, I warn you, that you under the pretence of bearing a Law to execute punish∣ment on all those that offend, as you call it, that you do not form your Weapons against the Work of this the day of my God, in which he is over-turning Baby∣lon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, even the Mystery of Iniquity, under which you have committed all your Spiritual Whoredoms, under the Name of Christi∣ans; and so Lucifer which was a Morning-Star, but was cast off, and droven into Darkness, is become your Head and Law-giver; from whence did come all your Church-Forms and Powers, seeking to make all the Earth to worship the Beast and the Dragon, and they have had power to slay the two Witnesses and have caused their dead bodies to lie in the streets, not being buried, because they were not to rot, but to be dryed up by the heat of their Persecution; for Darkness hath been spread over all Nations, by reason of the abominations which they have been made fat withall, having drunk the bloud of the Innocent, as an Ox drinketh the water, and yet have they not enough; therefore Cain's Spirit is not satisfied with bloud, till he hath bloud to drink; and then will he cry out enough, which the Lord will assuredly do▪ if he cease not to shed bloud: Therefore, before the day of Reward come upon you, cease, cease persecuting any for matter of Conscience, for the Lord is breaking the Clouds, and the Vail is a rending, and the Sons and Daughters of Adam shall be redeemed from the Earth, in which they have been in bondage. Therefore I warn you all, that you abound no longer in making use of those old cursed laws, which Bloud-suckers did create and form, in the time that Darkness had wholly clouded the mind of man from knowing any God in being,
and so made Gods unto themselves, and worshipped the works of their own hands, and leaving a Law that after Generations should bow to their Idols; but the Spi∣rit of Jah hath blown the breath of Lie into the dead bones, and esh, and Si∣news, are they covered now with all, which feels and knows the living God from a dum Idol; and the Invisible Life of Power hath raised up a quick living Witness, whose Mouth shall declare his Work in this day, which is to bring to an end all Types and Figures which are all to end in the body for Sacrifices, offering burnt∣offering, and the bloud of Bulls, and the fat of Rams, could not perfect the Comer then unto. Therefore a Body did he prepare to do the Wll; which Body put an end to all Types and Figures, Days, New Moons, and Sabbath-Days, as you call them; for who have you consecrated them to, to your Selves, or to the Lord: if to your Selves, then are they abomination unto the Lord; for he that keeps a day, let him keep it to the Lord, and not unto his own Lusts, for that is not pleasing in his sight; and if it had been kept unto the Lord, why are you wath when he hath brought an end to it? But you will say, What will He put an end to our Sabbath∣day? Did he not make Heaven and Earth on six days; and did he not rest the Seventh Day? And did He not gve a Cmmand that on the Seventh Day, Man should do no manner of work, he, nor his Ox, nor his Ass; and there was no Bur∣then to be born within the Gates, nor no fire to be kindled on that day: And what will you not keep it now? O foolish people! void of Understanding! where are you? what is become of your Jesus, as you call hm, that you stand in the Ob∣servations of Days and Times? For when God made all things, was it not by Him? For without Him, was not any thing made that was made; for He was the Word, which Wotd was his Power; by which power he formed all things; and his Power was the Light or Life of Man; and in it was Man in perfect Rest or Union with his Maker. And what need had man of one day of Rest, when as he rested in God; and a thousand years was but as one day in his sight. Nay, man had no need of one day in seven, if man had no need: of necessity it will follow, God had no need. Why what was the Seventh Day for, seeing that in six days he spke, and did not rest; what of his Works did he rest in? Was it not in man, that th God∣head did rest in first? Yea, for man was the express Image of the Father, which he could not have been, had not the Seed rested in him. But if God did make man his Rest, and man did rest in God, what need had men of a Seventh Day? which is a day of rest. Yea, God's Wisdom was seen in providing a Day of Rest for Fallen-Man▪ that so man might not altogether faint; but having one Day of Rest, it might figure forth▪ that there was a Restauration for Man, to rest in God, or God to rest in man; and for that purpose, was there one day left to be kept, till the time that the God∣head should in body it self in the Humane Nature, which was accmpished when the Eternal Light of Life did over pour or operate with the Nature of the Virgin; and then did God rest again in man, and man in God; and put an end to the Seventh Day, having abol shed all the enmity which was between the God head and the Man-head. And so is he the Day of Rest to all that come to
live in him; for he is Light▪  staid in Him, they have no Lack; but He is their Life, in which they rest out of all observations; and they dare not stand in the observing of your Holy days, nor of your Sabbath-days for if they should, they must deny Christ come in the flesh, and if Christ the Light be not in them, then are they Reprobates. But you may sy, We do not keep our Sunday as the Jews Sabbath, but as the first day of the Week, on which Christ rose from the Dead and met with his Disciples, for break∣ing of Bread and Prayer. Oh fools! When will you be wise? Was there ever any Command given by Christ, or any of his Apostles▪ that the Generations to come should cease from publick labour, and in private should serve their Lus, in providing dainty Food, and brave Cloths; and so your backs and your bellies are your ods. O abomination! must we suffer in imprsonments, if we will not mock God with you in owning such a day, and call it a Sunday or a Sabbath, or a day holier then another days, when you have consecrated it more to the Devillish Lusts, then all the other days: For is it not the Market-day wherein all your false Teahers, be they never such Drunken Beasts, if they can but get the Bible in their hands, and words in their mouthes, will prate an hour for ten or twenty shil∣lings; and f any of the People of the Lord be moved to go into their Idol-Temples to declare against their wickedness, presently hall them to the Magistrate, and then the Whip, or Stocks, or Prisons, or any cruel usage you can afflict on them, is too god in your sights: O abominable stink are you in the Nostrils of my God, made up in Iniquity, fit for destruction, if you repent not quickly. Therefore, all you Children of Light, bring forth your Testimony against their Idol-day break it down to the ground, and the living presence of Him that is a consmig fire shall be with you, and one shall put a thousand to flight, and the Wicked shall be as stubble before you, when as one man, you shall in the strength of JAH every one appear in your outward labour on their Sunday, as they call it. Take no thought what to say, I the Lord will be words in your mouth, and a Sword in your hands, and it shall pierce their bowels; for when they think to exe∣cute their law on your bodies, Ile raise up my Light in them sharp and powerful, and it shall kindle as a fire in their Breasts to devour. Therefore in tender bowels of love, am I made to warn all, professors and profain, that you take heed how you reject the light that is in you▪ which reproves for sin; and if you would be∣lieve it to be the Spirit of God made manifest in you, to destroy the lusts of the flesh, the power of Death, Hell and Grave; for whoso ver comes to believe in him that is l ght, shall not abide in darkness; but Christ, in them, the first fruits unto the Father; and then in order the members of your mortal bodies, which shall be made his; when by Judgement they are redeemed from the Earth, up in∣to the invisible love or life of God; For mans love or life hath been wholly drawn or droven into the Earth, and hath united it self unto the visible things; And so the visible have been a vail or separation between God and men. Bt as man comes to feel something to judge him for his loving earthly things, more then the Command of God; for his Commands have been near, even in thee if thou wouldest have obeyed it; That would have led thee to love the Lord
an end to all sin would soon be known; For, if mans love were returned unto God from the things of this world, all coufening, cheating, lying, swearing, stealing, and murder would be at an end; for were there not something that were the Cause these sins would not be produced; which Cause, is love to the things of this life; for mans love be∣ing in them, what will he not do to obtain the thing, that he coveteth after: So the root of all evil is covetousness: therefore there is but one way for man to be set free from the root of sin, and that is by owning of Gods Righteous Law; in him∣self, By which he may come to feel; Judgement executed on the first Adam, which is now a Child of wrath, being poluted by transgression: and concluded under sin, which none can see but those that owne that light in them, which is the pure Law, that reveals the man of sin, to be in all the Children of the earthly Adam; for before ever man can come to know life in God, he must come to know a Death; in, and to self; for the whole have no need of a Phisician; but such as be broken; for if man be not lost in the Earth; what need was there of the blood of the Sonne of God; to ransom man; But when with the Law, or light, man comes to see himself polluted in his own blood; cast out into the open field; no eye to pitty, but a will-leading to sin; And a Law-condemning sin: which Law is quick and powerful; in rendering condemnation on the body of sin; or the Child of the fallen Adam: which Law or light will not depart, from the seed of Judah in thee: If thou cast it not behind thy back, until it hath brought thee to know the wrath of God due to all sinners; and to thee in particular, And then the Earth shall be shaken and thou shalt quake and tremble, by reason of the terrours of the Almighty, that shall be poured out upon the head of the Drago∣nish nature, that hath born rule in thee. Then paleness of face with thy hands on thy Loynes, as a woman in travil crying to be delivered, from that body of sin, which is the cause of such a sorrow; but from it thou shall not git, till every tittle of the Law be executed on thee; that so thou mayest come to know the worth of the blood, that satisfieth the wrath of God, and turneth it into love; for in the revealing of his love to thee in time of need; thy Body, Soul and Spirit shall be ravished, to behold that way of Life, which he shall make thee partakers of, when he shall appear to annoint thy wounded Spirit, and by his free eternal love, shall bind up that which he hath broken: And this shall he do, and more then tongue is able to express; for all that will be willing, that his light, life and power in them shall rain; to the glorifying of him in their mortal bodies: But if you will not own his Light, and to it bring all your deeds, that thereby they may be Judged, and you by Judgment be redeemed, this is that you shall have at the hand of my God, In∣dignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish for ever. This from one that is a Daughter of JAH, Judith Eeds. London, Printed by J. B. for the Author, 1659.
