E3759 12442074 62107
Exceeding Joyfull NEWES From the Earl of ESSEX Being a true and reall Relation of His in∣compassing the Kings Army neare the Citty of Oxford, Decemb. 7. and the great skirmish which they had at the same time. Also how Sir John Meldrum, and Collonell Langham drew out their two Regiments of Blew-Coaths, seven troops of horse, and 9. pieces of Ordnance, and got beyond Oxford, and there set their men in battle array, rai∣sing two half-moons, and planting their Ordnance against the Cavaleers. Likewise the Proceedings of the E. of Essex since his departure from the Earl of Northumberland, E. of Holland, E. of Pembroke, and the Lord Sey, as Windsor, Decemb. 5. and what skirmishes he had in his march towards Oxford. Decemb. 9. Printed for H. Blundo. 1642.
HIS MAIESTIES RESOLUTION Concerning his marching towards Wor∣ster and Salisbury, and so to York. HIS Majesty having seriously weighed and considered the present estate and con¦dition of these West and Southerne Counties, and likewise of the Proceedings of his EXCELLENCIE the Earle of Essex, who is now in a speedy pursuit of His Graci∣ous MAIESTY and His Army, and doth use all possible means he can for to rescue His Royall Majesty from the Cavaleers, who doth now detain and keepe his Person by violence, and opposition.
The Cavaleers  that  Excellencie is resolved to follow and pursue them, and to let no time of opportunity slip, they do therfore most earnestly desire his Majesty that he would be pleased to leave these parts, and to btake himselfe towards the Northern Parts of this Kingdome, together with his Mayn Army, that so they may relieve His Majesties true and Loyall Subjects, which are now incompassed and surrounded by the Parliament Forces, un∣der the Command of the Lord Fairfax, Sir I. Hotham, and Captain Hotham. They further declared to his Majesty, that if His Highnesse were in those parts with his Army, it would prove very advantagous to all his Forces, by reason that Arms and Ammu∣nition, and all other Warlike Provision might the better be conducted unto them from forrein Parts. And that he might also put in execution his Designs against Hull, who having gathered a great Power and Strength in those parts, his Majesty might the easier beleager Hull, and so bring the Inhabitants thereof to due obedience and subjection. But his Excellencie having  infor∣maion and intelligence of the Cavaleers In∣tention, and that they did  to with∣draw his Majesty  his great Councell the high Court  towards Hull, to be revenged upon Sir Iohn
Hotham. His Excellency to prevent and stop their Passage, sent to the Counties of Norham∣ton, Warwick, Bedford, Darby-shire, and di∣vers other places, that they should rase all the strength they possible could, and oppose, kill and slay all that should come against them, and that they should raise as many horse for Dragoons, as they could. His Excellency is likewise resolved to pur∣sue and march after them, with his Traine of Artillery, and hath sent to those Forces which lye about Worster to be in a readinesse, and to have a Watchfull eye to the Kings Party, that they do not passe that way. His Excellency hath also sent to the Lord of Stamford the like Message, desiring him to be in a readinesse, and to have a diligent care that the Kings Party do not enter into those parts, or in that County; because it is reported and given out, that the Lord Digby is comming that way, and is resolved to give him a charge about the City of Hereford. But the Lord of Stamford hath strongly fortified himself about the said City, and is able with one thousand men to hold play against ten thousand. This is a perfect Relation of his Majesties Resolution concerning his advancing towards the North to besiege Hull.
A most Reall RELATION OF THE Proceedings of the E. of Essex, since his de∣parture from Windsor, Decemb. 5. from the Earle of Northmmber∣land, E. of Holland▪ E. of Pem∣broke, L. Wharton, and the Lord Sey. UPon Monday last his Excellency advan∣ced from Windsor, where hee tooke his leave of these worthy Peers, Namely, the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Holland, the Earl of Pembroke, the Lord Wharton, and the Lord Sey, who went to take their leaves of his Excellencie, before hee set forward his Iourney. Upon Monday towards Evening he over∣took his Forces, where they marched most part of that night, because his Excellencies Desire was to be as neer the Kings Army as he could
for fear the Kings Army should get ground of him and his Army, and the more because hee would execute the desires of both Houses of Parliament, and the Citysens of this Honou∣rable City. Upon Tuesday his Excellencie marched to Stoken-Church, where he found some oppo∣sition, there being about three thousand Cava∣leers billeted near to the said Town, but after one hours fight the Kings Army retreated, and his Excellencies Forces pursued them as farre as Aston in Oxfordshire, killing about two hun∣dred of them, with the losse of eight men, and a∣nother or two wounned. Upon Wednesday his Excellency marched to Tedstot ten miles on this side Oxford, and hath strongly intrenched himself there, making many Breast-Works and Half-Moons, and hath also sent Colonell Goodwyn with his Re∣giment of Foote and five Troopes of Horse to∣wards Abington, where they now lye with un∣danted valour and courage, although the Ene∣my be within one mile of them. Colonell Sir Iohn Meldrum, and Colonel Langham with their two Regiments of Blew are also got beyond Oxford, and have taken up their Quarters neer to Woodstocke, being a∣bout sixe miles from Oxford, having also seven Troopes of horse, and nine pieces of Ordnance, and about four small Drakes, the enemy being near unto them.
Sir Iohn Meldrum and Colonell Lang∣ham hath planted their Ordnance against the Kings Army for their own safguard and de∣fence, and hath also raised three Half-Moones, for the safeguard of their Forces. His Majesty being now surrounded and incompassed by his Excellencie the Earl of Es∣sex, it is very probable there will be a suddaine Battle; for both Armies are making of great preparation for the same, and most of their for∣ces are drawn up to a head. The Cavaleeas giues out speeches that the Troopers of our side for the greatest part, are resolved to stand as Nuters, but that is false, for both horse and foot have entred into an As∣sociation to assst each other, and to fight it out to the last man. The Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament do declare, that all Souldiers that do commit any offence or contempt, contrary to their Orders, shall b severely punished, accor∣ding to Law. John Brown Cler-Parliamentorum FINIS
