F1073 19527937 109012
A Letter, or Paper, Signed by GARALD FITZ-GERALD, In behalf of an Assembly of the Irish at GLANMALIROE in the Province of Leinster in Ireland. To the Commissioners of PARLIAMENT deli∣vered the 11. of March 1651. Also A DECLARATION thereupon, made by the said Commissioners of PARLIAMENT, March 12. 1651. Together with a Letter from the Earl of Clan∣ricard, to the Commander in Chief of the PARLIAMENTS Forces in Ireland: February 14. 1651. And Lieutenant General Ludlowes Answer thereunto, February 20. 1651. Printed at Dublin by W. BLADEN, 1651.
A Letter, or Paper, signed by Garald Fitz-Gerald, in behalf of an Assem∣bly of the Irish at Glanmaliroe in the Province of Leinster in Ireland, to the Commissioners of Parliament: Delivered the 11. of March 1651. Honourable Sirs; AS the horrid mischiefs (unavoidably) accompanying all Wars (though upon never so just grounds undertaken) are such and so many, and so recently ex∣perimented throughout this unfortu∣nate Kingdom, as no man can without horror think, much less dilate on a Theam so lament∣ably Tragical: even so the manifold blessings derived from a firm and honourable Peace, are so obvious to each understanding, as I may not presume to trouble men of so great judgement as you are, with any Com∣ment thereupon. Therefore to proceed briefly to the purpose; Be pleased to understand, That the Kingdom is advertised from all parts, of a free and noble dispo∣sition in the Common-wealth of England, to grant ho∣nourable and safe conditions of Peace unto this Peo∣ple and Nation: to the acceptance whereof, I dare assure you of their willing and real inclinations; In order whereunto, I do in this, and other the Provinces
behalfs, request your safe Conducts unto each Pro∣vince, with Blanks to Meet, Elect, and Authorize Members of the said respective Provinces, to meet with the Members so to be Elected by other the Pro∣vinces, at some convenient place within this Province, and thence to Authorize Commissioners to present Proposals to such as are or shall be thereunto Autho∣rized by the Common-wealth of England, and con∣clude on such Transactions as shall be agreed upon. Your Garrisons, in each Province, being so obstru∣ctive, as the Members may not with safetie come to∣gether to the afore-said Purpose. Unanimitie in this kind among the Provinces, being much more con∣duceable to a general quiet, than the particular address of any Province apart. This, I hope and expect, will produce that so much and so passionately desired a Settlement, which ought to be the prayer and wishes of all honest and wel-affected persons. Sir Richard Barnewall Baronet, and Colonel Walter Bagenall are Au∣thorized and imployed by the Assembly of this Pro∣vince, to solicit the Contents hereof; to whom I shall request you will be pleased to give full credit in what they shall offer in that particular and other matters, it being the sence of this Province, I should signifie so much unto you; to which subscribes, Sirs, Your most humble servant GARALD FITZ-GERALD. GARRENCH, 20 Feb. 1651. To the Right Honourable, The Commissioners of the Parliament of the Com∣mmon-wealth of England for the affairs of Ireland.
IRELAND. A DECLARATION made in Answer to the fore∣going Letter, By the Commissioners of the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England for the affairs of Ireland. THe said Commissioners, having on the eleventh of this instant March, received a Letter, or Paper directed unto them, bearing date the 20. of Febr. 1651. re∣questing on the behalf of the Provin∣ces of Ireland, safe Conducts unto each Province with Blanks; to Meet, Elect, and Authorize Members of each Province, to meet in some conveni∣ent place, for offering Proposals to such as are or shall be Authorized by the Common-wealth of England for the settlement of this Nation. Which said Paper, or Letter is subscribed by one Garald Fitz-Gerald, un∣der pretence of an Authoritie, which the said Com∣missioners cannot in Dutie and with Honour to the Parliament acknowledge; Yet for the satisfaction of those that may seem to be concerned therein, They do Declare, I. First, That the Settlement of this Nation doth
of right belong to the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England onely, the consideration whereof, is at present before them. II. Secondly, That in the Settlement thereof, the Parliament will make distinction between such Persons as have lived peaceably according to their duties, or (being misled) have since submitted to their Authori∣tie and Protection, and those who have Acted or A∣betted the Murthers and Massacres of the Protestants, and those that adhered to them during the first year of the Rebellion, and likewise such Persons as now being in Arms and Opposition to the said Authoritie, shall not timely submit thereunto. And therefore the said Commissioners cannot in justice give way to any Act, so much to the prejudice of the People of this Nati∣on, as may involve those that are peaceably minded, with them who continue in Hostilitie. III. Thirdly, That to grant safe Conduct and Blank Passes unto such as are in actual Hostility against the Parliament, to meet together from all the Provin∣ces to communicate Counsels, is an Act, to which the said Commissioners cannot in prudence consent. IV. Fourthly, That for such Persons as now are in actual Hostilitie against the Parliament, and are wil∣ling to lay down Arms, and submit to the Authoritie thereof, upon timely Application made to the Parlia∣ments Ministers here, on behalf of particular Persons or Places, such moderate terms will be consented un∣to as Men in their condition can in reason expect. Dated at Dublin the 12. of March 1651. Miles Corbet. Io. Iones. Iohn Weaver.
The Earl of Clanricards Letter to the Commander in Chief of the Parliaments Forces in Ire∣land, 14. Febr. 1651. Sir, SEveral of the Nobilitie, Clergie, and other Per∣sons of qualitie and interest in the Kingdom, together with the Corporation of Galloway, be∣ing met in this Town, and having taken into their con∣sideration, the present State and Condition of Affairs, and the destructive Effects of a long-continued War, have made it their suit and request unto me, to pro∣pose unto you the entertaining of a Treatie, in order to a Settlement in this Kingdom, and for your safe Conduct to such Commissioners, as I by their advice shall think fit to imploy unto you, for the carrying on of that matter; which request of theirs I have con∣descended unto by this Express directed to you to that effect, with this further intimation, That I shall not quit or decline them or their interests, until I see them settled in a good Condition, fit for the Nation to accept: or if that will be denied them, resolved to continue his Majesties Authoritie and Protection over them to the uttermost trial; and do not doubt, by Gods assistance, with the Forces and Arms we have alrea∣die, and such ayds and supplies, probably may come
from his Majestie and his Allies abroad, but that we may be so enabled as to alter the present state of Af∣fairs, or if that should fail, at least make the Conquest you have hitherto gained, for a long time, of little use or advantage to you; and sel our lives at a dear rate if compelled thereto. And so leaving it to your consideration, and expecting your timely Answer and certain Resolution, I remain Your servant CLANRICARD. GALLWAY, 14. Febr. 1651. If you please to send the safe Conduct desired, I desire it may be sent to Sir Charls Coote, or any other you shall think fit near this place, with a Blank for the number of five Commissioners & their retinue, not exceeding in the whole the number of twentie; whereby, upon intimation from him, I may send him a List of the names of the Commissioners. To the Commander in Chief of the Parliaments Forces in IRELAND.
Lieutenant General Ludlowes Answer to the Earl of Clanricards Letter, 20. Febr. 1651. My Lord, BY your Lordships of the 14. instant, you pro∣pose unto me the entertainment of a Treatie, in order to a Settlement of this Kingdom; and do desire my safe Conduct for such Commissioners, as you shall think fit to imploy unto me, for the carrying on of that matter. Whereunto, upon advice with the Commissioners of the Parliament of England, and di∣vers General and Field-Officers of their Armie, I have thought fit to give you this return: That the Settlement of this Nation doth of Right belong to the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England, to whom we leave the same, being assured they will not therein capitulate with those who ought to be in sub∣mission, yet stand in opposition to their Authoritie: but if the Lord have that mercie in store for any who are at present in Arms against them, as to incline their hearts to a submission to that Government, which he by his Providence hath placed over them, upon timely Application made to their Ministers here, on the be∣half of particular Persons or Places, such moderate terms will yet be consented unto, as men in their con∣dition
can rationally expect. As to the intimation of your future hopes and resolutions, I shall onely say thus much, That it hath been the practice of those who have served the Parliament in this Cause, to act according to their Dutie, and to leave the success to him who disposeth the issues of all things; and as the Lord hath hitherto enabled them exemplarily, to pro∣ceed against those whose hearts have been hardened upon vain and groundless expectations, to withstand offers of such favour as have been made unto them, so I assure my self he will still own them in his own way and work: Wherein that we may be continually found, is the desire of DUBLIN, 20. Feb. 1651. Your Lordship's humble servant, EDM. LUDLOWE. For the Lord of Clanricard. FINIS.
A Second Paper, deli∣vered unto the Commissioners of Parliament, by Sir Rich. Barnwall and Colonel Walter Bagenall, and the said Commissioners Answer thereunto. Further Proposals offered, In pur∣suance of the Authoritie given us. To the Right Honourable, the Commis∣sioners of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England for the affairs of Ireland. BEing inhibited to Reply to your Honors Answer of the twelfth of this present, onely to offer what further we had in charge; In pursu∣ance whereof, not being satisfied by your Ho∣nours Answer, how far your Honours are im∣povvered.
to Treat in order to the Settlement and Peace of this Nation, We desire you vvill be pleased to make the same knovvn unto us, that if qualified vvith Authoritie for carrying on so good a Work, Safe Conducts be given to such Persons, as by the Provinces shall be no∣minated, to Convean at time and Place con∣venient, when and where your Honours shall think fit. Whereupon the Province of Leinster, with such as shall make their joyn't Addresses, will endeavor by all good means, the setting on so happie a work, conducing to a General Quiet, and prevention of the great effusion of much Christian bloud, by a voluntarie Subjection, as well of Hearts, as Arms; the onely means to Advantage, make Stable and Glorious the Government of the Parliament in this Kingdom. Which offers, if your Honours may not assent unto, That safe Conducts be granted to such Persons as shall be appointed, to make their Applications to the Parliament of ENGLAND. Dated the 15. of March, 1651. R. Barnewall, Walter Bagenall.
The Commissioners of Parliaments Answer to the fore-going Proposals. Ireland. By the Commissioners of the Parliament of the Common-wealth of England for the affairs of Ireland. VPon Consideration had, of the Pa∣per this day produced by Sr Richard Barnewall, and Colonel Bagenall, the said Commissioners do return this Answer ensuing: First, as to the making known the Power of the said Commissioners, as is desired, they do not hold the same fitting, or reasonable: But such of this Nation, whose hearts God shall encline to a timely and free Submission to the Power of the Parliament, those Persons shall effectually know the Authoritie of the said Commissioners, to grant such just things, as shall be rationally desired; and do trust, the Lord
will enable the Parliament and their Ministers here, to make such others, whose hearts shall be still hardened to their further destruction, sensi∣ble of the Power God hath put into their hands. And as to the granting Passes to any Persons to go to the Parliament, to Negotiate for the Settlement of the whole Nation, the said Com∣missioners do not think it fitting, it not stand∣ing with the Honour and Iustice of the Parlia∣ment, to Treat about the Settlement of the Na∣tion, with such as, contrarie to their Dutie, are in Hostilitie against them. As to the residue of the said Matter contain∣ed in the said Paper, the said Commissioners have given Ansvver thereunto in a former Pa∣per of the 11. instant: to vvhich they referre themselves. Dated at Dublin 15 of March, 1651. Edm. Ludlowe. Miles Corbet. Io. Iones. Iohn Weaver. Printed at Dublin by W. Bladen, Anno Dom, 1651.
