F562 13089470 97339
A SEASONABLE SERMON FOR THESE TROVBLESOME TIMES. Preached to the Right Worshipfull COMPANIE of the HABERDASHERS, NOVEMB. 23. 1641. In the Parish-Church of St. Mary Stainings in LONDON: BY SAMVEL FAVVCET, Pastor there. Stirring up every one to lay to heart the Publique troubles, and to doe what is in his power to remedy them. ESA. 61. 1. For Zions sake will I not hold my peace. LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Joh. Sweeting, and are to be sold at his shop, at the signe of the Angell▪ in Popes∣head-Alley, neere Lumbardstreet. 1641.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE MASTER, WARDENS, ALDERMEN, ASSISTANTS, And the rest of the Society of the HABERDASHERS. THis Sermon (Worthy Sirs) is Dedicated to you, because Preach∣ed by your appoyntment, and now published, through the importu∣nity of many of you, who heard it; It was neither ability in the Au∣thor, nor choysenesse in the Work, that caused this Sermon to take so well among so many of you, but the sutablenesse of the Subject, to the present times, and it may be, the familiar plainenesse of the Sermon did worke much with some; (Ferrum potest quod Aurum non potest) Iron may doe that which Gold cannot doe; A blunt Sermon may, by Gods bles∣sing, worke more upon the hearts of the hearers, than that which is more acute, and in it selfe more excel∣lent, as for other reasons, so from the nature of the thing, because most sutable to the most of hearers; that
which the understanding doth not reach, cannot take the affections. The Authour studyed not to please, but to profit; he prepared and delivered this plaine Sermon, with a heart bleeding for the present troubles of our Israel, and breathing after the publique peace, and common good, as the spirit of the whole Sermon shewes; and he doth confesse that no importunity should have pre∣vailed with him, to have given it this (unthought of) second birth, had he not beene withall prest unto it, by his owne perswasion, that that which was accepted be∣ing heard, may, being published, doe good to many who heard it not. Some little is added in a place or two, which was prepared, but, through want of time, was omitted in the delivery; What ever it is (Worthy Sirs) it is yours, if you please to owne it, and so is the Authour of it yours, who desires to be reckoned a∣mong those who respect and honour you, and pray for you, and acknowledgeth himselfe your debtor, for ma∣ny favours, and rests Your Worships ever in the Lord, SAMVEL FAVVCET.
A SEASONABLE SERMON FOR THESE TROVBLESOME TIMES. PSALME 25. 22. Deliver (or redeeme) Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. THE Ministers of God, though they may not be time-servers, yet they may, and ought to be time-observers, speaking their words in due season; to that purpose (Right Worshipfull, and well∣beloved Fathers and Brethren) ye being by Gods gracious pro∣vidence here met, and presenting your selves at this time, as members of a publique Societie, and that So∣ciety one chiefe branch of this great Citie, and this Ci∣tie a principall part of the common bodie of this
whole Land, I looking upon you in this your pub∣lique relation, shall endeavour at this time to quicken in you publique affections, and raise up in you publique spirits, to seeke the common good, and lay to heart the common cause, and I know there is none of you such a stranger in Israel, but (considering the present state of things, and face of the times) will acknowledge this subject seasonable, and this Text full and pertinent for my purpose. Deliver Israel O God, out of all his troubles. In which words I shall consider; 1. The partie whose good and welfare is laid to heart (Israel.) 2. The meanes used to procure Israels good, and welfare, viz. prayer (deliver Israel O God.) 3. The mercy craved in behalfe of Israel, deli∣rance from troubles, from many troubles. Deliver (or redeeme) Israel O God, out of all his troubles. I begin with the first of these, the party whose good and welfare is laid to heart, (Israel.) Israel signifieth a prevailer with God, a name first gi∣ven to Jacob,Gen 32 28. and from him to that whole Nation that sprang of him; sometimes the name doth relate to the Church of Israel, sometimes to the civill state of Israel, Sometimes to both; and so here in this place, this Text is for substance, the same with that prayer of David; Psalme 51. 18. Psalm 51. 18. Doe good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the wals of Jerusalem, make up Lord, those sad brea∣ches, that are made both in Church and Common∣wealth; So here in the Text, Lord finde a way to ease thy people of their many pressures, to quiet the many and publique troubles, that are amongst us, Deliver Isra∣el, O God, out of all his troubles. The Prophet David having throughout the whole Psalme put up many great petitions for himselfe, and
his owne particular, and personall concernements, now he endeth and closeth the Psalme with this zea∣lous petition for the common cause, as if he had said, Lord, how ever it fares with mee, doe well to thy Church and people; how ever my cause speeds, let the common cause prosper; though I should have all gran∣ted that I have asked for my selfe, yet that would not satisfie me without it may be well with Israel, the pub∣lique troubles trouble me most: therefore deliver not onely David, but also Israel O God, out of all his troubles. Now this disposition and affection which appeares here in this holy man to the common good, is the same which is, and ought to be, in all true Israelites, in all the people of God; and that shall be my first Ob∣servation from these words, which I propound thus: Observ. It is the duty of every one to stand well affected to the common good of the Church and state wherein he lives. First, I say, it is the dutie of every one, be he high or low, rich or poore, of what ranke and condition soever, Magistrate, Minister, private person, every one that hath any relation to Israel. Secondly, it is his duty to stand well affected to the common good, that is, first, in his mind highly to esteem it above all his owne private concernements: second∣ly, in his will and affections to desire it earnestly, to rejoyce in it heartily, to mourne for the want of it deepely: thirdly, in his actions to endeavour it zea∣lously, to studie it, speak for it, plead for it, to labor every way possible to promote it. This is to stand wel affected. Thirdly, To the Common good both of Church and State; Israel in my Text includes both, they are both one and the same Israel, so neere allied, that the same men are the subject of both, though under a diverse notion: the Church and Civill state of Israel, doe re∣ciprocally imbrace one another like twins, the State defends and upholds the Church and Religion, and the Church blesseth and upholds the State, (as the
Widow maintained the Prophet, and the Prophet the Widow) if it goe ill with the one, the other cannot thrive; experience showes, that the ruine of Civill States proves the ruine of Churches, and decay of Religion, and the ruine of Churches, and decay of Religion, proves the ruine of Civill states. Revel. 2. When Christ had removed the Candlestickes from Epbesus, from Smyrna, from Laodicea, &c. those famous Cities were quickely laid in tho dust: Therefore, the Doctrine saith, That it is the duty of every one to stand well affected to the common good, both of the Church and State wherein be lives. Religion admits not of that distinction, betweene a good man, and a good Citizen: it is impossible that he should be a good Common-wealthsman, who is not a true friend unto the Church, nor can he be a good Church man, who is not a true friend to the Common-wealth: as there is no trusting of that man to be true in his Religion, who is not true in his Loyaltie; so there is no trusting of that man to be true in his Loyaltie, who is not true in his Religion. Confirmation These things being thus explicated, I come now to the proofe of the point, and here first it were easie to bring forth variety of examples of godly persons of all conditions, whose pulses have continually beate to∣wards the common good, sometimes endeavouring it, sometimes rejoycing in it, sometimes bewailing the want of it, sometimes praying for it, sometimes prefer∣ring it before their owne private concernments, yea, before their owne lives; I will instance in two or three examples instead of all. Exod 32. 10. Looke on Moses, a publique person indeed, and a man of a publique spirit, The people of Israel having sinned against God, and provoked his wrath against them, the Lord saith to Moses, Let me alone, and I will utterly consume this people, and thou shalt lose nothing by it, for I will make of thee a great Nation: but how likes Mo∣ses this preferment upon these tearmes sde the verse fol∣lowing
how he takes on, Lord I beseech thee, what ever becomes of me, spare the people and doe them good, God for∣bid that my honor & greatnes shold be raised, out of the common ruine. Such a publique spirit also was in Mor∣dicai, Hest 10. 3. when he was raised to high honour, all his care was to improve all his preferment to the common be∣nefit; it is said, that he sought the publique good and welfare of his people. So Hester engaged all she had, and all she was, for the common good, Remembring that she was raised to honour for that purpose, that she might doe publique service. What should I speake of David, how doth he lament and mourne for the o∣verthrow of Israel, even in that battle wherein Saul, 2. Sam. 1. 17. and Jonathan were slaine, though the Crowne came thereby to his owne head, the joy for his owne gaine and honour was drowned in his griefe for the publique losse. The truth is, it hath alwaies beene the disposi∣tion of all the godly, never to desire to rejoyce, but with the joy of Gods people, nor to be glad, but with Gods inheritance, as the Psalmist speakes,psal. 106. 5. but still to stand affected one way or other, as it goes well or ill with the common cause, and such a publique spirit should possesse us all, and that for these reasons. Reason 1. First, In respect of God: the people of God must tender Gods honour above all things, and desire that God may be glorified. Now God is most glorified, and honoured in the world, when his Church and Religi∣on fiourisheth, but the decay of Gods people, is the decay of Religion, the decay of Gods Worship, an occasion of triumph to the adversary, and of reproach∣ing and blaspheming, saying, Where is now their God? Dan. 9. 19. and therefore holy men, when they begge of God for the common cause, pleade thus, Lord doe it for thine owne sake, for thy names sake, for thy glory sake. Psal. 122. 8. Secondly, in respect of others, for my Brethren and Companions sake, saith the Psalmist: we are all mem∣bers of the same body, and members sympathize one
with another, and all with the whole body; they are rotten members that feele no paine when the bodie is out of temper, we ought not to minde every one his owne things, Pl▪ 2. 4▪ but every one the things of others, he is the best man who is most usefull and instrumentall to the common good; the very Heathen could say so, (non nobis ipsis solum nati sumus, &c.) we are not borne onely for our selves, and (Virbonus est commune bonum) a good man is a common good, the whole Neighbor∣hood, and Communitie is the better for him, yea, the whole Kingdome, the whole world; the better any man is, the more ready he is to promote the common good. Psal. 122. 6. Thirdly, in respect of our selves, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love thee: there is no true prospering, but in the prosperity of Jerusalem, in the publique weale; the thriving of one member, when the whole bodie pines, as it is in nature monstrous, so it cannot be in time lasting; What folly and madnesse is it for a man at Sea, to be decking and trimming up his owne private cabin, and in the meane time take no care of saving the whole Ship which is in danger? Ier. 45 4, 5. as the Lord said to Baruch, Behold I am plucking up this whole Land, and seekest thou great things to thy selfe? seeke them not. This is not a time to have our thoughts al∣together taken up about our owne private and person∣all concernements, when the publique cause lyeth a bleeding. In this behalfe there is great reason, we should have publique spirits, and labour all we can the com∣mon good, because every one of our private comforts or discomforts, are involved in the publique weale or woe. Hence is that charge, Jer. 29. 7. Ier. 29. 7. Seeke the peace of the City wherein yee shall dwell, that in the peace thereof ye may have peace, and therefore Psalme 128.Psal. 128. it is pro∣mised to a man that feareth the Lord, as the very top and Crowne of all his comforts, that he shall see Jeru∣salem in prosperity, and peace upon Israel: the blessings
promised him before, that his wife should be as a fruit∣full Vine upon the walls of his house, and his children like Olive Plants, round about his table, had beene but sad blessings without publique peace; the publique flourishing of Church and State, hath a great influence upon all our private affaires, and so hath the publique woe and wracke. By this time, I hope ye are all satisfied, That it is eve∣ry mans duty to stand well affected to the common good, both of the Church and Civill state wherein be lives, and by all possible meanes within his reach, to preferre it before his owne private concernements. Now this Doctrine I shall apply by way, 1. Of Conviction. 2. Of Reproofe. 3. Of Exhortation. First, this Doctrine convinceth of falsehood that malicious slander and reproach, which hath beene cast upon Religion, and Religious men, by the devill and his instruments in all ages; it hath beene the policy of the devill, to labour to bring Religion into disgrace with Princes, suggesting that it is a disturber of the common peace, a troubler of states; It was so in Saint Paules time, he was indeed a man of peace, and pray∣eth in all his Epistles for all the Churches, Gal. 5. 10. 12. Peace be unto you, and wisheth that they were even cut off that trou∣ble them, and cause divisions and rents among them; 1 Tim. 2. 2. and for the Civill state, he every where presseth obedi∣ence to Kings, and all in Authority; Act. 24. 5. yet he is tradu∣ced as a state-troubler, and a raiser of sedition among the people. So Christ himselfe is accused to be an ene∣mie to Caesar, as if his Kingdome and Caesars could not stand together. Jer. 9. 1. So Jeremie, a man of that publique spi∣rit, that he melted himselfe into teares for the common cause, yet he is accused to be a conspirator against the State. Jer. 38. 4. It was so with David, though he had ventured his life for the common safety, in that combate with
Goliah, yet Sauls flatterers present him to Saul, as a man disaffected to the weale publique. It was so with Elias a man who was indeed the chariots of Israel,1 King. 18. 17. and the horsemen thereof, yet he is charged to his face by Ahab to be the troubler of Israel. It seemes it is the genius of Religion, to be thus scan∣dalized in all ages, but the truth is, Religious men are the best Common-wealthsmen, as this Doctrine hath proved, and best friends to the Church and state where∣in they live, the very supporters, and holders up of Kingdomes, they who are, not onely peaceable in the Land, but peace-makers, and peace-procurers from the God of Peace; and yet, as leud people beget bastards, and then lay them at other mens doores, so the incen∣diaries of the world, who like the Sea, cannot be qui∣et, but are enemies unto peace, raise commotions and combustions in states, and then lay the fault on them who least deserve it. It was so in Hamans time, he was the great kindle-coale himselfe, and yet see how he ac∣cused the poore people of the Jewes, who lived quietly; Hest. 3 8. There are a rebellious people amongst us (saith he) who will not obey the Kings Lawes, and it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them; No doubt it did exceedingly grieve Mor∣decai, and the rest of the Jewes, to lie under such an aspersion, but God found a time and meanes to cleare their innocencie, and to discover the grand troubler, and peace-breaker, as the story showes. And so God will in his good time finde out all Church, and state∣troublers, who stand in the gappe indeed, but in a bad sense, to keepe it from closing, and to make the breach wider. It was said of some of the Counsellers of Aurelian, that by them the good and honest Emperour, who might know nothing, but what they pleased to in∣forme him, was even bought and sold; So many good Princes, well inclined by their owne naturall dispositi∣ons, are often infinitely abused by false suggestions,
and many times learne at last by sad experience, who be their true friends, and who their enemies; in the meane time, all that are true-hearted Israelites, must commit their cause to God, and labour not by words onely, but by deeds to convince the slanders of their adversaries. That it is possible for some men to carry foule hearts under painted habits, and pretend Religi∣on, and intend rebellion, none will deny; but Reli∣gion hath no principles of sedition, or rebellion in it, but all that are taught of God, are alwayes friends to the publique good, that which runnes most in their mindes, is the welfare of Israel. In the second place, this Doctrine may reprove di∣verse sorts of men: First, Those base and unworthy spirits, who, as if they were borne onely for themselves, live onely to themselves; make onely themselves the center of all their aimes, and actions, have no publique thoughts, publique endeavours, seeke not at all the publique wel∣fare, but the feathering of their owne private nests, is their utmost end: some there are who minde not the publique cause at all, they care not what dammage come to the weale publique, so they may sucke to them∣selves thereby some private advantage; nay some care not though whole Kingdomes be set on fire, so they may warme themselves by the flames thereof. Secondly, those also are to be reproved, who though they be not actors in the common hurt, yet are abet∣tors, or at least, not opposers: How many men in place and authority, have thereby opportunity to stop much evill, and to doe much good for the common cause, if they had hearts, but they have no courage for the truth as the Prophet speakes: men can appeare for them∣selves, and appeare for their friends, but not for God, or for the publique cause; O that men would beleeve that neutrality in this case, is all one with opposition, Judg. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz, curse the Inhabitants thereof, because they
come not forth to helpe, silence is not alwayes consent, but when we ought to speake it is; when God sets a man in place, and gives ability, and offers him opportuni∣ty to show himselfe in a good cause, then and there for a man to doe nothing, is to doe evill, and to make him∣selfe guilty of all the hurt that possibly might have been prevented, if hee had done what was in his power to doe. This may be applyed to every one whom God hath called to any publique imployment, and given opportunity unto, to doe any publique service; if ye doe not for the Church, for the Common-wealth, what ye may doe, ye betray it, and what ever hurt the troublers of Israel doe, whom ye have not to your pow∣er opposed, will be set upon your score. Thirdly, This reproofe may yet be brought downe lower, even to men of private condition, wee heard that even such ought to have publique spirits, and not minde onely their owne things, but the publique cause. But how many among us even in these stormie and tumultuous times, when the whole ship of Church and State, is in danger to be drowned, how many of us like Jonah, are asleepe still? and minde nothing, lay nothing to heart, put to no hand to helpe the com∣mon cause? Alas, (ye will say) we stand low, what can we doe? I tell you, every one of you, may and ought to doe something for the common cause, as the Master of the ship said to Jonah, Ionah. 1. 6. what meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God that we perish not. We are all busie, and is this a time for thee to sleepe? doe something to helpe, if thou canst not sit at the sterne, nor handle the ropes and tacklings, nor man∣nage the Oares, yet thou mayest pray; at least call up∣on thy God, that we perish not; What a sad thing is it to consider, that though the dangers of Church and State, are at this time so great, that the greatest wise∣dome in the Kingdome, knowes not where to begin to
set about the cure, yet how few lay any thing to heart? How few mourners are there in Jerusalem, for all the abo∣minations that are committed in the middest thereof? Ezek. 9. 4. How few, how cold, how formall are our Prayers, for a happy successe of those great affaires that are in hand? How little doe we in these stirring times, towards the carrying on of the great worke of Beformation? We are ready to cal unto the great Assembly of State, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, helpe us for the Lords sake, helpe us now by your wisdome, by your courage, by your counsell, helpe to settle our Peace, to make up our breaches, to prevent our dangers, or we are undone; And those Worthies, and Heads of our Tribes, on the other side, are readie to cry backe againe to us, doe you helpe too, or we can doe nothing; the worke is too heavy for us, we find great rubbes in our way, while we are labouring the publique good: great Mountaines which we can neither remove nor leape over, we are at a stand, helpe by your strong cries and strivings in Prayer to God for us, that he would open a way, or we cannot helpe: the present dangers are beyond the skill of the wisest Pilots, unlesse God himselfe allay the windes and stormes which arise still more and more, unlesse God helpe us to cast overhoord, those Jonasses, which are yet too hard for us, all our rowing and tug∣ging cannot bring the Ship to land, all will miscarrie when we have toyled our selves to the utmost. Beloved, this is the voyce of those who sit at the Helme; the voyce of our Parliament-worthies, and yet how many of the people of this Land, yea, of this Ci∣ty, are still asleepe, and will not heare this voyce, nor be affected with the present dangers, nay, how many amongst us are so farre from helping our Parliament-Worthies, in their promoting the common good, that they doe what they can to hinder them, by slighting their persons, depraving their actions, mis-judging of their intentions, dis-regarding what they propound,
what they order; pulling backward all they can, not affording them a good word for all their paines and care, and cost, and hazarding daily their very lives for the publique safetie, yet how little all this is regarded by many, and how ill requited, I cannot speake with∣out griefe and shame; the Lord lay not this sin to our charge. Those people are farre from promoting the publique good, who doe what they can to dis-hearten, and dis∣courage those who are promoting it. That for re∣proofe. Let us now in the last place, be exhorted and per∣swaded, for Gods sake, for our owne sake, for the Churches sake, for the Kingdomes sake, for Posterities sake, now at length to looke about us, and see which way it is possible for any of us to contribute any helpe to the common cause, and let us set about it, consi∣dering that all our private concernements will be losse, if the publique miscarrie. O that great men in publique place, and Noble men would shew Noble Spirits, and with good Nehemiah, Nehem. 2. 4. 5. improve all their greatnesse, and interest, at Court for the publique good! O that all the representative bo∣die of the Kingdome, would shew themselves more and more, to be men of publique aimes! we may pray for the publique cause, they can speake for it, plead for it, act for it; Oh that every one of them would consi∣der what they are intrusted with! Me thinkes not one of them should dare to betray that trust, but rather ha∣zard all in a faithfull discharge of it, as Hester did, Hest. 4. 1. If I perish, I perish, it is the cause of God, of Religion, of the whole Kingdome, it is better to doe worthily, and perish for a Kingdome, than unworthily, and pe∣rish with a Kingdome. And you worthy Citizens, especially who are in any publique place, take to you publique spirits; This Ci∣tie is truely said to be the looking-glasse for the whole Kingdome to dresse it selfe by; the whole Kingdome
hath from time to time beene beholding to you both for your helpe and for your example; Ye being a great and verie considerable bodie, may doe much; much to discourage the common enemies, much to encourage our Parliament-Worthies, by your countenance, and concurrence of your mindes and hearts with them, by your assistance, by your strength, by your purses: Yee have done much alreadie, we blesse God for you, and we blesse you in the name of the Lord, and the Lord blesseth you, and will blesse you; be not wearie of well-doing. Now Ireland calls for your helpe, the fire is begunne there, and who knows whether it may burne, if it be not timely quenched? those Romish Ignatians, and antichristian brood, have begunne that fire there, who doubtlesse are blowing the coales at this time here amongst us also. Well, God hath brought all their mischievous designes upon their owne heads hitherto, and I am confident so he will still; but yet we must do our dutie, everie one must bestirre himselfe, and bring his bucket of water towards the quenching of this common flame, especially sith no man is so meane and weake, but he may contribute something towards this great worke; If he cannot lend a pennie, he may give a Subsidie of Praiers, towards the taking off of Israels troubles; and that is the second Generall, observed in the Text. We have considered the partie, whose good and welfare is laid to heart, (Israel) I come now to con∣sider the meanes used, to procure Israels good and wel∣fare, it is Prayer. Deliver Israel O God. Hence The second Observation ariseth thus. Though every man cannot helpe forward the publique good, every manner of way, yet every man may, and ought to doe it by Prayer. A man must endeavour to helpe Israel out of troubles by the use of all the lawful meanes, which God hath put into his hands, every way he can, but whether hee can helpe any other way or no, yet hee must Pray, this is
an universall, indispensable dutie, charged upon all or∣ders, rankes, and conditions of men. 1. Kings, and Magistrates must command and rule for the common good, but they must Rule and Pray. 2. Statesmen must consult, and set their heads on work to study the common good, but they must consult and Pray. 3. Ministers must Preach, and spend themselves in the common service, but they must Preach, and Pray. 4. Souldiers must fight, and offer themselves willingly for the defence of their Country, but they must Fight and Pray. 5. Rich men must Contribute, and open their purses freely, when the common cause calls for it, but they must Contribute and Pray. 6. Lastly, He that can do none of these things neither Command, nor Advise, nor Preach nor Fight, nor Contribute, yet he must Pray, none are exempted from paying this Subsidie of Prayers, as there is no impossibility in the thing, it may be done of all, so there is a neces∣sity, it must bee done of all, a double necessi∣ty. Psal. 1 22. 6. 1. Necessitas praecepti, all are commanded to pray, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. 2. Necessitas medii, there is no meane to be used, that can bee successefull to helpe Israel out of troubles, without seeking to God by Prayer, and that for these three reasons. Reason 1. 1. All Israels troubles come from God, no commotions in States, no combustions in Church, or Common∣wealth, but God hath an all-ruling, and all-ordering hand in them, Amos. 3. 6. There is no evill in the City, in the King∣dome,
which the Lord hath not done; whether it come from enemies abroad, Isa. 10. 5. Hos. 13. 11. Ashur is the rod of Gods anger, orfrom bad governors at home, God sometimes Gives a King in his wrath, to be a scourge to a people; or come it from the rebellions of people, 2. Sam. 12. 11. 1. King. 11. 14. 1 King 12. 15. Judg. 9. 27. The Lord raised up evill against David, out of his owne house; The Lord stirred up adversaries against Solomon; The Lord rent the Kingdome from Reboboam: The Lord sent an evill spirit betweene A∣bimelech, and the men of Shechem; The Lord bringeth people low through oppression, &c. Men and devils may have their wicked heads and hands, in nationall troubles, but God hath a just hand in them all, therefore by what meanes soever, nationall stormes doe rise in a Kingdom, we should looke above instrumentall causes, and say with the Mariners in Jonah 1. 14. Jonah, Thou Lord hast done as it pleased thee. Secondly, As God hath a hand in bringing upon Is∣rael all his troubles, So God onely can remove them, and therefore, it is necessary to pray with the Psalmist here, Deliver Israel O God: In vaine is Salvation hoped for from the hillsJer. 3. 23. (and you know great men are called hils and mountaines,) In Jehovah our God is the Salvation of Israel saith the Prophet. If there bee a Nationall storme raised, it will not downe, untill the Lord say unto it, Peace, and be still; if there be Nationall rents, and divisions in Church and State, it is the Lord onely that can cure these wounds, and make up these breaches: If a watch bee taken asunder, and every part unpinde, it must be the skill and hand of the maker of it, to set it together a∣gaine; one Scripture saith, that he that turneth the Rivers of waters, turneth the hearts of Kings.Prov. 21. 1. Psal. 85. 7. Another Text saith, he that stilleth the rage of the Seas, quieteth the fury of the people. If the sword be unsheathed it is the Lord onely, that can command it up, there is a full place to this purpose, in the Prophesies of Jeremiah. Jer. 47. 6. O thou Sword of the Lord; how long will it beere thou be quiet?
Put up thy selfe into thy scabbard, rest and be still, this is Vox populi, the voyce of the people, but in the next verse followeth Vox Dei, the voyce of God. How can it be qui∣et, seeing the Lord hath given it a charge against Askelon, and against the Sea shore? there hath he appointed it. Every judgement commeth from God, with a commission and charge what to doe, and how farre to goe, untill wee can prevaile with God to call in his Commission, there is no possibility of staying the judgement; Vaine is the helpe of man: Trust not in Princes, there is no helpe in them, nor in Parliaments, there is no helpe in them neither, all the consultations and endeavours of the greatest, and wisest, and holiest men in the world, can∣not remove one Nationall trouble from Israel, unlesse the Lord put to his hand, and that God will not doe, unlesse wee be earnest with him in Prayer, in that be∣halfe; and that is the third Reason why wee should pray for the removall of Israels troubles. Because, as God onely can remove Nationall trou∣bles, So prayer onely can prevaile with God to doe it; Pray∣er is that which will bring all Gods promises into per∣formances: God hath made many sweet promises, but all his promises are made to our prayers, Ezek. 36. 37. Aske, and yee shall have, and saith the Lord, I will for this be inquired of by the house of Israel, to doe it for them; Prayer is the key to unlocke all the Treasury of Heaven, there is not a blesting there, but prayer will fetch it downe; God hath in a manner bound himselfe to Prayer, hee who ruleth the world, and hath the hearts of all men in his hands, suffereth himselfe to be (as it were) over-ruled by Prayer; Prayer can knocke downe enemies; Exod 17. 11. When Moses held up his hands Israel prevailed; Prayer can un∣dermine all the plots of mischievous men, and blast all their designes; It was Prayer that choaked Achitophell, Lord turne the wisedome of Achitophell to foolishnesse, saith David. It was Prayer that advanced Haman to the gal∣lowes; Hester, and Mordecai, and the Jewes fasted, and
prayed, and they prayed Haman to death, and all his plots to shame and ruine. Therefore if we would have our Israel freed from troubles, we must seeke to God in behalfe of Israel; Deliver Israel O God. Now from this Doctrine, we may be informed, which is the right way to remedy our present troubles in Church and State, Isa. 22. 8, 9, 10, 11. it is to strive with God, and be ear∣nest with him to helpe and amend all; use other meanes we must, but without this, all other meanes will be inavaileable, nothing can helpe Israel, so long as the children of Israel bee loud in their sinnes, and silent in their prayers: when Christ is asleepe in the ship, it is not the tumbling and tossing of the ship, nor the roa∣ring of the winds & Sea, nor the noyse of the Mariners handling their tacklings, that can awake him, but only the prayers of the Disciples, Luke 8. 23. Lord Save us, wee perish: And hence we are also informed, who are like to be the best helpers of Israel at a pinch, the best friendes to Church and Common-wealth, when they are in di∣stresse, namely such as have acquaintance with God, and can prevaile in Heaven; the praying generation are the wonder-workers of the world, the true Chariots of Israel, and horsemen thereof. Therefore beloved, suffer the words of Exhortation, if ye desire to be instrumentall to the publique good, pray, pray, pray: your consultations will doe no good with∣out prayer; your Fortifications no good without pray∣er; your ammunition no good without Prayer; your contributions no good without you give prayers with them, and send prayers after them; Prayer must reme∣dy all, and hold up all, and therefore it is needfull we should hold up Prayer; The few Prayers that have been made in the Land, have prevailed hitherto with God to spare us, that we are yet a Nation; O let us venture still in this ship, which brings home such returnes, let us give God no rest till he make our Ierusalem the praise of the earth, let us beset the Throne of Grace, with
much earnestnesse, and much importunity, the season requires it, and the present state of things calls for it, delay will be dangerous, ye know if fire be begun in a house, a few buckets of water brought in time, may quench it, if time be delayed, a thousand times so much water will doe no good; If we will not now for the allaying of Israels troubles, part with prayers, here∣after we may offer to redeeme Israels safety with teares, and blood, and yet not prevaile.  And now let me adde to this Exhortation these directions. First, Who ever intends to pray for Israel, as David doth in this verse, let him remember to pray for himselfe first, as David doth in this Psalme, not because a man should preferre his owne private good before the publique, that is a∣gainst the former Doctrine, but because we can never doe Israel good by our prayers, so long as wee our selves are out of Gods favour; God will not heare us for others, untill he hath heard us for our selves: there∣fore Psal. 51. 18. David keeps this method, not only in this Psalme, but in the 51. Psalme, hee first begges pardon for his owne sinnes, and makes his owne peace with God, and then in the close of the Psalme, petitioneth for Sion and Jerusalem, the publique cause; The blind man in the Gospell, saw this truth, that God heares not sinners, that is, impenitent sinners, they who hide their owne Gen 4▪ 4. soares, shall never prevaile to heale others; God had respect first to Abel, and then to his offering: and the golden Scepter of favour is first held out to Hester her selfe, before she is in case to present her petition for her people. Beloved, this is to be thought on, our pray∣ers will not prevaile with God for making up the pub∣lique breaches, so long as the private differences be∣tween God and our owne Soules remaine uncomposed; there is no hope that our prayers will prevaile to helpe forward the reformation of things amisse in Church & Civill state, so long as we mind not what is amisse in our own houses, in our own hearts; if our prayers have not
hitherto prevailed for the healing of the publique wounds, and quieting Israels troubles, it is worth the considering, whether we have been persons fit to deale in such a businesse; I remember what is spoke of witches, who as some say, use good prayers, away with them, (Si Magicie, Deus non vult tales, si piae, non per tales) if they be magicall prayers, God will heare no such peti∣tions, if they be holy prayers, yet God will heare no such petitioners: every one can apply this to the pur∣pose in hand. Secondly, Take this further direction, who ever would pray aright for Israels deliverance from trou∣bles, must get a Heart affected with, and bleeding for Is∣raels troubles; none are fit to pray for the publique cause but they who have publique spirits, and can make the publique weale or woe their owne; wee many times want words in this case, because wee want affections, commonly deepe inward impressions doe cause large outward expressions; this hath made the Saints of God begge as earnestly for the common cause, as they could have done for their owne lives. Thirdly, But if we find our selves to have large affe∣ctions towards Israel, and our hearts breathing hea∣ven-ward in behalfe of Israel continually, and yet we are straitned in our expressions, when we are to present Israels case before God, let us to helpe our selves here∣in study the Scriptures, and therein, 1. Take notice of all the promises of God made un∣to Israel, unto his Church and people, and turne them into prayers that they may be fulfilled. 2. Take notice of all Gods threatnings against the enemies of his Church, that Antichrist shall be destroy∣ed, that Babylon shall fall, that God will bring the plots of wicked men upon their owne heads, &c. and turne them into Prayers, that they may bee perfor∣med. 3. Take notice of all Gods workes of providence,
what Gods dealings with his people have beene here∣tofore for good, and this also will administer matter unto us of prayer, that God would still be the same. Our Fathers trusted in thee, and thou didst deliver them, Psal. 22. 4, 5. 4. Especially, (and that comprehends all) to helpe and guide us in praying for Israel, let us study the Pray∣ers of the Saints of God, which stand upon record in the Scriptures, and observe how they have powred out their Soules before God in behalfe of Israel, upon all occasions; We may take out Coppies by them, wee may make use of their words, if they answer our occa∣sions; how ever, it will helpe us exceeding much, to observe and make use of their arguments, whereby they have strove with God, in the behalfe of Israel, according as the present case required. They use Arguments drawne, First, From something in God. 1. Sometimes they urge Gods Promises: Lord, thou hast said, that if evill befall thy people, and they humble themselves, and pray, and seek thy face, thou wilt heare and helpe, Lord now performe thy promise, So prayes Jehosophat, 2 Chron. 20. 8, 9, 10.2 Chron. 20. 8. 2. Sometimes they urge Gods power; So prayeth Hezekiah, 2 King. 19. 15, 16. 2 King. 19. 15. O Lord our God, thou art a God able to deliver us. 3. Sometimes they urge Gods mercy and truth; So prayes Daniel, Dan. 9. 4. Dan. 9. 4. O Lord the great God, keeping Covenant and mercy to them that love him. 4. Sometimes they urge Gods Glory, and Honour; So prayeth Jeremie, O Lord, though our ini∣quities testifie against us, yet helpe us for thy name sake, Jer. 14. 7. Jer. 14. 7▪ Psal. 74. 22. And so the Psalmist, Arise O Lord, maintaine thine owne cause, Psal. 74. 22.
5. Sometimes they urge Gods Offices; O God, to whom vengeance belongeth, shew thy selfe, Psal. 94. 1. Psal. 94. 1. O thou Shepherd of Israel, stirre up thy selfe, and come and helpe us. Psal. 80. 1. Psa. 80. 1.O thou hope of Israel, the Saviour of it in time of trou∣ble, why shouldest thou be as a man astonished, (who knowes not whether to goe forward or backeward) and as a mighty man that cannot save? 6. Sometimes they urge Gods former deliverances; Lord, thou hast beene our helpe in all genera∣tions, Psal. 90. 1. Psal. 90. 1. Our eares have heard our Fa∣thers tell, what thou hast done for thy people of old: Lord thou art as able as ever, as good as ever, as mercifull as ever. Secondly, In their prayers for Israel, the people of God fetch arguments from the consideration of the party prayed for, Israel. 1. Sometimes from their relation to God; We are thy people, thy heritage, called by thy name; leave us not, Jer. 14. 9. 2. Sometimes from their weakenesse, Amos 7. 5.Amos 7. 5. O Lord God, cease I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? 3. Sometimes from their dependance upon God; We have no might against this great multitude, neither know we what to doe, but our eyes are towards thee, 2 Chron. 20. 12. 2 Chron. 20. So the Psalmist, Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but our trust is in the name of the Lord our God. Thirdly, In their prayers for Israel, the people of God urge God with arguments drawne from the consideration of Israels enemies, their multitude, their power, malice, pride, and cruelty. Arise, O Lord, let not men prevaile, let not their mischievous imaginations prosper, lest they insult; How long shall the ungodly
triumph, and make such proud boasting, Joel. 2. 17. Wherefore shall the wicked blaspheme thee daily, saying▪ Where is now their God? Psal. 137. 7. Psal. 94. 8, 4. If we have hearts to pray for Israel, we may by wri∣ting after these Copies, learne the Art how to doe it, in a manner acceptable to God, and comfortable to our owne soules, and advantagious to the common cause, which we intercede for. And thus I have done also with the second thing observed in the Text, the meane used to procune Isra∣els good and welfare, viz. Prayer. Deliver Israel, O God. I should now come to the third generall of the Text, the mercy prayed for in behalfe of Israel, Deli∣verance from troubles, from many troubles; and hence we may observe, that 3. Observ. The Israel of God, Churches, and States, professing true Religion, may be molested with troubles, with many troubles. This is no new thing, as were easie to shew, as also the reasons of it; but time will not suffer; I will here onely acquaint you with some of the troublers of Isra∣el, that ye may take heed that none of you be of that number, and that ye may the better know how to di∣rect your Prayers to God for Israels reliefe. I passe over here the troublers of Israel from without, and will onely touch upon such as may harbour within Israels bosome. First, Evill Magistrates are troublers of Israel, the Scripture saith so, My Father hath troubled Israel, saith Jonathan, 1 Sam. 14. 29. Thou art he that troubleth Israel, saith Elias to Ahab, 1 King. 18. 18. If the pillars of Church and Common-weale bee out of frame, the foundations out of course, if the great wheeles which move all, Eccle. 3. 16. goe wrong, if Authority discountenance Religion, violate Lawes, if injustice and oppression be in the seate of Judgement, this must needs trouble Is∣rael. That must needs be a miserable State, where wick∣ednesse
is got into high places▪ and the waters are trou∣bled and mudded at the Fountaine-head, when there is no helpe to be got by appeale, but the higher a man goes, the worse it is, as the Prophet JeremyJer. 5. 1. 4. complaines that it was in his time, hee could not finde a man in Place and Authority, who executed judgement: a hard case; he found the inferiour ranke nought, and hee saith, I will get me to the great men, and he findes them worst of all. Jer. 5. 1. 4. 5. Therefore, when ye pray for the reliefe of Israels troubles, pray that God would make Kings nursing Fathers, and Queenes nursing Mothers Isa. 49. 23. unto his Church; pray that God would restore our Judges, as at the first, and our Counsellers, as at the begin∣ning; Isa 1. 26▪ Amos. 5. 24. pray that judgement may runne downe as waters, and Righteousnesse as a mighty streame, that Justice may bee executed, for so long as Agags are spared, Jonasses not throwne over boord, Achans not brought forth and stoned, Israel must looke for troubles. Secondly, As evill Magistrates, so evill Ministers are troublers of Israel; Church-men may be State-troublers, I need not tell you that, the world sees it, how some men, who say they are in holy Orders, may have a great hand in putting all things out of Order. I will not inlarge my selfe in this complaint, it is in all your mouthes; my part is, (as my Text guides me) to put you in minde, to turne this complaint into a Prayer, that God would purge the Sonnes of Levi, that from the Mal. 3. 3. Jer. 23. 15. Prophets of Jerusalem, profanenesse may no longer goe forth, over all the Land; that they who should be stu∣dying to save Soules, may not busie themselves about troubling States and Kingdomes; Pray that God would send forth faithfull Labourers into his Harvest, and provide a burning and shining Light for every Candle∣sticke of this Land: if the Gospell of Peace were well Preached throughout the Kingdome, it would be a singular meanes to settle, and maintaine the Peace of the Gospell.
Thirdly, I must yet further put you in minde of o∣ther troublers of Israel, the Pope and his adherents, all Jesuited papists, and their abetters, are arch Church-troublers, and State-troublers, and ever were; And so long as these Canaanites live among us, and hold up their heads, let us never looke for peace; Is it peace Jehu? saith Joram: the answer is, What peace? So long as Idolatrie is countenanced in Israel; Have we not found by experience, this Antichristian and Babylo∣nish sect, to be alwayes enemies unto Peace, and fo∣menters of division, betweene King and people, King∣dome, and Kingdome? What a sad thing is it to thinke that this generation of Vipers, which have so often stung us, should yet be nourished in our bosomes? shall they lodge there till they eate out our hearts? (Sic notus Ʋlysses?) Will we beleeve nothing, untill their knives be at our throates, and their swords in our bowels? pardon my zeale in this behalfe, it is the cause of God, Cal. 5. 12. and the common cause; I would they were cut off that trouble you, saith Paul, and yet he was no uncharitable man; Mercy to them, is cruelty to the whole King∣dome, it hath proved so hitherto: Yee know what a fire this generation of men have now kindled in Ireland, they are blowing the coales here, and God knowes how soone the flame may breake out. I heare sometimes in this City, some men cry out ve∣hemently against Puritans, puritans, what monsters they are, and some amongst us say, they had rather side with Papists than Puritans; I beseech you let mee speake freely, I am not yet learned enough to interpret the meaning of that word Puritan, I know that with that staffe, the prophane world beates all that are better than themselves. I would be loth to countenance the intemperancies and wilde courses of a froward Gene∣ration amongst us, who shame the Religion they pre∣tend unto, of whom, more presently; but yet I would desire that reasonable men would consider, whether
partie they had rather trust their throates with, (if it should come to that) the Papists, or the Puritans; and whether partie hath been greater plotters against States and Kingdomes. Fourthly, I doe not yet deny but that there are troublers of Israel on that other hand also; such as pro∣fesse a strict way of Religion, yet walke not according to the Rules of Religion; some despise Authority, con∣temne Lawes, disturbe common Order, runne out of ranke; Some in these daies usurpe upon the Office of the Ministery uncalled, to the great offence of Authoritie, and hinderance of the Reformation in hand; Some u∣surpe upon the Office of the Magistrate, who being pri∣vate men, take upon them to be publique Reformers, not knowing of what spirit they are, nor considering in what Station God hath set them. Doubtlesse, many things are amisse in Church and Common-weale, and it becomes every one to the utmost of his power, to promote the desired Reformation, but in a right way, and due Order; every one must consider, not only what is fit to be done, but what is fit for him, or one in his place to doe, lest instead of making up of the breach, 2. Sam. 6. 6. we prove makers of breaches, as it fell out in the case of Ʋzzab. Fifthly, I must also bring into this Catalogue of trou∣blers of Israel, the Anabaptists, and those other turbu∣lent Sectaries amongst us, who trouble our people, by buzzing in their eares, that we have no true Mini∣sterie, no true Church, no true Ordinances, but all Antichristian, and upon these grounds separate from our Congregations, and set up new Churches among themselves: experience proves that there is an unquiet spirit in many of these, ignorant, proud, censorious, headstrong, selfe-conceited, selfe-exalting, contrarie to the wisedome that is from above, which is Iam. 1. 17. First pure, then peaceable, humble, meeke, gentle, &c.
1. Cor. 14. 33. O Pray to God, who is the God of Order, and not of confusion, to set up order amongst us betimes, lest whilst every man Preacheth what he will, and practi∣seth what he will, we breake into so many peeces, as will but prepare us to become all a prey to the common adversary. Sixthly, I had here concluded, but that me thinkes I heare some man blesse himselfe, and say, I am none of these troublers of Israel, that have yet beene na∣med. I beseech you therefore, give me leave to be plaine with you, in naming one kinde of Church, and State troublers more, and then I have done. Every wicked liver, every unreformed person, every ungodly, un∣just, prophane, uncleane person, is a troubler of Is∣rael: See the proofe, Hos. 4. 1. The Lord hath a contro∣versie with the Land, because of swearing, lying, stealing, oppressing, committing adulterie; because of these the Land mournes. Oh, consider it, are there none such a∣mong you? Thou sayest thou art no Papist, but art thou not an Atheist, one that lives as if there were no God in the world? Thou sayest, thou art no Schisma∣ticke, but art thou not a Scoffer at Religion, and a jearer at those who walke in that way which is called holy? Thou thankest God thou art no troublesome Sectary, but art thou not a prophane person like Esau; a swearer, a drunkard, a fornicatour, a deceiver, one that profes∣sest the Gospell, and art a shame to the Gospell? if thou beest, thou art a grand troubler of Israel, and thou hast a hand in pulling downe judgements upon the Land. Beloved, let every one of us looke to it, lest while we endeavour to helpe Israel by our prayers, and contributions, we hurt and wound Israel by our lives: There is great variety of thoughts amongst men, about reformation of government, and reformation of disci∣pline; The Lord send forth his truth and Light, and shew us all our wandrings, and lead us in the good
way, in that behalfe; but all sorts agree in this thing, about the necessity of Reformation in manners; O let us every one mend one, every one sweepe before his owne doore, every one reforme his owne house, his owne heart, and then, as ye heard in the second point, we shall be fit to intercede for Israel, and pray with David here, Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. Amen, Amen. FINIS.
