I109EA R220442 99831843 36310
In Case any Proviso should be offer'd to the Bill of Natu∣ralization, to oblige the Persons mentioned in the Bill constantly to reside in England, it is hoped the same will be rejected for the Reasons following. I. NEVER any such Clause was in any Bill of Naturalization before; and new unusual Clauses, in Acts of Parliament, are dangerous. II. There is no occasion for any such Clause; no Instance can be given of any Naturaliz'd Person of any Estate considerable that liv'd abroad, and spent his Rents there; or if there should be an Instance or two, that's not enough for this general Restraint. III. Such a Clause will hinder Strangers from being Naturaliz'd, which would be a Mischief to the Nation; for these being Men of Fortunes, 'tis good for the Publick to have them come among us. IV. The Farmer of the Scavidge of the City in the Custom-House of London, hath, on other Occasions of Naturalization, done his Endeavour to have a Clause to save the said Scavidge to him; but has always been dis∣countenanc'd in Parliament. V. That this Clause incapacitates them to do his Majesty Service abroad, which they are capable to do. VI. That 'tis said, If they shall live abroad with their Family, they shall forfeit their Priviledges: Now what shall be counted their Families is not explained, and they left in the dark as to these Forfeitures. VII. When they are Naturaliz'd, they are English Subjects to all Intents and Purposes; and this Clause takes away Liberty and Property from them, which is an ill President as to the rest. VIII. If this Proviso be inserted in the said Act, those named in it would be troubled every Day abroad by Governors of the Plantations, and Col∣lectors of the Custom-House there, as likewise by the Consuls in Foreign Places, on pretence, That those named in the said Act are absent from England, and therefore these Ships or Effects are Forfeited by the said Clause as absent from England, which may be restored on Proof to the contrary: But this would be the utter Ruin of the Ships and Effects seized on, and no Satisfaction for them.
Maesacker, and Others, in the Bill of Naturalization.
