I307 99827784 32207
AN ACT For prevention of FRAUDS and PERJURIES. W R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE IE MEIN TIENDRAI DƲBLIN, Printed by Andrew Crook, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, on Ormonde-Key, 1695.
An Act for Granting unto His Majesty, An Aid or Additional Custom on the Several Goods and Merchandizes therein mentioned. WE your Majesties Most Loyal Sub∣jects the Commons of Ireland, in Par∣liament Assembled, being Convinced that the Supplies already Granted unto Your Majesty this Session of Parliament, are not Sufficient to Answer Your Majesties Oc∣casions; And desiring to shew the sense we have of the great benefit we daily reap under your Most happy Government, which we Resolve always to support with such Necessary Supplies of Money as your Majesties Affairs Require, and the Con∣dition of the Kingdom will bear, Have Given and Granted unto Your Excellent Majesty, An Aid or Additional Duty to be Raised and Levyed upon the Goods and Merchandizes following (That is to say) On Tobacco, Old-Drapery, New-Dra∣pery, Muslin, Callicoes; all sorts of Linnen, Scotch-Cloth, and Wine that shall be Import∣ed into this Kingdom, according to such Rates, and during such time, and in such Manner and Form as is herein after mentioned and Expressed. And We humbly beseéch Your Majesty that it may be Enacted. And be it Enacted, by the King's Most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the▪ Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Com∣mons in this present Parliament Assembled, and
by the Authority of the same, That all Tobacco, Old-Drapery and New-Drapery (Except such Old and New-Drapery that shall be of the Ma∣nufacture of England, and Imported thence) Muslin, Callicoes; All sorts of Linnen, Scotch-Cloth, and Wines (Except Wines of the Growth of Spain, and of the Dominions thereunto be∣longing) that shall be Imported into this Kingdom at any time from and after the Day of the Royal Assent given to this Act, unto the Twenty Fifth Day of December, which will be in the Year of Our Lord God, One Thousand, Sir Hundred, Ninety and Nine, and no longer, shal Answer and Pay unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, over and above all Rates and Duties Due or Payable for, or out of the same, by Vertue of any former Law or Laws in Force at the Making of this Act, the Rates and Duties hereafter mentioned (that is to say) For every pound weight of Tobacco, Imported within the time aforesaid, one penny half peny, sterl. And for every Yard of Old-Drapery Imported within the time aforesaid, Except as before Ex∣cepted, Twelve-pence, sterl. And for every Yard of New-Drapery Imported within the time afore∣said, Except as before Excepted, Four-pence, sterl. And for every Ell of Muslin, Callico, and of all and of every other sorts of Linnen Imported, with∣in the time aforesaid (Scotch-Cloth Excepted) Six-pence, sterl. And for every yard of Scotch-Cloth Imported, within the time aforesaid, Six-pence, sterl. And for every Tun of Wine (Ex∣cept Wines of the Growth of Spain, and of the Dominions thereunto belonging) Imported within the time aforesaid, Three Pounds, sterl.
And so proportionably for a Greater or Lesser Quantity. And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid▪ That the said several Duties shall be Raised, Collected, Levyed and paid unto Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, during the time aforesaid, at the same times, and in the same manner and Places, and by such Rules, Means and Ways, and under such Penalties and For∣feitures as are mentioned and Expressed in one Act of Parliament made in a Session of Parlia∣ment which began the Eighth day of May, in the Thirteenth Year of the Reign of the Late King Charles the Second, Intituled, An Act for Settling the Excise, or New Impose, upon the said Late King Charles the Second, His Heirs and Successors; the same to be paid upon Merchandizes Import∣ed and Exported into or out of the Kingdom of Ireland, according to the Book of Rates to the said Act Annexed. And whereas some Doubt hath lately Arisen, whether Tobacco Imported into this Kingdom ought to Pay, or is Chargeable with, unto His Majesty any Greater Duty upon any Account whatsoever then two pence half-penny for every Pound Weight, by Vertue of any Law or Laws in Force before the Making of this Act. For the Settling whereof, and for prevention of all Con∣troversy for the Future touching the same. e it Enacted and Declared, by the Autho∣rity aforesaid, That no more then Two-pence half-penny for Every Pound Weight of Tobac∣co Imported into this Kingdom, was, or is Pay∣able, or Do, or Did of Right belong unto His Majesty, or any of his Predecessors, by Vertue
aforesaid. That any Person or Persons wh shall before any Person or Persons Impowered, by Vertue of this Act, as aforesaid, to take Bail or Bails, Represent or Personate any other Person or Persons, whereby the Person or Per∣sons so Represented and Personated, may be ly∣able to the Payment of any Summ or Summs of Money, for Debt or Damages; to be Reco∣vered in the same Suit or Action wherein such Person or Persons are Represented and Perso∣nated, as if they had Really Acknowledged and Entred into the same, being Lawfully Con∣victed thereof, shall be Adjudged, Esteémed, and Taken to be Felons, and suffer the Pains of Death; And Incurr such Forfeitures and Pe∣nalties as Felons, in other Cases Convicted or Attainted, do by the Law of this Realm Lose and Forfeit. FINIS.
