i736 16140716 104817
C2 R DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms By the Lord Lieutenant and Council. ORMONDE. WHEREAS by our Proclamation of the fifteenth day of August last, concerning the' due payment of Rents, Quit-rents, and all other Moneys payable to His Majestie, We gave such premoniti∣on to all persons concerned of the dangers that the Failers therein would incurre, as we well hoped would have freed us from the necessity of exercising the utmost rigour against them which we have forborn.  treasure could by any means be provided for the Army and Civil List, which in great part hath been sup∣plyed out of England by His Majesties Care and Tenderness to His Subjects of this Kingdom; but finding that our Lenity which should have quickned Defaulters, hath rather made them Presumptuous in detaining his Majesties Dues, beyond what was adventured in the late times of Vsurpation, when His Ma∣jesties Subjects lay under heavier Burdens and Taxes Quarterly, than they do now in the whole Year; And Collectors, Receivers and Accountants in most Counties to fail in their payments and accounts, by means whereof the Army is now become near three months in arrear since the landing of Vs the Lord Lieutenant in this Kingdom, though there be suf∣ficent due to his Majesty to discharge the same. And We the Lord Lieutenant intending that the Army shall shortly take the Field and continue abroad much of the Summer, To the end there may be a timely provision for the Army, and all burthening His Majesties Subjects by Billet or freequarter prevented, and the Civil List duely satisfied for the carry∣ing on the Administration of Civil Iustice: We do hereby declare that if any person or persons shall fail in payment of their Easter Rents, quit-Rents with all Arrears of Rent and other moneys due and payable by them at the receipt of the Exchequer, at or before the last day of Easter Term next, or if any Far∣mer by Inland Excise or any person accountable for any part of the duty of Excise, or New Impost, Customs, Subsidies, Compositions, the money due for Fire Hearths, places used for fireing and stoves, or other sums of money, shall fail to account for and make due payment of what they are respectively chargeable with, at the dayes and times whereon the same are
or shall be due and payable, and at furthest before the end of the said Easter Term for what shall be by that time due, and for what shall thence forth grow due or payable at the days and times to which they are obliged or shall be appointed by our very good Lord Arthur Earl of Anglesey, His Majesties Vice-Treasurer and Receiver General, or the Court of Exchequer, they must expect, that beside the observation which we shall make of the disaffection of such as by withholding his Majesties Dues, do, as much as in them lyes, distress the Army and Government, they must expect the strictest and most coercive course shall be taken with such, by sending Pursivants for them, taking Distresses and otherwise. And We do hereby further Declare, that we shall require from time to time from the said Vice-treasurer an account of the vigorous Execution of this our Proclamation, to whom we shall also give Assistance by the power of this Board, as we shall finde there is occasion, and take order for the displacing and punishing such Officers, Collectors and others as shall be found Transgressors of their Duty and this our Proclamation. And to the end all his Majesties Subjects whom it may concern may take notice hereof, and yield due and undelayed obedience thereunto, We do require the principal Officers of every Citie and Town Corporate, and the High Sheriff of every County to cause this Proclamati∣on to be published and fixed up publickly in the principal Shire-towns, and also at the said Sheriffs County-Courts, and in all Cities and Market-Towns, and other Publike places, and parts of their Counties, immediately after receipt thereof, and to give an account to this Board of their so doing, as they will answer the contrary at their perils. Given at the Council Chamber in Dublinthe tenth Day of April, 1663. Jo. Armachanus. Mau. Eustace Canc. Ja. Dublin. Mount Alexander. Anglesey. Massereene. R. Coote. Santry. Hen. Tichborne. Jo. Bysse. J. Temple, Paul Davis. Fra. Hamilton. Art. Forbes. Robert Forth. Ja. Ware. GOD Save the KING. DƲBLIN, Printed by JOHN CROOKE, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and are to be sold by SAMUEL DANCER, next door to the Bear and Ragged Staff in Castlstre, 166.
