K179 12576698 63604
The Light of Truth Triumphing Over Darkness and Ignorance, Error and envy. Manifested in Robert Gordouns late preten∣ded testimony to the true Saviour. Wherein every one whose eye is open may see his Seat; And who have Salt in themselves may favour his words, work and Spirit and discern his deceitful dealing by smitting the innocent in secret, yet not with that subtilty which is able to cover in this day wherein Light is manifesting the works of darkness. SO, The Devil was here deficient BUT Envy slays the foolish man. Given forth in the 2 Moneth 1670. By George Keith▪ & G. White-head. Printed in the year 1670,
R. G. Having had knowledge of thee from the beginning and ac∣quantance with thee through many years, and a love for the, nd re∣gard to thee, I found a readiness in  to signifie My sense of thee and sorrow for thee in that spirit and mind which could delight to do thee a service in Love. But indeed thou appearest before me as one very uncapable (in that spirit and state wherein thou stands) of a return to the Lord or of a steady Conductor to thy bewildred minde, the traver∣sing of which without a guide hath centred it in a Whirle pool. And in thy reelings thou art now resolved thou wilt fight, neither with great nor small, but with the King of Israel: The Light of . I have often wisht thee to come under its banner, that it might have become thy covering, then had not darkness covered thy understanding nor the Fogs of lirror so confounded thee but that thou might have seen thy way out of the mire and clay wherein thou art toyling thy self, travel∣ling in pain and bringing forth the wind. It did not a little astonish me, upon a view of thy book to find thee (whom I judged had attain'd a measure of reason) setting up thy own shaddow, in thy own immagination, and then cudggelling it down a∣gain as though thou wert encountring an Army, for where did the people called Quakers deny that body (prepared of God to do his will in) which suffered at Jerusalem by wicked hands? which thou seems to take for granted; and then labours like a man in a sweat, (and in∣deed thy labour is in the fire) to prove its existence in that day of its service and its necessity as to mankind, which by them was never de∣nyed, and I dare thee, and all men upon the earth to prove they did or do. I take notice of thy acknowledgement in the 4 pag. of thy book, that the manifestation of God in the flesh of Christ, was that their by way might be opened for the ministration of the other mistery , separating them and making the one subservient to the other, and yet after runs against it n the whole scope of thy work: which is manifest beyond all gain saying▪
qualification and a work to be wrought and that by a Spirit too? ven as though the words had been expresly written to give thy words th lyc. I am really sorry for thee, and my very  dsird and doeth thy good) and mark thy self that if possib thou might see the confusion hy enemy drives thee into, fo within ten lines after on the same page thou says, seeing the travel of his soul rested well plased that he might make it effectual within every man, end yet before, no work to be  in any man by any light or spirit: Oh Robert whether drives thou? whether art thou driven? I marke one thing more pag. 4. thou says, He hath already subdued all, made an nd of sin compleated the work of ▪ redemtion, dyed for Us and reconcild Us to God &c. and as I was weighing it in my mind what or whom thou did intend by the words, Our, and Us, That other part of thy book came before me pag. 13. where thou says: he did bear Our sins in his body on the tro, Propitiation for the sins of the  world past present and to come, so then it appeared by the word Us thou in∣tends the whole world. Nevertheless (to go round again) thou pleads with a generation, saying that their pleading a faith in his death and sufferings, interest in the satisfaction and attonement made to God through his blood▪ pag. 6, Will not shelter them from the wrath of the Father, pag. 7. What I not shelter them, and yet Christ a propitiation for their sins past present and to come, what incongruous work is this, which they that runs may read. Several other passges in thy book are observable, and I do not charge thy intention with blasphemy but thy work unawares Vergeth near it, for pag. 22. thou says of Christ who was never defiled, having the iniquities of us all in hs body &c. how unsound are thy words? and in pag. 24. thy words are, Spiritual msticall lgoricall Christ, light within us, Spirit and poer in the man Christ. And now does thou know what thou speakes? to Catigorize a Spiritual and an Alegoricall Christ identically, and so in effect mak them both one. Thou hast sometimes accused some for Alegorizing his body of flesh, but now thou darest do it to his Spiri; I wish thou knew the weight of this and what tendency it hath to make void the faith converting its object into a Chimaera. In the same page thou says: if in every man this seed or Christ is not saved: doeth it remain for ever under condemnation? There is a suppositi∣on and a question from it of thy own forming, and presently thou con∣cludes it a doctrine of some others, saying, oh how contrary is this
doctrine? First it is gross confusion in thy self, to call a supposition and question, a doctrine, and secondly it is a smitting in the dark, by thy implying and raking for granted there is a people that hold it. If thou meanest the people called Quakers acuse them openly, if not then clear them, of the many inconsequent implycations of thy book which many do and will understand to be against them until thou put off thy Vizad. But it is enough to me, (and I wish it may be serviceable to thee for good) that some faithul friends of truth have in love to truth and to thee set thy work before thee as in a glass, that happily thou may see thy self by their labour of Love which after followes▪ else I might have found in my heart to have dealt with thy book throughout, and I am satisfied in due time thy own words will become thy burden, but still I wish it may be for thy good for I have a real Love to thee and regard for thee as I said at first. A. Robeson.
Light set over Darkness. In somewhat writ in answer unto a printed paper published by R. G. (so far as it Concerns us the people called in derision Quakers and our principle) wherein he hath both disingenuously represented us, and darkly) and ignorantlly opposed our principle, even Iesus Christ▪ the true light wh enlightning every man that comes into the world that all through him might believe and in believing might all aim unto eternall life and salvation. R. G I have seen and considered thy book or paper entitled A Testimony to the true Saviour, and I find somewhat in me from the Lord to answer thee in Love to thy soul, and in a zeal for God and his truth and people, whom the spirit that hath set thee on work, to write this book hath laboured to vail and cloud that the light of the glory thereof, might not shine forth, but its work is in vain, for the truth shineth forth in brightness over all that confusion, mist and darkness by which it seeks to hinder it, and indeed the youngest child of truth may see thy weakness, and confusion herein, and how thou figh test as one beating the air against that precious people, and their testimony whom though thou doest not expressly design, yet any who reads thy book, and are acquainted with us and our principle, wil see that thy book is levelled mostly against us, and our principle▪ its very design be∣ing to cast mire and durt upon us, and to marre the visage and beauty of that precious truth, the Universal light which is within, but it is re∣turned upon thee and this stone which thou rejects, and seeks to per∣swade others to reject is set over thee, and will be too brthensome for thee, if in time thou repent not. I finde not my self concerned to take a particular notice of all thy words, so as to give a particular answer to them, onely so far, as thou manifests both thy own confusion, and self contradiction on the one hand, and thy opposition to the sound and wholesome words of truth together with thy disingenious stating and wresting of that pure doctrine affirmed and declared by us, on the other. In the second and third page thou writes of two snares, wherewith some are intangled, which are summed up in this, to wit the dividing these two great Gos∣pell
Misteries, and setting the one in opposite terms against the other, contrary to the tendeny of the Holy Scripture, and what these Snares are thou more particularly expresses, pag. 5.—But there are some upon the one hand, so zealous for Christ (thou says) and what he did for u n his Crucified body without us that they nglect in them∣selves, and ppose in others the mistery of Christ within as a matter of no cocernment at all to them &c. and this thou reckons the first snare and indeed a snare i is, and that very dangerous and dreadfull▪ but for all thy work to discover this snare to others, thou art found intangled in it thy sel, and intangling others with thee, as much as thou can s I may afterwards make appear. The second snare thou mentions, is that some on the other hand, pretend so much zeal, for this mistery, Christ within, the opperations ad acting of the Spirit of God in themselves, that they deny the mistery of God in the flesh of Christ▪ as a matter of any necessity to them, as to redempion reconcliation, and justifica∣on &c▪ which charge thou plainly directs against us caled in drision Quakers, as may appear by the import of thy discourse, though thu does not exprely name us, to which I say it is a fase charge, nor are we guilty of it▪ as also thou falsey alleadges, tha we recko to accomplish this in our own bodies, each for himself throuh obedience to the Law, or Light in his Conscience, which Light they call Christ, Redeemer ad onely Saviour, without rspect to the rue Christ▪ and ou onely Savi∣our Jesus Christ of Nazareth. I say this is false, for hough we say Re∣cociliation, and justification, and Redemption is wrought in us▪ by Christ▪ yet not without respect to Christ, even as outwardly manifest, born, and crucified &c. for our justification &c▪ hath a true and real, and certain respect to Christ both as inwardly manifeed in us, and also as manifested in that body of flesh which was crucified in  &c for we do believe that he took upon him the form of a servant ev in the outward and died even in the outward, and offered up even his very flesh▪ through the eternal Spirit in the outward, as a sacrifice of a sweet smell▪ and atonemnt unto God, in order to our justificaion and re∣conciliation with God, so as thereby he prepared or made ready the way, for our justification▪ though our justification was not sply and absolutely thereby wrought, as if no more were to be done by him and his Spirit in us or as if his outward body, flesh, blood, and life were the onely sacrifi, and propitiation, excuding the inward. And now if I should stop here, and proceed no furthe I give a sufficient testimo∣y gainst thy flse charge upon us, yet I must say somewhat frther for
the clearing this matter, for whereas thou not onely affirms that Salva∣tion and justification hath a necessary respect to Christ his taking on him the form of a Servant or man, in the outward, and umbling him∣self therein, even to the outward death (which we also grant God ha∣ving so ordained it to be) but also thou seems to affirm, that the express knowledge and blif of his taking on him the form of man, and his obden and sufferings therein is of aslute necessity unto all and every one, for salvation, so as none could be saved without that express knowledge, though it was ne∣ver revealed to them. This I deny, how canst thou prove this by Scri∣pture, for may not the benefit of Christ his taking on him, the form of a man redound unto many, who do not expresly know it (they having a true light within them) even as a diseased person may receive benefit of a cure applyed to him thouh he has not an express knowledge of all the names and ways, ow from first to last it hath been prepared, and even as many have sffered hurt, through the disobedience of the first man to wit Adam who have not known expresly that ever such a man was, or the manner of his disobedience. So why may not even many receive benefit, through the obedience of Christ, in the outward, who have not known expresly his outward coming and sufferings? otherwise Adams disobedience were more effectual for mans destruction, then the obedience of Christ were for his Salvation. As for what thou writes against those, who pretend to the imputed righteousness of Christ &c. but under all this retaining and indeed en∣tertaining the Serpents nature in their souls &c. as in pages 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 11, it toucheth not us, for we have no such principle, not beliefe, and thou hast need to examine thy own heart, leat thou be found in this snare thy self, does thou retain, or entertain, nothing of the Serpents nature in thee yea art thou ot of such a belief, that sin doth of necessi∣ty live▪ in thy soul, and thou cannot be freed so from it, but that it must live in some measure in thy soul, for term of life, and is not sin th Serpents nature, and if it cannot but live in thee, does thou not re∣tain, yea entertain it in thy soul? for surely sin cannot live in any mea∣sure▪ where it finde no entertainment? yea as to this matter art thou not in conusion, and contradiction to thy self; for though thou blames them, who pretend to the imputed righteousness of Christ, but under all this reaining, yea entertaining the serpents nature, pag. 6 yet p. 16 thou expresly pleads for Redempion in another for us, while in is within, and to  otherways, thou calls it an arguing with God, and charging him with folly, how wilt thou rid thy self heir of Confusion
and contradiction to th self, I might take notice of divers other un∣sound words of thine from pag. 1. to pag. 10. but desiring to be short, I shall pass them▪ and onely take into consideration another piece of con∣fusion and contradiction to thy self, for pag. 9. thou says, Of one who is dead in sins and trespasses, and remains so still, that he is a child of wrath, as well as others, and is altogether so stil and yet pag. 12▪ thou affirms that God is fully attoned, perfectly reconcied to man, &c. singy and solely upon the accot of the active and passive obedience of the man Jesus Christ of Nazarh, done in his crucified body with∣out us, nd this thou would inter from, 2 ar. 5. 18. and thou further add that he (to wit Paul, in the cited place) mentions not any consideration▪ qualificatio▪ or work wrought, or to be wrought in any man, by any Light or Spirit whatsoever, now is not this confusion and contradiction to hy self. First to say a man dead in ins or unsanctified altogether is altogether a chld of wrath, Secondly to say, that God is fully and perfectl attoned and recociled with him, in this state, for what  t to be a child of wrath, but that the wrath of God is upon him▪ and against him, and yet says thou God is fully reconcild with such, altogether children of wrath, and yet God is fully attoned, perfectly reconciled with them, is it not palpable confusion, and contradiction? nor does that cited place 2 Cor. 5 18 prove what thou intends▪ onely thou wrests it, as that thou say, he says not God, is yet to be reconci∣led but he is alread fully reconciled but say I with whom is he  re∣cocled with unbelievers, and unsanctified persons? but the Apostles words are in that place hath reconciled us viz. us who believe and are sanctified, but of the world he saith reconciling, so not reconciled yea in the sae place he mentions a qualification to be wrought by the Spirit, on their parts▪ in order to their full reconciliation. viz that they be reconcied to God be ye reconciled to God said he. And pag. 13. I hou affirms that faith is but the evidence of that re∣dmption, and salvation already wrought by Christ for us, citing that Scripture, Heb. 11. 1 but though the Apostle say, faith is the evidence of things not seen, he does not , it is but the evidence, as excluding it from being any qualication requisite unto redemption, or justificati∣on, yea he calls it also a subance of things hoped for. And here I shall take notce, how thou art fallen into that principle of the so clled who maintain that men are justified with God▪ before , and that faith is onely the evidence of jufication▪ But thn brings no sfficient proves of Scripture to
53 6 of . nor 2 Cor. 5. 18. 2▪ nor Act▪ 4. nor Gal. 44. Give any ground for it that God is fully attoned, perfectly reconcied with u∣belivers, for though he was made sin for us, and that God had laid n him the iniquities of us all, yet the unbelievers do still remain under the burthen of sin and they are concluded in it, & wrath is revealed in them against it, as saith the Scripture, and God is against them in it, till they be agreed with him through faith and fanctication (age said he with thne adversary, &c.) and there is o peace to the wicked saith my God, it is not sid, there is no evidence or intimation of peace to them, but there is no peace to them while they so continue & as for the one oing once for all, yet the frit and effect thereof is not given unto ll, so s that all re justified for many are condemned, he that believeth not, said Christ is condemned already. I come now to examine thy assertion, page 10. which tho indeavors to confirm▪ through the most part of thy paper, and it is this. Secondly (says thou) there is another snar carrying death also in the bosome of it, though covered with the smooth words of power, spirit, and light within, and it is tha spirit that publisheth that the light that enlightneth every man that comes into the world, is the true Christ, our only Saiour, Mediator and Redeemer, and that there is not another, and that man  to head, and to be joyned to this light, as that, which as  condemns him, so i able of it self to save and redem him▪ as he becomes obedient thereuno▪ Here with open mouth thou smies against our principl, even Jesus Christ the true light that enightens vry man that cmth into the wol, that all through him might believe, though thou may remember that some time formerly thou ht cnfessd to it▪ and also pleaded for it, but thou hast given way to the darkness which hath clouded any smal conviction of thi truth in thy soul, and now turned thee into nmity against it, and that th darknes hath ruled thee in this work appears plainy from thy manifold confusion and contradiction to thy self wherein thou art intangled pag. 17. thou says this Doctrine (declarig the Light and Power  Spirit within, to be Christ, the only Mediator and Saviour,) asserts another Christ, another Saviour then him Jsus Christ of Nazareth, wh conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born of  May, and yet pag. 5. tho pleds for Christ within▪ and blames them who neglect in them∣slvs, and oppose in othrs the mistery of Christ wihin, yea page 7 , for Christ formed within men, saying to them that without dyig to the old Nature of sin, and rising i the new  of rightoss▪  so Christ formed within you, you cannot inrit the
Kingdo who of the weakst discrning cannot see thy self contracti∣on here ea and thy enmity to the mistry of Christ within! though at times forgeing and contradicting thy elf, thou seems to be for t, but if thou were indeed for this mistery Christ within as he is the seed, the , the Power and the Life, tho would not say that such Doctrine asser another Christ, then him Jesus Christ of Nazareth, for Jesus Christ is still one and the same, the Saviour, and Mediator, and R∣deemer is still one and not divided, there re not two Christs, one without,  of the Virgi Mary, and another within, formed within, but it is one and the same Lord Iesus Christ▪ who in the fulness of time, took upon him, the form of  servant, and was found in the true form of a Man born of the Virgin Mary, who was also in the beginning with God, and was the Gift of the Fathers love unto man, from the begining, to be in them, and unto them Light and Life to enlighten nd quicken them unto God. But now let us a little weigh the weight of those arguments, which thou  against ths Doctrine; of the Light within, being the Savi∣our, and saving them, who become joined ad obedient there∣unto▪ First thou sys, this Doctrine is of no less consequence, then to esta∣blish agai the Covenant of wor▪ which speaketh thus▪ do this, and live thereby, making void the Righteousness, which is of Faith in Christ which speaketh on this wise, believe, and thou shalt be saved. To which I say nay, this Doctrine doth not estblish the Covenant of the works of the Law, mentioned by the Apostle, by which no flesh can be justified, no doth it make void the Righteousness which is of Faith, Chrit for the Righteousness which is of Faith in Christ doth well consist stand with obedience to Christ the seed, and with works which are wrought in the vertue and strength of him, the seed formed within, raised within, living ithin, ye their consistence is so necessary, that they cannot be divided, for aith without works i dead, but thou art ignorant of the Nature of the New Covenant, or Righteousness of faith as if it excluded works, and doing and as if doing were prop only to the Old or first Covenant, in order to justification, which is false, for both th first and the second Covenant requireh doing, and works, but after a different manner, the first Covenant▪ puttth man upon doing, without giving unto him, that grace and life, which s sufficient, to make his works acceptable unto God, perfectly and hroughly, which i oly
dministred in the incorrptible seed of ife, in its arisings, and spring∣ings up in the heart, and so the first Covenant or Law comes before the seed be raised, or brought forth▪ and requires man to do such things▪ in th state. ut man can giv no prefect obedience to this law for it onely condemns him, and gves him the knowledge of sin▪ but gives him no spiritual life, for the life is in the ne Covenant and springeth up in the seed thereof, and so the first Covenant or Law is called in Scripture the Carnal Commandment, and it seed and birth is Carnal, o accoring to the flesh, which cannot give unto man to perform per∣fect obedience unto God▪ for the Law makes nothig perfect but the bringing in of a better hope which is the power of an endless lfe, in the incorruptible immortal spiritual and heavenly seed not onely requir∣eth prfection and perfect obedience, but bringeth to it and giveth power to answer and perform it, for the new Covenat ath a sed and birth that is not carnal and weak but spiritual and powerful, and requi∣reth obedience and works of and from men, in this even in the virtue, power, and life of this spiritual seed, and of this Ishmael and Isack, Esa and Jacob, were figures, as the Apostle declares in the Epistles to the Gallaians and Romans, Ishmael and Esau, sigifie the chidren of the lesh, or fleshl seed, who are the childen of the old or first Covenant, who cannot attain unto the blessing of full and perfect justification and acceptance with God through all they can do▪ but the lection attain∣eth it the elect seed, and the children thereof▪ who are born not of the flesh, but of the pirit, not of a fleshly seed, but a spritl, not of the first Adam, but of the second, who are the children of Abraham, ac∣cording to the spirit, of whom Isck and Jacob were figures, and though the new Covenant requireth faith or beliving yet it requireth not onely faith, but works also, in order to a full and perfect justificati∣on with God, for Abraham was justified by works, and not by aith on∣ly so Rachab, so Phirha and the Apostle saith▪ Rm. 8. 13. If ye throgh the spirit do mortife the the deeds of th body, yee shall liv, so th new Co∣venant requireth both aith and works too; believing and doing, but believing is the first thing▪ it requireth men not simply to do▪ without respect to aith in Christ the seed, but requireth each in their order as hat men should believe and do, for its faith which draw life from Christ and expresseth it in works, which render them living and accptable unto God▪ (otherwise they are dead) so people must first believe, and then to their faith they must adde virue &c. and this believig is a winnig of the very heart, and soul of man, unto the Light and pirit and power
of Christ, within, manifest in the eed through which strength▪ is rece∣ved to give perfect obedience to God. Moreover that the new Cove∣nant requireth doing, is plain from Dut. 30. 14. But the word is very near unto thee▪ even in thy mouth, and in thy heart▪ for to do it, which word, the Apotle Paul, expounds to be the wod of Faith and ighte∣ousnes of Faith, (Rom. 10. 8) which e preached and that was the new Covenant I have been the more large in opeig this matter, because it will give occasion unto me, to return a clear and full answer, in very few words, to all thy other canal and unlearned objections and reaso∣nings against the Truth in this particular, as in that thou brings for a second Argument that Paul said, b the works of the Lw, , &c. And here thou adds by way of exposiion▪ that is by our obedi∣ence to the Law, either written in Tables of stone, or to the Law▪ or Light in the Conscience, but this exposition has o ground from Scrip∣ture, and its but a figment of thy own invention of darkness for its clear, by the works of the Law, Paul understands the law of the first Co∣venant as the Jews imitation of the Letter are outwardy administred, before the spiritual seed of Lif be raised; which hath in it▪ the Law of the Spirit of Lif in Christ Jesus▪ for the justification is in the seed and these works only are jstified▪ which are done in the Life and vertue thereof, nor is thy third objection of any more weight, as whre the Apostle saith, Had there been a Law given, whch cold hav given life, ve∣ily rightousnss should have been by the Law, for it is manifest he under∣stands the Law of the first Covenant, which was the ministration of death, and no of Life, but the Law of Christ, or the Law of the spirit of Life in Christ Jesus giveth life, and so justification is by this Law, and yet faih is not made void, nor the promise made of none effect,  the reward reckoned not of Grace but of debt, for this law, is of Grace, and of promise, and the whole obedience givn to it▪ is all of the free Grace of God in Christ Jesus, and the same answer may serve to that o∣ther Scripture cited by thee,  man is jufied by aith without the deeds of the law, and to him that worketh not, &c. Which excludes the deeds and works of the law of the first Covenant, or the works of any law▪ from justification, which is not given forth and administred in the Eect noble and royal, and mortal and incorruptible eed of life▪ for be∣fore this seed be raised all are under transgreion  further says▪ Tht the Apole concludes them ignrant of▪ and not submiig to the rght∣ousness of God, who go about to establish thir own righteousnss, by the works of the Law, so say we also but the rghteousness which is in the elect seed
and the works thereof, are not that self righteousness, but the righ∣ousness of God, and is our righteousness, as Christ is ours, evn by the free grace & gift of the Fater. So having thus cut the  seem∣ing strength, thy carnal objections may have with weak people, I shall not ned further to answer particularly thy other words here∣abut▪ seeing they contain no force of Arguments, but are only thy bare assertions and positions, which wanting a sufficient foundation fall of themselves. Thou further alleadges page 15. That to affirm justfcation, to b in o∣bedence to the Light , is to make him who is indeed the good Samari∣tae▪ to be no better thn the Priest and he Levite, who looked upon the wd∣ed man and so passed by, but hast thou not here grossly manifested thy weakness and shallowness▪ does he not the part of he good Samarita, in coming ito our wounded souls in powring in the Wine and Oyl of his blessed spirit life and vertue, to cleanse and  them, yea if he did not appear in us, and justifie  within, work Redempton nd Salva∣on from sin in our hearts, he might e said rather to pass by us, as the Priest and th Levite. But that both here and oft elsewhere thou insi∣nates; as if we had no respect to his outward coming and sufferings in order to justification, is a lfe and disigenious alleadgnce of thin, we dearly own and respect him, in bot the way of his coming, an do not set the one in opposition to the other, nor divide them, for they are in Unity; and work together (according to the Eterna pupos of God) for the full and perect deliverance and Savation of Man, and who receive him, in his inward coming, and become subjct to him▪ receive the enefit of his ouward coming, receive the benfit of his sufferings and death▪ his suffering and death is theis, and they who wit∣ness him to live in them, may , it is Christ, who dyed who can con∣dmn, who have hi Lif in them, have any interest in his death, and his blood cleanseth them from all sin, but who seeks to rely upon his outward coming, and suffering▪ and deny and crucifi his appearance of Light, and Life in their heart, have no prt in him. But thou altogether excludes his inward coming by his Life and Spirit in mens hearts, from havig any share in mens Redempion, and Salvation, whereas the Apostle speaks of being savd by his Life, and mentions ▪ day of Redemption▪ that was yet to come, after his outward sufferings, uto which those who first believed in him, were , and though the Apole says▪ if while we were enemies, we were reconciled
to God, by  death of his Son, yet he adds, much more shall we besaved by his Life, and though thou use thi Scripture to prove, that men are fully and perfectly reconciled with God singy and solely upon the ac∣count of what Christ did & suffered without us in his cruified body, ex∣cluding so much as any inward quallification wrought by him in u, et it is but an abuse of the place, nd a wresting the word, beyond the true intnt and sence of the spirit▪ nor need I go any further, then thy own confession, to alleadg a more safe way of understading that Scripture, as whee thou says, page 13. Alhugh in the day of Isaiah▪ Chist was not come in our flesh, yt the prop speks f t, as a  aleady done it being so i the purpose of God and so why  said that speak of being reconcil'd after this manner, it being so in the purpose of God, to reconcile them, fully unto him, not as they remain in enmi∣ty to him, but turned from it and so become friends and loves of him, and we do willingly acknowledge, the full and perfect Redemption, was in Christ, while we were enemies, yet we did not receive it, while we continued enemies, but now since we believed, and were turned to him▪ in our hearts, we have received it, as said the Apostle, by whom we have now received the attonement, or reconciliation, so mark the word [] we have now received the reconciliation, now since we believed, and were turned to him in our hearts, but not before. In the 17 page whereas thou accuses us, With denying the true Christ and asserting another, ye thou art found in the same guiltiness thy self, which we are free of, for we believe and acknowledge him, who was manifest in that body of flesh, to be the true and only Christ and Savi∣our, and yet we believe him also to be the only true Christ and Saviour as manifest n us, for he is not two Christs but one, though he has had two manners or ways of coming, as without us, and within us, both useful and needful, yea, both concurring unto our full and perfect deli∣verance and savation, from sin and the consequences thereof in soul and body, and we believe that his outward coming was not a bare and naked example, but hath a real influence and service in its place in and upon all, who are saved, though all have not that express knowledge thereof, yea will thou not confess that infants are saved by Christ, who yet have not this express knowedge of him. But that I may make it appear, that thou denyes the true Christ, I shall bring th own words page 17. Where thou expressly denyes, that this light, which enlightens every man tha comes into the world is Christ, and
what is this to deny Christ, and to deny the Scriptures Testimony of him, for said he himself I am the light of the World, and said John of him, he was the true light that enlightens every man that comes into the world that all through  believe, and if all through him might believe (which was Johns Testimony) then all through him might be saved. But thou wilt have this light not to be in Christ, but some other light which remain∣ed in Adm after his transgression, and before the promise of the Ms∣siah, and stands in every man, as a witness for God, wheby he shall be left without excuse, on the day of his righteous judgement, but thou gives no shadow of proof for it, that this Light is another, for though quenched the partcular measure o his light in him: at his trans∣gression, yet he had (to wit Ch.) a residue of light to reach forth unto him again, though Adam changed yet Chrit remained the same, and shined a light in his conscience in the midst of all that darkness he had let in by hi transgression, and who was it that convinced him of his sin, but Christ, to whom all judgement is committed and who was it. that first peached the Gospel to him, was it not Christ, was not God in Christ reconciling even Adam unto himself, after the fall and did not Christ come again to give light and life unto Adam behoved not Adam to know Christ within him▪ else he had been a reprobate, was not the word of Faith brought near to him, even in his heart was not the seed sown in him, which hath its fruit eternal Life, and did not this seed in him bruise the Serpents head, and i Abl Enoch, Noah, and though we say that the seed of the woman, which bruiseth the Serpents head, be Christ within, yet we do not limit your words to him, as only within, for they may be partly understood of his coming within, and also of his coming wthout for in both he bruizes the serpents head, & what pittiful ignorant reasonings is it in thee, as to say, he (to wit God) did not direct him to tha ligh in his conscience &c. in pointing out to him a remedy, but I ask thee was not Adam saved or to be saved, as other men to wom Paul ths saith. Say not in thy heart who shall ascenà into Heven &c. For the word is very nar unto thee, even in thy heart, and this said he is the word of Faith which we preach, and Mose directed the Jws to the word, eu 30, and was not the voice of Go in the Garden heard in Adam, and the same word also in his heart which is calld the in∣grafted or implanted word, that is able to save the soul. And that Law, and Nature, by which the Gentiles did the things con∣tained in the Law, thou will not have it to Be the Law; and Nature of Christ but some other thing, but what thou tells not, but this hath
been so oft over again and again confuted in our friends printed books, that herein I need say little or nothing to it, which thou hast borrow∣ed, from the blind and dark Priests, which have so taught thee, though some time ago, thou came by this Light which now thou disputes a∣gainst to be in some measure convinced, that it was the true and saing Light, alas! for thee, that thou hast let the darkness so blind thy un∣derstanding, after it was a little opeed, God be merciful unto thee, and give thee a sight of thy folly and enmity against the truth, and a heart to repent therefore. Only shall propose a few Queries unto thee, which may serve to show, that the Nature and light by which these Gentiles did the things of the Law, and knew God, was that of Christ, for 1▪ How could they do the things of the Law, but by the Di∣vine Nature of Christ, seeing without him men can do no good thing! 2. How could they be excused, but by Christ, as some were, yea. 3. How could they be without excuse▪ who disbeyed, if they had no prin∣ciple given them, sufficient, whereby to perform their obedience, which is only Christ, for an insufficient principle had been a sufficient excuse for them. 4. How did some of them perfect the Law, and judged the circumsion and was Jews inwardly and had praise of God, if not by Christ. 5. How could they clearly see the invisible things of God, but by Christ the Son, seeing it is said, none knows the Father, but the Son▪ and he to whom the Son reveals him, and though these invisible things are clearly seen in or through the things that are made yet not without that which is to be known of God▪ manifest in them, which God had shewed unto them, which gave them an eye, or understanding to see his invisible power and Godhead in these things. And thus I have gone through all these things in thy book, which de∣serve any consideration, so far as they relate to us, and our , the other pages in thy book being spent almost wholly in provi that, which none of us deny, nor any called Christians that I know of  thou setst up a man of straw; to create work unto thy self to knock  down as to prove that Christ is outwardly come in the flesh, and suffered and died, and offered up himself and his body, and life, unto God, for a sa∣crifice of attonement, all which the Scriptures approve better then thee, and who among Christians deny it, but under all this, it may appear, that thou secretly labours to prove that the Name of Jesus Christ, Re∣deemer and Saviour belongs only, to the word, as it was manifest in that particular body and form of man, born of the Virgin Mary, but no to him as manifest in the Saints, which both contradicts the Scripture
Testimony, and also thy own words elsewhere, who speaks of Christ within, yea of his being formed within and though we do wilingly grant that the word, as it became manifest in that flesh, and form of man, and assumed uno it, the seed o` Abraham, is called and indeed is Jesus Chrit, yet we may not limit nor confine th Name ony to him as manifest in the outward, for as he is inwardy revealed in us he is called Christ, yea by him, even Jsus Christ, were all things  said  Apostle But I cannot before I have done with thee but take notice how in di∣vers places, thou disingeniously represents our , and words, flinging thy scoffs and jears at the blessed and  seed, caling it a strage allegorical mistical Christ, but if he be so  uto thee it is because thou hast spent thy eye upon his light in thee which would have given thee, true acquaintance with him. But dare thu deny it, is there not a divine and elect seed in the Saints by which he is formed in them, and liveth in them, and is h not crucifi∣ed in some and raized, or arizen in others and how could this be, but in respect of te eed, for as he is in the Father, and was with the Father, before the World began, he cannot be said to be crucified nor raized. And oh how bdly and disingeniously thou represents us as say∣ing▪ That it is the seed that it is only to be redemed , as being un∣der the Law, sin, condemnation, Whereas we say indeed, that the seed suffers uder sin and is to be raised from under it, yet the soul, yea and the whoe man is also to be saved within; and through the sed whoever believe in Christ and are joyned to him, but we do not say, the seed is condemned, unless by such a spirit as thine, as drowns it calling it but a Natural thing, as the Iews condemned Christ calling him but a Man, the Carpenters Son and then in thy ignorance and envy thou asks, if in evey man, this seed or Christ is not saved? doth it remain for ever in some under condemnation? I answer nay, for though for a time it suffer, yet in the time appointed of God, it is raised up in all, even the most ungodly, over all their ungodliness to minister in them, the Wrath and righteous judgement of the Lord against them, without mercy, as thou wilt find by sad experience if in time thou re∣pent not which I wish from my heart, even that repentance may be gi∣ven thee, for all thy enmity and hard speeches against him and his truth. Again how grosly and disingeniously thou wrests the words of some of us, viz. That Christ was sometime preached a crucified, to the Iews but more generally a light to the Gentiles▪ as if there were one Christ (says thou) to wit, a crucified Christ, preached to the Iew, and another Christ, to
wit, a Light enlightning every man that comes nto the World, preahed unto the Gentiles, but this is a most piteous and abominable wresting of these words aforesaid, which do not import 2 Christs but but one and the same in a twofold way of manifestation, or appearance, and though Prophets and Apostles preached him, as in the form of a man, yet they preached him also, and that more generally, as a light to the Geutiles, yea and to Iews also. Thou would also perswade simple people as if we did separate the benefit of Christs outward coming from inward, while thou speaks, after this manner▪ How are you thus ini∣ferably be beguilded to preach up the Light enlightning vory man, that comes ino the World for  Christ to cry up a light within,  cry down the blood without, to preach him as an example, to cast out the  but though we preach him as the sight that enlighens , and cry up the light within, yet we cry not down the blood without, no in preach∣ing him, as an example do we deny the aonement  are bu hy false and groundless insinuations, and as toucng our preaching him, as the light that enlightens every man that comes ino the world, that all though him might believe and so be saved thou  as well have bespoke Iohn, after that manner, saying O thou miserable beguied John, who preaches the light that enlightens every man that coms in∣to the world to be Christ▪ for so he preached him and so did others. I shall yet take notice of two or three passages  in thy book, and so leave it, for to trace and follow thee in all thy confusions and dark imaginations, were neither worth the travel, nor the time, for by these few hints, the weakest of any true judgement, may perceive, what a bulk of confusion thy book is. Pag. 27. thou says, That light and salvation of the Gentiles prophesied f 49. 6. Isa. is not said, I will give it, the light that enlightens every man that comes into the world, for that was already given to every ma▪ as he came into the worl, but it is, I will give, speaking of one to be given, that which was not actually given, for a light to the Genttles, but this is a most weak and shallow manner of reasoning, for though Christ was given in some mea∣sure, for  light from the beginning, and even in the darkest times, yet afterwards he came to be given in a greater measure, of light and mani∣festation, so here is not another light, then was given at first, but a fur∣ther measure of the same, for in he beginning was the word Christ Je∣sus, and in him was life, and the life was the light of men. And thus all thy other empty & shallow reasonings may be answered in many other place, which speaks of Christ as a light, a Prophet &c. which thou would confina onely to him, as outwardly come▪ as particularly that of Moses, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise unto you, like unto , which thou would onely hint and confine to his outward
coming and becoming many in the land of Judea, for otherwise thou says, it could not be said, that he should be raised up lke unto Moses, for Mo∣ses was a man. But the light and power, and spirit within, is not a man, as Moses was. But if we go to scan too narrowly upon this word like unto me, as if it did import every way a like, it will not answer thy intent, for Christ, even as man in divers weighty circvmstances was unlike to Moss, Christ was bon of a Virgin, so not Moses, Christ never sinned so not Moses, and many others migh be named, but if thou say Moses and Christ were like to one another, in that likeness, understood by the spirit, so say I, which yet is not confined simply or onely to his man∣hood, for even Christ in spirit was and is raised up like unto Moses inso∣much that as Moses was given of God as an outward deliverer of the outard Israel, from out of Egypt, and from under Pharoah in the out∣ward, destroying their enemies without, and leading them through a red sea and wilderness outward into a good outward land, and giving them Laws and Precepts from God &c. So Christ even in Spirit is gi∣ven of God as an inward deliverer, of the inward Israel from out of spi∣ritual Egypt, and from under spiritual Pharoah destroying their inward and spiritual Enemies, leading them through an inward and spiritual sea & wilderness▪ into a good spiritual land, giving them spiritual Laws & Precepts from God, and stoning them to death with a spiritual stone, who do not observe them, and is this no likeness at all intended by the spirit of God, as the sense of these words of Moses? How has thy pre∣judice blinded thee in this and many other things? Last of all I cannot but reprove thee, for thy disingenuous and de∣ceitful insinua ion in the last page of thy Book, in these words. How much sorr punishment shall he be thought worthy of that hath trod under foot the Son of God, and counted the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing  the blood of any ordinary man r beast. But did thou ever read or hear from any of us, as if we counted the blood of Christ, even in the outward, as the blood of any ordinary man, or beast? or thinks thou to infer such a conclusion from our principle as because we say, Christ the light within us is preci∣ous and saving, that therefore we account his blood as the blood of any ordinary man, or beast, but I must tell thee thy inference is bad and de∣ceitful and doth no wise follow from our principle, as is evident from what is aforesaid, yea the spilt blood of his Saints▪ and their death is of great account with the Lord, when brought to it through the violence of men, acted by Sathan, and much more the blood of him, who as a Lamb offered up himself without spot to God, as a sacrifice of a sweet smell who was delivered for our offences, and rose again for our justifi∣cation. G. K. Writ 7. 2. mo, 1670.
Here follows Robert Gordon's answering and confu∣ting himself; some of his manifest Contradicti∣ons; to his Principles being insert, in his own words: And the Pages of his Book noted where they are. R. Gs. Principles. GOd man, in whom all things pertaining to mans redemption, &c. were transacted not in our persons or within us, but in his crucified body without us, before any good wrought in us. He hath already subdued all things, finish∣ed trasgression, made an end of sin, page 3. and 4. R. G's Contradiction. The mystery of Christ by his spirit dwelling in his Saints, call'd in the holy Scripture, Christ within you, whereby God works in us, &c. God working all things in us by Christ, pag. 4. his Spirit working all their works in them, pag. 5. Observation. See his manifest contradictions: How is sin and transgression fi∣nished and made an end of without man, while no good is wrought in them? And seeing God works or transacts all things in Believers by the mystery of Christ and his holy spirit within, and all their works in them; how is all done and finished without them before any good is wrought in them? R. G. Some pretend so much zeal for this mystery of Christ, the operation of the Spirit of God in themselves, that they deny the mystery of God in the flesh of Christ, page. 5. Contradiction. The mystery Christ within you, whereby God works in us through faith the fruit and effect of the work already wrought, &c. Christ within us whereby through faith we have evidence in our selves, &c. page 4. Observation. We cannot too much own, or be over much zealous for the mystery of Christ within, or the work of God through his spirit within us:
nor thereby deny the mystery of God in the flesh of Christ, or the effect and benefit of his sufferings in his body, as falsly is implied and insinu∣ated against us, since that in owning Christ in the mystery, we cannot but own the evidence thereof. R. G. In the crucified body of Christ perfected and wrought at once Redemption, Iustification and Reconciliation, finished and compleated in Christ for us, pag. 13. not in our persons, pag. 4. Contradiction. He was delivered for our offences, he was raised again for our justification. O remember the work of regeneration is to be wrought within thee, pag. 9. Observation. If Redemption, Justification, &c. be not to be fulfilled by Christ in man, or not in their persons: what are you redeemed stified or regenerated) from or out of: Surely not from iniquity or sin, as true believers were; and then you hypocriss in is remaining in your per∣sons, foa all your pretenses of being redeemed, justified, &c. without. But take thy contradiction. O remember the work of regeneration i is to be wrought within thee, R. G. He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. He mentions not any consideration, qualification or work wrought, or to be wrought in any man by any light or spirit whatsoever [A gross er∣rour] but singlely and solely upon the account of the active and passive obedi∣ence of the man Iesus, &c. pag. 12. in the crucified body, justification, &c. finished, compleated for us, pag. 13. Contradiction. Who seeing the travel of his soul, was satisfied that he might make it effectual within every man, that should come to God through him; he counted to his Apostles the word of reconciliation as his Ambassadors in his steed to beseech men to be reconciled to God. Work out your salvation, pag. 12. Observation. But first, Were the Saints made the righteousness of God in Christ, without any inward qualification or work of his light or spirit? What a gross errour, contradiction and sin-pleasing doctrine is this! Is not this the Priests very notion of imputation, while men are corrupt and sinful in themselves, while they neither partake of the divine nature nor divine image in themselves; And then, Secondly, what need was there
for the Apostle to beseeh them to be reconcil'd to God, or to work out their salvation, if it was already wrought and finished without them before any good was wrought in them? R. G. The Lord doth not direct man to that light in his conscience that shewed him his loss, nor to light and power &c. But promiseth him another kind of Saviour. Contradiction. A great mystery, God manifest in the flesh, &c. He alone, and none else then the very Word; the love of the Father must be this great undertaker, &c. (viz. for man) pag. 20. Observation. See his manifest falshood and contradiction: For God the very word or love of the Father, which doth redeem, deliver and save the soul, are not of another kind then the Light and Power: But the same divine Light and Power, by which the promised Seed, did, and doth bruise the Serpents head, and overcome him, that man might be re∣deem'd from the hand of his enemy. R. G. The worker of the Redemption could not be the light enlightening every man, &c, pag. 21, Contradiction. [Yet] the very word (pag. 20.) God manifest in flesh. p. 18. Observation. Here his gross error and contradiction, in denying Christ, the Word and Redeemer, to be that light that enlightens every man, and yet the very word doth redeem and save: And was it not the Word that was with God that was the true Light, that enlightens every man coming into the world? See Io. 1. 1. 4, 9. R. G. Redemption, and all things already wrought, purchased, &c. for us in the crucified body; not within us, but before any good wrought in us, pag. 3, 4, 5, without the help of any thing to be wrought in us, pag. 20, Contradiction. He (to wit Christ) ever liveth: Mark, this man ever liveth to make in∣tercession for them. O bear with me a little, not satisfie your selves until you have a real evidence of your being particularly redeemed by experimentally witnessing the Living power of truth in your inward parts, pag. 7.
Observation. Note his contradiction here. For first, if all things be already wrought in the crurified body, what doth he interceed for? Is it for that which God cannot justly with-hold (if this be true) Secondly, are all things already wrought without the help of any thing to be wrought within: And yet we must have a real evidence of our par∣tcular redemption by the living power of truth in our inward parts. See how he hath confuted himself herein. R. Gs. Erroneous and envious Principle. That such as preach and print up the light inlightening every man that comes into the world to be he (to wit Christ) reject him, and set at nought the stone, &c. pag. 32. Contradiction. This is the Christ to whom John came to bear witness, and there is not another; he is the word made slesh, pag. 31, 32. the word was not convert∣ed into flesh, but remain'd the word still, pag. 22. Observation. This man preacheth up that in one place to be the Christ, which in another place he preaches down or denies it to be: For that Christ that Iohn came to bear witness, to that was the word (that became flesh and tabernacled in them) was the true light that enlightens every man that comes into the world mentioned before (Ioh. 1.) But this R. G. Further shews his Self-confutation, Enmity, and Anti-christian spirit against the true Christ, who is the light. See here R. G. his An∣ti-christian doctrines against the universal light and power of God and his Son, Io. 1. ch. Viz. 1. That the spirit that publisheth, that the light that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world is the true Christ, is a snare carrying death in the bosom of it, pag. 10. 2. That the light that enlightens every man that comes into the world, is not he (to wit Christ) pag. 20. 3. That the worker of redemption could not be the light and power, pag. 21. 4. That the bearer away of iniquity cannot be a meer spiritual Christ, altogether light and power within, pag. 22. 5. That the true Christ, man's only Saviour and Redeemer, and the light and salvation of the Gentiles prophesied of Esa. 49. 6. is not the light that enlightens every man that comes into the world, pag. 26. 27. 6. That the unbelieving Iew who rejected Christ, yet had a clearer sight of him then they have who assert that the light that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world is he, and that such are wholly ignorant, pag. 29.
7. That none of the Prophets ever witnessed the light that enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world to be the true Christ, pag. 32, 33. 8. That they deny the Lord that bought them, who set the light that en∣lightens every man to be the true Christ and Saviour, pag, 40. 9. That such are miserably beguiled, who preach up the light enlightening every man that comes into the world for the true Christ, pag. 37. R. Gs. Contradictions to his Principles before cited. He is Iesus Christ the same, yesterday, to day, and for ever without begin∣ning or end of dayes, he is the word by which the world is made; yea, of the Son it is said, thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth, and thus he is the wisdom and power of God, pag. 23. This is the Christ, to whom John came to bear witness, and not another, he is the word, pag. 31, 32. Redemption is see by the light of the glorious Gospel shining in our hearts, pag. 25. Old Simeon was a devout man, obedient to the light in his consci∣ence, he waited for the consolation of Israel, and it was revealed to him by the holy Ghost, Luk. 2. 17. through it in himself he waited the appointed time, &c. Observation. Christ said, I am the light of the world, Io. 8. 12. ch. 12. 46. and ch. 3. 19. and that was the true light that lighteth every man that cometh into the world; Io. 1. 1. (read on) and that light which brings to see Redemption, and revealed the consolation of Israel, to wit, salvation by Christ was his light within, wherein Simeon and others of the holy men of God waited, and this was a light of the glorious Gospel or power of God shining in the hearts, &c. R. Gs. Principle. That the light in our consciences that shews good and evil, is not given for righteousness, nor able to reveal or give life (any more then the law writte in Tables of Stone.) p. 11. R. G's. Contradiction. [Yet] Old Simeon was obedient to the light in his conscience, &c. Re∣demption is seen by the light shining in our hearts, &c. (as before.) Observation. Then the light in the conscience is given for righteousness (if to be obeyed) for it manifests evil, and leads out of darkness, and sin where it is obeyed, and every one that doth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be manifest that they are wrought in God, Io. 3. wherefore the light in the conscience is given for righteousness: and the path of the Just is a shining light, and the life that was the light of men is above and before the Letter or Law writen in tables of stone, as to giving of life.
R. G. God said to Adam, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt die (it could not be revoked) who could fulfil the requirings of Wrath and satisfie? not Light and Power, &c. But he who trod the Wine. Press of his Fathers wrath alone, P. 19. 20. R. G's. Contradiction. The Chastisements of our Peace were upon him, &c. p. 21. Observation. Mark, here, Wrath and Chastsements are two differing things, and differ in the execution; as Chastisement is in love to Gods People, who receive the Attonement, but Wrath and Vengeance due to Rebellion; and is to come upon them whom he will tread down in his anger, and trample in his fury, even in the Wine-press of his wrath, as Isai. 63. Now it appears, this R. G. takes this, as Christs stopping (or treading down) the Fathers wrath, (as his words import) wherein he is greatly mistaken; for it is rather an executing of his wrath, and revenge upon the wicked or Persecutors, whom he will trample in his fury for the deli∣verance of his own Seed, and ransomed ones: And this Christ who is both the wisdom, light, and power of God, can, and will do, by whose power also salvation for sin and death, is witnessed in them that believes in the Divine Light and Power, which is able to give us all things per∣taining to life and godliness, 2. Pet. 1. 3. R. G. Redemption is a Mystery, which by the Principles of right reason, cannot be discerned. Contradiction. But is seen by the light of the glorious Gospel shining in our hearts, p. 25. Answer. Right reason doth spring from the true light that shineth in the heart, and the good that this light teacheth and sheweth is reasonable or con∣sistent with right reason, however this man seems to decrie right reason; in some degree therein resembling Lod. Muggleton, (the false witness) who saith Reason is the Devil. But this R. G. again in Contradiction to himself, seems to set up right reason, to justifie his Principle, as where he saith, p. 2. concerning Mary, that the light in her Conscience, is not the Son called Jesus, conceived in her Womb; Surely that agreeth not to right reason aith he. But surely, if he denie the light of the Son of God to be in her Conscience, because of his Conception, or taking on him Flesh in the Virgins womb, he might as well denie and oppose his Divinity;
for  was not limited into that compss, as not to be in her Consci∣ence, nor was the Son of God and his light to be under such a limita∣tion (either as to time or place) as a finite creature, for his out-goings were from of old, from everlasting, Micah 5. 2. Here follows a further Account of some passages taken out of R. Gordons Book, wherein his Confession to the Truth (pro∣fessed by us as to the work of the power and spirit of God within) and his erroneous Contradictions to the same, are set opposite, that his self Confutation and breaking the neck of his own Cause, may be obvious to every unbyassed Reader. R. G. his confessing to truth. R. G. p. 6. First there is a spirit of Error, (a) and its work is to de∣ceive, and its end to destroy such in whom it ruleth, and its deceit is seen under this fair Covering, a pretending to the imputed (b) righ∣teousness of Christ, pleading a faith in his Death and Sufferings, inter∣est in the satisfaction and attone∣ment made to God through his blood, but under all this, retaining the serpents (c) nature, In their soul preserving alive in themselves un∣mortified corruptions bearing do∣minion (c) over them, (d) O be not so easily decieved, God will not be thus mocked, he sees not as man sees, (e) he trieth the heart and reins. Know of a truth, such as you sow, such shall you reap; to whom you yield your selves servants to o∣bey, his servants you are, whether of in unto death, (e) or of obedi∣ence unto rightousness; and on the
day of the Lord every Kingdome shall have its own, on the day of that wonderful severation, when the Lord shall judge the world by the man Christ Jesus, every thing shall be severed to be for ever inclu∣ded in that state whether of light or darkness into which it was sown, according to that righteous pro∣ceeding of the son of man, Matt. 25. He shall sy to the sheep on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom▪ But to the Goas on the left hand, depart from me ye cursed, and on that day your supposed coverings though of the imputed (f) righteousness of Christ, your high pretences, though to his death and sufferings; your crying Lord, Lord, will not shelter you from the wrath of the Father, you being wholly altogether of the nature of those Goats on Christs left hand, though pretending to the Sheeps cloathing. Oh! hear with me a little to plead with you in ten∣der compassion to your immortal souls, that you might be perswaded; Yes, intreated to inquire a little in∣to this matter, not satisfying your selves to say that you believe there is a Redemption (g) already purcha∣sed you in Christ, until through a li∣ving faith in your selves (h) you have a real evidence of your being particu∣larly redeemed by experimental wit∣nessing
the living power * of the (i) Truth in your inward parts, which in words you outwardly pro∣fess, Consider the words of our Lord to Nicodemus, Except a man be born again (k)he cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, there lyeth an impossibility in this thing, he placeth not Goats, remaining such in their state, in the same place with Sheep; there is a great gulf between these two: They are of two con∣trary natures; Two opposite States and Kingdoms prepared for them. Therefore without being changed, without being in your minds re∣newed, translated out of darkness into sight, without dying to the old Nature of Sin, and rising in the new nature of Righteousness. And so Christ (l) formed within you, you cannot inherit this Kingdom, because without this real change wrought in some measure within you through the Operation of the Spirit of God within (m) there is only a dawbing of the old Sepul∣chre, while rotteness is till within, a talking of being justifyed through the Redemption already purchased in Christ, without winessing the Life, Power, and Virtue of the thing it self within. (n) Therefore I do exhorts thee Spirit in thy mind thou art subjected to, for as many as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God; and if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his: o that it will not be enough to say that Jesus Christ dyed for sinners, and that his righteousness is imputed to thee, as altogether from without thee: O remember the work of Regeneration is to be wrought within thee.
R.G erroneously contradicting R. G. (a) All things pertaining to mans Redemption, were transacted in God-man (Christ) not in our persons, nor within us, but in his crucified body without us, before any good (b) wrought in us; God having already wrought all things for us, in the body of Christ, as being our rightousness. p. 3, 4. (c) He hath already subdued all things, finished transgression, & made an end of sin, abolished condemnation and death, and so hath for ever in him∣self compleated the work of Redempti∣on, &c. with God for us. p. 4. (d) To bear my testimony to the Redemption and Rightousness already purchased in his crucified body for us, the son buried our sins in his grave, all things are finished, sin, death and the flesh in the body of Christ, p. 5. 16. (e) It is a mystery of the Gospel, the believer to be pure and beautiful as in Christ, while weak in many things in himself▪ in his body he hath a law
of sin, but in the Lord he hath put it off, as he walks by sight he is in the Earth, in Labours, in Groaning, war∣fare, and Imperfections, &c. p. 16. (f) The Law, Sin, Death, charged upon his Crucified body he buried them in his Grave, thus abolished Sin out of the sight of God, p. 39. (g) Redemption, &c. already wrought, purchased in his Crucified body (for us) without us, p. 4. (h) The light in the Conscience is not able to reveal or give life, p. 11. (h) There is a Spirit in some that declares that we are Redeemed, Iusti∣fied, Saved, and made Righteous, and accepted with God by the work of the Spirit * of God wrought within us, p. 11. (i) What ever Spirit shall declare Christ now coming, or coming to within us, to Reconcile, to Attone, to Redeem us, &c. is no other than a Denier of Iesus our Saviour, not∣withstanding its high pretences to light and power, and Spirit within, p. 15. 16.
(k) But know thou, O Man, that that Doctrine how misterious soe∣ver in shew, that teacheth Redempti∣on to be by Operation of the Spirit within us, and not by that alone * Operation of God in the man Christ Iesus is, it may be agreeable to mans reason, but a fearful cotradiction to that blessed Mistery of Grace, p. 17. (l) Vnder this Mental Reserva∣tion, the seed, the light, the nature of the Dove in me, is he the Christ, &c. but is this a form of sound words, pag. 31. (m) Come down from the heights of your reason, to believe your Re∣demption already finished the law of sin and death already abolished, p. 3. 7. through what he did and suffered without you, without respect to any works wrought, or to be wrought (n) within you, by any light whatsoever. p. 42. (o) The work of Redemption is al∣ready  at once in the Crucified bdy without us, p. 21. 23. The Ope∣ion of the Spirit of Christ within us Redeem  p. 23.
Thus far R. G. hath shewn himself one while like a Quaker (so called) having gotten many of their words, another while like a Presbyterian, or Independant▪ shewing his self-contradiction and instability. And what may the Reader think of him, but that he hath gathered and learn∣ed something from the Quakers, or out of their Books [though he was never of us.] However like a perverse Apostate he chiefly smites at them, in his enmity chiefly to the injury of his own Soul and Conscience, who for all his opposition, cannot wholly forget, and drive the Quakers prin∣ciples out of his mind, but is forced to confess to the truth of them to his own confusion and overthrow; And it's remarkable that the most of his Pamphlet is confued; But where he acts the part of a Quaker, (so called) whom he further imitates in this wise, (viz.) R. G. Christ's Death and Sufferings, his Resurrection and Righteousness will not avail thee, thou remaining in thy self wholly unchanged, unsanctified by and through the operation of the Spirit of Christ within thee, whereby they may become of use to thee, Thou wast dead in Sins and Trespasses, and remains so still, thou wast a child of wrath as well as others, and thou art so still, &c. [And in his 35 page he goes on thus, viz] What will an Historical faith s of things altogether without, avail thee, while thou hast not the evidence within thy self, by a lively faith of thy being redeemed through the Redem∣ption that is in him? A attering hypocritical extolling of Christ in his Offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet without thee, while thou deniest him in the exercise of these Offices within thee, by the Operation of his Spirit, &c. And this is thy own condition R. G. as appears by many passages in thy Book, contrary to what here thou hast confessed, as may plainly be seen in comparing thy contradictions before; and who but one pre∣sumptious and impudent, would have appeared thus publick as thou ht done, to confute others▪ (and to undervalue and oppose the sufficiency of the Light, Power, and Operation of Christ within, as to Redemption, Salvation, and Justification, &c.) with such a heap of darkness and confusion as thou hast vented, who yet otherwhiles art made to con∣fess to the Operation of the Power and Spirit of Christ within, whose Light is set over the head of all thy Darkness, Deceipt and Enmity, and over all such Backsiders as are in the same spirit of Enmity and Opposition with thee: such as R. Cobbet, Elizabeth Atkins (and Rob. Rich, who is of a Ranting Principle) [to whom we may add Muggleton, or his railing against us;] who have spread abroad their confused mali∣tious Pmphlets, with their lies and slanders against us, wherein they
do but gratifie malitious spirits, Apostates, and Ranters. And seeing that Michael Stantcliff (who came some years amongst us, professing the Truth with us, and owning the light within, and to some yet doth formally seem as if he were a Quaker, which appeaance no doubt he hath found to make for his Interest,) yet is turned into so much dimness, darkness, and enmity again the People called Quakers, as to opprove of this Rob. Godon his Pamphlet (iled, A Testimony to the true Saviour) as being an Ingenious clear Piece, and that which we could never get through, &c. As also, to help to convey or spread them abroad (against those that Preach the true light that enlighten every man that cometh into the world to be Christ, &c.) R. G▪ intending chiefly the people called Quakers, against whom he hath insinuated divers forgeries and slanders; Wherefore we say to thee M. Stant∣cliff, be ashamed, and repent of thy approving and countenancing such a bundle of Confusion against the truth, and (against an inno∣cent People whom thou once owndt) remember from whence thou art fallen, and how thou persistest in enmity and prejudice against Truth and us, least the Lord cut thee off, and thou end thy days in trouble and anguish; we have desired and sought thy good, though thou hast rewarded us evil for good: And now we wish thy Repen∣tance, and pray the Lord forgive thee, that thou mayest not end thy days, and perish in thy Perverseness and gain-saying.
Here follows a brief account of some places of Scrip∣ture sent to Robert Gordon by Gawin Longworth: R. G. his Answer to them. Ioh. 1. (from 1. verse forward) in the beginning was the Word. 12. chap. ver. 46▪ I am come a light into the world. 15. chap. ver. 5. I am the vine, ye are the branches. Rom. 8. 10. If Christ be in you, &c. 1. Cor. 1. 24. Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. 2. Cor. 13. 3▪ Seeing you seek experience of Christ speaking in me. Tit 2. 14. Who gave himself for us that he might redeem us from all iniquity, &c. 1. Ioh. 5. 12. He that hath the Son hath life. Chap. 4. vr. 4. Greater is h that is in you, then he that is in the world. Robert Gordons Answer to these Scriptures, viz. I Have considered the Scriptures thou mentioned, and I find that in none of them it is testified who the true Christ our only Saviour is; but what he is through the operations of his spirit in Believers, called therefore the Anoint∣ing within, or Christ within, but these operations of his spirit within are no where in Scripture called the Lord's Christ our only Saviour. And if thou own no other Mediator, Christ or Saviour, then what is described in these Scrip∣tures thou mentions; then necessarily thou disowns the Lord Iesus Christ of Nazareth, a man approved of God, &c. Thus far R. G. telling us of the writings of that enlightned man, Iacob Behm. Observe. Here the enour and tendency of R. G's. Answer, how An∣tichristian it is; he appears here plainly as owning another Mediator, Christ or Saviour, then that Christ that said, I am come a light into the world, I am the vine, &c. (and we ask, was not he Jesus of Nazareth?) and of whom it is testified in Scripture, Christ in you, Christ the power and wisdom of God. He that hath the Son hath life, who gave him∣self for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, &c. But R. G. doth not own this Christ to be the Lord's Christ, or Jesus Christ of Na∣zareth, but he must have some other Christ then this Christ, that is de∣scribed in those Scriptures before (but dare he say that Iacob Behm. owns his doctrine herein?) for this Christ who is the Word, the Light, the
Christ in Believers, the power and wisdom of God, speaking in Sains. R. G. deems but as operations of the Spirit, and not Christ the Ope∣rator, Saviour or Redeemer; wherein he is greatly mistaken, and has out-run himself besides any right aim: For Christ, as the Word, the rue Light, the power and wisdom of God, the Redeemer from all iniquity, and as in his Saints, the giver of life and victory over the world, &c. He is the true Operator of God, and the Author of Faith, the worker out of Sin, the Saviour and Redeemer from iniquity (and so an Opera∣tor as such) he is given for a leader, for light, life, and salvation to all that believe in his light, which will shine, live, prevail, and prosper against all the darkness, dark spirits, and enmity which oppose it. Something further added. HEreby it may appear, and be very obvious to every impartial Reader, how disingeniously, injuriously; and falsly this R. Gordon hath dealt by us called Quakers, whom he chiefly smies at (chiefly for our so much owning and preaching the true light that enlightens every man) having, in many things he hath writ, neither given a true account of our principle, nor stated our words, nor the Authors, nor cited our Books or Pages, that it might be seen how he hath wronged us worse then ma∣ny of the Priests have done, insinuating several falshoods against us, which were never our principles, and then making war against them, and drawing false inferences and consequences upon us, which have nei∣ther natural dependence, nor any relation to our principles; as may be seen at large in his bundle of impertinencies and confusion. And whereas R. G. several times confesseth Christ and his spirit to be within us, revealing and evidencing within us, what God hath wrought for us in the body of Christ, as that love God commended to us in his Son, through his suffering and death, according to his 1. 4. and 23. pages. Now mark herein he hath in some degree assented to the truth of our principle, though to his own confusion; for that it follows, that our preaching Christ and his Spirit in the true Believers, doth not oppose nor make void his sufferings without, but evidence and make known the benefit and living effects thereof within, and bring both into the fellowship of Christs suffering, and to a conformity unto his death. But this R. G. in contradiction to himself, like a malitious injurious person, insinuates
gainst us the dividing and opposing Gospel truths one to another, and a denying the mystery of God in the flesh of Christ, as a matter of any necessity to redemption, reconciliation, &c. falsly adding these words, viz. Rcking to accomplish this in their own bodies each for himself, through obedience to the law or light in his conscience, &c. pag. 5. This is a false conclusion put upon us, and contrary to what this man hath confessed before: For its not of our selves, but God that works in us to will and to do by his spirit and power, which evidenceth and revealeth in us life and salvation, by Jesus Chrit, who is our Saviour and Redeemer, and by him and in him hath God appeared to reconcile us to himself, who hath wrought all our works in us, Isa. 26. 12. and to this we testifie in his Son (who is made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sancti∣fication and redemption) and against all such dark spirits and opposers of his light and work within, as this our Opposer is, who saith that God man in his crucified body without us, and before any good wrought in us, hath already subdued all things, finished transgression, made an end of sin, abo∣lished condemnation and death, hath for ever as our head in himself com∣pleated the work of redemption, reconciliation with God for us, &c. God having already finished, wrought and accomplished all things for us in the body of Christ, pag. 3, 4, 5, 9, 12, 13. And further he adds, pag. 26. vz. having already vanquished in his crucified body, and buried in his grave sin and death, and all the powers that were against us: But in contradicti∣on to hs asserting all these things as wrought in his body, he layes it otherwhiles upon purchase, as redemption, reconciliation, righteousness, &c. being already purchased for us in his crucified body without you, with∣out respect to any works wrought, or to be wrought within you by any light whatsoever. Thus far R. G. pag. 4, 5, 9, 23, 42. But to go round again in contradiction to this, of all this being wrought, accomplished, and purchased without in his crucified body without respect to his light and work within, R. G. confesseth and tells us of God working all things in us by Christ, the mystery of Christ within, and the operations of his spirit working all their works in them, p. 4, 5. From whence it then follows, that all is not wrought and accomplished without them, nor ought the work or light of Christ within thus to be disrespected as this man most blindly doth; neither is mens sin and death either vanquished or buried in the grave with Christs body without; for sin and death reigns in and over all men till they be quickned and renewed by the spi∣rit of Christ within, and raised up out of sins and trespasses,: and in this sense we own true beleevers and sanctified ones to be purchased un∣to
God, and hereby an everlasting inheritance obtained or purchased, and that God hath purchased his Church with his own blood, Act. 20. 28. And that such as were a chosen or purchased people or generation, were a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People to shew forth the praise of him who had called them out of darkness into his marvellous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. So such did not  and oppose the light within, nor disrespect its work within as to the purchasing and redeeming man to God; as this blind Opposer hath done, whose confusion runs after this manner, viz. all things are already wrought and compleated for us in the crucified body without (nay) God works all things in us by Christ the mystery, the operations of the spirit of God works all their works in them: See here how inconsistent this mans work is, and how he hath broke the neck of his own cause. But for whom doth R. G. reckon? hath this God-man (as he calls him) or God and Christ (in union) wrought and compleated, or purchased all, as redemption, salvation, righteousness, &c. was it for all or but for a few? See his Answer. R. G. pag. 13. For the sins of the whole world past, present▪ and to come, &c. A large confession and latitude to the world, in∣dulging them in sins to come, as the sin-pleasing professions are wont to do, and further to hearten them on therein all their dayes, he reckon∣eth God doth not see their sin in them, pag. 39. And surely they cannot be hindred of salvation for all this, nor it in justice be detained from them, because its so dearly purchased and paid for, and wrought wit God, by his Son, when no good is wrought in man (if you believe R. G.) which doctrine tends to make a merry world in their sins (and not to regard the work of God within) as it hath made many hypocrits, and many such merry also over God's witness or light in them, which would have wrought good in them, had they own'd it to have wrought evil out of them. But seeing R. G. hath run into the Priests and Professors doctrine, in his confused way and method, maintaining their principle of satisfaction and imputation, opposing the light and work of Christ or the spirit within as to justification, redemption, or salvation within. Let's first inquire how he states this satisfaction (or work that he thinks was wrought with God by the man Christ, but not in man) R. G. God said to Adam, in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt dye, and because he is God it could not be revoked, the justice of God must stand firm in the ex∣ecution of this sentence, he is just and righteous as well as lving, justice to be answered to the full; who could break thorough this stir'd up wrath? who could have answered the requirings of love, and fulfil the requirings of wrath
that would hold man captive in death, and yet satisfie both? Not its light and power in the man Christ, or the light enlightning every man that comes into the world, not the word alone, but Iesus Christ partaking of our flesh and blood, as being the Son of the Virgin Mary, pag. 19, 20. Note his errour in denying the light to be Christ, and so opposing Christs Divinity. Let the impartial Reader judge of this man's confusion and ignorance herein, in these his distinctions about God and Christ, and between Christ and the light and power within, not owning the light that en∣lightens every man to be Christ, or the Son of God contrary to Scrip∣ture; whereas the light that enlightens every man, is that eternal word that made all things, which to say, this cannot answer or satisfie love and wrath, is a blasphemous opposing the omnipotency and power of God, as if he could not satisfie himself in either, and his slghting and debasing the divine light, and power of Christ in man, and so under∣valuing God, as if he were no Saviour, especially while this man thinks God was so displeased, and his wrath so stirred up, that it would hold man captive in death, unless Christ as the Son of Mary, should satisfie and answer this wrath, and undergo this death, another while (in contradiction) it was as God man that he satisfied, &c. which if he take it to be an eternal death or wrath, that was threatned on man for disobedience, I ask if Christ did undergo that either as God or as man, or as both? and dare any say plainly that God executed wrath and re∣venge from himself upon his innocent Son, or take vengeance upon the Son of his love, or could that be an answering of divine Justice, so to take vengeance on the innocent, and let the guilty go free, with their sins past, present and to come; and then, if all be if all be thus wrought and purchased of God by Christ, paid and satis∣fied for in his crucified body: and that for the ins of the whole world, and in their stead, and that for their sins past, present and to come: then how can God in justice execute wrath or revenge on any for sin, if his innocent Son hath undergone it and satisfied it all, and that for all men, for sins past, present, and to come: And then what manifest contradiction is it for this man to confess to his intercession, his ever living to make intercession for them that come to God by him (though this we own) But how doth this agree with the doctrine of such a rigid or severe satisfaction and payment as be∣fore implied? For if the Son endured the Fathers wrath to the full, and thereby stop it (for Priests call it vindictive Justice) doth not this ender God to be more severe than his Son; yea, and unjust also: As
if a Creditor should keep or leave the Debtor in prison, and alwaies be interceded to, either for his deliverance or forgiveness, when his Surety hath paid and satisfied to the utmost farthing that could in the rigour of the law be exacted upon the Debtor; which much less can be either mercy, forgiveness, or remission: But if it be granted that for∣giveness of sins must be asked at God's hand for Christs sake, and that man must repent and be converted, that his sins may be forgiven and blotted out, and that he may be under God's terms, and under an obli∣gation to believe, obey and follow the spirit of Christ within, in its inward operations and teachings; then this confutes this man and all such carnal professors: For all is not done without, nor man absolved or discharged in the Court of Heaven (as Priests use to say) either from the guilt or punishment of sins past, present and to come, seeing that all judgment is committed to the Son, and men are not acquitted, by his sufferings without, either from the obligation or obedience of his law within, which is that of the spirit or new covenant which is in∣ward, but are liable to the censure and judgment thereof, if they dis∣obey it, and walk contrary to the spirit of truth within, wherein we are not without the law to God, but under the law to Christ. And God is not satisfied with men in their sins, his wrath being revealed from heaven against all unrighteousness of men, how ever they may imagine Christ to have satisfied is in their stead, and removed it out of God's sight. And further, as to that death that came over Adam in that day he transgressed, it was not the sentence of eternal wrath and destruction, given and fulfilled by God, but a death from that innocent life and communion which he had with God before, as the fruit of his trans∣gression which God foretold, and threatned them with before, not as from an obligation upon God presently to take full revenge on man, or to cut him off for ever the same day he transgressed; for that he did not, neither was his divine justice such an obligation upon him as to limit him from shewing mercy or forgiveness (on repentance) and sal∣vation without such a rigid payment or severe kind of satisfaction as is supposed; for he said I am a just God, and Saviour, and besides me there is no Saviour: and in his mercy and love to lost man in general, he both promised and gave a seed to bruise the Serpents head, and to be a ransom, attonement, and most acceptable and satisfactory sacrifice as a Lamb without spot to God, not as the subject of wrath or vindictive Justice, but as a sweet smelling sacrifice to God, and propitiation for
mankind, and to be a living example through all, not only to end the law and sacrifices without, but also to bring the true believer through, and beyond the ministration of death, condemnation and wrath within, into peace and union with Gd, who out of his infinite love, sent his Son to save man from sin and death, whose suffering, sacrifice, media∣tion, inercession and offices (with the blessed effects thereof within) we own and confess according to the Scriptures of truth, as inwardly re∣vealed and evidenced by the spirit, which we do not admit, either o sins past to be unrepented of, nor of sins present to be committed, nor sin o come to be persisted in, however this, or other Opposers and Pro∣fssors do sooth and flatter themselves therein, under their traditional notion, of a satisfaction, and imputation without them, p. 16. (as af∣ter R Gs. qestions) How can there be redemption, where conscience hargeth of sin, is it not against reason to believe redemption in another for us while sin is within? To this he thus answers; To this spirit, I say, who art thou that thus agues with God? Which indeed is no answer nor proof, but a meer slly begging of the question, nor any demonstrati∣on that such a belief, that is both contrary to conscience and the con∣viction of the light therein, is either true or right in the ground of it, whereby any are thus credulous either of their being redeemed, saved or jstified wihout them, whilst they lie under the guilt and imputation of sin in their own consciences, sin being then their burden and bon∣dage, which is contrary to a redeemed and justified state; but such a blind and dead faith, and conceit of redemption and justification, as this man hath appeared in, hypocritical Professors are wnt to sooth up themselves withal in their sins. And R. G. further adds, p. 1. viz. Indeed it is a mystery of the Gos∣pel that man's rason cannot comprehend, the believer to be pure and beautiful as in Christ his head, while weak in many things in himself, in his body ath a law of sin, but in the Lord he hath put it off; as he walks by ight he is in the earth, in labors, ingroanings, warefare and imperfections; but as he walks by faith he is in Christ, walking in rest, in victory and per∣fection, these r paradoxes reason cannot fathom. Answ This man thinks hee's gotten beyond reason in his paradoes, which indeed do appear so contradictory, confused and unreasonable, that every rational man may see his darkness herein, to conclude the believer in warar, and imperfections in the body, with a law of sin, while pure, beautiful, walking in rest, in victory and perfection in Christ his head, which is all one, as to say he i in Christ; and out of Christ,
pure and impure, perfect and imperfect, at the same instant, or (as the hypocritical Priests and Professors have said) that men are imputatively righteous, and justified, while inherently and actually sinful and unjust: and yet for all this R. G. makes account in pag. 39. that the law, sin and death are so charged on Christs crucified body, that sin is purged away out of the sight of God; while yet he does not believe, hs people actlly reed from it, which is corrupt Antinamionisme, but these and such like para∣doxes e cannot own, as either reason or truth: For how is Christ the Believers and Saints head, or they perfect in him, if they be imperfect or impure in the body? are they not members of Christ? and is not their faith their victory over sin and death? And is it no▪ perfection they have wated and travelled, to be eewed into the image of the heaven∣ly? Where's the new birth, new creature, perfect on, righteousness and true holiness, so much preached, and testified of, by the holy men of God in the Scriptures of truth? if men must be reckoned pure, and perfect, and in Christ when yet they are not washed from their fithi∣ness, in which state many are, when yet they conceit that God counts them pure and jstified: Bu he that jt fieth the wicked, and he that condemneth the just they both are aboination before the Lord. R. G. We find thou hast no brought forth any new thing as to matter or substance, in these matters, but art pnged in the old dark stuff of Priests and Professors, who have writ against us, though thou art more confused, and appearest more malitious against us then many of them however thou pretendest love and bowels▪ p. 40 which cannot hide thy dissimulation and enmity; and thou hast not methodized nor worded their principles so well as many of them, thou being confounded and mangled between truth and their corrupt traditional principles, which we perceive thou dost not see the bottom and tendency of, however▪ thou thinkest thou art wise, but the devil hath blinded thee with prejudice and conceit, as he hath all that take thy part, and spread thy books, or else thou durst never have brought such a piece of folly, falshood, and mixt mangled stuff to publick view, as thou hast done, who also to shew thy ignorance of redemption thou usest these words, viz▪ The operation of the spirit of Christ within us, not to redeeus, p. 23. and Christ came into us by, the ministration of the spirit not to redeem us, pag. 38. Answ. This is contrary to the testimonies of both Prophets and Apo∣stles, who witnessed the redemption of their souls, from under the bondage and power of sin and death, so from the hand of the enemy,
Psa. 107. 2. David said, draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it; ps. 69▪ 8. So he did not put redemption afar off; for the God of Israel was near, whom the people owned for their Saviour and Redeemer from all inquity, Ps. 130. 7, 8. And as the Apostle exhorted, grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed uno the day of redem∣pt on, Eph. 4. 30. So that there was a day of redemption to be ex∣pected, unto which they were sealed by the holy spirit; which redem∣ption was a freedom, recovery or purchase from all iniquity (which could not be effected without the operation of the spirit of Christ with∣in, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all inquity, Titus 2. 14. But this R. G. would impose on people a faith concerning redemption, reconciliation, and justification, as all being finished, wrought or purchased without them, without respect to any works wrought or to be wrought within them, by any light whatsoever, p. 42. See, Reader, how erroneously he hath excluded the work of God and Christ from within, as to the ransoming or freeing of man from sin, and making him righteous, and so bringing him into unity, peace, favour and friendship with God, which is the true sense of redemption, justi∣fication and reconciliation, which are not effected, nor obtained with∣out the operation of the spirit of holiness within (though Christs testi∣mony, suffering and example without had a tendency thereto) 1 Cor. 6. 11. For it was by the spirit of God, that the Saints were both wash∣ed, sanctified and justified, how ever tke Devil and his Agents endea∣vour to exclude, and invalidate the inward operations of God, Christ, or his Spirit. G. W. Errata. Page 1. l. 37. 'for consider read crucifie. p. 4. for 1. r. 4. l. 6. for en∣lghtening, r. enlighteneth. p. 12. l. 27 for any, and. p. 14. l. 1. for is this, r. is not this, &c. p. 15. l. 38. for no r. not. p. 16. l. 12. for spent, r. shut. p. 17. l. 39. for hint, r. limit. p. 18. l. 1, for many r. man. Second part. p. 2. l. 30. for counted. r. committed. p. 8. l. 7. r. Christ now come, dele to. p. 12. l. 2, for Longworth r. Lawrie.
