L212A 99828375 32802
A TREATISE OF PARTICVLAR PREDESTINATION; VVherein ar answered three Letters. 1. Tending to disprove particular Predestina∣tion. 2. To shew the contradiction betwixt Christ dy∣ing for all, and Gods Election of some. 3. To prove that the soule doth not come from the parent, and consequently that there is no Originall sinne. By THOMAS LAMB. LONDON, Printed in the yeare, 1642.
To the unpartiall Reader, Grace, and Peace. Courteous Reader. FOr as much as the glory of God ought to bee most deare in our eyes, which wee ought to seeke, and preferre more then our lives; I could not with good conscience and reason, but publish these few lines following, (especially being earnestly desired by some of my deare friends,) and the reasons are, first, because the truth of the Gospell, which holds forth Christs giving himselfe a ransome for all men, 1. Tim. 2.6. A propitiation for the sinnes of the whole world, 1 Iohn 2.2. and that he tasted death for every man Heb. 2.9. (which is such a glorious truth, as without which first the Gospell of Gods free grace cannot bee preached to all men, secondly neither can wick∣ed men nor unbelievers be required to believe; and thirdly neither can the not beleeving in Christ be concluded to be a sinne,) all which being pro∣fessed by the people of God (who desire in all sin∣cerity
to walke in all the wayes of God, and to bee led wholy by the rule of his word, what ever the hazard be thereby) they are thereby scandalized to hold free-will, and to denie particular election of persons, and persons hereby kept from the truth: to the end therefore that these stumbling blockes might be taken out of the way: these fol∣lowing lines doe manifestly declare Christs dy∣ing for all, and particular Election to stand to∣gether, which therefore can be no let to hinder people from the wayes of God, nor yet from dis∣cerning this particular truth of Christs dying for all, the excellency whereof none can prize, but those that know it; the which excellency if others could know, I am confident they would not bee such enemies to their owne soules as to slight it. 2. Because those that do deny particular election doe presse upon us, as if we were behind hand to defend our selves, and our principles against them, wheras it is manifest (and they know it to be true) that they have had these three Letters in way of answer to their Letters, and have made no reply, and therefore to the end that it might ap∣peare, that we doe not comply with them, secondly that we are not behind hand to defend our selves against them, and thirdly that we might provoke
them to reply, and to manifest their reasons to publicke view, if they have any for the defence of themselves in answer to what I have written to them, which I conceive they cannot doe, I have therefore adventured to put forth the same to prove whether they can or not, and lastly con∣ceiving that some may be staggering, and not so well established as were to be wished, and con∣ceiving that these may be some stay to them, and meanes to give them further light then yet they have, (which if they lie in obscurity would doe no such good) for whose sakes in speciall, J doe endeavour that they should bave this for present, till further occasions bring forth further labours; accept therefore I intreat you in love this small endeavour read it over with earnest intention, meditate of it, and trie it by the Scriptures with pious devotion; and if any good light and divine knowledge comes to thee by it, I shall have my desire, give God the glory of it, let me have the benefit of thy faithfull, and fervent prayers, and I shall ever rest. Thine in any service of love to my power. THOMAS LAMBE.
AN ANSVVER TO A short writing, for the disproving of particular Predestination, made by T. S. in which answer, particular Predestination is cleared and proved by T. L. IT is said that God hath predestinated, that those that will beleeve in Christ shall bee saved, and those that will not shall be damned. To which I answer, that this is to short a description of Predestination, because Predesti∣nation is not a conditionall but an absolute De∣cree, as the Scripture holds it forth, Rom. 8.30. In which place two things are to be noted, and the first is the definition of the Subjects of predestination, and they are onely those which are in time called, justified, and glorified, and the second is the order of the causes where we are to note, that glorifica∣tion is not the cause of our Justification; but Iustification is the cause of glorification; so likewise Justification is not the cause of vocation, but vocation is the cause of Iustification; so like∣wise vocation is not the cause of Predestination, but Predestina∣tion is the cause of Vacation; and there is no cause of Predesti∣nation,
but the meere will of God; and therefore Predestinati∣on is absolute not conditionall; promises and threatnings may be found conditionall, but a conditionall decree the Scripture maintaineth not. And where it is further said that many doe affirme, that God hath decreed some to doe wickedly, and so to fall under condem∣nation. I answer, that God hath decreed to permit some to doe wick∣edly, and to refuse grace, and accordingly to punsh them; and to prevent others and to create them in Christ Iesus,Ephes. 2.10. unto good workes; and accordingly to save them; and to this accords, Rom. 9.22.23. what and if God will to declare his wrath, and make his power knowne, suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath prepared or fitted to destruction; that hee might de∣clare the riches of his mercy upon the vessels of mercy, which he hath prepared unto Glory; and they have not prepared themselves thereunto. Now to disprove this kind of Predestination, something is said concerning Adam, how that he was created after the Image of God in the faculties of his soule; and disposition of his bo∣dy; and set by God in the Garden of Eden, who gave him a Law concerning the Tree of Knowledge of Good, and Evill, decreeing that if he did obey he should live; but if hee did eat he should die; and that although God foresaw that Adam would break his Law, yet it will not follow that God decreed he should break it; To which I answer that it doth follow that God decreed hee should break it else he would not have suffered him to break it; having power to hinder him, if it were his will (hee could easily doe it) but he will not: therefore it is his will to permit Adam to break his Law. And where it is said that if it were so, then Adam had no meanes to resist sinne. (I answer) I deny the consequence, for it doth no more fol∣low, that Gods Decree that Adam would, or should certainly fall by his permission, doth take from Adam power of resistance of sinne, then Gods infallible foresight th Adam would fall doth; the later you grant and prove, Acts 15.18. therefore the former stands upon the same ground.
And whereas it is said, that if Adam had resisted the Temp∣ter and stood he had crossed the decree of God, which is impossi∣ble, because Gods Decree is unalterable. I answere, and affirme the like of his prescience or foreknow∣ledge, which is as infallible as his decree, for if Adam had resi∣sted the tempter and had stood; God had beene deceived in his foresight concerning his fall; and this Argument is as much as if the skie fall wee shall have Larkes: but it doth not fall, and therefore they be not easily had. And where it is further said that if it should bee grant¦ed, that God decreed that Adam should eat and die, and yet commanded him that hee should not eat, to the end that hee might live, this were to make the Lord contrary to himselfe. I answer denying the consequence, for these things are not contrary, namely for God to command Adam not to eat; as hav∣ing Authority so to doe, to the end hee might trie his willing obedience, and in case he fell to discover the hainousnesse of his sinne and disobedience, and God foreseeing hee would fall to permit him so to doe is no contradiction at all, but a pure truth; for if men were elected in Christ before the foundation of the world, then was the fall presupposed, and that they were so Paul affirmeth it, Ephes. 1.3.4. and therefore in this point there is no danger at all. And where it is further said, if there were no such decree concerning Adam, then not concerning his posterity neither. To which I answer, that there is such a Decree concerning Adam, to permit him to doe the evill which was forbidden; Ergo there is such a Decree concerning his posterity. Also to permit them to doe those things which they doe that are for∣bidden. And whereas it is further said, that if any still will hold, that God decreed any mans condemnation, then it is for transgres∣sion of the Law, which no man could doe before he was cre∣ated I answer, that although no man could transgresse the Law be∣for hee was created, yet God could foresee that man would transgresse a Law before man was created: and decreed to suf∣fer him so to doe, and decreed to punish him accordingly. And wherereas it is further demanded, whether God de∣creed
the condemnation of Adams person, and supposed the answer will be no: because God decreed to send his sonne, to redeeme him from Death, and if him why not all his Posterity: seeing it is written, Ioh. 3.16. That God so loved the World, that he gave his onely begotten Sonne, that whosoever beleeved in him, should not perish but have Everlasting Life. To which I answer, that it doth not follow from hence, that God hath decreed to doe for all alike, in causing of them to be∣leeve:Ezek. 3.6.7. Mat. 11.21 for though it may be concluded, that God gave Christ and Christ gave himselfe for all alike: yet he doth not give the Doctrine of the same to all alike,Ephes. 2.8. Phil. 1.28. much lesse doth he give Faith, which is the effect of the same Doctrine to all alike: and there∣fore is said to be the gift of God, not in common, as the Preach∣ing is, but in speciall and peculiar as the Election is. Rom. 11.7. and therefore true Faith is called the Faith of Gods elect: Tit. 1.1. given onely to some and not to others, Mat. 13.11. as be∣ing those that are Predestinated, and therefore effectually called, justified and glorified. Rom. 8.30. but others he suffers to walke in their owne wayes. Act. 14.16. as the Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction Rom. 9.22. And the Reprobates and wicked of the World, could not do such wickednesse as they doe, but that it pleaseth God to suffer such dishonourable wayes and practises to be for a time, as knowing how to bring forth his owne glory in their just deserved damnation: But he doth not suffer his E∣lect to walke in their owne wayes: but doth prevent them that they escape Eternall Damnation, 1 Cor. 11.32. That he might glorifie himselfe in them in his mercy, as upon the Vessels of mercy, which he hath prepared unto glory, Whereas you conclude with this request, that your positions against particular Election, may be either receiv'd or answered, I now conclude with the like, (having as I suppose sufficiently answered this:) that you would either shew, wherein the in∣sufficiency of my answer lies, or yeeld thereunto. An Answer to a Letter written by R. H. sending to shew the contradiction that is betwixt Christs dying for all, and Gods Election of some. The which Answer sheweth, that there is no contradiction be∣twixt
these two, but a sweet concord; by T. L. First you say you write to shew the contradiction that is be∣twixt universall redemption and particular election, and how doe you doe this; you aske the question how Christ died for all men, seeing he never intended salvation to them. To this I answer, that Christ may be said to have died for all men, although he never intended to make all men to believe in his death for salvation; you say if God hath onely elected some persons, and rejected all the rest, then there is no way of reco∣very made for them that are rejected; But Christ hath made a way of recovery out of the lost estate, for all those for whom be died. Ergo. To this I answer, that Christ hath made, or purchased away of recovery for all men, if they doe not reject him and it also; but election is a fore-apointment that such persons are elected, shall believe and be recovered, and if the rest doe not it is their owne fault, because they beleeve not the truth which preach∣ed, Rom. 11.5.7. Iohn 16.9. Mar. 3.5. You say generall redemption extends it selfe to all; particular Election it opposeth it; and saith no not to all but to some onely. This I deny and say, Election doth effect that some doe be∣lieve, but it doth not oppose any in point of beleeving: and so it doth not follow that although man doe not effect in himselfe in himselfe faith, and cause himselfe to be elected (as is imagined) that he is not the cause of his owne destruction by the refusall of grace offered, and I put the case that none were elected at all: would it then come to passe that generall redemption which ex∣tends it selfe to all would save all; (because you say particular Election intends onely the salvation of some) if not then would I aske the reason why? if you say because all doe not believe, then you say true, and what if none believe, then none should be saved: whereby you may see that although generall Redemption extends it selfe to all, to all, yet neverthelesse if none beleeve, none should be saved; and that none would beleeve unlesse they were elected, appeares in that none would beleeve unlesse God worke it, such evill is in mans nature, as doth continually op∣pose the Doctrine of grace, untill they bee overcome thereby, which Doctrine for God to afford to men effectually proporti∣onable to the measure of corruption, even to the taking of it
away in some and not in others, by the extent of his providence, proceeds onely from the good pleasure of his will differently as the same is extended by his continuall government of the world; so then it doth appeare that Election is a thing super-added over and above, besides the meanes of Redemption to cause some to beleeve, which otherwayes would effect the same. You say they contradict one another in their ends, which they cannot doe, if they be truths both as for example: you say the end of generall Redemption is the salvation of all, and the avoiding of respect of persons; but the end of particular Ele∣ction is this and but this: (namely) to save this person and con∣demne that, and because he will doe it he will doe it; and can give no Reason, nor shew any cause why to cleare his Justice or vindicate his Mercy; To which I answer, that the will of God is reason enough for the disposing of his gifts of Grace, to whomsoever he pleaseth, both for the clearing of his Justice, and vindicating of his Mercy. Secondly, I say to command and provide menes for all, or ending to the salvation of all: and yet to decree the salvation onely of some is no contradiction at al: but onely a wise dis∣posall of the matter; so as not to bee wholy frustrate of his Commands and meanes; which otherwise would come to passe, if he should leave to mankind the whole disposall of the busi∣nesse. Thirdly I answer, concerning respect of persons, wee are to marke and mind what it is, and in it wee are to consider two things: first that it is alwayes something in the person, for which he is respected, and secondly that the thing is unsuffici∣ent why he should be so respected, but oherwise to give un∣like Gifts to persons that are alike is no respect of Persons: or if it be then God is such a respcter of persons as may be prov∣ed plenteously, for the people of the Iewes were as bad as o∣ther Nations, and yet God gave them more and greater Gifts then he did to other Nations, Ezek. 16.47, 48. Deut. 7.7. Act. 7.39 40. And likewise Manasseh who did more evill then the Heathen whom the Lord had destroyed, 2 Kings 21.9. 2 Chron. 33.9.10. Neither were the 42. Children worse then
Manasseh, and the Iewes living in his time which notwithstan∣ding perished, and the other were spared as is to be scene 2 Kings 2.24. and God gave them no time to repent of their sinnes, as he did to Manasseh, and the people who notwithstanding when the Lord spake unto them would not regard. And Paul likewise exceeded many other in wickednesse, or at least was as bad, and many of them which yet had no miraculous appariti∣on of Christ, to effect their conversion, Faith and Grace as Paul had: therefore the dealing of God in communicating of Gifts doe differ, though the persons doe not differ, but be one as bad as the other, yea many, those which have the most and greatest gifts bestowed upon them are the worst; and therefore in Ele∣ction if there be any difference God chuseth the worst both of persons and things, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28. the end is that he might avoyd respect of any thing, in the persons or things which hee chuseth, either present or foreseene, ver. 29. for what any person or thing is in goodnesse, hee or it is,Ephe. 2.19 Iam. 1.17 that he or is by the worke of God, vers. 30. the end is that hee might have the whole praise, vers. 31. Fourthly I say if God leave the matter wholy to man in gene∣rall Redemption, as that hee doth Elect Persons no otherwise then in Relation to qualities: then he hath respect to persons, and the reason is, because hee hath respect to something in the person, for which he doth respect him: and yet the thing is in∣sufficient why he should be o respected, for according to that position more should have been chosen, but with respect to what they doe, which others doe not, now it remaines to be examined whether that which some do of themselves by their owne pow∣er, puts a worth and excellency upon their Persons, to cause God to chuse them above others: if not then I demand why and up∣on what reason God should chuse them above others; and a∣gaine, if that which some doe of themselves, and by their owne power put a worth and excellency upon their Persons, to  God to chuse them above others; thn Paul rreth in saving that Election is or favour or Grace, Rom. 11.5 6. Now I conceive it will not be said there is a worth or excellency upon the person of any man, by what he oth by his owne power, in point of beleeving Sanctification, obedience, and perseverance to cause God to chuse him; and if not, then is God a respectr
of Persons, and not just but partiall; because hee doth respect one more then another, and yet the thing for which hee is re¦spected doth not deserve why he should bee so respected, and according to the Argument it is all one, as if a Judge should save some Malefactor, because he is rich, strong, wise, beauti∣full, or because neere of kindred, whereas hee will condemne another, because hee is a stranger, or evill favoured, poore, foo∣lish or weake which were partiality. And on the other side, and if any will affirme that what some doe of themselves, by their own power in point of beleeving, Sanctification, obedience, and perseverance, put a worth and ex∣cellency upon their persons above others, to cause God to chuse them, the absurdities will bee more horrible; which what they will be I leave to you to conceive and judge of. In the next place, you say you come to answer some of my Scriptures, that I bring to prove particular Election, and first you begin with my saying, that they which are in time sa∣ved were formerly appointed so to bee: you say it is a very truth, but nothing at all for particular Election: and why doth it not? you say; it proves yours to bee a truth also; for all that are or shall bee saved were formerly appointed so to bee; but who be they? not any person abstract from Faith Sanctification, or obedience to the Gospell as you say I must prove, if I will prove particular Election. To which I answer, I doe observe in your answer subtilty, weaknesse and error, and first for Subtilty it is observable, that you say, who are they that are or shall be saved, and then you answer not any person abstract from Faith, Sanctifie, &c. and herein you doe subtilly turne the question from Election to Salvation, thereby insinuating as if wee should say, that some persons abstract from Faith, Sanctification, and should be saved, whereas the proper question is who be they that are elected: or more properly whether men beleeve before they be elected, wee know grant and agree, that all that are saved doe beleeve, and are sanctified before they are saved: but most properly is the question whether Faith, Sanctity, and obedience be the cause of Election, this doe I absolutely deny. Secondly, I doe accuse you of weaknesse, because you doe not answer to the second part of the reason at all, which if
you had I conceive you would have found it to strong for you, and therefore it is meere weaknesse to shun the strength of an Argument: to prove this I expresse the former Argument by me framed, and it was this. That which God doth in time, he did appoint or decree to doe before time; but he doth cause some to beleeve in Christ, and not others; Ergo he did so decree before. This you say proves not particular Election, and doth it not indeed? I would put you in mind that it doth; for it sheweth that God doth in time cause some to beleeve, and not others: Ergo, he did elect their persons, and appoint and decree them to beleeve in Christ before. Now to prove this, I shewed that the sole cause of the diffe∣rence proceeded from the Lord, why one beleeved and not an∣other by these Scriptures, Mat. 13.11. Where Christ saith, To you it is given to know the Secrets of the Kingdome of Heaven, but to others it is not given, Phil. 1.29. To you it given for Christ, not onely to beleeve in him but also to suffer for his sake. Phil. 2.13. for it is God which worketh in you both the will and the deed. The Conclusion then is this, if God work Faith in some in time, and not in others, then hee did appoint so to doe before, and consequently did elect them and not others; the former is by me proved, and not by you disproved nor denyed, for you make no answer thereunto, whether God God causeth some to be∣leeve above others or no, this you speake nothing to at all: and the other you grant to be a truth, namely what hee doth in time he decreed to doe before; Ergo, he did elect and appoint some to beleeve and not others. And thus you may behold your selfe to deale very weakly, and the strength to prevaile against you, deale therefore more strongly next time and more punctually, or else yeeld to the truth. Thirdly, I doe accuse you of errour in the sequell of your dis∣course, in that you make a respective Decree of Election in refe∣rence, unto what man will doe in point of beleeving, Sanctifica∣tion, obedience and perseverance; which if it bee so then man is the cause of his Election and adoption, and then such a per∣son may rejoyce in what he hath done in causing himselfe to be elected and adopted, but against this I doe set the manifest
words of Scripture 1 Cor. 4.7. who is it that hath separated thee, or caused thee to differ from another man? you say a mans selfe by his voluntary beleeving, and practising the duties of Sanctification, obedience and perseverance, but against this the text is considerable: what hast thou that thou hast not re∣ceived? if you will now say that the Gospell is Gods gift but the ability to beleeue obey and presevrere is in man or else God should be Vnjust to condemne us for not doing that with we have no Power to doe; here would I have you to hold to the Text, that either you have not this Power as you are men simply, or if you have, then another man hath it as well as you, then doth Paul aske the question still, who hath separated or caused thee to differ from another man? if you say you used the ability or power which you had aright, which if another had done as I have, he had sped as well as I: then this will follow that you have separated or caused your selfe to differ from another man, by a right use of the power you had in your selfe above another, and have not received it and may glory as if you had not recei∣ved it, but fie upon this filthy error which doth so set up man, and take from God contrary to the mind of Paul in this place; and also in the 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 29. Where it is said that God ele∣cteth foolish weak vile despised things, and things that are not: one end is to bring to naught things that are, another end is that no Flesh should glory in his presence, in Ephes. 1.4.5, 6. compa∣red with chap. 2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Wee may see that he choseth those that were dead in sins, Children of wrath, Gentiles, uncircumcision, such as were without Christ, strangers from the Common-wealth of Israel, aliens from the Covenants of Promise, such as had neither Faith nor Hope, but were a farre off without God in the World; yea even at this time when they were dead by sinnes, ver. 5. then did God set his great love upon them (ver. 4.) to chuse them (Chap. 4.) that he might worke Faith and Holinesse in them (Chap. 2.8.10.) that thereby he might set forth his rich Grace and kindnesse, and praise. (ver. 7 Chap. 1.6.) and that he might take from man all occasion of arrogating to himselfe any boasting at all (Chap. 2.8, 9.) thus I conceive I have replied sufficiently to your answer, and would put you in mind that there were two reasons more, which you have not spoken too at all: and it is much that you
three Reasons,  two of them:  you have ansred the  to my purpose,  have no spoken to  them  to prove the thing in a That  is the  the . Now the  why God sends the Gospel  be preached which is the  of Faith,  plensly, in the pla then  of his Elt and cho∣sen ones in th place  Act. 18.6.9 11. comp with the 16.7, 8, 9, 10.  Election is  cause of Faith. Eternall life is the gift of God Rom 6.22. therefore all the causes concurring to  bee the gift of God aso; But some persons onely are  those  as those in whom onely  Faith is a cause concurring to , Ego Election  cause and Faith as its proper effect, it's the gift of God. Here followeth an answer to Letter which was . In which answer is shewed how that the some and originall sinne, and corruption of nature is derived by the  ration from Adam. LOving friend according to you  have adssed my selfe to you in these few following  for you perusall. You say wee have beene in dispute about the soules comming from God, you say, I deny it. I conceive you are mistaken, for I only say the soule doth not come from God immediately with out the meanes of the parents, for by th meanes of the Parents hold the soule to come from God and the body also You say it is impossible for the  of one  the Sp¦rit f other, because the Spirit is the To which I answer, separate the Spirit of the  from the flesh in the act of generation, and what ging w there bee  of soule  body, whs on the other side if you conjoyn  together in the gei wh should hinder, but that there should be the same conjunction  gneration  thing gende∣red,  ing to the  command of God
to every creature gendering, that they should goe forth & multiply according to their kind, not a part but the whole of their kind, such as they themselves are; you alledge Zach. 12.1. which saith God formeth the Spirit of a man, and so he doth the body too, Iob. 31.15. and the body of the corne also, 1 Cor. 15.36, 37, 38. But this hindereth not, but that he useth the meanes which hee hath appointed in nature, for the effecting of these formes, for it is plaine that they are all naturall formes, and essentiall to the nature of the creature formed, so man, soule and body both parts are essentiall to his nature, and effected by meanes of man, whose nature it is you alledge, Psal 33.15. Hee fashioneth their hearts every one of them; which is to bee understood of Providence whereby he ordereth their hearts in their severall operations, and affections and nothing pertinent to creation or infusion of soules. As for Heb. 12.9. I shewed that the Apostle cals God the Fa∣ther of Spirits in respect of his absolute authority over them, secondly in communicating grace and goodnesse to them, you say you can see no reason to take it so, and why you say he opposeth the soule to the body, this I grant, but whereas you say he oppo∣seth the fountaine of the one to the fountaine of the other; that remaines yet for you to prove, that hee opposeth the fatherhood of the one, to the fatherhood of the other, cannot be denied, but that by fatherhood should be meant fountaine, cannot be clearly concluded in respect of the essence, of soule and body, unlesse you meane by fountaine, author of the spirituall life of grace, and sal∣vation, communicated to the soule by the Gospell of God, as Iam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.23. for to speak as the thing is it's Grace com∣municated which gives the soule its true being, for before the soule is dead in trespasses, but grace makes it alive, and God by communicating the same grace by which the soule lives, is cal'd the Father of Spirits, or spirituall Father opposed to our naturall Father, of whom wee are carnally begotten, and borne, and the Apostle would have the beleeving Hebrewes to submit them∣selves unto his chasticements, who as he is the Author of our spi∣ritual life, so is he the preserver of the same spirituall life, & useth the same for their profit and life, as he doth expresse himselfe, and therefore seeing you have submitted your selves to your na∣turall Father, much more should you submit your selves to this spirituall Father for your profit, and spirituall benefit, that you might be partakers of his holinesse.
You say if the soule comes by generation, then there must be a conjun∣ction of Spirits at the same time as is of bodies, and this you deny, Ergo. To this I answer, that bodies of mankind abstracted from their spirits have no conjunction. you say if soules of Parents begets the soules of the children, then a learned man must beget a learned child, and a gracious man a gracious child as well as a sinfull man a sinfull child, seeing learning grace and sin are all accidents, having a being in the man, not being with the man, for a man say you may be a perfect man as Adam was without them. First I deny the consequence which is, if a soule begets a soule, then a learned man must beget a learned child, and so of grace as well as of sin: becase if the soule doe beget a soule it is to bee supposed that it begets such a soule in likenes as it was in natures being: and not such a one as it was by art or gift, but learning is artificiall and grace is of gift: but sin is naturall, for it is the corruption of nature, and did enter ino the world by one man over all men, Rom. 5.12. and therefore wee are by nature the children of wrath, Ephes. 2.3. and not by accident. Secondly I answer to the antecedent that the soule doth not beget the soule, but the person soule and body doth beget the person soule and body; and such as is the person begetting in his nature, such is the per∣son begotten. And whereas you say all persons are free from sin till they commit acti∣ons of sinne, and thereby onely doe become in bondage to it to which you alledge, Ioh. 8. which place doth more directly shew the person that is in bondage, than the thing which brings him into bondage, as if he should say hee that committeth sinne, doth plainely declare him∣selfe serviceable and subject thereunto, Romans 6.12. and whereas you say a present bondage presupposeth a former freedom, this is not deny∣ed, so as you have respect to Adam who was created good, and so free from sin, till he fell from that state into sin, into which he brought all his posterity together with himselfe, Rom. 5.12. otherwayes there are many of the sonnes of Adam, which should need no redemption by Christ, if they be free from sinne in themselves, and besides as it over∣throwes Christs dying for all: so I see not why they should not continue free by a carefull use of their power they have in nature, even in keeping the Law, and so consequently be saved thereby which is the opinion of divers, and then should Christ die in vaine and to no purpose at all, Gal. 2.21. and by the same reason one may, all may, nay if there had been a Law which could have given life, surely rghteousnes should have beene by that Law, Gal. 22. but the Scripture hath concluded all der sin, therefore since the fill of Adam free from sinne no otherwise
then by  faith in Christ, and so I  questions. That all mn have as much benefit , without  Adam  and death  as all die in Adam 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. To which I say all have not to much benefit  Christs resurrection  their actuall Faith, as they have  death by Adams sin or death without actuall sinne, because hey  have naturall union with Adam: without their actuall sinne, but none have spirituall union with Christ without actuall Faith (or I had raher say personall Faith, because I conceive faith may bee potentiall as well as actuall) as for the Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. by which you back your question. I con∣ceive it is by you mistaken very much, because you gather from thence that all men have benefit by Christs resurrection without their perso∣nall faith: which I conceive is not the mind of Paul, but onely to shew that Christ was the head or first fruits, whose resurrection is both the beginning, and also a sure pledg of the resurrection of his body or whole lump that have being in him by faith, ver. 18. and have his spirit in them, Rom 8.10.11. Christ by his Spirit quickens their mortall bodie, the certainty whereof makes them debters to live after the spirit, ver. 12 And Christ in foure severall places in Ioh. 6. speaks of this matter as of a speciall benefit belonging to the faithfull, 1 in ver. 39. 2d. in v. 40. 3d. in ver. 44. 4d. in ver. 54. It is true the wicked also shall rise but not as a benefit from Christs re∣surrection, in, or unto which they have no relation but by an effect of his glorious power to their utter confusion and condemnation Ioh. 5.19 estAnd whereas you aske how Christ restores all things from the bon∣dage of corruption, I conceive by al things you will understand a limi∣tation in relation to the univers,s. or else I will ask you whether wicked persons be not things, and whether those things bee restored from the bondage of corruption by Christ, & therefor by all things must be meant al the faithfull, and all things in relation to them for their happinesse. Your last qustn is whether Christ the righteous Jud wil judge by the law given to Adam before the f, or by the Gospel afer, or by both by both,s. for the law given to Adam before he sinned, is it which he sinned against, & thereof it comes that man hath need of a Gospell or glad t∣dings of grace and mercy which grace and mercy if it bee received it delivers from the curse of the Law, if it bee not received hee lies under the curs of the Law still, and under the refusall grace also according a the meanes of making owne this grace hath been aforded. FINIS.
