M3030 11861892 50024
THE SECOND PART OF AN ARGUMENT, Shewing, that a Standing Army Is inconsistent with A Free Government, and absolutely destructive to the Constitution of the English Monarchy. With Remarks on the late published LIST of King JAMES's Irish Forces in France. Proximus ardet Ucalegon. Virgil. Aen. l. 2. London, Printed in the Year, 1697.
The Preface. THE following Considerations were writ∣ten, and designed to be published soon after the Argument against a Stand∣ing Army appeared. But a Report being gi∣ven out, That the Advocates for a Stand∣ing Army would do Wonders on that Subject, 'twas thought convenient to expect Their Atchievements, that if their Success should prove in any measure answerable to their Confidence, the Publick might have been no farther importuned about the Matter. I think I may justly say, This Mountain, after all its Pangs and Convulsions, has brought forth no∣thing but a ridiculous Mouse. And therefore I shall submit to the Judgment of all impartial Englishmen, what is here said in confirmation of the Argument: Which I hope will be of the greater weight, because taken from our own History.
An Argument, &c. PART II. WE have much talk of a Standing Army which is to be in time of Peace, but no body can tell us what they are to do: We know their usual Commission is to kill and slay; But where is the Enemy? Men talk of this with as much certainty, as if they were already esta∣blished. Which is yet the more surprizing, if we reflect on one of the Articles of Charge a∣gainst the late King James. It is plain therefore that all this is Practice, and that these bold Fore∣stallers of Parliaments would fain Enact that without Doors, which from the Foundation of this Kingdom was never attempted within. These Gentlemen are also pleased to affirm it necessary to have a vast Body of Forces continu∣ed on foot: Whereas the first Project we find for a Standing Army, in the Year 1629, requires on∣ly three thousand Foot in constant Pay, to bridle the Impertinence of Parliaments; to overaw the Parliament and Nation; to make Edicts to be
Laws; to force upon the People vast numbers of Excises; and in short, to overturn the whole Frame of this noble English Government. Who∣ever has a mind to peruse that dangerous Scheme in Rushworth's Appendix, pag. 12. and what he says of it in his History, will see enough. I marvel whose Advocates these Men are in this Matter: For I am satisfied none of those brave Englishmen, who have fought honourably a∣broad, ever meant, when the Service was over, to be a Charge, Burden and Terror at home to their own Country; nor to disfranchise us of two of our Native Liberties, Freedom from Martial Law, and Billeting of Souldiers; and thereby directly to take away from themselves, as well as from their Fellow-subjects, one half of the Be∣nefit of the Petition of Right, and in consequence the other half too, The Freedom of their Persons and Estates. I shall therefore consider of a Standing Army, without minding who is for it, or who is against it in this Age, and only shew what are like to be the Consequences of it in future Reigns. And I have reason to do thus, because if the Parliament give the best King a Standing Army, the worst King shall hereafter claim and have it. We have many Instances where Parliaments in a kind Fit, by one sudden Grant, have entail∣ed a World of lasting Misery upon the Nation. I will mention but one; The Kingdom was newly delivered from a bitter Tyrant, I mean King John, and had likewise got rid of their per∣fidious Deliverer the Dauphin of France; who
after the English had accepted him for their King, had secretly vowed their Extirpation, which theDaniel, pag. 148. Viscount of Melun, a Frenchman, being at the point of Death, disclosed; they were more∣over blessed with a young Prince, of whom they conceived mighty Hopes, in the Hands of a very wise and honest Council. This was Life from the Dead, and a true Revolution. In the Trans∣port of all this Happiness, about the 7th Year of this new King Henr. 3. the Parliament granted him the Wardship of their Heirs. Knighton, pag. 2430, records it thus; Magnates Angliae concesserunt Regí Henrico Wardas Haeredum & terrarum suarum, quod fuit initium multo∣rum malorum in Anglia. He says this Grant was the beginning of many Mischiefs in Eng∣land. In the Year 1222 these Mischiefs had their Rise and Beginning; but where they ended, no old Chronicle could ever tell: For after this intolerable Bondage had continued above four hundred Years, the Nation at last ransomed them∣selves in our time by giving the Excise. It is a grief to all after Ages to find a Parliament so mi∣serably overseen, for they both mistook their Man; and the hopeful Prince proved as bad as if the very Soul of his Father John had passed into him, which is the common Character gi∣ven him by all the Antient Historians: And then they utterly mistook the Nature of the Grant, and did not foresee what a Misery and Vassalage it might prove to their Posterity. I appeal to all
the Antient Nobility and Gentry, who know any thing of the Affairs of their own Families, whether it was so or not: And yet these were honest and brave Men, who would rather have died than have been the Authors of so much Mischief: but they were led by false Appear∣ances, that by having the King Guardian of their Children, they could not be wronged; they would have the best Education at Court, stand fair for future Preferment, and that a happier Pro∣vision for their Posterity could not be made: Nei∣ther could it, for the very Learning which this instructive Passage has given to their late Poste∣rity, countervails all the Mischiefs that are past. But the Advocates for a Standing Army tell us, That tho the Wards by being annexed to the Crown, and so becoming a Prerogative, could not be parted with, which was the cause of the long continuance of that Mischief, after it was known and felt to be so; yet all this is cured by making the Act Temporary, and setling a Standing Army only during his Majesty's Reign, or for Years, or they know not how. I find they have a great mind to their Cucumber, for they are content to have it dressed and pickled any way. I answer, That succeeding Princes, if they find an Army, will keep it, and will not trouble them∣selves whether the Law be Temporary or Perpe∣tual. A plain Instance we have of this in the Cu∣stoms: For tho Tunnage and Poundage, and the other Impositions, are a Subsidy and free Gift, and the King's Answer to the Bill thanks the
Subjects for their Good-wills. And tho Parlia∣ments have always used such Cautions and Limi∣tations in those Grants, as might prevent any Claim, and heretofore limited them to a short time, as for a Year or two; and if they were con∣tinued longer, they have directed a certain space of Cessation, or Intermission, that so the Right of the Subject might be the more evident; at other times they have been granted upon occasion of War for a certain number of Years, with Provi∣so, that if the War were ended in the mean time, then the Grant should cease; and of course they have been sequestred into the hands of some Sub∣jects for the guarding of the Seas: Notwithstanding all this, tho the Parliament so carefully guarded their Grants, yet King Charles the First took this Subsidy without any Grant at all, for sixteen Years together; tho se∣veral Parliaments in the mean time forbad the paiment of it, and voted all those to be publick Enemies that did not refuse it. The like did his Son the late King James till his Parliament gave it him: and in his first Speech to them he de∣manded it as his own, by the name of my Reve∣nue. And why then shall not another Prince come and say the same, Give me my Army, if he ever have a Parliament to ask? To limit a Prince with Laws where there is an Army, is to bind Sampson with his Locks on. Having made appear that an Army now will be an Army always, I come in the next place to show what the Consequences of it will be, both
by the Experience of former Ages, and by the Nature of the Thing. In all Ages and parts of the World, a Stand∣ing Army has been the never-sailing Instrument of enslaving a Nation; which Richard the Se∣cond, (Walsing. pag. 354.) compassing to do here in England, accordingly used the Means. For the Safety of his Person, he assembled together (multos Malefactores) a great number of profli∣gate Persons out of the County of Chester, who should keep watch and ward continually about him in their turns. This Life-guard of his con∣sisted of four thousand Archers; who commit∣ted such Outrages amongst the People, overawed the Parliament, and aided him in his Tyrannical Proceedings in such a manner, as could not be believed, if it were not witnessed by a whole Parliament, and his own Confession,Item, Tempore quo idem Rex in Parliamento suo fecit adjudicari Ducem Gloucestriae, & Comites Arundell & War∣wick ut liberius possit exercere Crudelitatem in eosdem, & voluntatem suam injuriosam in aliis adimplere, sibi attraxit multitudinem magnam Malefactorum de Comitatu Ces∣triae, quorum quidam cum transeuntes per Regnum, tam infra Regis hospitium quam extra, Ligeos Regni crudeliter occiderunt, & quosdam verberaverunt, vulneraverunt, & de∣pradarunt bona populi, & pro suis victualibus solvere recu∣sarunt, & Uxores & alias mulieres rapuerunt, & violave∣runt, & licet super eorum hujusmodi excessibus graves que∣rimoniae deferebantur ad audientiam dicti Domini Regis; Idem tamen Rex super his justitiam, seu remedium facere non curavit, sed favebat iisdem gentibus in maleficiis eo∣rum; Considens in iis & eorum praesidio, contra quoscun{que} alios Regni, propter quod fideles regni sui magnam commo∣tionis & indignationis materiam habuerunt. Decem. Scrip. Col. 2748. Artic. the 5th.
In short, tho many of those Cheshire-men plundered and lived upon Free-quarter; beat, wounded, killed and ravished where-ever they came: Yet because they enabled him to execute all his cruel and arbitrary Designs in Parliament, he countenanced them in all their Crimes, as con∣fiding in them, and trusting in their defence of him against all the Realm beside: For which cause all the Lieges of his Realm had great mat∣ter of Commotion and Indignation. This Parliament was in the 21st of his Reign, and in it the Frame of this English Government was quite destroyed. I need not shew in what Particulars, for that is done already by Bacon, and many other Lawyers. But in short, the King was made absolute, and the whole Power of Parliament, which might remedy things after∣wards, was given up: For it was made Trea∣son for any Man to endeavour to repeal any of the Arbitrary Constitutions that were then made. I am even ashamed, when I observe former Princes so zealous for oppressing and wronging a Nation, and so bent upon it, to reflect how cold and remiss many Subjects have been in all times, and how unconcerned to preserve their indispen∣sible Rights, which are the very Being both of themselves and their Posterity: To see King John ready to pawn his Soul, and offer Miramo∣lim the Emperor of Morocco to turn Turk, and to make his Kingdom tributary to him only, to get his Assistance to enslave this Nation, and Sub∣jects to take no care of their English Liberties;
which certainly are proved to be worth keeping by the eagerness of bad Princes to take them a∣way. But to return to our Cheshire-men, and to the Parliament which they had in charge, Sagitta∣riis inumerabilibus vallato, walled about with an infinite number of Archers, as it is described Ar∣tic. 4. The Parliament was hereby so overawed, that in what they did they were Ma∣gis timore Regis ducti quam mentium ratione,Walsing. led more by fear of the King than their Consciences; their Souls were not their own. And besides the Standing Awe and Ter∣ror which this Guard was to both Houses during their Session, there happened a Passage at last which put them all into a very great Fright: It is thus set down by Stow, p. 316. And then licence being had to depart, a great stir was made, as is used; Whereupon the King's Archers, in num∣ber 4000, compassed the Parliament-House (thinking there had been in the House some Broil by fighting) with their Bows bent, their Arrows notched, and drawing ready to shoot, to the terror of all that were there; but the King herewith coming, pacified them. These Men did the King such acceptable Ser∣vice, that he could do no less than make some return to his Implements, which he did in ho∣nouring Cheshire for their sakes. In this Session of Parliament he made it a Principality, Cap. 9. and himself Prince of Chester: And so as Bacon ys, Counties go up, and Kingdoms go down: This had never risen again but by a happy Revo∣lution,
which followed in less than two Years. So much for the Cheshire-men. But what signify the Proceedings of this vil∣lanous Crew to an Army, who are all of them Men of Honour, and perhaps in Parliament-time shall be ordered a hundred miles off? these can∣not wall in, surround, begirt and beset a Parlia∣ment, nor consequently hinder it from being a Free Parliament. That I deny, for I hope such an Army may differ in Judgment, and can peti∣tion a Parliament at that distance; and we very well know that their Desires are always Com∣mands. The Parliament in 41, long before there was any breach with the King, were in a fair way to have been petitioned out of doors by an Army 150 miles off, tho there was the Clog of a Scotch Army at the heels of them, who upon the least Motion would certainly have followed. And if Denzill Holles had not locked the Doors, and com∣municated the Matter to the House, who imme∣diately fell upon the Officers that were Members, Colonel Ashburnham, Willmot, Pollard, &c. and quashed the Design, it had brought the whole Nation into great Confusion. The Petition of an Army is like that of the Cornish-men in Henry the Seventh's Time; it is always a strong Peti∣tion. Nay, an Army could not go out in this hum∣ble way to over-rule a Parliament. If they are in being, they influence; and in Cesar's easy way they conquer, by looking on. The very Reputati∣on of a Force to back them, will make all Court-Proposals speak big, tho never so contrary to
the Interest of the Nation. For there is no de¦bating nor disputing against Legions. It will tempt them to do many things they durst not otherwise think of: What is much out of our reach, rarely is the Object of our Thoughts; but the Facility of Execution is generally the first Motives to an Attempt. Now it is abundantly the Interest of Court-Flatterers to live under a corrupt Reign. Then Bribes and Confiscations fill their Coffers. No Man's Wife or Daughter is free from their Lust, or Estate from their Ava∣rice. They extort Presents from the Nobility, Goods from the Tradesmen, and Labour from the Poor. In short, all is their own. And 'tis to be feared, these Gentlemen (unless they have more Vertue than usually falls to their share) will put Princes upon such Counsels as promote their own Advantage. They will tell them how mean it is to be awed by a few Country Gentle∣men, when all the Kings in Europe besides are got out of Pupilage, as Lewis XI called it. They will fill their heads with a thousand trifling Jea∣lousies of Monsters, Commonwealths, and such like Bug-bears: and it hath been difficult even for the wisest Princes to free themselves from this sort of Cattle. False Prophets shall arise that shall deceive even the Elect. Nothing but the Fear of Punishment, and the being made a Sacrifice to the Peoples just Revenge, can make such Men ho∣nest: But if they have an Army to protect them, all these Considerations are laid aside, and all Ar∣guments are answered in a word, The King has an Army. The King has an Army, stops all Mouths,
and cuts off all Reply. It is as if it should be said, Set your hearts at rest, for the King has all Power in his hands, and you have none: He has all your Estates, Lives and Liberties, under his Girdle: Slaves, and talk! The King has an Army, is a confuting Answer to every thing but a better Army, which Thanks be to God and his present Majesty we have found. But as we are not to live upon Miracles, so we are not to tempt Dangers. I have stayed the longer upon this Point, in shewing how inconsistent an Army is with the Freedom of Parliament, because they being the Keepers of our English Liberties, can ill perform that Office, when they have parted with their Power into other hands. They are the last Re∣sort of the Subject for the Redress of their Grie∣vances. But how shall they relieve the poor Royston-men, for instance, from the Oppression and Insolences of the Souldiery, when perhaps they shall be subject to the like themselves? The Projectors are aware of this terrible Inconveni∣ence, and therefore they propose an Expedient, That it shall be the King's Army, but the Par∣liament shall have the paying of them; whereby they shall be as much the Parliament's humble Servants, as the Parliament their proper Mas∣ters. Much at one I believe. For the Long Parlia∣ment had not such a King and Parliament Army as this, but an Army that was all their own, their Creatures, as the Court-word is; raised, listed, commissioned, and paid wholly by them∣selves,
and not in Partnership; and that had man∣fully fought all their Battels: And yet upon the first Distaste they were pleased to take, they dis∣tressed their own Masters, and with a high hand forced them to banish eleven of their principal Members, Denzil Holles, Sir Philip Stapylton, Glyn, and such other great Men. Sir Philip Sta∣pylton died in his Banishment. At another time they would not suffer near a hundred Members to enter into the House, whom they thought not well affected to the Business then in hand, and at the same time evil intreated and imprisoned about forty Members. This they called purging the House. After they had thus handled them at se∣veral times, in conclusion, the Officers came and reprimanded the House, bid take away that Fool's Bawble the Mace, violently pulled the Speaker out of the Chair, drove out the Mem∣bers, and locked up the Doors, and so good night to the Parliament. The Wisdom of that Parlia∣ment may have been very great, but it was Non-sense for them to think, that an Army does not know its own Strength. For without dear-bought Experience any body may know before∣hand what will be the natural Consequences of a Standing Army. From the day you set them up, you set up your Masters; you put your selves wholly into their hands, and are at their discreti∣on. It is the Conquest of the Nation in the si∣lentest, shortest, and surest way. They are able to dispose of your Lives and Estates at Will and Pleasure: And what can a foreign Conqueror do more? If after this we live and possess any thing,
'tis because they let us: and how long that shall be, neither we, no nor they themselves, know. Nay, in many respects an authorized Standing Army is far worse than a foreign Invasion, and a Conquest from abroad. For there we have a chance for it: but this is a Conquest in cold Blood, which may not be resisted. And we lose the inseparable Rights of the Conquered, which is to rescue and deliver themselves, and to throw off the Yoke as soon as they can. It is likewise a great Aggravation of our Misery, to be enslaved at our own Cost and Charges: Besides the bitter Resentments of Unkindness and Breach of Trust, if it be done by those who ought to protect us, and provide better for us; at least should not leave us in a worse Condition than they found us. But above all, if we contribute to our own Thral∣dom by our Folly, Flattery and little self-seeking; if the Destruction of us and our Posterity be of our selves, that Reflection hereafter will have a Sting in it; and it will not be enough to say, Who would have thought it? Now in being over-powered and conquered by a Foreign Enemy, we contract none of this Guilt, and suffer it as a bare Calamity. But there is no great fear of that, for the Duke de Rohan is our Guarantee that we cannot be conquered from abroad; who in a spiteful Description of England says, it is a great Animal that can be destroyed by nothing but it self. Every body must die when their time is come: and Empires as well as private Men must submit to Time and Fate; Go∣vernments have their Infancy, their Meridian,
and their Decay; and the Preludes to their De∣struction are generally Luxury, Pride, Sloth, Pro∣digality, Cowardice, Irreligion, Self-interest, and an universal Neglect of the Publick. God grant this be not the Condition of a Nation I know. Well, 'tis all one; for let a Standing Army be what it will, still we must have it for this unan∣swerable Reason, viz. The Defence of the Nation from a sudden Invasion: for unless, say they, you have an Army to lie leiger, you are liable to be over∣run by a foreign Enemy e're you are aware; and you will shew less Wit than Aesop's Rhinoceros; you will have your Men to raise, and your Teeth to whet, when you should use them. This Thought I confess is very natural and obvious, and therefore could not possibly escape our wise Forefathers; yet we cannot learn that ever they put it in practice, which is a great sign they did not like it. No, we are well assured that they would not have suffered a Mercenary Army to defend the Nation if they would have done it gratis. They would rather have mistrusted it would double the Inva∣sion, and make it as big again as it was. I do not speak this by guess, but have it from the wise Sir Robert Cotton, who being consulted, 3 Caroli, in a difficult State of Affairs, amongst other things gave this Advice at the Council-Table: Rush∣worth, pag. 469. There must be, to withstand a Fo∣reign Invasion, a proportion of Sea and Land Forces. And it is to be considered, that no March by Land can be of that speed to make head against the landing of an Enemy: Then that follows, That there is no such Prevention as to be Master of the Sea.
For the Land Forces, if it were for an offensive War, the Men of less Livelihood were best spared; and we used formerly to make such Wars Purgamenta Reipublicae, if we made no farther Purchase by it. But for the Safety of the Commonwealth, the Wis∣dom of all times did never intrust the Publick Cause to any other than to such as had a Portion in the Publick Adventure. And that we saw in eighty eight, when the Care of the Queen and of the Coun∣cil did make the Body of that large Army no other than of the Trained Bands. In the same Advice to the King he lets him know how the People resented his keeping up an Army in the Winter, tho we were then in War both with France and Spain. The words are these: And the dangerous Distastes to the People are not a little improved by the unexampled Course, as they conceive, of retaining an Inland Army in Winter Season, when former Times of general Fear, as in eighty eight, produced none such; and makes them in their distracted Fears conjecture idly, it was raised wholly to subject their Fortunes to the Will of Power rather than of Law, and to make good some farther Breach upon their Liberties and Freedoms at home, rather than defend us from any Force abroad. And tells the King the Consequences of these Jealou∣sies is worthy a prudent and preventing Care. But what signify the Proceedings of former Ages to us? say the Projectors, the World is strangely altered, and the Power of France is become so formi∣dable, that it can never be opposed in the Elizabeth way. They still keep up an Army of three or four hundred thousand Men, and how shall us
defend our selves against all those, without ten or fifteen thousand disciplined Troops? I think the Author of the Argument, page 18 and 19, hath sufficiently shewed the Difficulty, if not Impossibility, of a Foreign Invasion, whilst we are superior at Sea; the great improbability the French King should engage in such a Design, and much greater he should succeed in it. But that we may for ever lay this Goblin, we will admit our Fleets to be kidnapp'd by an unlucky Wind, whilst the French land twenty thousand Men in our Country. Tho in gratitude for this Concession, I hope my Adversaries will grant that their Fleet cannot get back again without our meeting with them, (since the same Wind that carries them home, will carry us out); or if they will not be so good-natur'd as to allow this, I will undertake for them (for we live in an under∣taking Age) that they will agree we shall inter∣cept their Supplies. Then the Case is thus, That twenty thousand Men, of which few can be Horse, are landed in England, without any hu∣mane probability of being supplied from abroad. I say, this Army shall never march twenty miles into the Country; for they cannot put themselves in a marching posture in less than a fortnight or three weeks; and by that time we may have 100000 Militia drawn down upon them, whereof ten thousand shall be Horse, and as ma∣ny Dragoons as we please: And if this Militia does nothing else but drive the Country, cut off their Foragers and Straglers, possess themselves of the Defilees, and intercept Provisions, their Ar∣my
must be destroyed in a small time. Of this kind I could give many Instances out of History: but because Antient ones, they say, will not fit our purpose, I will give you a late one out of Ireland. 1st, I think it will be readily agreed, there are ten Men in England for one in Ireland. 2dly, That King William had more English and Scotch to join with him in Ireland, than the F. K. hath Malecontents in England. 3dly, That even our Militia have more Cou∣rage than Irishmen. And yet tho we had eight thousand Horse, and above thirty thousand Foot in Ireland, and a great part of the Country in our possession, yet we were more than four Years in conquering the rest, and almost a Miracle we did it then. And I believe no Man will deny, if we could not have supplied our Army from England, but they had all there perished; such is the Ad∣vantage of fighting upon one's own Dung∣hil. And to shew what Treatment the French are like to meet with in England, I will put you in mind of the Purbeck Invasion, which was so pri∣vate, that it was seen only by an old Man and a Boy: And yet tho the Country thought the Go∣vernment against them, we had above forty thou∣sand Voluntiers in Arms in two or three days time, who came thither on their own accord to give them the meeting; and if they had been there, I doubt not would have given a good ac∣count of them. Our Court when it was over, shewed their dislike of it, and questioned the
Sheriff of Dorsetshire about it. And tho we have forgot it, yet I believe the French will re∣member Purbeck; for it shewed the true Spirit and Genius of the English Nation. To conclude, The whole management of this Project is ridiculous; but the fatal Consequences of it require deeper thought: For when we have fool'd our selves into the Bondage of a Standing Army, how shall we ever get out of it again? Not as the Nation freed themselves from the Court of Wards. We cannot buy it off for two very good Reasons: No Money will be taken for it; and we shall have nothing to give which is not theirs already: Our Estates, Lives and Liber∣ties will be all at their Command. They will have the Keys of our Money, and the Titles to our Lands in their Power. This last and irreparable Mischief and Misery the Projectors had prepared for us. But under a Gracious King and a Wise Parliament, I hope we shall never see it. His Majesty's Declaration is directly against a Standing Army, as a means to assist all Arbitrary Designs, and thereby enslave the Nation; directly against all wicked Attempts of Conquest, and all Despotick Government; 'tis full of Liberty and Property in every part: So that we are sure to be safe on that side. And this Declaration was so highly valued, and so wholly relied upon by the Parliament, that it is incorpo∣rated into our Laws as the only redress of our past Grievances and Oppressions, and the best Foun∣dation of our future Happiness: And with entire
confidence that his Majesty would continue to act in pursuance of that Declaration, the Parlia∣ment resolved that he should be, and be declared King. So that it is to be accounted the Pacta Con∣venta of this Government. Here I know the Projectors will say, That the Army condemned by the Declaration, was the late K. James's Army, kept up in time of Peace without Consent of Parliament; whereas this Standing Army is to be kept up with their Con∣sent. True it was so, and therefore it was a Riot and unlawful Assembly every hour it stood; and having no Law for it, it might have been presen∣ted or indicted; to no purpose indeed: But as an Invasion upon the Subject it might be resisted and pulled down as a Nusance, when-ever the Nation found themselves able. But suppose this Army had been made part of the Constitution, and had obtained an Act of Parliament for it, which is as much as we can have for a King or a Queen; what then had become of us? They were Aids and Instruments of Arbitrary Government be∣fore, but then they had been legal Instruments, and had enslaved us by Authority. In short, we could not have relieved our selves from them, nor any one else in our behalf, because our own ct and Deed would have always been good against us. The delightful Notion we know his Majesty by, is that of our Deliverer which he was upon this occasion. But these mischievous Projectors would turn it into such a Deliverance, as if we
had been helpt over a Ford, to be afterwards lost in the Sea. And as to the Parliament, we are safe on that side, for a Reason amongst others which is in the Declaration in these words; And it can∣not be imagined that those who have invited us, or those that have already come to assist us, will join in a wicked Design of Conquest, to make void their own Titles to their Honours, Estates and Interests.
A POSTSCRIPT, with Re∣marks on a late published LIST of Irish Papists now in the French King's Service. THE Advocates for a Standing Army having lately published a List of an Army of Irish and other Papists now in the French King's Ser∣vice, which they say are ready when called for, I could not let that Paper go without some Re∣marks; because it informs us of some things, that, if I mistake not, deserve the Consideration of all true English Men, and are as followeth. 1. That there is in France an Army of eighteen thousand Irish and other Papists, with K. James at the Head of them. 2. That they are ready to be transported hither when called for. 3. They give broad Hints that there is a sort of Men amongst us, who will call for them. 4. That these Irish and their Correspondents will answer whatever has been or shall be written against a standing Army. To the first I answer, that tho the Irish are the best Troops in the World to plunder, murder, and massacre the innocent and defenceless People,
yet they are the worst of all Souldiers when they meet with Resistance. The late War in Ireland, particularly the Siege of London-derry, and the routing of Justin Maccarty, one of their best Offi∣cers, who was at the Head of a considerable Ar∣my, by a small Number of the despised Militia, has abundantly demonstrated this Truth. And it deserves the Resentment of the English Nati∣on, to find the Enemies of their Country endea∣vouring at last to fright them with that despica∣ble Crew, when the Terror they would have given us of the French Armies has proved in∣effectual. Besides, the French King is in possessi∣on of these Irish Troops; they serve him, and are paid by him: and no Man but a Publick Boutefeu would have the Confidence to say, He will lend them to King James to invade us: For what will that be less than declaring a new War? And they who think it in the Power of the French King to assist King James against us, without any Breach of the late Treaty, do in effect say, That due Care has not been taken of the Nation, than which there cannot be a more scandalous Reflection on his Majesty. To the second and third of their Menaces I shall only say, That 'tis somewhat extraordinary, that Men should dare publickly to avow their Correspondence with our Enemies, to own them∣selves acquainted with their Designs against us, to threaten the People with an Army of Irish Banditi, and to let us know that there are some a∣mongst us ready to join them. But the Great Council of the Nation being now assembled, will
undoubtedly make such Provision for our Safety, that neither they nor their Correspondents shall be able to hurt us. In the last place they tell us, that this is an An∣swer to the Argument against a Standing Army, and to all that has been or shall be written on that Subject. Here's thorow Work indeed: and 'tis pity it should want a Place in the next Edition of the Irish Wisdom. Mr. Bayes's fighting singly a∣gainst whole Armies is nothing to it: For he like a modest Man, was only for routing such as should be raised, and never once dreamt of de∣stroying them before they had a Being. 'Tis hoped therefore that this last Goblin will do us no more hurt than all the rest that have been industriously raised to terrify the People, and to disturb the Publick Peace. THE END.
