P114 R40053 18674583 108147
A LETTER FROM A Citizen of Oxford, TO A Citizen of London, Concerning the DISSOLUTION OF THE PARLIAMENT. SIR, YOurs I receiv'd of the 18th. Instant, with an account of the Com∣mon-Councels Proceedings, as likewise the Proclamation for the Dissolution of the Parliament, and the Calling of another to meet on the 21. of March next; and in compliance to your desire, I shall en∣deavour to acquaint you with our Surprize, and the sence we have of those Transactions here, with as much brevity, clearness and impartiality as the little experience I have in Affairs will permit. As for the calling a Common-Councel, it is every one's wish here that the worthy Citizens of London had not been so Spirited with Zeal, or rather hurried on with Jealousies, that would not give them leave to see the time expired, that was appointed by His Majesty for the meeting again of the Parliament, but by a too forward Petition, would seem to impose upon, and distrust his Royal Conduct and Care; and by that, and other courses, have more Exasperated, then Composed matters, and ra∣ther procured their being Dissolved, then their Meeting again. Shall I deal plainly with you, and tell you my Opinion? I think it would be∣come us Citizens much better to mind our Trades, and our Shops, then
to meddle with State-affairs: For no doubt those at the Helm know better what to do, then we can tell them, as being the most Experienced, having the best Prospect, and are the most concerned in an even and steady managing of Affairs. You daily acquaint me with the Fears you are in of Arbitrary Government, and yet I cannot see what Reasons and Grounds you have for them: Does not the King let the law have its full scope? has he deprived any of his Subjects of their Priviledges? has he put the least Curb upon, or failed to do Justice to any one? has he raised Money without the consent Af his Parliament? I do not hear of the least of this has been done, and therefore I cannot imagine upon what bottom you build your Jealousies and Suspicions of Arbitrary Power. Certainly never any Nation had so Good, so Gracious, so Merciful a Prince; he ought to be the Joy and Delight of his People, as he is the Admiration and Wonder of the rest of the World. Has not his Mercy extended to the very worst of his Enemies? and have not his greatest Persecutors ob∣tained their Pardons, and enjoyed his Protection and Care, as if they had ever been his greatest Friends? All this has been done, and can we distrust such a Prince? I must tell you, I fear these courses will provoke and draw upon us Gods Anger and Judgment. As for Occurrences here, our Preparations are very great, as well as Expectations, for the meting of the King and his Parliament, which we hope will compose all our Differences, and heal our Divisions; at least we shall not be found guilty of meddling with things out of our Pro∣vince, nor by any too hasty Motions, give occasion for further Mischiefs and Breaches, though perhaps we might brag and value our selves as high for our Zeal, and good intentions for the Publick Cause, as any others of our Fellow-Subjects: yet as in Religion one of the greatest Virtues is a perfect Resignation and Submission to all that Divine Provi∣dence shall be pleased to order, so we are apt to think the same of our Governours in this World: Therefore it is only our parts to choose for our Representatives such Persons as are best acquainted with the true Interest of the King and his People; such as are apter to Compose, then raise Disputes, and are true Members of the Church of England; and then leave all the rest to His Majesty, and Them, and think of nothing but of putting in Execution what they shall think fit to Ordain and Or∣der; which we hope and look upon as the best means for the maintain∣ing the Protestant Religion, and the Honour and Interest of the King and the Nation, and which will most contribute towards the Reconciling of all Differences, and the Uniting us amongst our selves: which shall be the daily prayer of, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, T. P.
