P319 R20865 12610780 64362
THE PAPISTS St. Dominick and his Rosary: OR, A Full Discovery of all the Cheats and Forgeries imposed by him on the People, which the politick Con∣trivance of his Successors have continued to this day in the Church of Rome, Ever since the year of Christ 1216, when Pope Honorius the III. instituted this disorderly ORDER of DOMINICANS. A great Dignitary whereof (a very few years since) and then an Almoner in England, now A Cardinal at Rome, Compiled an Abstract of all, as he calls them, Sure and Safe Ways to Salvation in their Church, one of which is here inserted verbatim, and the very same he gave with his Blessing, to a then Romanist, now an eminent Discoverer of the Hellish Popish Plot; with these words at delivery thereof, This is an excellent Paper, and if you will carefully learn and practice it, you may know certainly how to be saved. The Truth of which is here humbly offered to the conside∣ration of all Men who have the use of Reason and Reading. LONDON, Printed for N. E. by Thomas James, and are to be sold by Randall Taylor, near Stationers-Hall, 1681.
THE PAPISTS St. Dominick and his Rosary: OR, A Full Discovery of all the Cheats and Forgeries imposed by him on the People, which the Politick Contri∣vance of his Successors have continued to this day in the Church of Rome. CErtainly there was not a devouter Man than St. Do∣minick, in all the Legends of the Popish Saints. Now you shall hear what this Whoreson did. In his time the Albigenses were a great Eye-sore to the Pope. These People were a sort of honest orderly People, that lived in Piedmont, that is to say, at the foot of the Alpes, that car'd not neither for Crosses nor Holy Water, nor Reads, nor Re∣liques, nor, to tell ye the truth, for the Pope himself. Now if 'twould vex a Saint to see his Copy-hold so touch'd, no wonder the Pope was so enrag'd at these good People. The Pope therefore hearing of the great Fame of St. Dominick, for St. Dominick was no small fool in those days; he was so fa∣miliar with the Virgin Mary, as if he had been her Cousin German; and she had such an Affection for him, that she gave him a notable Wit, a Silver Tongue, and a Brazen Face; and many other such Trinkets. And if he had a mind to work a Miracle at any time, it was but whispering the Virgin in the Ear with an Ave-Mary or two in the next Room, and the business was done; so that his fame far exceeded Dr. Faustus's, who wrought with the Devil. The Pope therefore, I say, hearing of the great fame of this same St. Dominick,
sent him with all speed to charm and conjure down those Hobgoblins of Albigenses, that did so terrifie his Fancy. A way went St. Dominick with his Thunderbolts, and his Anathe∣ma's, and his Bulls, his Comminations and Execrations, and what not. But all these trifles frightned the Albigenses no more than a verse out of St. Matthew, written in a piece of Paper, will terrifie an Ague. So that St. Dominick fearing to lose his Credit, repairs to his old friend in a corner the Virgin, and tells her how the case stood. She no sooner heard his Voice, but she came tripping presently down from Hea∣ven in her Morning Gown, and appearing before him. Friend Dominick, quo she, what's the matter? The Devil, quo he, the Devil is got among the Albigenses. Is he so? quo she, no matter for that; do but thou go and preach the Rosary among 'em, and thou shalt see all the Swine in the Countrey never leave trot∣ting, till they all meet at the general Rendevouze in the Lake of Geneva. Ay, quo St. Dominick; is that the trick on't? And by the Mass I'll try it. With that he went incontiently and preach'd the Rosary, and converted above a Hundred thou∣sand Hereticks, before a Cat could lick her Ear: That is to say, to whisper ye in the Ear, as a friend. He went and advis'd the Pope to set his Mastiffs, the Neighbouring Princes upon 'em, who being once incourag'd with a sanctifi'd Hallou, set upon those poor naked Creatures with their Armed Bands, and murder'd much about the number before specified. And this way of Conversion was cry'd up for a Miracle; and when they thought the Fact had been almost forgotten, was after∣wards call'd, St. Dominick's Preaching the Rosary. But you'll say, what a Devil is this Rosary? Why then thus, St. Dominick observing the great benefit and good success of his preaching the Rosary, and that thereby he had very much dis∣peopled the World, resolv'd to recruit it again; to which purpose he erected a Sodality of Virgins, of the Order of the Immaculate Lady of the Rosary. And these Female Sodalities were to be erected in no other place, but where the Praedi∣cant Fryers, of the Order of St. Dominick had a Mansion. And now, Friend, I hope you smell a Rat, if ye do, tell me whe∣ther St. Dominick were not a good natur'd man, and did not deserve to be a Saint, to provide so well for his Family. But you don't tell me all this while what this Rosary is—
Why look ye—if you will believe, after I have told ye that and a little more, that the Papists and their Teacher are both Knaves and Fools, and that their Religion is nothing but Folly and Knavery, as I do, and not take their parts as a Company of People, without Sense or Wit, about the Town do. I'll tell ye the whole business, here is such a piece of Pious Gullery and Imposture, that if there were no other Religion in the World besides that of Popery, a man would swear there were none at all. The Rosary then is a certain Form of Praying to God in Honour of his Blessed Mother. For I tell ye, there's nothing to be done without her; she's Queen Regent of Heaven, and governs all things there, as if her Son were a Minor, at the age of 1680 years. This Rosary consists of 150 Ave Marie's, in imitation of Davids Psalter, that consists of 150 Psalms; and if David had written 150 more Psalms, you had had 150 more Pray∣ers in the Rosary. It is divided into 15 Tens or Decades, and every Decade contains 10 Ave Maries and 1 Pater Noster. By which Papistical Proportion, the Virgin Mary is 9 times more Honourable than her Son. And thus you see what he has got among the Papists by coming into the World to save Sin∣ners: The Protestants therefore are of another belief. It contains two sorts of Prayers, Mental and Vocal. A very great ease to the Subject. For thus Women may play at L'antre Lou, and Men talk Polities at a Coffee House, and think their Prayers, both at one Time. The Common People may say them in the best Fashion they can. Never did Mountebank give plainer Directions for the taking a Scorbutic Pill, however you see 'tis good easie Soul-physick and a Sick-conscienc'd Man may go abroad with it, without catching cold. It contains 15 Mysteries; among the rest; the Incarnation, Crucifixion and Ascension; but the two last, and consequent∣ly the chiefest, according to the mode of Papistical Venera∣tion, are the Assumption of the Virgin Soul and Body; and how she was Crowned Queen of Heaven and Earth. What would some men give to see a true Relation of this Solemnity? But thus you see how they hodge-podge their
own sottish Superstitions and silly Humane Inventions with the most glorious Mysteries of Christianity. Here they make the Virgin Mary Queen of Heaven, and yet in some places you shall see her so poor, that she is not able to af∣ford her self any more than an ordinary red Wastcoat. But you'll say there's a Mystery in that, sometimes she appears in her best cloaths to shew her Grandeur; sometimes in her worst to shew her Humility. Stories so ridiculous, even to some among themselves, that they have not spared to give out that St. Dominic's Tales were made at Geneva. But that excuse will not serve, for those Tales were in being long before Geneva was their Antagonist. The most Remarkable Statutes of this Society are, That every Brother and Sister is bound to say a full Rosary twice a week, either at once, or by parts. And it may be said Kneeling, Standing, Lying or Sitting as opportunity will serve. That is in the very Act of Carnal Copulation it self, if need require. Or at the necessary House, where it stops a Dysen∣tery, or relieves the hard bound, as occasion serves. If any one being hindred, cannot say his Rosary, and causes another to say it for him, he gains the Indulgences as if he had said it himself. This is an extraordinary convenience indeed. For a Holy Fa∣ther may be taken up in good Company, and not have any leasure to serve God: I confess there is something of Morality in the case, for one man to come to another and say, Sir, I shall be busy all this day at a Gaming House, pray pray for me to day, and i'll do as much for you too morrow. But as for the Divinity of the Business, truly I think tis a meer Mockery of the God which they pretend to adore. Now happy are they who are of this Sodality, Male and Female, Rich and Poor, Old and Young, Longtail and Bobtail; for let 'em Drab, Drink, Cheat, Lye, Game, do what they please, for no sins are excepted, they have Indul∣gences either plenary, or for so long time, which they will, upon the easiest Conditions imaginable. Herrings at 40 a groat were never so cheap as sins of Omission and Commssi∣on at Rome: As for Example, If any Members of the Sodality are resolved to take their full swinge of the Pleasures of this Life, as often as they shall say a full Rosary they shall have a plenary Indulgence to save them harmless, by warrant of
Paul III. June 3, 1542; more added by other Popes 177 years, and 77 days of Pardon for every time. Now if any of these Sinners live 77 years, and commit 77000 crimes, and for every crime says a full Rosary, I would fain know how long they shall fairly keep out of Devils Clutches at 177 years and 77 days Par∣don for each Offence? If any Member of the Sodality, desirous to try how they like a sinful Life, will stint themselves to a certain number of years, be∣fore they engage too far, for saying a third part of the Rosary, they shall have an Indulgence for five years experience; by war∣rant of Sixtus the IV. May 3, 1479. If they like it and intend to continue, they shall, for saying another third part, have an In∣dulgence for 40 years more, by warrant of Adrian the VI. April 1, 1523. Thrown into the Bargain upon the same account two years more by Clement the VII. May 18, 1475. They that are so eager at their Pastimes, that they cannotintend to Pray; if they do but carry the Rosary about 'em, blessed by a Dominican, so that it may be seen, shall have 200 days Indul∣gence for every day, by warrant of Innocent the VIII. Here's a∣nother Question for a good Arithmetician. Or if they do but visit the Altar of the Rosary, then they shall have a hundred days Indulgence for every day they make such a visit, by warrant of Gregory XIII. Jan. 3, 1579. Prisoners, Travellers and Servants, that cannot be present at the Processions of the Rosary, for every full Rosary they say shall gain a Plenary Indulgence, by warrant of Sixtus Quin∣tus Jan. 30, 1586. Any of the Sodality, that either hears, says, or causes to be said, the Mass of the Rosary, beginning Salve Radix Sancta, shall have Indulgence as Plenary as if he had said a full Rosary; by warrant of Paul the Third. But if any of them do the same for a dead Brother or Sister, they not onely do themselves a kindness, but release a Soul out of Purgatory; by warrant of Alexander the VI. Nay if the Party deceas'd be not of the Sodality, yet if any of the Society shall but enter his Name in the Sodality-book, he shall have the benefit of his Friends Indulgences, whatever they be, as if he were living; by warrant of Paul the Third. After all this, though any of the Sodality have liv'd never so wickedly, never so viciously, never so prophanely, with∣out
the least spark of Repentance, yet, when they came to die, if they have but once said the Rosary in their lives, and do but hold in their hands as they lye a dying, one of the Can∣dles which are hallow'd in the Sodality, they shall have a Plenary Indulgence, saying only Jesu Maria; and such an Absolution, as to be restor'd thereby to the Purity and Inno∣cency which they had in Baptisme, by the Warrants of Inno∣cent VIII, Adrian VI, Gregory XIII, and Pius the V. Look ye, Gentlemen, hear are four of the Principal Pan∣nel of Popes, that have given their Verdict for this Business, and you may find Sales-men I warrant ye anow, among the rest of the Tripple Crown'd Rout, to joyn with them. 'Tis a matter of no small Consolation to be so easily Sav'd, one∣ly for holding a Wax Candle in a mans hand upon his death bed. And therefore you may consider among your selves, whether the Authority be sufficient to oblige your belief. Could it be made out, the Wax-chandlers would be the Rich∣est Company in London. What cunning ways they had in those days to Cheat the poor Devil? He, like an Oofe, stands gaping by the Beds side, ready to receive a Soul, when all of a sudden in comes a Fellow with a Wax-candle, puts it into the dying mans hand, bids him say, Jesus Maria, and then, Sirrah, cries he to the Devil, go about your business. You may be sure the Devil is not a little troubled to see him∣self so baffled, but seeing no help nor no remedy, as blank as a Nonplus't Disputant, he claps his Tail between his Leggs, and steals away, glad that he can scape so too. What Golden Advantages must these of necessity be to the Coffers of Rome, when People have so little Wit, and such a world of deluded Faith, to be guided by such a Roman∣tick Devotion as this; fabulous in the very fourth degree? Certainly there is not more sottish, more despicable Non∣sense, to be found among the Fakirs and Pagods of the Indians: Men of Reason, that never heard of these things, would have a greater Veneration for Mankind, then to think they could believe such Vanities: So that I look upon a bigotted Papist to be only a two-footed Brute. Certainly the rest must know better. For it is impossible that four Popes should be four such Fopps, to impose such a piece of Nonsensical Ribaldry as this upon any sort of People,
had they not either very low thoughts of future Salvation, or that they found no other way in the World to establish their Authority, but upon the contempt of Heaven. That they may be Worshipt, they make Idols of themselves; that is, they have Eyes and Ears, but will neither hear nor see, and blind themselves, on purpose to misguide the blind into perpetual Ignorance, which is the Mother of two the foulest and most deformed Daughters in the World, Ido∣latry and Superstition, the Mortal Enemies of that Beauti∣ful and Spotless Virgin, True Divine Worship. But what is the reason of all this sottish ignorance a∣mong the Papists? Oh! read Mons. Sancy, and he'll tell ye. For says he, Go to an honest Protestant Divine, and ask him by what means a detestable sinner may be sav'd? He'll presently reply, by Embracing the Death of Christ, by Praying with a Contrite Heart and a true Repentance, &c▪ Ask a Jesuit concerning that nice sin of Sodomy, he'll fit your humour better then a Country Parson. He'll onely put the Rosary of the Immaculate Lady about your neck, and bid you say Domini Jesu, suscipe. And this Application rightly manag'd gives ye a full and absolute Indulgence and Re∣mission of all your Sins, as well in reference to the Crime as the Punishment. And therefore 'tis no strange thing that the Papists should abhor the severe Religion of the Protestants, and embrace so kind and favourable a Professi∣on as their own; by the freedom whereof the Gates of Paradice are always open at a minutes warning, and un∣fold as easily as the City Gates in the Night to a Six pence. Well then, my Masters, since ye must have Indulgences, I'll tell ye where ye may have them, and upon what days thorough all the Twelve Months. For you must know the Pope's Fair lasts all the year. Rome is the great Mart where you may purchase these blessed Baubles call'd Plenary Indulgences (for, for other Indulgences, every Pardon-Pedlar brings 'em home to your Doors. Now that you may not go and lose your labour, these Plenary Indulgences are there publickly put to Sale every Month in the year, as follows.
January 1, 7, 10, 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 25, 27, 31. February 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 22, 24, 26. March 7, 12, 19, 20, 22, 25. April 2, 3, 5, 23, 28, 29. May 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 19, 20, 21. June 2, 11, 13, 15, 24, 29. July 2, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30. August 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 15, 16, 19, 21, 22, 24 26, 28, 29. September 1, 8, 10, 14, 20, 21, 27, 29, 30. October 4, 18 23, 28. November 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 30. December 7, 8, 21, 24. I'll promise ye, a bonny brisk Trade, for you may be sure the Pope would never keep open Shop all the year long for nothing. And thus you see every great City and Town has its peculiar Commodities. Exeter, Taunton, and Norwich for Serges and Stuffs, Colchester for Bays and Oy∣sters, Chester for Cheese, Newcastle for Coals, Rippon for Spurs, Hereford for Cider, Tewkesbury for Mustard; and to go abroad, Norimbergh for Smiths Work, Montpellier for Tweezers, Caudebeck for Felts, Nants for Brandy, Bruns∣wick for Mum, Venice for Treacle, cum multis aliis; and Rome for Pardons and Indulgences. 'Tis true the Pope has the Advantage of 'em all, in two respects; First, Because he deals chiefly in Soul-Com∣modities, sells Purgatory, Paradice, and Heaven it self, which are every bodies money; and if one won't, ano∣ther will. Secondly, Because he never trades upon Trust, but all for ready money; and so can have no losses, in regard no body can break in his Debt. But if men will be thus gull'd and fool'd, who can help it? And now give me leave to give ye one small Advertise∣ment, because they are so much in fashion, for the gene∣ral good of all the Papists in England and Ireland; and so farewell.
Advertisement. THese are to give Notice to all Pa∣pists aforesaid, of what Rank, De∣gree, Quality, Sex, Age, Trade, or Calling soever, That in St. Law∣rence's Church, without the Walls of Rome, every Wednesday in the Year, a Soul is de∣livered out of Purgatory; as also upon Septuagessima Sunday. The same every Sun∣day at St. Pauls. The same at other Churches upon Tuesday after the First Sunday in Lent, Saturday after the Second Sunday in Lent, and upon the Second and Fourth Sun∣day in Lent. The same upon Friday and Sa∣turday, after the Fifth Sunday in Lent, and Saturday after Whitsontide. The same from the Sixth of May till the Sixth of August, and every day at St. John's in Laterano, as being the Popes own Bishoprick. If any Papist, either in England or Ireland, have a mind to redeem from those Torments a Father or a Mother, a Brother or a Sister, an Uncle or an Aunt, or a Wife or a Mistriss; or if any Lady will as ridiculously believe her Lap∣dog, her Tabby Catt, or her Monkey, in the same Distress, there they may speed with Money in their Pockets, if they speak in time. Published for the Trial of Good Nature.
Indulgences. For Entring into the Sodality. WHO entring into the Sodality, causeth his Name to be written in the Fraternity-Book, and will Confess and Receive, and say Five Tens for the good success of the Church, gaineth a Plenary Indulgence; and the like at his Death, having Confessed and Received. Pius V. Cons. 17. Sept. 1569. Clem. VIII. Cum sicut accepimus. 2. Feb. 1598. For Saying the Rosary. As often as any doth say a Full Rosary, he gaineth a Ple∣nary Indulgence. Paulus III. 3. Junii 1542. more 177 years and 77 days of Pardon granted by sundry Popes and Le∣gates in divers times. For saying the third part of the Rosary. Five years and five Quarentains of Indulgence, by Sixtus IV. Ea qui ex Fidelium. 4. Idus Maii 1479. More 50 years, Adrian. VI. Illius qui. 1. April. 1523. More two years, Clem. VII. Et si temporalium. 8. Idus Maii, 1534. More 40 days, Alex Leg. Germaniae, & si gloriosos. 10. Mar. 1475. For Carrying the Rosary. He that Carrieth the Rosary Blessed by a Dominican Fa∣ther, so that it may be seen, to the Edification of others, gaineth for every day, 200 days of Indulgence: Innocentius VIII. Alex. VI. For Visiting the Altar of the Rosary. For Visiting the Altar of the holy Rosary, there is an 100 days of Indulgence gained. Greg. XIII. Cum sicut accepimus. 3. Jan. 1579.
For the Feasts of our Lady, Mysteries of the Rosary, and First Sundays of the Months. Confessing and Receiving upon any of the Feasts of our Lady or of the 15 Mysteries of the Rosary, and Visiting the Chappel of the Fraternity, a Plenary Indulgence; Pius IV. Dum praeclara 30. April. 1562. Greg. XIII. Pastoris aeterni, 5. Maii 1581. Clem. VIII. Cum sicut accepimus, 2. Feb. 1598. Doing the like upon the First Sunday of every Month, and praying for the Peace of Christian Princes, and Exaltation of the Church, &c. a Plenary Indulgence; Greg. 13. Ad Augendam. 29. Aug. 1579. For Going in Procession. Any Brother or Sister that shall be present at the Processi∣ons, which are done upon the Feasts of our Lady, gaineth a Plenary Indulgence; Pius 4. Dum praeclara 30. April. 1562. The like is gained by going to the Processions of this Fra∣ternity the First Sundays of the Months; Greg. 13. Pastoris aeterni, 5. Maii 1581. For such as cannot come to the Chappel or Processions. Such as cannot Visit the Chappel upon the Feasts of our Lady, or Mysteries of the Rosary, or may not come to the Processions of the First Sundays, as Prisoners, Travellers, or Servants, having intention to confess in due time, and saying a full Rosary, do gain a Plenary Indulgence. Sixtus 5. Dum ineffabilia. 30. Jan. 1586. The Sick, or such as be law∣fully hindred, do gain the like, if they say five Tens; as the same Pope granted in the said Bull. For Saying the Name of Jesus or Mary. Who saith at his Death time the Blessed Name of Jesus by Mouth or Heart, having confessed and received, or at least being repentant of his Sins, gaineth a Plenary Indul∣gence; Clem. 8. Cum sicut accepimus, 2. Feb. 1598. And he that will at any other time say devoutly, in or out of the Rosary, the Name of Jesus or Mary, gaineth Seven days of injoyned Penance; Pius 5. Injunctum nobis, 14. Junii 1566.
For Holding a Candle at Death time. Adrianus 6. Illius qui 1. April. 1523. granted a Plenary In∣dulgence to the Brother or Sister that will at their Death time hold in their hands a Candle of such as are wont to be hallowed in this Sodality, if before in his life time he said once at least the Rosary; saying Jesus Maria, a Plenary In∣dulgence; and such an Absolution as one is thereby resto∣red to the Purity and Innocency which he had by Baptisme. Innoc. 8. Adrian. 6. Greg. 13. Pius 5. For Works of Charity. Doing any Work of Charity, as Visiting the Sick, Giving Alms, good Counsel, or such other things, there is 100 days of injoyned Penance remitted for every Deed: Greg. 13. Cum sicut accepimus; 3. Jan. 1579. For being present at the Divine Office. Hearing the Office, Mattins, Even Song, &c. or being present at the Congregations of this Sodality, there are 60 years of injoyned Penance gained: Clem. 8. Cum sicut acce∣pimus 2. Feb. 1598. For assisting at the Anniversaries cele∣brated for the Deceased of the Sodality, 100 days of Indul∣gence; Greg. 13. Cum sicut 3. Jan. 1579. For the Mass of the Rosary. Any of the Sodality that faith, or causeth to be said, or heareth the proper Mass of the Rosary, beginning Salve Ra∣dix Sancta, which is found in the Mass Books of the Friars Preachers, gaineth all the Indulgence, which e should gain by saying the whole Rosary: Paulus 3. 31. Aug. 1537. For the Dead. If any of the Fraternity saith, or causeth to be said, the Mass of the Rosary, Salve Radix Sancta, for any Dead Bro∣ther or Sister, there is a Soul delivered out of Purgatory; Alex. 6. Illius qui perfecta, 1494. Paul. 5. saying the Rosary for any dead Brother or Sister, or for any other deceased, writing first his Name in the Sodality, he gaineth the Indul∣gences as if he were living, and is thereby holpen for to be delivered from Purgatory, and is also participant of the Good Works of the Sodality, and of all the Order of St. Dominick Paul 3.
For Visiting Five Altars or less. He that will Visit Five Altars, or if there be not so many, two or one, and shall say 25 Pater Nosters and Ave Maria's, before them for the good success of the Church, gaineth all the Indulgences granted to such as do personally visit the Stations and Churches of Rome, within or without the Walls; Leo 10. Clem. 7. Et si temporalium 8. Idus Maii 1534. & Pius 5. Inter desiderabilia, 29. Jun. 1569. confirmeth the same, so that the Altars be in the Oratory or Church, where the Confraternity is founded. And to the end you may judge what a Treasure of Indulgences is in Rome, I will put down here briefly the days of the Months in whith the Indulgences be granted, omitting the names of the Churches for brevi∣ty sake, and I will put down only the Plenary Indulgences; for the rest are innumerable. January 1, 7, 10, 13, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 22, 25, 27, 31. February 1, 2, 3, 5, 9, 22, 24, 26. March 7, 12, 19, 20, 21, 25. April 2, 3, 5, 2, 28, 29. May 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 12, 19, 20, 21. June 2, 11, 13, 15, 24, 29. July 2, 14, 15, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30. August 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 15, 16, 19, 21, 22, 24 26, 28, 29. September 1, 8, 10, 14, 20, 21, 27, 29, 30. October 4, 18, 23, 28. November 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 26, 30. December 6, 7, 8, 21, 24. Besides these, there is every day in the year a Plenary Indulgence at St. John Later. There is also a Plenary Indulgence in Rome in divers Churches upon the days following Christ-mass day, and the 3 days fol∣lowing, Circumcision and all the Octaves, Epiphany and all the O∣ctaves, Easter-day and all the Octaves, Ascension, Whitsontide Eve day, and all the Octaves, Corpus Christi and all the Octaves, the four Sundays of Advent, and all the days of Lent, Assumption, and all the Octaves, St. Lawrence and all the Octaves, All-Saints and their Oct. and in St. Peters Church upon all the Apostles days. Indulgences for the Souls of Purgatory in Rome. In St. Laurence's Church extra muros, every Wednesday of the year, a Soul is delivered from Purgatory, and every Sunday in St. Pauls, and upon Septuagessima Sunday in St. Lawrence. Tuesday after the First Sunday of Lent, Saturday after the second Sunday of Lent, third and fourth Sunday of Lent in other Churches besides St. Pauls. Friday and Saturday after the Fifth Sunday of Lent. Thurs∣day and Saturday after Whitsontide. From the 6th of May until the 6th of August, there is daily at St. John Later. a Soul delivered out of Pur∣gatory.
Indulgences and Priviledges Granted to the Sodality of our most Sovereign and Immaculate Lady of the Rosary, founded in the Churches, Chappels, and Oratories of the Order of Preachers. Compiled by the R. F. P. T. H. Prior of the English Religious of the said Order at Bornhem in Flanders. The Beginning and Author of the Holy Rosary. WHen the Heresie of the Albigenses (a Sect most injurious to the Thrice Sacred Virgin-Mother of God) infected the Countrey of Tholosa in France, the holy Patriarch St. Do∣minick, inspired by the Holy Ghost, came from Spain to preach against their Errors: Who finding great difficulty in their Conversion, repair∣ed to the most pure Virgin, whom he found to be still his gracious and particular Patroness; and fervently prayed her to shew him some means for their Reduction. The Mother of Mercy appeared unto him, and commanded him to preach the Rosary, as the aptest Reme∣dy against Vice and Heresie; and most pleasing to God and her self. The which he performed with so good success, that he converted therewith more than an Hundred thousand Hereticks and Sinners. St. Dominick seeing how beneficial this Devotion was to Souls, had a special care to see it flourish. He charged therefore his Order, the Friars Preachers, to teach it still unto the Christians, and they la∣boured so well, that with great applause it was received of all sorts of people. So that now it is generally spread over all Christendom, and that the greatest Princes and Potentates do think it an honour for them∣selves to be inrolled in the Sodality of the Rosary, as Servants devo∣ted to the Blessed Virgin; to whom it is so acceptable, that in all A∣ges, by her Intercession, God hath wrought innumerable Miracles for to favour it, as may be seen in sundry Books published to that effect. And sundry Popes considering the utility of this Devotion and Sodality, have confirmed and endowed it with divers great Priviledges and Indulgences, as here-under shall be seen. What the Rosary is, and how to say it. The Rosary is a certain Form of Praying to God in the Honour of his Blessed Mother, consisting of 150 Ave Maria's, even as the Pro∣phet David's Psalter of 150 Psalms; wherefore it is also called our Ladies Psalter. It is divided into 15 Tens or Decades, every De∣cade containing 10 Ave Maries and 1 Pater Noster. It is a most perfect Devotion, comprehending the two sorts of Prayers Mental and Vocal, and the chiefest Mysteries of our Redemption. For to say it, you ought to take the Beads reverently in your Hands, blessing your self with the Cross at the end of it. And before you begin any Ten, to meditate a little upon the Mystery correspondent to it, recollecting your mind from outward Distractions. The common people, if they think this difficil, may say it in the best fashion they can, directing their intention to the glory of God, and honour of his Blessed Mother.
The Mysteries of the Rosary. The Mysteries of the Rosary are Fifteen; divided into Three sorts The first are called Joyful, forasmuch as our Blessed Lady recei∣ved by them great joy. The secend Dolorous, because she was much afflicted to see her Son abused by wretched Sinners. The third Glorious, for containing the most glorious Actions of our Saviour, &c. The Joyful Mysteries. 1. The Incarnation of the Son of God. 2. Our Ladies Visitation of St. Elizabeth. 3. Christs Nativity. 4. Christ's Presentation in the Temple. 5. How he was found Disputing with the Doctors. The Dolorous Mysteries. 1. Christ's Apprehension and Sweating of Blood. 2. His Tying to the Pillar and Whipping. 3. How he was Crowned with Thorns. 4. How he Carried the heavy Burden of the Cross. 5. Hs Crucifying between two Malefactors. The Glorious Mysteries. 1. Christ's Glorious Resurrection. 2. His Triumphant Ascension into Heaven. 3. The Descending of the Holy Ghost. 4. The Blessed Virgins Assumption both Body Soul. 5. How she was Crowned Queen of Heaven and Earth. Although none are bound by the Statutes of this Society, to say the Rosary more than once a Week, yet the oftner it is said, the greater is the participation of Indulgences. It will be therefore good, that we say it thrice every Week in manner following; upon Mondays and Thursdays the first five, in honour of the Joyful Mysteries; the se∣cond upon Tuesdays and Fridays, contemplating the Dolorous; the third upon Wednesdays and Saturdays, meditating the Glorious. Upon Sundays, because they are consecrated to Prayer, the whole Ro∣sary may be said. Of the Erection of the Sodality. The Erection of this Confraternity belongeth only to the most R. Fa∣ther General, or Superiours of the Order of Preachers, or such as they give Licence unto; and if any doth the contrary, Pius 5. Inter Desid. 29. Junii 1569. & Greg. 13. Dudum. 1. Aug. 1575. declared such Sodalities to be of no value. Being erected in any place where the Religious of St. Dominick hath no Mansion, if in time they come to inhabit there, the Sodality with all its appurtenances shall pass to the said Order, as Greg. 13. commandeth in his Bull Dudum, 2 Aug. 1575. None can bar the Erection of the Sodality, nor disturb the Brethren in their Pious Exercises; and he which doth the contrary, is deprived of all Indulgences whatsoever; by Pius 5. Inter Desid. 29. Junii 1569.
The Statutes of the Sodality. 1. Any person whatsoever may enter into the Sodality without paying any thing, his name ought to be written in the Fraternity Book, and his Beads hallowed by him that hath Licence to do it. 2. Every Brother and Sister is bound to say once a Week a full Ro∣sary, either at once or by parts. It may be said Kneeling, Standing, Lying down, or Sitting, as Opportunity will serve. 3. If any by Negligence or Oblivion omitteth to say it, he incur∣reth no Sin, but he gaineth not the Indulgence for that time. 4. If one being hindred, cannot say his Rosary, causeth ano∣ther to say it for him, he gaineth the Indulgences as well as if he had said it himself. 5. The First Sunday of every Month, and the principal Feasts of our Lady, a Procession ought to be made, at the which all the Bre∣thren and Sisters are to be present, with their Rosaries in their Hands, and also Candles, if conveniently they may. 6. Every Year four Anniversaries ought to be celebrated for the Dead Brethren and Sisters, viz. the first day after the Purification, Annunciation, Assumption, and Nativity of our Lady, at the which all ought to be present, and to pray for the Deceased. 7. When any of the Sodality dieth, every Brother and Sister of the place ought to say a full Rosary for his Soul. 8. In remembrance of the famous Victory had by the Christians a∣gainst the Turk in the Gulph of Lepantho, 7 Octob. 1571, when Eu∣rope was in great danger to be subdued by that Tyrant; the Pope Gregory 13. commanded that upon the first Sunday of October the Chief Feast of the Sodality should be celebrated; for as much as it was piously thought that it was obtained by the Prayers of the Soda∣lity, which at the very hour of the Battel was in Procession, pray∣ing to God for the good Success of the Christian Navy: And unto this Feast all the Brethren and Sisters ought to come. Note, That all and singular the aforesaid Indulgences can∣not be gained, but in the places where the Confraternity is founded; as Pius 5. declared in his Bulle inter Deside∣rabilia, 29 Jun. 1593. Communication of Good Works. Besides the above Indulgences, each one of the Sodality is participant of all the Good Works that any Brother or Sister of the Sodality doth throughout the World; and of all the Good Works that the Religious Persons of the Order of Preachers do any where, as Masses, Disciplines, Prayers, Fasting, Suffering of Martyrdom, Preaching, Teaching, and all other Good Works; which being many thousands, can∣not
chuse but be an inestimable Treasure, a rare Priviledge; Leo 10. Pastoris aeterni, 6 Oct. 1520. At the Discretion of the Brothers of the Confraternity. Twice in their Life, on the days they please to make choice of, being confessed and communicated, they may gain a Plenary Indulgence; Innocent. 8. Clement. 8. Other Priviledges granted to the Brothers of the Confraternity. At Easter, Nativity, Annunciation, Visitation, Purification, and Assumption of our Lady, and three days before, the Do∣minican Fathers may absolve them from all Cases reserved even to the Pope (so they be not comprehended in Bulla Coenae) and release them of all Oaths, and change their Vows, except the Five Ordinary. Leo 10. being dead, they have at least four Masses a year said for them in the Con∣vents of St. Dominick; and who shall be there present the days after the Purification, Annunciation, Assumption, and Nativity of our Lady, shall gain a Thousand nine hundred days of Pardon. Granted by Nineteen Cardinals of the said Confraternity in the year 1479. Indulgences for such as be not of the Sodality. Gregory 13. Exponi Nobis, 1 Octob. 1577, granted a Plenary Indulgence to any Christian whatsoever, that Con∣fessing and Receiving, shall visit the Chappel of the Rosary, upon the first Sunday of October and the third Sunday of April, praying for the peace of Christian Princes and Exal∣tation of the Church, &c. 5 Consueverunt 17 Sept. 1569, granted to any whatsoever that shall accompany the Proces∣sions of the Sodality Seven years and Seven Quarentains of Indulgences; Sixtus 4, Ea quae 4 Idus Maii 1477, granted five years and five Quarentains to any that shall say the third part of the Rosary. To such as are present at the saying of the Salve Regina. Paulus 5. Vivae vocis oraculo 1608, granted to all the faith∣ful that will be present when Salve Regina is said after Com∣plin by the Fathers of the Order of Preachers, 200 days Pardon.
I know the Protestants will laugh in their Sleeves at this Advertisement, and cry, Risum teneatis Amici! Nay they will affirm, That Souls thus deliver'd, are but out of the Frying-pan into the Fire. For that, that detestable sin of Ingratitude; never can carry a Soul to Heaven. Now there was never any of these Redeem'd Souls that ever ap∣pear'd to thank their Benefactors upon Earth; which renders 'em guilty of the greatest Ingratitude in the World: so that being thus excluded Heaven by that same Villainous Sin, and fetch'd out of Purgatory i'the Devils name, there re∣mains only the third place for Sanctuary. But what say the Monks and Friers, and the whole Chiurme of Popish Divinity? What care we whether Souls be in∣grateful or no, or whether they go to Heaven or Hell, so we can but please the People and get Money. 'Tis enough that the Clergy of Rome, like so many Asses, know their Masters Cribb, and adore the Rack, from whence they pull down their Provender. Now to speak a little home to the Point, I must needs say, that the Master of Purgatory is a very great Fool, and has not half so much wit as a City Constable. For he, when he sends Ratts to the Counter, goes Snips with the Keeper: But the Pope, High Consta∣ble of the Earth, sends Peccant Souls to Purgatory, and when they are discharg'd, takes all the Fees to himself; which whether it be not a strange over-sight in the Lord of Lower Bridewell to permit him so to do, I leave all the World to judge. 'Tis well his Holiness has not to deal with some of our Jailors in England. These are the Papists, and these are their Gods; 'Twixt Atheist and Papist now where are the odds? There's no God, says the Atheist, says the Papist a Million; Who adore every Lubber, and every Trapes Gillian. If none then be nearer to One than a Thousand, The Pope has a Thousand to One for to lose on. So Atheist than Papist must needs be the better, Because he comes closer to God and his Letter. Then let the bold Atheist lay aside but his None, And the Papist his Millions, they may center in One, That One, who may then to both be so kind, To grant 'em to see their foul Errors of Mind. FINIS.
