P3843 R31135 11780431 49027
woodcut portrait of charles ii DIEV ET MON DROIT
The Burning of London by the Papists. images of the burning of london, the king, and the pope with papists Muering Kings Gunpou Tr Cruelty Popery THE Protestant TUTOR. Instructing Children to Spel and read En∣glish, and Ground∣ing them in the True Protestant Religiō, and Discovering the Errors and Deceits of the Papists London, Printed for Ben-Harris under  azza of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1679.
ADVERTISEMENT. THose highly approved and only true Spirits of Scurvy-grass, both plain and Golden, famous for their Admira∣ble Cures in the Scurvy Dropsie, and several other General Distempers, are exactly and faithfully prepared and Sold by the first Authour Rob. Bateman, at his house in Pauls Chain, near Do∣ctors Commons, London, with Printed directions for their use, the Bottles are all Sealed with his Coat of Arms, The Half-Moon and Ermins, to prevent Counterfeits, Price 1 s. each Bottle. They are also to be Sold by Benjamin Harris Author and Publisher of this Book at the Stationers Arms in the Piazza of the Royal Exchange and at his Shop against the Kings-Bench in Southwark.
To the Right Honourable James Earl of Doncaster and Dalkeith, Eldest Son to the most Illustrious Protestant Prince, JAMES Duke of MONMOƲTH. My Lord, SInce the Papists who have of late so notoriously appeared to be the Grand and Implacable Enemies of this Kingdom, by De∣signing the destruction of His Ma∣jesties Person and Government, and the Protestant Religion, left to us by our Ancestors, have been so wicked∣ly Industrious to promote their curs∣ed Opinions among the Ignorant, as they have demonstrated by that
vast number of Popish Primers, Catechisms, Manuals, and a multi∣tude of such Romish Trash and Trumpery, which they intended to have dispersed like a General In∣fection among the youth of this Na∣tion, if they had not been happily seized, and justly committed to the Flames, since the discovery of the Damnable and Horrid Popish Plot; I am confident it cannot be unaccepti∣ble to your Lordship, if I endeavour to strengthen and confirm this young Generation in Protestant Princi∣ples, by the methods whereby they in∣tended to Debauch them; This My Lord is the Design of this little
Book, which being seriously consi∣dered, will discover an horrible pro∣spect of the Tyranny and cruelty of that Bloody Religion, and will ob∣lige all good Christians and Prote∣stants, by all lawful ways and means to oppose to the utmost the putting our necks under that slavish Yoke, which neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear, and which of all Judgements we may beseech Almigh∣ty God to deliver us from; which is the daily prayer of My Lord, Your Lordships most Humble Servant Benjamin Harris.
My Lord, my weak Endeavours out have too The Sum and Substance of The Martyrs Book; Arotection and Acceptance if you give, It shall, as shall your Lordship ever live. My Lord, the lives & deaths of Saints & Kings, This little Book unto your Lordship sings. For pardon and protection I intreat, The Volumes Little my Presumption Great. B. H.
The Preface. To all Protestant Parents, School-Masters and School-Mistresses of Children, Greeting. WHat can be thought more neces∣sary at such a time as this, then to arm our Innocent Children against the cursed and continual Practices of our Ro∣mish Adversaries, who designed not only the Murder and destruction of the bodies, but the ruin and damnation of the souls of our poor Children also, with the utter Ex∣tirpation of the Protestant Religion from under Heaven, may we not rather desire to see our dear Children go to the Grave
before us, then to leave them behind us to be bred up in Popish Superstition and Ido∣latry, or otherwise to be Imprisoned, Rackt, Tortured and Burnt at the stake as our Fathers have been before us; The Smith∣field Fires are hardly out wherein our Grandfathers suffered Martyrdome, the bloud of above Two Hundred Thousand murdered with all manner of Cruelties in Ireland, Cryes aloud for Vengeance to Heaven; The bloody Massacres of the poor Protestants in Piedmont, Poland, and other Places, are but as yesterday, The Horrid Treacherous murder of that Worthy Gentleman Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, ought always to appear before our eyes; in him we were all designed for Romish Revenge, by his death we may clearly observe what was intended to the whole Protestant Party in England; We
have it under Colemans own hand, that the glorious Design was To root out that Heresie (and those Hereticks) which had so long troubled this Northern world; and for carrying on this blessed work, Kings, Lords, Commons, Men, Women, Children of all Ages and Sexes were to be sacrificed to that bloody Anti∣christian Idol of Rome: Oh Lord God how great and wonderful are thy mercies towards us? how near were we to the pit of Destruction, and yet were not sensible of our extream danger, before thou O Lord didst shew us (we hope) a way to escape, which we humbly beseech thy Blessed Ma∣jesty, to discover more and more to the overthrow and Destruction of thine and thy Churches bloud-thirsty Enemies; How did they put Protestants, (as the Heathen Emperours did of old) the Christians into
the Skins of Bears and Lyons, thereby to incite them to murder and destroy one ano∣ther, or like their cursed brethren at Paris, who when they had cruelly butchered above Thirty Thousand Protestants, without the least occasion or Reason whatsoever; in three or four days time: they afterwards Falsly and Impudently Reported, that all this was done because the Protestants had contrived a Plot against the King, I shall add no more but only to inform you that this little book may in some measure discover to our Children what they must certainly ex∣pect if ever Popery prevail against us, and theefore nothing can be thought more ne∣cessary than to teach them to Spell and Read English, and to Create in them an Abhorrence of Romish Idolatry at the same time, which being infused in their green and tender years, may leave an
Impression in their Minds to the End of their Lives, which is the Real and Hearty Desire, and Design of Your Friend and Servant, Benj. Harris.
parade of people with torches and the pope with a devil on his shoulder
The Protestant Tutor &c. An Acount of the Burning the Poe at Temple-Bar in London, No∣vember 17, 1679. THE horrid Designs and Contrivn∣ces of the Pope, his Priests, Jesuits and Papists for many years last past, for rooting out the Protean R li∣gion from under Heaven, in this Kingdom as well as in all the Protestant Countreys in Europe, has raised such a just indignation in the breast of every Good Christian and True Eglihman, That the people of this Nation have upon all oc∣casions endeavoured to discover their generous Resentment and Detestation of those cursed In∣vaders of their Religion and Civil Liberties but never more apparently then upon the 17th of November 1679, that being the day on which
the unfortunate Queen Mary died, and that Glorious Princess Queen Elizabeth that True Defender of the Christian Protestant Faith as∣cended the English Throne, and thereby dis∣pelled those thick clouds of Egyptian Popish Darkness, which had so long overspread these Kingdoms. Upon the said 17th. of November, the Bells began generally to ring about three a Clock in the morning, in the City of London; and seve∣ral Honourable and Worthy Gentlemen be∣longing to the Temple, as well as the City (re∣membering the burning both of London and the Temple which was apparently Executed by Popish Villany) were pleased to be at the charge of an Extraordinary Triumph, in com∣memoration of that Blessed Protestant Queen, which was managed in the manner following. In the evening of the said day, all things being prepared, the Solemn Procession began setting out from Moregate, and so proceeded to Bishops-gate-street, and down Hounsditch to Aldgate, and from thence through Leaden-hall-street, Corn-hill by the Royall Exchange, through Cheap∣side to Temple-bar in the Order following.
1. First marched six Whifflers in Pioneers caps and red wastcoats. 2. A Bellman ring∣ing his Bell, and with a loud and dolesome voice, crying all the way, Remember Justice Godfrey. 3. A dead Body representing Justice Godfrey in the habit he usually wore, and the Crevat wherewith he was murdered about his neck, with spots of Blood on his Wrists, Breasts and Shirt, and white Gloves on his hands, his face pale and wan, riding upon a white Horse and one of his Murderers behind him to keep him from falling, in the same manner as he was carried to Primrose-hill. 4. A Priest came next in a Surplice, and a Cope Imbroidered with Dead mens Sculls and Bones, and Skeletons, who gave out pardons very plentifully to all who would murder Protestants, and proclaiming it Meritorious. 5. A Priest alone with a large silver cross. 6. Four Carmelite Fryers in white and black Habits. 7. Four Grey Friars in their proper Ha∣bits. 8. Then six Jesuits carrying bloody Dag∣gers 9. Four wind Musick called the Waits play∣ing solemnly all the way. 10. Four Bishops in Purple, with Lawn sleeves, and Golden Crosses on their breasts, and Crosier staves in their hands.
11. Four other Bishops in their Pontificalibus, with Surplices and Rich Imbroydered Copes, and Golden Miters on their Heads. 12. Six Cardinals in Scarlet Robes and Caps. 13. Then followed the Popes Chief Physician with Je∣suits powder in one hand, and an Urinal in the other. 14. Two Priests in Surplices with two Golden Crosses. Lastly, The Pope in a lofty Glorious Pageant, representing a Chair of State, covered with Scarlet, the Chair being richly Embroidered and Fringed, and be deckt with Golden Balls and Crosses; At his Feet was a Cushion of State, and two Boys sate on each side the Pope, in Surplices with white silk Banners, painted with red Crosses, and bloody Consecrated Daggers for murdering Protestant Kings and Princes, with an Incense Pot before them Censing his Holiness. The Pope was ar∣rayed in a Rich Scarlet Gown, lined through with Ermins, and adorned with Gold and Sil∣ver Lace, with a Tripple Crown on his Head, and a Glorious Collar of Gold and precious stones about his neck, and St Peters Keys, a great quantity of Beads, Agnus Dei's, and other Catholick Trumpery about him. At his Back
stood the Devil, His Holinesses Privy Councellor, frequently Caressing, Hugging and VVhisper∣ing him all the way, and oftentimes instructing him aloud to destroy His Majesty, to contrive a pretended Presbyterian Plot, and to fire the City again, to which purpose he held an Infernal Torch in his hand; The whole Procession was attended with an Hundred and Fifty Torches and Flambaus by order, but there were so ma∣ny more who came in Voluntiers, as made the number to be several Thousands. Never were the Balconies, VVindows and Houses more nu∣merously filled, nor the Streets more thronged with multitudes of people, all Expressing their Abhorrence of Popery with continual Shouts and Acclamations, so that in the whole pro∣gress of their Procession, by a modest compu∣tation it is judged there could not be less then two hundred thousand Spectators. Thus with a slow and solemn state in some hours they arrived at Temple-bar, where all the Houses seemed to be converted into Heaps of Men, VVomen and Children, who were divert∣ed with Variety of Excellent Fireworks: It is known that Temple-bar since its Rebuilding is a∣dorned
with four stately Statues of Stone, two on each side the Gate, Those toward the City Representing Queen Elizabeth, and King James, and the other two toward the Strand, King Charles the first, and our present Gracious So∣vereign; Now in regard of the day, the Statue of Queen Elizabeth was adorned with a Crown of gilded Lawrel on her Head, and in her hand a Golden shield with this Mottoinscribed there∣on, The Protestant Religion, Magna Charta; se∣veral lighted Torches were placed before her, and the Pope being brought up near the Gate, the Song following was sung in Parts, between one who represented the English Cardinal Howard, and another the People of England. Cardinal Howard. From York to London Town we come, To talk of Popish Ire, To Reconcile you all to Rome, And prevent Smithfield Fire. The People Answer. Cease; Cease! thou Norfolk Cardinal, See yonder stands Queen Bess,
Who sav'd our Souls from Popish Thrall, O Queen Bess, Queen Bess, Queen Bess. Your Popish Plot, and Smithfield Threat, We do not fear at all. For Loe! beneath Queen Besses Feet, You fall, you fall, you fall. Now God preserve Great CHARLES our King And eke all Honest men; And Traytors all to Justice bring, Amen, Amen, Amen. Then having entertained the thronging Spe∣ctators for some time with the Ingenious Fire∣works, a very great Bonefire was prepared at the Inner-Temple-Gate, and his Holiness after some Complements and Reluctancies was decently tumbled into the Flames, the Devil who till then had faithfully accompanied him, left his Holiness in the Lurch, and laughing gave him up to his deserved Fate. This last Act of his Ho∣liness Tragedy was attended with such pro∣digious Shout of the Joyful Spectators, that it might be heard far beyond Somerset-House, and we hope the sound thereof will reach all Eu∣rope,
The same evening there were Great Bon∣fires in most streets of London, and universal Acclamations, Long live King Charles, and let Popery perish, and Papists with their Plots and Counter-plots be for ever Confounded as they have hitherto been. To which every honest English Man will readily say, Amen.
The Roman small Letters. a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z, &. The Italick small Letters. a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s s t u v w x y z, &. The English small Letters. a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r r s s t u v w x y z, &. Roman Capitals. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V U W X Y Z. Italick Capitals. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V Ʋ W X Y Z.
The English Capitals. A B C D E F G H I K L M N O P Q R S T V W X Y Z. The five Vowels. a e i o u. The Consonants. b c d f g h j k l m n p q r s s t v w x y z. Double Consonants. ct sb sh sk sl fl fsl Other Double Letters. si fi ssi ffi & ae oe.
a e i o u ab eb ib ob ub ac ec ic oc uc ad ed id od ud af ef if of uf ag eg ig og ug a e i o u be be bi bo bu ca ce ci co cu da de di do du fa fe fi fo fu ga ge gi go gu a e i o u bat bet bit bot but cad ced cid cod cud dap dep dip dop dup fal fel fil fol ful gad ged gid god gud hac hec hic hoc huc lap lep lip lop lup. bra bre bri bro bru cha che chi cho chu dra dre dri dro dru fla fle fli flo flu
The Lords Prayer. OUr Fa-ther which art in Heaven. Hal-low-ed be thy Name. Thy King-dom come. Thy will be done on Earth as it is in Hea-ven. Give us this day our daily bread. And for-give us our Debts, as we for-give our Deb∣tors: And lead us not in-to Temp-ta∣ti-on, but de-li-ver us from e-vil: for thine is the King-dom, and the Pow-er, and the Glo-ry for e-ver, A-men. The Creed. I Believe in God the Fa∣ther Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth:
And in Iesus Christ his onely Son our Lord, which was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, suf∣fered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Buried, he descended into Hell, the third day he arose again from the dead, he ascended into Hea∣ven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Al∣mighty, from whence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead: I Believe in the Holy Ghost, the Holy Catho∣ick Church, the Communion of Saints, the Forgiveness
of Sins, the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Ever∣lasting, Amen. The Ten Com-mand-ments. Exodus 20. GOD spake all these words, say∣ing, I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house or Bond-age. I. Thou shalt have no o-ther Gods be-fore me. II. Thou shalt not make un-to thee a-ny gra-ven-im-age, or a-ny like-ness of a-ny thing that is in hea-ven a-bove, or that is in the earth be-neath, or that is in the wa-ter un-der the earth; thou shalt not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them: For I the Lord thy God
am a jea-lous God, vi-si-ting the in-i∣qui-ty of the Fathers up-on the Chil∣dren un-to the third and fourth Gene∣ra-ti-on of them that hate me, and shew∣ing mer-cy un-to thou-sands of them that love me and keep my Command∣ments. III. Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guilt-less that tak-eth his Name in vain. IV. Re-mem-ber the Sab-bath day to keep it ho-ly; six days shalt thou la-bour and do all thy work; but the se-venth day is the Sab-bath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt not do a-ny work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy daugh-ter, thy man-ser-vant, nor thy maid-ser-vant, nor thy Cat-tle nor thy stran-ger that is with-in thy Gates. For in six dayes the Lord made Hea-ven and
Earth, the Sea, and all that in them is; and rest-ed the se-venth day, where∣fore the Lord bles-sed the Sab-bath day, and hal-low-ed it. V. Hon-our thy Fa-ther and thy Mo-ther, that thy days may be long up∣on the Land which the Lord thy God giv-eth thee. VI. Thou shalt not kill. VII. Thou shalt not com-mit A∣dul-te-ry. VIII. Thou shalt not Steal. IX. Thou shalt not bear false wit-ness a-gainst thy Neigh-bour. X. Thou shalt not co-vet thy Neigh∣bours house, thou shalt not co-vet thy Neigh-bours wife, nor his man-ser∣vant, nor his maid-ser-vant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor a-ny thing that is thy Neigh-bours.
The X Commandments Paraphras'd EXODUS XX. See here in short what Moses once did give To Is-ra-el; Do this and thou shalt Live; Which Sacred Precept's Writ by Gods own hand Throughout all ages unrepeal'd shall stand. 1. REnounce all other Gods but only me. 2. Unto no Image bow thy heart or knee. 3. Make no vain mention of my dreadful name. 4. The sacred Sabbath-day do not profane. 5. Honour thy Parents and a Long life see: 6. Murder and Malice and Rash anger flee: 7. From filthy Lusts keep Soul & Body clean. 8. Steal not, defrau not, tho thy state be mean. 9. Bear no false VVitness that great sin decline. 10. Thirst not for others wealth, Praise God for thine. Fear God and keep his Commandments: For this is the whole duty of Man, Eccles. 12.13. These Laws O Lord write in my heart that I May in thy Fear and Favour Live & Die. M. N.
Lessons for CHILDREN, Di-vi-ded in-to Di-stinct Syl∣la-bles. The First Lesson. IF thy Bro-ther, the Son of thy Mo∣ther, or thy Son or thy Daugh-ter, or the Wife of thy Bo-som, or thy Friend which is as thine own Soul en∣tice thee se-cret-ly, say-ing, Let us go, and serve o-ther Gods, which thou hast not known, thou, nor thy Fa-thers. Namely of the Gods of the Peo∣ple which are round a-bout you, nigh un-to thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the Earth, e-ven to the o-ther end of the Earth.
Thou shalt not con-sent un-to him, nor heark-en un-to him, nei-ther shalt thine Eye pi-ty him, neither shalt thou spare, nei-ther shalt thou con-ceal him. But thou shalt sure-ly kill him, thine Hand shall be first up-on him to put him to death, and af-ter-wards the hand of all the People. And thou shalt stone him with stones that he dye, be-cause he hath sought to thrust thee a-way from the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of E-gypt, from the House of Bon-dage. And all Is-ra-el shall hear and fear, & shall do no more a-ny such wick-ed∣ness as this is among you.
The Se-cond Les-son. NOw we be-seech you Bre-thren by the com-ing of our Lord Je∣sus Christ, and by our ga-ther-ing to∣ge-ther un-to him. That ye be not soon sha-ken in mind, or be trou-bled, nei-ther by Spi-rit, nor by Word, nor by Let-ter as from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand. Let no Man de-ceive you by a-ny means; for that day shall not come ex∣cept there come a fal-ling a-way first, and that Man of Sin be re-veal-ed, the Son of Per-di-ti-on who op-po-seth, and ex-alt-eth him-self a-bove all that is cal-led God, or that is Wor-ship∣ped, so that he as God sit-teth in the Tem-ple of God shew-ing him-self tha he is God. Re-mem-ber ye not, that when
was yet with you, I told you these things. And now ye know, what with-hold∣eth, that he might be re-veal-ed in his time. For the My-ste-ry of In-i-qui-ty doth al-rea-dy work; one-ly he who now let-teth, will let till he be taken out of the way. And then shall That wick-ed be Re∣veal-ed, whom the Lord shall con-sume with the Spi-rit of his Mouth, and shall de-stroy with the bright-ness of his com-ing. E-ven him whose com-ing is af-ter the work-ing of Sa-tan, with all Pow∣er, and Signs, and ly-ing won-ders; And with all de-ceive-a-ble-ness of Un-righ-te-ous-ness in them that Pe∣rish, be-cause they re-ceiv-ed not the
love of the Truth that they might be sa-ved. The Third Lesson. CHildren Obey your Parents in all things, for that is well-pleasing unto the Lord. Who so loveth Instruction, loveth Knowledg, but he that hateth Reproof is brutish. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, while the evil days come not, wherein thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them. The fear of the Lord is the begin∣ning of Wisdom, a good Understanding have all they that keep his Command∣ments. My Son, hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy Mother; for they shall be an Ornament
of Grace unto thy Head, and Chains about thy Neck. Hear ye Children the Instruction of a Father, and attend to know Under∣standing. Correction is grievous unto him that forsaketh the way, and he that hateth Reproof shall die. The fourth Lesson. Then Pilate took Jesus and Scourged him, and the souldiers platted a Crown of Thorns and put it on his Head, and they put on him a Purple Robe, and said, Hail King of the Jews, and they smote him with their hands. Pilate therefore went forth again and saith unto them, Behold I bring him forth to you, that you may know that I find no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth wearing the
Crown of Thorns, and the Purple Robe, and Pilate saith unto them, Behold the Man. When the Chief Priests therefore and Officers saw him, they cryed out, saying, Crucifie him, Crucifie him: Pi∣late saith unto them, Take ye him, and Crucifie him, for I find no Fault in him. The Jews answered him, We have a Law, and by our Law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God. The Fifth Les-son. When Pi-late there-fore heard that say-ing, he was the more a-fraid; And went a-gain in-to the Judg-ment Hall, and saith un-to Je-sus, Whence art thou? but Je-sus gave him no answer. Then saith Pi-late un-to him, Speak∣est
thou not un-to me, know-est thou not that I have pow-er to Cru-ci-fie thee and have pow-er to re-lease thee. Je-sus an-swer-ed, Thou could-est have no pow-er at all a-gainst me, ex∣cept it were gi-ven thee from a-bove, there-fore he that de-li-ve-red me un-to thee, hath the grea-ter Sin. And from thence-forth Pi-late sought to re-lease him, but the Jews cri-ed out, say-ing, If thou let this Man go, thou art not Ce-sars Friend, who-so-ever ma∣keth him-self a King, speak-eth a-gainst Ce-sar. The Sixth Les-son. When Pi-late there-fore heard that say-ing, he brought Je-sus forth, and sate down in the Judg-ment Seat, in a place that is cal-led the Pave-ment, but in the He-brew Ga-ba-tha.
And it was the pre-pa-ra-ti-on of the Pass-o-ver, and a-bout the sixth hour, and he saith un-to the Jews, be-hold your King. But they cri-ed out, a-way with him, a-way with him: Cru-ci-fy him, Pi∣late saith un-to him, shall I Cru-ci-fy your King? The Chief Priests an-swe∣red, we have no King but Ce-sar. Then de-li-ve-red he him there-fore un-to them to be Cru-ci-fied, and they took Je-sus and led him a-way. And he bear-ing his Cross went forth in-to a place, cal-led the place of a Skull, which is cal-led in the He-brew Gol-go-tha. The seventh Lesson. And there followed Jesus a great Company of People, and of Women which also bewailed and lamented him.
And Jesus turning unto them, said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves and for your Children. For behold, the days are coming, in the which they shall say, Blessed are the Barren, and the Wombs that never bare, and the Paps which never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the Mountains, fall on us, and to the Hills cover us. For if they do these things to a green Tree, what shall be done to the dry. And there were also two Malefactors led with him to be put to death. And when they were come to the place that is called Calvary, there they Crucified him and the Malefactors, one on the right hand, and the other on the left.
The eight Les-son. Then said Je-sus, Fa-ther, for-give them, for they know not what they do. And they parted his Ray-ment and cast Lots. And the Peo-ple stood be-hold-ing, and the Ru-lers al-so with them de-ri∣ded him, say-ing, He sa-ved o-thers, let him save him-self, if he be Christ, the Chosen of God. And the Sol-di-ers al-so mock-ed him com-ing to him, and of-fer-ing him Vi-ne gar, and say-ing, If thou be King of the Jews, save thy self. And a Su-per-scrip-ti-on al-so was writ-ten o-ver him in Let-ters of Greek and Lat-tin, and He-brew, This is the King of the Jews. The nineth Les-son. And one of the Malefactors which
were hanged, railed on him, saying, If thou be Christ, save thy self and us. But the other answering, rebuked him saying, Dost thou not fear God since thou art in the same Condemnation? And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward of our deeds, but this man hath done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord re∣member me when thou comest into thy Kingdom, and Jesus said unto him, ve∣rily I say unto thee, to day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. And it was about the sixth hour, and there was a darkness over all the Earth untill the ninth hour; And the Sun was darkned, and the Vail of the Temple was rent in the midst. And when Jesus had cryed with a loud Voice, He said, Father, into thy
hands I commend my Spirit, and hav∣ing said thus, he gave up the Ghost. Now when the Centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this was a Righteous man, and all the People that came together to see that sight, beholding the things which were done, smote their breasts and returned, and all his Acquaintance and the women that followed him from Gallilee stood afar off beholding these things. The Tenth Lesson. And be-hold there was a man na-med Joseph a Coun-sel-lor, and he was a good man, and a just; (The same had not con-sent-ed to the Coun-sel and deed of them) he was of A-ri-ma-the-a, a Ci-ty of the Jews (who al-so him-self wai-ted for the King-dome of God.
This man went un-to Pi-late, and begged the Body of Je-sus, and he took it down and wrap-ped it in Lin-nen, and laid it in a Se-pul-chre that was hew-en in stone, where-in ne-ver man be-fore was laid. And that day was the Pre-pa-ra-ti∣on, and the Sab-bath drew on; and the wo-men al-so which came with him from Ga-li-lee fol-low-ed af-ter, and be-held the Se-pul-chre, and how his bo-dy was laid. And they re-tur-ned and pre-pa-red Spi-ces, and Oint-ments, and res-ted the Sab-bath day ac-cor-ding to the Com-man-de-ment. The Eleventh Lesson. By faith Moses when he was born, was hid three months of his Parents, because they saw he was a proper Child,
and they not afraid of the King's Com∣mandement. By Faith, Moses when he was come to years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter; choosing rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a Season. Esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches, than the Treasures in Egypt; for he had respect unto the Re∣compence of Reward. By Faith he forsook Egypt, not fear∣ing the wrath of the King; for he en∣dured, as seeing him who is Invisible. And what shall I more say; for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barack, and of Sampson, and of Jeptha, of David also, and Samuel, and of the Prophets, who through Faith sub∣dued
Kingdoms, wrought Righteous∣ness, obtained Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of Fire, escaped the Edge of the Sword, out of weakness were made strong, made valiant in Fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens. Women received their dead raised to life again, and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection. The twelfth Les-son. And o-thers had Try-al of cru-el mock-ings, and scourg-ings, yea, more∣o-ver of bonds and Im-pri-son-ment. They were ston-ed, they were sawn a∣sun-der, were temp-ted, were slain with the sword; they wan-de-red a-bout in sheep-skins & goat-skins, be-ing de-sti∣tute, af-flict-ed, Tor-men-ted, of whom
the world was not wor-thy, they wan∣de-red in de-sarts and in Moun-tains, and in Dens and Caves of the Earth. And these all hav-ing ob-tain-ed a good Re-port, through Faith, re-ceiv-ed not the pro-mise, God ha-ving pro∣vi-ded some bet-ter thing for us, that they with-out us should not be made per-fect. Where-fore see-ing we al-so are com-pas-sed a-bout with so great a Cloud of Wit-nes-ses, let us lay a∣side e-ve-ry Weight, and the sin which doth so ea-si-ly be-set us, and let us run with pa-ti-ence the Race that is set be-fore us. Look-ing un-to Je-sus the Au-thor and fi-ni-sher of our faith, who for the Joy that was set be-fore him, en-du∣red the Cross, de-spi-sing the shame,
and is set down at the Right hand of God. For con-si-der him that en-du-red such Con-tra dic-ti-on of sin-ners a∣gainst him-self, least they be wea-ri-ed and faint in your minds, ye have not re-si-sted un-to bloud, stri-ving a-gainst Sin. The Thirteenth Lesson. And I saw another Angel come down from Heaven, having great power, and the Earth was Lightned with his Glory; and he cryed with a strong Voice, say-ing, Babylon the great is fallen, is fal-len, and is become the Habitation of Devils, and the hold of every foul Spi∣rit, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful Bird. For all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication,
with her, and the Merchants of the Earth are waxed Rich through the a∣bundance of her Delicacies. And I heard another Voice from Hea∣ven, saying, Come out of her my Peo∣ple, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues, For her Sins have reached unto Heaven, & God hath remembred her Iniquities. Reward her even as she hath rewar∣ded you, and double unto her double, according to her works, in the Cup which she hath filled, fill to her double; How much she hath Glorified her self, and lived deliciously, so much Torment and sorrow give her, for she saith in her heart, I sit as Queen, and am no widdow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, Death, and Mourning, and
Famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with Fire; for strong is the Lord God who judgeth her. The Four-teenth Les-son. And the Kings of the Earth, who have com-mit-ted For-ni-ca-ti-on with Ba∣by-lon, and liv-ed de-li-ci-ous-ly with her, shall be-wail her, and la-ment for her, when they shall see the smoke of her burn-ing, stand-ing a-far off for the fear of her Tor-ment; say-ing, A-las, A-las, the Ci-ty Ba-by-lon, that migh∣ty Ci-ty; for in one Hour is thy Judg∣ment come. And a migh-ty An-gel took up a stone like a great Mil-stone, and cast it in-to the Sea, say-ing, thus with Vi-o-lence shall that great Ci-ty Ba-by-lon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all, and the voice of Harpes,
and Mu-si-ci-ans, and of Pi-pers, and Trum-pe-ters, shall be heard no more at all in thee; And the light of a Candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of the Bride-groom and the Bride, shall be heard no more at all in thee, for thy Mer-chants are the Great Men of the Earth, for by thy Sor-ce-ries were all Na-ti-ons de-ceiv-ed. And in her was found the bloud of Pro-phets, and of Saints, and of all that were slain up-on the Earth. The Fifteenth Lesson. And after these things, I heard a great voice of much People in Heaven, saying, Allelujah, Salvation and Glory, and Ho∣nour and power unto the Lord our God for true and Righteous are his Judg∣ments, for he hath Judged the Great
Whore, which did corrupt the Earth with her Fornications, and hath aveng∣ed the Bloud of his Servants at her hand. And again they said Allelujah, and her smoke rose up for ever and ever, and the four and twenty Elders, and the four beasts fell down and Worshipped God that sate on the Throne, saying, Amen, Allelujah; and a voice came out of the Throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his Servants, and ye that fear him both small and great. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of migh∣ty Thunderings, saying, Allelujah, for the Lord God Omnipotent Reigneth, let us be glad and rejoice, and give honour to him.
The Six-teenth Les-son. And I saw an An-gel as-cend-ing from the East, hav-ing the Seal of the Liv-ing God, and he cry-ed with a loud voice to the four An-gels, to whom it was given to hurt the Earth, and the Sea, say-ing, Hurt not the Earth, nei∣ther the Sea, nor the Trees, till we have Seal-ed the ser-vants of our God in their Fore-heads. And I heard the Num-bers of them which was Seal-ed, and there were Seal-ed an hun-dred for-ty and four thou-sand of all the Tribes of the Chil∣dren of Is-ra-el; Of the Tribe of Ju∣da were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Ru-ben were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Gad were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Ash-er were Seal-ed twelve
thou-sand, of the Tribe of Neph-tha-li were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Ma-nas-ses were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand. Of the Tribe of Si-me-on were Seal∣ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Le-vi were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Is-sa-char were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Za∣bu-lon were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Jo-seph were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand, of the Tribe of Ben∣ja-min were Seal-ed twelve thou-sand. Af-ter this, I be-held, and lo a great mul-ti-tude, which no man could Num∣ber of all Na-ti-ons, and Kin-dreds, and Peo-ple, and Ton-gues stood be-fore the Throne, and be-fore the Lamb, clo-thed with white Robes, and Palmes in their hands, and cry-ed with a loud voice, say∣ing
Sal-va-ti-on to our God which sit∣teth up-on the Throne, and un-to the Lamb. And all the An-gels stood round a∣bout the Throne, and a-bout the El∣ders, and the four Beasts, and fell be∣fore the Throne on their fa-ces, and wor-ship-ped God, say-ing, A-men, Bles-sing, and Glory, and Wis-dom, and Thanks-giv-ing and Ho-nour, and Pow-er and Might, be un-to our God for e-ver and e-ver, A-men.
MR. John Rogers Minister of S. Se∣pulchers Church in London, was the first Martyr in Queen Maries Reign, and was burnt in Smithfield, February the 14. 1554. His Wife with nine small Children, and one at her Breast follow∣ed him to the Stake, with which sor∣rowful sight he was not in the least daunted, but with wonderful patience dyed Couragiously for the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Some few days before his Death he writ the following Exhortati∣on, and sent it to his Children. Give ear my Children to my words, whom God hath dearly bought, Lay up his Laws within your hearts and Print them in your thought.
I leave you here a little Book for you to look upon, That you may see your fathers face when he is dead and gone; Who for the hope of Heavenly things while he did here remain, Gave over all his golden years to prison and to pain. Where I among my Iron Bands inclosed in the Dark, Not many days before my Death, I did compose this work. And for Example to your Youth, to whom I wish all good; I send you here Gods perfect Truth, and seal it with my Blood. To you my Heirs of Earthly things which I do leave behind, That you may read, and understand, and keep it in your mind.
That as you have been Heirs of that which once shall wear away, You also may possess that part which never shall decay. Keep alwayes God before your Eyes, with all your whole Intent; Commit no fin in any wise, keep his Commandement. Abhor that arrant Whore of Rome, and all her Blasphemies; And drink not of her cursed Cup, obey not her Decrees. Give Honour to your Mother dear, remember well her pain; And Recompence her in her Age, with the like Love again. Be alwayes ready for her Help, and let her not decay, Remember well your Father all, that should have been your stay.
Give of your Portion to the Poor as Riches do arise, And from the needy naked soul turn not away your eyes. For he that doth not hear the Cry of those that stand in need, Shall cry himself, and not be heard when he do's hope to speed. If God hath given you Increase and blessed well your store, Remember you are put in trust and should relieve the Poor. Beware of foul and filthy Lusts, let such things have no place, Keep clean your Vessels in the Lord, that he may you embrace, Ye are the Temples of the Lord, for you are dearly bought; And they that do defile the same will surely come to nought.
Be never Proud by any means, build not thy house too high, But always have before your Eyes that you are born to dye. Defraud not him that hired is your Labour to sustain, But pay him still without delay his wages for his Pain. And as you would another man against you should proceed, Do you the same to them again if they do stand in need. Impart your portion to the Poor in money and in meat, And send the Feeble, Fainting Soul, of that which you do eat. Ask Counsel always of the wise, give Ear unto the end; And ne'er refuse the sweet Rebuke of him that is thy Friend.
Be always thankful to the Lord with Prayer and with Praise; Begging of him to bless your work, and to direct your wayes, Seek first, I say, the Living God, and alwayes him adore; And then be sure that he will bless your Basket and your Store. And I beseech Almighty God, Replenish you with Grace; That I may meet you in the Heavens, and see you Face to Face. And though the Fire my Body burn, contrary to my kind; That I cannot enjoy your Love, according to my mind: Yet do I hope that when the Heavens shall vanish like a Scrowl, I shall you see in perfect shape in Body, and in Soul.
And that I may enjoy your love, and you enjoy the Land, I do beseech the living Lord to hold you in his hand. Though here my Body be adjudg'd, in flaming Fire to fry, My Soul I trust will streight ascend to live with God on High: What though this Carkass smart a while what though this Life decay, My Soul I hope will be with God, and live with him for Aye. know I am a Sinner born from the Original, And that I do deserve to dye by our fore fathers Fall. ut by our Saviours precious Blood, which on the Cross was spilt, Who freely offered up his Life to save our Souls from Guilt,
I hope Redemption I shall have, and all that in him Trust, When I shall see him face to face and live among the Just. Why then should I fear Deaths grim look, since Christ for me did dye; For King and Caesar, Rich and Poor, the force of Death must try, When I am Chained to the Stake and faggots girt me round, Then pray the Lord, my Soul in Heave may be with Glory Crown'd. Come welcome Death, the end of fears I am prepar'd to Dye; These Earthly flames will send my So Up to the Lord on High. Farewell (my Children) to the Worl where you must yet remain, The Lord of Hosts be your defence till we do meet again.
Farewel my true and loving Wife, My Children and my Friends; I hope in Heaven to see you all, When all things have their ends; If you go on to serve the Lord, As you have now begun, You shall walk safely all your days, Until your life be done. God grant you so to end your days, As he shall think it best, That I may meet you in the Heavens, Where I do hope to rest.
people being tortured and burned at the stake Popish tyrany · and · Cruelty · canons on the shore pointed at ships attacking from the sea
A prospect of POPERY, OR, A short View of the Cruelties, Treasons, and Massacres committed by the Papists since the beginning of the Reign of Qeen Mary. THAT Blessed Prince, King Edward the Sixth, (of whom good Mr. Brad∣ford saith, That he was one of the holiest and most godly men in England, of whom we may sooner speak too little than too much) growing every day more sick than other, so that he seemed past recovery: some of his Lords about him informed him, That the true Reformed Religion would be in great danger if he did not chuse a Protestant Successor, and that it was the part of a Good and Religi∣ous King to lay aside all other respects, where the Glory of God, and the Welfare of the Subjects are concerned: these Reasons so prevailed with this Godly Prince, that by his last Will he excluded his Sister Mary (who was the next Heir) from the Crown,
because she was a Papist, and left the Suc∣cession to the Lady Jane Grey, the Daughter of the Duke of Suffolk, whose Mother, being then alive, was Daughter to Mary, second Sister to King Henry the VIII. To this VVill all the King's Council, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and most of the Judges and Lawyers of the Realm, consented; and, after the death of King Ed∣ward, Proclaimed the Lady Jane Queen in London and Westminster. When the Lady Mary heard how matters went, being at Hunsdon in Hartfordshire, she sent a Letter to the Privy Council, wherein she claimed the Crown, as due to her by Birth; but the Lords answered, that according to the last Will of King Edward the Lady Jane was Proclaimed Queen, & they would acknowledge no other; the Lady Mary was much perplexed at this Letter, and thereupon retires to Framing∣ham Castle in Suffolk, where resorted to her ma∣ny zealous Protestants, of that County and Nor∣folk, who being always forward in promoting the
Gospel, assured her of their utmost help and sa∣sistance to gain the Crown, if she would engage not to attempt any alteration of the Protestant Religion settled by her Brother King Edward. To this she easily agreed, assuring them, That she would never bring in Popery: and that with so many Vows and Protestations, that none could doubt her. And being thus guarded with the Power of the Protestants, she vanquished the Forces of Queen Jane, and was settled in the Kingdom. After which she soon made good that cursed Popish Maxime, That no Faith is to be kept with Hereticks: for being afterwards petitioned by the said Protestants in Suffolk, to make good her promise; she was very much offended, telling them, Since you are but Mem∣bers, would you rule your Head, you shall one day know, that Members ought to obey their Head, and not to rule over it. So that by the incite∣ment and perswasion of her wicked Bishops, she soon brought in Popish Idolatry, and supprest the Protestant Religion, and burnt and de∣stroyed the Professors thereof, so that, though
her Reign was the shortest of any Prince (ex∣cept Rich. the 3d.) yet more Christian Blood was spilt in her time, for the cause of Religion, than in any Kings Reign whatsoever, since King Lucius the first Establisher of Christianity in England: for in her five years Reign the Martyrs of Christ and his Gospel, in all parts of the King∣dom, amounted to the number of 277 persons, of all sorts and ages, for there perished in the con∣suming flames, five Bishops, 21 Divines, eight Gentlemen, 84 Artificers and Tradesmen, 100 Husbandmen, Servants and Labourers, 26 Wives, 20 Widows, nine Virgins, two Boys, two Infants, one springing out of his Mothers womb as she was burning at the Stake, and most un∣mercifully flung into the fire at the very birth; 64. more in those furious times were persecu∣ted in their Faith, whereof seven were whipt, sixteen perished in Prison, twelve buried in Dunghils, and many more lay condemned in Irons, who were happily saved and delivered by the glorious entrance of Queen Elizabeth.
The Spanish Invasion by the Pa∣pists in the Year 1588. PHILIP, the Second King of Spain seem- to bear a great kindness and Respect to∣ward Queen Elizabeth, during the Reign of her Sister Mary, yet afterward when she came to be Queen, and promoted the Protestant Religion, and would not comply with his Designs and Interests, he became her most Bitter and Inveterat Enemy; which he suf∣ficiently Demonstrated in the 31th. Year of her most happy Reign, and in the Year of our Lord 1588. When he Designed no less than the utter Conquest and Ruin of Eng∣land, which was occasioned by the Great∣ness and Ambition of Spain, the Instiga∣tion of the Pope and some Traiterous En∣glish Fugitives. The Arguments which In∣duced them to it were, That the Church
of God could not be more Gloriously and Meritoriously Propagated, then by Conquer∣ing of England, and thereby Extirpating and Destroying Heresie, and setting up the Ro∣man Catholick Religion therein; that the Queen of England was an Heretick, and Ex∣communicated by the Pope, and continued Contumacious to the Church of Rome, and was therefore by all Ways and Means to be taken away and destroyed. And to execute this Glorious and Blessed Enterprize, the Spaniards prepared a Migh∣ty Navy of One Hundred and Thirty tall Ships, containing Fifty Seven Thousand Eight Hundred and Eight Tun, wherein were Eight Thousand Six Hundred Mariners, Nineteen Thousand and Ninety Five Souldiers, and Two Thousand Ninety Eight Gally-Slaves. The Duke of Parma▪ likewise designed to bring Fifty Thousand Souldiers more out of Flanders to joyn with them They had also aboard Two thousand six hundred and thirty great Ordinance, with Boats and Tenders, and
all sorts of Provision whatsoever, not forgetting to bring also Chains, Whips, and Butcherly Knives, to Enslave, Torment, and Murther the poor English Protestants. This Mighty Fleet was full five Years in preparing, and was so exceeding powerful, that the Spaniards themselves were even a∣mazed at it, and procured the Pope to Chri∣sten it, The Invincible Armado; he himself likewise Contributing a Million of Gold to so Pious and Religious a Design; and thus with the Popes Blessing, and the Prayers of the Roman Catholicks to God and the Saints for their good Success, this Dreadful Navy sailed slowly towards the English Shoar (the Ocean seeming to groan with its Burthen) which they brought into the form of an Haf Moon, intending to have Landed at the Thames Mouth, that by seizing on the Head, they might with more ease command the Body of the Kingdom. Queen Elizabeth in the mean time was not idle, but in the first place com∣manded a Fast to be kept, requiring all her
Subjects to make humble Supplications to God for Success and Deliverance from this Imminent danger; yet knowing that Pray∣ers without Endeavours, are like Rachel, Beautiful but Barren, she with all speed pro∣vides a double Guard, ordering the Trained Bands of the Counties to be raised for a Land Guard, and as good a Fleet as possible, consisting of One hundred and forty Ships, divided into three Squadrons, commanded by the Lord Howard Admiral, Sir Francis Drake Vice Admiral, and the Lord Henry Seymour Rear Admiral. When this Mighty Moving Wood of Spain was entred the Brittish Seas, and found the Queen so well prepared, contrary to their Expectation, they resolved rather to make a Chase Fight than lie by it. The Queen commanded the Lord Admiral to make ready Eight of her worst Ships and to fill them with Wild Fire, Pitch, Rosin, Brimstone, and other Combusti∣ble Matter, which were sent before the Wind and Tide in the Dead of the Night into the
midst of the Spanish Fleet, and the Trains taking Fire, made such a Dreadful Thun∣dering, that the Affrighted Spaniards th¦ing them to be deadly Inventions, raised a sad Outcry, and hastily cut their Cables, and in the greatest Fear and Confusion fell foul one upon another, whereupon the Queens Fleet under Drake and other Com∣manders, sunk and took many of them, and drove others upon the Sands; so that of One hundred thirty four Ships that set sail out of Lisbon, only thirty three returned. In short, the Spaniards lost in this Voyage, Eighty one Ships, and Thirteen thousand five hundred and odd Souldiers, and above Two thousand Prisoners taken in England, Ireland, and the Low-Countries. And thus this Mighty Design came to nought, and the Al∣mighty was wonderfully pleased to deliver these Protestant Kingdoms from Popery and Slavery, and let us beseech God to continue this Blessing to us and our Posterity for ever. Amen.
god's eye viewing guy fawkes in front of parliament The GunPowder Treason people being tortured and killed and people trapped in a burning building
The Gun-powder Treason Con∣trived by the Papists, Nov. 5. 1605. THe Papists having received so many Disappointments of their several cur∣sed Plots, and their Conspiracies against the Life of the Glorious Queen ELIZABETH proving Abortive, and their great hopes of a Popish Sccessr being abated by the coming in of Kng James, they yet resolved, if possible, to retrieve their cause: To effect which, there was a Damnable Design Con∣trived by some Priests, Jesuites, and other Papists, to Undermine the Parliament-House, and with Gunpowder to Blow up the King, Prince, Clergy, Nobles, Knights, and Burgesses, the very Confluence of all the Flower, Glory, Piety, Learning, Pru∣dence and Authority in the Land, Fathers, Sons, Brothers, Allies, Friends, Foes, Papists
and Protestants, all at one Blast. To which end the Conspirators took Lodgings near the Parliament House, and then all the Con∣spirators took an Oath of Secrecy in these words: You shall Swear by the blessed Trini∣ty, and by the Sacrament you now purpose to re∣ceive, never to Disclose, directly or indirectly, by Word or Circumstance, the matter that shall be proposed to you to keep secret; nor desist from the Execution till the rest shall give you leave. And now the business went on apace, and all things being ready, the Fifth of November was the day designed for the Execution, but about ten days before, a Letter directed to the Lord Montegle was delivered by an un∣known person to his Foot man in the Street, with a strict charge to give it into his Lords own hand, which accordingly he did, and the Lord being troubled at the Contents, presently imparted it to the Secretary of State, who soon presented it King James; which was in these words:
MY Lord, Out of Love to some of your Friends, I have a care of your preserva∣tion; therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise some excuse to shift off your Attendance at this Parliament, for God and Man have commanded to punish the Wickedness of this time, and think not slightly of this Adver∣tisement, but retire your self into the Country, where you may expect the Event with safety; for though there be no appearance of any stir, yet I say they shall receive a terrible blow this Parliament and yet they shall not see who hurts them. This Cousel is not to be Contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no harm, for the danger is past so soon as you have burnt the Letter; and I hope God will give you the Grace to make use of it: to whose Holy protection I commend you. The King reading this Letter, concluded it contained some extraordinary design, and that by the Blow was meant some Blast of Gunpow∣der; And thereupon ordered strict search to be made under the Parliament House about Midnight, the Parliament being to sit next
day. And at the Door of the Celler they found one Guy Faux, prepared and booted for a Journey; who being apprehended, a further search was made, and upon removing some Billets that were plac'd to prevent disco∣very, they found the Serpents Nest filled with 36 Barrels of Gun-powder; and searching Faux, there was found about him a dark Lan∣thorn, three Matches, and other Instruments for firing the Powder: and thus was this hor∣rible Plot discovered, and we Protestants once again escaped from the Horrid Designs of the Papists, and the Conspirators received their deserved punishment. Those that were first in the Conspiracy; were Robert Catesby, Thomas Piercy, Tho. Winter, Ro∣bert Winter, John Wright, Christo. Wright, Guy Faux Gent. and Bates Catesby's Man. Persons made acquainted and Promoters of it, were S. E∣verard Digby, Amb. Rookwood Esq; Fran. Wesh∣am Esq; Rob. Kets, John Grant Gent. several of whom were executed as Traytors for this cur∣sed Conspiracy of the Popish Faction, whose Mercies are Cruelty, and whose Delight is in Blood and Mischief.
The Massacre of Ireland, acted by the Papists upon the Pro∣testants in that Kingdom, in the Year, 1642. THe Jesuites Priests and Friers in Ireland, pretending that the English did unjust∣ly detain the Papists Lands from them (which yet were justly forfeited to the Laws by their continual Treasons and Rebellions against the Government) did endeavour by all ways possible to stir up all sorts of that cursed Fa∣ction, both Gentry and Commonalty, to shew the utmost of their Zeal for the Destru∣ction of the English-Protestants: and when their business was so well laid that there was little probability it should miscarry, they in their publick Prayers recommended the good success of a Great Design, tending much to the Advancement of the Catholick Cause; and that they might stir up the people to act
this Villany with the greater Cruelty and Animosity, they every where publickly dis∣coursed, That the English Protestants were He∣reticks, and not to be suffered to live any longer among them; that it was no more sin to kill one of them, than to kill a Dog; and that it was a mortal sin to relieve or protect any of them. They also with great malice, represented to the people the severe Courses taken by the Parliament of England to suppress the Ro∣mish Religion. When their Plot was ready to be execu∣ted, they proceeded against the English in divers methods; some of the Irish Papists on∣ly stripping the Protestants, and turned them out of doors naked: Others murdering Man, Woman and Child without mercy. Yet they all agreed in this, to root out, and utterly de∣stroy all the Protestants out of that Kingdom. Yea, so extream violent were they against them, that they would not endure the En∣glish Language, but punished all those that spake it, and changed the Names of all En∣glish
Places: in some places killing the Cows and Sheep, only because they belonged to the English; and sometimes cut off their Legs, or a piece out of their buttocks, leaving them to live in pain. The Popish Priests gave their Sacrament, to several Irish, upon condition that they should spare neither Man, Woman nor Child of the Protestants; saying, That it did them a great deal of good to wash their hands in their blood. They also excommunicated all that should relieve, harbour, or give them Alms; so that many were starved and perished for want of Relief, and their Monks and Fryers exhorted them with tears in their Eyes not to spare any of the English. They boasted that when they had destroyed them in Ire∣land they would go into England, and would not leave the memory of an English Man under Heaven. They said, They thought it as lawful to kill an English Man, as to kill a Sheep or a Dog; and that it was no more pity or conscience, to take their Lives or Estates from
them, than to take a Bone out of a Dogs Mouth. The day before this Bloody Massacre be∣gan, the Priests gave the People a dismission after they had said Mass; telling them, They had now free liberty to go out, and take possession of their Lands; and to strip, rob and dispoil the English of all their Goods and Cattle, The Prote∣stants (as they told them) being worse than Dogs, for they were Devils, and served the Devil; and therefore the killing of them was a merito∣rious Act, and an excellent Preservative against the pains of Purgatory. VVhich caused some of these Murtherous Villains (after they had slain a great many of the English) publickly to boast, That if they should die presently, they were sure of going to Heaven, without going at all to Purgatory. The Irish Papists then proceed∣ed to commit all manner of Cruelties and Villanies imaginable; stripping stark naked Man, VVoman and Child, driving some hun∣dreds together into a River, where they were drowned, putting an Hundred and fif∣ty into a Castle, and burning them all toge∣ther.
A Protestant Woman being delivered in the Fields, they gave the new born Infant to the Dogs to be devoured. The Irish Wo∣men followed the Camp, and stirred up the Men to Cruelty; crying, Kill them all; spare neither Man, Woman nor Child. Yea, such was their detestable Malice, that they taught their Children to kill English Children. One of the Irish Woman was very angry with a Soldier, that he did not bring the Grease of a fat English Gentlewoman, who was mur∣dered, to make Candles with; which they barbarously did in many places. In brief, by all manner of cursed Cruelties, the Irish and English Papists, in a short time, murdered near Three hundred thousand Innocent Eng∣lish Protestants, without the least cause or provocation given them: Whose Blood yet cries loud for Vengeance from Heaven a∣gainst them; and which we doubt not but the God of Vengeance will judge in his due time.
people being burned at the stake, stabbed, and eaten by dogs a masecree london burning London in Flames
The Massacre of Paris, acted by the French Papists upon the Protestants in that Kingdom, and the Cruelties of the Papists since in Piedmont, Li∣thuania and Poland, in the Year 1655 and 1656. AFter the end of the Civil Wars in France, in the time of that bloody King Charles the Ninth, and that there was a pretended Agreement between them, the Papists used divers means to draw the Chief of the Pro∣testants to Paris, under pretence of a Mar∣riage between the King of Navarre, who was a Protestant, and the Lady Margaret, Sister to the French King. But in the mean time the Papists in Roan murdered divers Protestants as they came from a Sermon, and grievously beat others: which the King seemed to be displeased at, and three or four were executed. After this the Articles of Marriage were agreed on, and to be at Pa∣ris. Admiral Coligni, a gallant Gentleman,
and one of the Protestant Generals in the last War, was invited by the King to be at the Wedding: and being come, the King and Queen Mother falsly pretended a great deal of kindness for him. The King of Navarre and the Lady Margaret were married, and a while after, the Admiral going along the Streets, was shot at; wherewith he lost his Fore-Finger, and was hurt in the Arm. The King complained of the mischief, swearing and promising to execute justice upon the Offenders. In the Evening of the same day, the Duke of Guise sent for the Captain of the Switzers, and shewed him the Kings Com∣mission for murdering of the Admiral. At Midnight the Provost, Sheriffs, and Captains of every Ward in Paris, had the same Com∣mission shewed them: assuring them, that through the whole Realm of France the Pro∣testants should be killed; and that the Watch-Word for the General Massacre, should be the tolling of the Bell in the King's Palace at Break of Day, and that the Executioners
of this Villany should be known by White Handkerchiefs tied on their Arms, and a White Cross in their Hats. In the mean time the Murderers broke into the Admirals Lodgings, and killed him upon his Knees in fervent Prayer to God: his Body was thrown out of the Window; and his Head being cut off, was sent to the King and Queen Mother, and by them sent to the Pope and Cardinal of Lorrain, as a grateful present. Then went the Murderers out into the Streets, crying, Courage, my Fellows, we have a good beginning, let us fall upon the rest, the King commands it, it is his express pleasure, he commands it. All the Attendants of the King of Navarre and Prince of Conde, which lay in the Kings Pallace were Massacred; and then through all the City were the Protestants Murdered, so that that night and the two next days there were slain in Paris above Ten thou∣sand Persons of all Ranks, Ages and Sexes; for they spared not Children in the Cradle, nor Infants in their Mothers Wombs: but to
colour their Villany, they gave out, that the Hugonots, or Protestants, had conspired to kill the King, though there was not the least pretence for so wicked a Slander. The King threatned the King of Navarre, that if he would not turn Catholick, he should be ser∣ved in the same manner: saying, You shall have Death or the Mass. The Massacre pro∣ceeded to other places; so that in a few Months there were murdered above Three∣score thousand in France, only for being Pro∣testants. When the Pope heard the News he set apart a Day of Thanksgiving to God, and published a Bull of Extraordinary In∣dulgence to such as should pray for the Hea∣venly Assistance to the King and Kingdom of France for Rooting out Hereticks. The Papists have since upon all occasions convinced the World of their Wolvish Na∣ture, in seeking by all means to destroy the Protestants. As particularly, in the Year 1655. When their Cursed Priests and Jesuites stirred up the Duke of Savoy to fall upon his
Innocent Protestant Subjects in the Vallies of Piedmont, whereby several Hundred In∣nocent Souls were basely murdered, of all Sexes, Ages and Degrees, with the greatest Cruelty and Variety of Torments that it was possible for bloody Malicious Papists to invent. And since that, in the Year 1656. they have acted the like Villanies upon the Prote∣stants in Lithuania and Poland; wherein ma∣ny had their Skins flead off, and pull'd over their Ears while they were alive; others their Hands and Feet cut off; some their Bowels taken out alive, some wounded in the Heads and Bodies, and melted Lead poured into their Wounds; others their Eyes boared out: and it was accounted a great favour if they had only their Heads cut off with Swords. How long, O Lord, Holy and True, ere thou avenge the Blood of thy Saints and Servants upon the Bloody Antichristian Beast of Rome.
The Burning of London by the Papists, Septemb. 2. 1666. IT seems now unquestionable to every true Protestants, that the City of London was burnt by the Papists; both from the for∣mer Depositions and Informations given into the House of Commns presently after that dreadful Desolation, as also by the discove∣ries made since by Capt. William Bedloe and others, and their several new attempts of this kind; but since we know the Papists have liberty to deny or forswear any thing, it may be necessary to revive some of those Evidences which were given of it at that time; and certainly those that knew before-hand, when the City would be fired, were Confederates in the cursed Conspiracy. Mr. Rich. Langhorn of the Temple, lately execu∣ted at Tyburn for High Treason, having some discourse with one Mr. Light of Rat∣cliff in February before the Fire, after some
dispute about Religion, Mr. Langhorn took him by the hand and said, You expect great things in 66. and think that Rome will be de∣stroyed; but what if it be London? Mr. Tisdale imforms, that being with one Fitz-Harris, an Irish Papist, in July before the Fire he told him, There would be sad Desolation in Septem∣ber; and Mr. Tisdale asking where this deso∣ation should be, he answered, In London: E∣lizabeth Style affirms, that being in an earnest discourse with a French Papist in April be∣ore the Fire; he furiously replied, You Eng∣ish Maids will like the French Men better, when there is not a House left between Temple-Bar and London-Bridge, she said, I hope our yes will never see that: he added, This will ome to pass between June and October. There ere a multitude of other Informations gi∣en in, which cannot be comprehended in his small Volume: but nothing is more ear and apparent, than the confession of Ro∣ert Hubard, a French Papist, who acknow∣dged that he was one of those that fired
the House of Mr. Farriner, a Baker in Pu¦ding-lane, near Fish-Street-hill, fro whence the Fire had its beginning, bein perswaded thereunto by one Stephen Pei¦lou a Papist, who brought him to the hous and then gave him three Fire-Balls, one which Hubert fastened to the end of a lon Pole and lighting it with a Match, put it i to the Window, and staid till he saw th House in a flame: Hubert confessed, the were Twenty three Accomplices, where Peidlou was the chief; and after committin this horrid fact, which produced such terr¦ble effects, Hubert's Conscience was so sta¦tled, that he voluntarily confessed the ma¦ter, for which he was committed to the Ma¦shalsea Prison in Southwark, where a Fren Merchant visited him, and told him, He not believe he had done it, to which Hubert¦plied, Yes Sir, I am guilty of it, and have do it by the instigation of Monsieur Peidlou fr a desire of a reward which he promised me up my return into France; and for a clear con¦ction
of his Guilt, Mr. Lowman Keeper of the White Lyon Prison, was appointed to set Hubert upon a Herse, and carry him to the place where the Bakers house stood, and he directly pointed at the place, though then in Ruines still affirm∣ing that it was the very place, as indeed it was, & a while after was justly executed for the same. This terrible Fire begun the 2d. of Septem. about one in the Morning, and continued burn∣ing till the 6h. of the same Month, and overrun the space of 373 Acres within the Walls of the City of London; and 63 Acres 3 Roods without the Wl; and there were burnt 89 Parish Churches six Chappels, the most spacious Cathe∣ral of St. Pauls, the Royal Exchange, the Great Guld-hall, the Custom-House, many Magnifi∣cent Halls of Companies, several princip City Gates, and 13300 Houses, which was accomp∣ied with the loss of vast quantities of rich Houshold Stff, and Goods of all sorts, especially Books (of which, alone were lst the value of near n 150000 Pounds) so that the whole loss is com∣uted to be 9900000 l. and yet by Gods Provi∣ence, not above 6 or 8 Persons were burnt.
two portraits Dr. Tius  Cptai William Bedl four men strangling another man Sir Edmondbury Godfrey strangled
A Brief Account of the Horrid and Damnable Plot in the Year 1678. Con∣trived by the Papists for the Murder∣ing of His Majesty, Destruction of the Protestant Religion, and Over∣throwing of the Government by Law Established. With a Relation of the Murder of Sir Edmund-Bury God∣frey. AS Hell and Rome had improved all their Skill and Force for some Years past, in Contriving and Managing this ellish Design; so the Almighty was Gra∣iously pleasd (notwithstanding our con∣inued Provocations) to appear for our Deli∣erance, by blasting all their cursed Contrivan∣es even at the very Birth; & the first Instru∣ent made use of by his Providence, was Dr. itus Oates, who notwithstan ing all the Ro∣ish Lies and Calumnies cast upon him, was
liberally Educated, being bred a Student in St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, where he took his Degree, and proceeded Dr. of Divinity at Sa∣lamanca in Spain: He was Vicar at Bobbing in Kent, in the Year 1672. and afterward Mini∣ster near Chichester in Sussex. Sometime after he became Chaplain to the Duke of Norfolk. In all these Stations, he was a Person of a sober Life, and never charged with Debauchery; the manner & occasion how he became ingaged mongst them, is thus related: While he was the Duke of Norfolk's Chaplain, he over-heard some Whisperings amongst the Popish Priests, (with whom this Family was sufficiently haunted) that there was some Grand Design on foot, which created in him a longing desire to sound the bottom of it, and if it were pos∣sible to Countermine it; to this purpose he en∣tred freely into Conversation with them, and shortly after desired to be admitted into the Society of Jesus, (as the Jesuits blasphemously stile their Order) which after 3 days they con∣fented to, and finding him fit for Business, they did not imploy him as usually they do
No vices (as they call young Students) in drudgery; but resolv'd to send him as a Messen∣ger to carry Letters to, and from the Society; which exactly fitted the design he was ingaged in: & so in a while he was sent with Letters to Valle dolid in Spain, which Letters (suspecting them to be of very dangerous consequence) he dexterously opened, & thereby discovered something more of their Hellish Contrivances; He managed their Affairs so much to their sa∣tisfaction, that after a while he was made pri∣vy to their secret Consults, whereby he under∣stood that the City of London, in the year 1666. was fired by Treachery & Contrivance, & was told how the Plot was laid, and who severally acted therein, and that the Jesuits got four∣teen Thousand Pound by that Fire. He kept short Notes of all Passages of concernment, in∣tending to produce them when they might be of use to unmask this detestable & bloody con∣spiracy, which he resolved to do, though with the hazard of his Life, since he perceived His Majesties Life was daily in danger: And Fa∣ther Whitebread, the Jesuits Provincial, having
ingaged Dr. Oates, before his last return into England, to murder Israel Tongue, Doctor of Di∣vinity, because he had Translated a Book cal∣led The Jesuits Morals into English, promising him fifty pounds for a reward, he thereupon became acquainted with that Doctor; and finding him to be a Person of Trust and Inte∣grity, he communicated to him the Design of Murdering him, and likewise some particulars of the Plot and both of them having consult∣ed of the best Method for managing the disco∣very, wherein they were sure to meet with mighty Opposition, and run no small hazards; they concluded to acquaint one Mr. Christopher Kerby with the business, as one who for his Fi∣delity, Zeal and Courage, for the Protestant Religion, His Majesties safety, and the interest he had in Court, was the most capable and likely Person the could think of to assist them; and therefore on Monday 12th. of August 1678. Dr. Tongue shewed Mr. Kerby 43 Articles drawn up in writing, requesting him to make the same known to the K. without acquainting any other Person therwith: and Mr. Kerby
next morning in St. James's Park acquainted His Majesty, That His Enemies had a Design a∣gainst His Life; and that he did not know but hee might be in Danger in that very Walk: His Ma∣jesty ask't, How that could be? Upon which Mr. Kirby acquainted His Majesty, that there were two Men, by name Grove and Pickering, that watcht an opportunity to shoot his Majesty, & that another Person was hired to Poyson him; after which his Majesty order'd a further scru∣tiny to be made in the Business, & a while after Dr. Oates discovered himself to Mr. Kirby, ha∣ving written divers fair Copies of the Infor∣mations concerning this Horrid Design; & up∣on the 28th. of Sept. these Informations were sworn to before Sir E. G. who would needs keep a Copy of one of them, having never be∣fore perused them; whereby it did appear that the Plot in general was by Fire & Sword when all other means fail'd, to subvert the Establish∣ed Govern and Religion of these King∣doms, an ce the same to Popery. The Chief  s being the present Pope In∣nocent  a Congregation consist∣ing
of 350 Persons held about Dec. 1677. Decla∣red all His Majesties Dominions, to be part of St. Peters Patrimony, as forfeited to the Holy See, for the Heresie of the Prince and People, and to be dis∣posed of as he should think fit; likewise Cardinal Howard, whom the Pope as his Legate had ap∣pointed to take possession of England, in his Name, & was made Archb. of Canterbury, and others were made Bishops of most of the Dio∣cesses in England: Also Johannes Paulus de Oli∣va was concerned, with La Chese a Jesuit, Con∣fessor to the French K. the Provincials of the Je∣suits, Strange and Whitebread, the Benedictine Monks at the Savoy, where they had erected a Colledge of Jesuits & Seminary Priests, to the number of 1800 which were then in England; several Lay-Persons of Quality were also drawn in to joyn with them, to Command the Forces they were to Raise, and to Execute the great Offices of the Realm; as the L. Arundel of War∣der, to be L. Chamberlain of land; the L. Powis, L. Treasurer; Sir Wil in, L. Privy Seal; Edw. Coleman, Secr ; L. Bel∣lasis, General; Sir Fra  r. Gene∣ral;
Rich. Langhorn, Adjutant General: who had Commissions sent them sealed by Paulus de Oliva from Rome; this work was so great, and in their apprehension so glorious, that the most Eminent of the Popish Clergy in Europe were ingaged therein; so that it cannot be said to be the Act or Contrivance of any few particular Persons, but an Unanimous undertaking of the whole Romish Church, and so it must be recor∣ded to Posterity, to their everlasting shame. The means thereby they resolved to ac∣complish this Hellish Design were; 1. By kil∣ling the King, which they endeavoured to do either by Stabbing, Pistol or Poyson. 2. By Firing London, Westminster, and other Cities and great Towns in England, immediately up∣on the Murther of his Majesty. 3. By a Ge∣neral Massacre of Men, Women and Children, to which purpose they had formed an Army, and Fifty Thousand were to be Listed about London: The Officers were to be all Resoltue Papists and for the most part French and Irish; These they gave out, were enough to Cut the Throats of one undred thousand Protestants,
especially being taken upon a Surprize, when the Militia of London was undisciplin'd and unprovided: All these Particulars and abun∣dance more, were discover'd to the Council on Saturday the 28th. of Sept. 1678. by Dr. Oates who was a long time under Examination; But now the adorable Providence of God was pleased to take the Crafty in their own Net, and so far to Infatuate these Romish Achitophells, that they themselves mortally wounded their own cause by venturing upon a bloody Enter∣prize, which presently Alarum'd the whole Nation, and left no room to doubt whether or no there were a Plot. This was the Mur∣ther of that worthy Magistrate Sir Edmunbu∣ry Godfry, whose memory shall be dear to Po∣sterity, as a Martyr for our Church, & a Ran∣som for the State. Sir Edmundbury Godfry ha∣ving as aforemention'd taken Dr. Oates his de∣positions and Discoverys of the Plot, which was no more then every Justice of the Peace was bound to do; yet for the necessary dis∣charge of this duty, the Popish Conspirators were so enrag'd that they resolved to Cut him
off; the rather as may be supposed, to frighten all other Magistrates from Intermedling with any Affairs relating to the Plot. It is not cer∣tainly discovered how many were concerned in the Business; but those who are known to have been in it, are Father Girald, and Father Kelly, two Irish Priests; Rob. Green, Cushion∣man to the Queens Chappel; Lawrence Hill, Servant to Dr. Godden, Treasurer of the Chap∣pel, Henry Berry, Porter at Somerset-House, and Mr. Miles Prance, Gold-smith in Covent-Gar∣den, who wrought to the Queen; these were actually present at the Murther, & were per∣swaded by the Popish Priests, to commit this Horrid Murther, by being told that Sir Ed∣mundbury was a great Persecutor of Hereticks, & a particular Enemy to her Majesties Servants, and hat he had very lately Examined People a∣gainst them, & had got Depositions to fix base Crimes and Scandals on their Religion, & that he Catholicks would be ruined unless he were aken off; and therefore it was necessary for he Glory of God, and the good of the Church it ould be done: And that besides they should
have a good Reward from the Lord Bellasi and that it was no Sin, but a work of Charit and so far from Murther, that it was Meritor¦ous. After this, upon Saturday Octo. the 12t some of the Conspirator set Sir Edmundbu & waited for him till Nine a Clock at Nig at which time he passed by Somerset-House, a Hill who knew him stept out in a great deal hast, and intreated him for Gods sake to he him, for their were two Men a Quarrelli and he was afraid there would be bloud-she He at first refused it, but Hill being Import¦nate, he at last consented, Hill went first, a Sir E. followed into the Gate, and just behi followed Girald and Green, and as he was g¦ing down the Stairs, Green suddenly thre twisted Handcherchief about Sir E. Neck, a presently all of them puld him down, a Throtled him, and gave him many viole punches with their Knees, & Green wrung Neck round almost withal his force; th they removed him into a Room in the up Court; and Mr. Prance who made the Dis very, went with a dark Lanthorn thither to
where Captain Bedlow saw Mr. Prance; and terwards carried him into the Fields, to a ace called Primrose Hill, and there in a ditch ey left his Body, with his own Sword run rough him, and the Scabbard and his Gloves id on the Bank, that he might be supposed  have Murthered himself: but a while after, r. Bedlow Voluntarily came in and gave an ccount of the whole matter; as also of the opish Plot, and then seized upon Mr. Prance ho joyned with him in his Evidence, upon hich Green, Berry and Hill were Executed r the Murther; and Coleman, Ireland, Picke∣ng, Grove, White-bread, Harcourt, Fenwick, avan, Turner, and Langhorn, for the Popish amnable Conspiracy, from which let us eseech Almighty God for ever to deliver s. Amen.
A Paraphrase on St. Luke, the 1 Chapter, from the 19th. verse, to End Being a real Scripture-Dialo between the most happy Lazarus the tormented Dives. To the Reader. BEhold these lines crave thy most solid vi Since by the Scriptures they are proved t Dost thou want Riches? here without ail m s Is a most blessed stock of lasting Treasure. This Heavenly Treasure will enrich thee mor Than all the Jewels on the Indian Shore, Receive it joyfully, and say no more. Poor men rejoyce whilst rich men houl cry Such is the pleasure of the Deity. Then cease thy tears, poor wretched foul, l An ear unto poor Lazarus thy friend. Lazarus. Most Noble Sir, view but these Sores I bear, And how each one doth like a Mouth appear;
For some relief my wounds do loudly cry, And humbly begg your Christian Charity. Alas I've lain here day by day unable, E're to obtain the Scraps fall from your Table: The very Dog's more kindness shew than you, Who lick my Sores and heal my Ʋlcers too: Alas great Sir I Languish, nay I Dye, Only for want of timely Chartiy. Let me request your bounty, for I know, God will repay you doubl what I owe; For Godssake and your own, let me but have Sme kind relief, to shield me from the grave, Scraps from your Table, I do only crave. Dives. Why how now Sirrath! how dare you presume To urge my patience with your begging tune How dare you venture at my Gate to lye? Up and be gone, or else prepare to dye. Talk you of Sres and Wounds, what's that to me? The Dogg's indeed your fittest consorts be: My Table is not spread to grant relief, To every begging lazy idle Thief: Such as your self may be for ought I know, Be gone you idle Rascal. Sirrah go,
Or I'le release your idle cryes & groans With a good Cudgel that shall break your bones What if you Languish, Perish, Rot or Dye: Do so or hang your self, pray what care I. You tell me God will double what I give, Yet will I not believe it, as I Live. Go to him then your self, if you are able, And tell me then who keeps the beter Table: Go get you gone you lazy idle Thief, I fear you there will find but small relief. Lazarus. Farewell proud scornful Dust and Ashes, I Will henceforth only on my God rely; With winged speed I will approach thy Throne, And all my grief and misery make known. Lord thou art able to relieve my wants, Relieve my misery, and here my plaints. From thee, my God, I do expect much more, Than ever yet I found at Dives door. How ever Gracious God I now must try, My Strength decayes, Great God, behold I dye. Angels. Hail blessed Lazarus! all Hail we say, We're sent thy Soul to Heaven to convey.
Blest Abraham attends with open Armes. Who will secure the from all future harms. Rouze then blest Saint, and Hallelujah sing, Whilst we with expedition take the Wing. In order to Transport thee to that place Of joy, where Tears shall ne're bedew thy face. Dives Lifting up his eyes in Hell. Behold me, Father Abraham, I lye Surrounded with eternal misery: Shall Lazarus a blessed Place obtain, Whilest I all Hellish Torments do sustain. Have mercy on me, Father, Pray now send Thrice Happy Lazarus, to dip the end Of one of his Blest fingers, amd asswage My Hell tormented Tongue, which Fire makes rage: Some cooling water for my Tongue, for I Must now in Hells Eternal Torments Fry. Abraham. Remember Son, to add unto thy grief, When living, you allow'd him no relief. ou then possess'd your good things, he his bad, You swam in mirth, whilest Lazarus was sad. ut now the Case is alter'd much, for he hall ever joy, whilest you tormented be;
Besides a Gulf between us two there lies, More deep than is the Earth beneath the Skies And let me tell you, you will find it tru, Y cannot come to me, or I to you. Dives. Dear Father, let me then this suit obtain, Send him unto my Fathers house again; Five Brethren there I have, O let him tell To them the Torments I endure in Hell: And if they will not then their sins refrain, Let Lazarus return to the again. Abraham. Moses, the Prophets too must be their Guide, And pray what else should they desire beside. Dives. Nay Father Abraham, but if one went. Ʋnto them from the Grave, they will repent. Abraham. If Moses, and the Prophets will not do, They'l not believe a Messenger from you.
Words and Proper Names from Two to Seven Sillables, both whole and divided into Sil∣lables, for the more easie In∣structing of Children in True Spelling. A ABel A-Bel Affirm Af-firm ugmented Aug-ment-ed braham A-bra-ham bility A-bi-li-ty bednego A-bed-ne-go dmiration Ad-mi-ra-ti-on
Ahasuerus A-ha-su-e-rus Allsufficiency All-suf-fi-ci-en-c Association As-so-ci-a-ti-on B Baptism Bap-tism Babel Ba-bel Beautiful Beau-ti-ful Benjamin Ben-ja-min Bountifully Boun-ti-ful-ly Beezebub Beel-ze-bub Beneficial Be-ne-fi-ci-al Baalperazim Ba-al-pe-ra-zim Beatification Be-a-ti-fi-ca-ti-on C Candle Can-dle Caleb Ca-leb
Chastising Cha-sti-sing Canaan Ca-na-an Catechising Ca-te-chi-sing Canterbury Can-ter-bu-ry Christianity Chri-sti-a-ni-ty Chederlaomer Che-der-la-o-mer Consideration Con-si-de-ra-ti-on Consubstantiation Con-sub-stan-ti-a-ti-on D Daughter Daugh-ter Dinah Di-nah Distracted Di-stract-ed Daniel Da-ni-el Damnable Dam-na-ble Deceitfulness De-ceit-ful-ness Dalmatia Dal-ma-ti-a Deliberately De-li-be-rate-ly Deuteronomy Deu-te-ro-no-my
Determination De-ter-mi-na-ti-on E Eating Eat-ing Esther Est-her Excellent Ex-cel-lent Ephraim E-phra-im Establishment E-sta-blish-ment Elizabeth E-li-za-beth Excommunicate Ex-com-mu-ni-cate Evilmerodach E-vil-me-ro-dach Extraordinary Ex-tra or-di-na-ry Elihoenai E-li-ho-e-nai F Flourish Flou-rish Francis Fran-cis Forreigner For-reign-er
Farnaby Far-na-by Foundation Foun-da-ti-on Fornication For-ni-ca-ti-on Falliblity Fal-li-bi-li-ty G Garment Gar-ment Gomer Go-mer Grievously Grie-vous-ly Gomorrah Go-mor-rah Graciously Gra-ci-ous-ly Gamaliel Ga-ma-li-el Genealogy Ge-ne-a-lo-gy Gibelaraim Gi-be-la-ra-im Glorification Glo-ri-fi-ca-ti-on H Heaven Hea-ven
Hulda Hul-da Horrid Hor-rid Hallowed Hal-low-ed Hosanna Ho-san-na Humility Hu-mi-li-ty Hallelujah Hal-le-lu-jah Hospitality Hos-pi-ta-li-ty Heliopolis He-li-o-po-lis Hypocritieally Hy-po-cri-ti-eal-ly I, J Inquire In-quire Judgment Judg-ment Japhet Ja-phet Ithri I-thri Jealousie Jea-lou-sie Infinite In-fi-nite Issachar Is-sa-char Jesuit Je-su-it
Instruction In-stru-cti-on Jerusalem Je-u-sa-lem Inquisition In-qui-si-ti-on Immanuel Im-ma-nu-el Immortality Im-mor-ta li-ty Jurisdiction Ju-ris-dic ti-on Jehovanisi Je-ho-va-ni-si K Knowledg Know-ledg Kedar Ke-dar Knowingly Know-ing ly Kilkenny Kil-ken-ny Kiderminster Ki-der-min-ster Kiriatharba Ki-ri-ath-ar ba Kireathebaal Ki-re-a the-ba-al L Laughter Laugh-ter London Lon-don
Learnedly Learn-ed-ly Lincolnshire Lin-coln-shire Lamentable La-men-ta-ble Leviathan Li-vi-a-than Liberality Li-be-ra-li-ty Laboriousness La-bo-ri-ous-ness M Meekness Meek-ness Martha Mar-tha Mightily Migh-ti-ly Magdalen Mag-da-len Mercifully Mer-ci-ful-ly Melchizedec Mel-chi-ze-dec Moderation Mo-de-ra-ti-on Mesopotamia Me-so-po-ta-mi-a Macedonia Ma-ce-do-ni-a Machination Ma-chi-na-ti-on Multiplication Mul-ti-pli-ca-ti-on
N Neighbour Neigh-bour Nimrod Nim-rod Nourishing Nou-rish-ing Napthtali Naph-ta-li Negligently Neg-li-gent-ly Nathanael Na-tha-na-el Nehemiah Ne-he-mi-ah Nonconformity Non-con-for-mi-ty Nebuchanezzar Ne-bu-chad-nez-zar O Oppose Op-pose Obed O-bed Oppressing Op-pres-sing Oliver O-li-ver Omnipotent Om-ni-po-tent Obadiah O-ba-di-ah Opportunity Op-por-tu-ni-ty Onesephorus O-ne-se-pho-rus
P Perswade Per-swade Patrick Pa-trick Popery Po-pe-ry Pilgrimage Pil-gri-mage Pharaoh Pha-ra-oh Perplexity Per-plex-i-ty Palestina Pa-le-sti-na Parliament Par-li-a-ment Prorogation Pro-ro-ga-ti-on Proclamation Pro-cla-ma-ti-on Politically Po-li-ti-cal-ly Philadelphia Phi-la-del-phi-a Philosophically Phi-lo-so-phi-cal-ly Predestination Pre-des-ti-na-ti-on Propitiation Pro-pi-ti-a-ti-on
Q Quenching Quench-ing Quinzay Quin-zay Quartering Qua-ter-ing Quietness Qui-et-ness Qualified Qua-li-fi-ed Questioning Que-sti-on-ing Questionable Que-sti-on-a-ble Qualification Qua-li-fi-ca-ti-on R Reward Re-ward Rachel Ra-chel Redeemer Re-deem-er Rebekah Re-be-kah Redemption Re-demp-ti-on Resolution Re-so-lu-ti-on
Rehoboam Re-he-bo-am Remaliab Re-ma-li-ab Resurrection Re-sur-rec-ti-on Rizautalipput Ri-zau-ta-lip-put Renunciation Re-nun-ci-a-ti-on Reconciliation Re-con-ci-li-a-ti-on S Substance Sub-stance Sodom So-dom Saviour Sa-vi-our Synagogue Sy-na-gogue Samuel Sa-mu-el Sanctuay Sanc-tu-a-ry Sennacherib Sen-na-che-rib Samaria Sa-ma-ri-a Superstition Su-per-sti-ti-on Supplantation Sup-plan-ta-ti-on
T Trouble Trou-ble Thomas Tho-mas Traiterous Trai-te-rous Treacherous Treach-e-rous Tertullus Ter-tul-lus Temptation Temp-ta-ti-on Theophilus The-o-phi-lus Tyrannically Ty-ran-ni-cal-ly Tribulation Tri-bu-la-ti-on Thessalonica Thes-sa-lo-ni-ca Transubstantiation Tran-sub-stan-ti-a-ti-on V, U Voyage Voy-age Ʋnjust Ʋn-just Vashti Vash-ti
Ʋzzah Ʋz-zah Vanity Va-ni-ty Ʋngodly Ʋn-god-ly Vitellus Vi-tel-lus Ʋriah Ʋ-ri-ah Victorious Vic-to-ri-us Ʋngodliness Ʋn-god-li-ness Vespasian Ve-spa-si-an Victoria Vic-to-ri-a Visitation Vi-si-ta-ti-on Ʋncircumcised Ʋn-cir-cum-ci-sed Ʋniversality Ʋ-ni-ver-sa-li-ty Ʋnreconcilable Ʋn-re-con-cile-a-ble W Wretched Wretch-ed Wilkins Wil-kins Wickedness Wick-ed-ness Wallingford Wal-ling-ford
Wonderfully Won-der-ful-ly Warsovia War-so-vi-a Wetteravia Wet-te-ra-vi-a Wearisomness Wea-ri-som-ness Y Younger Youn-ger Youthful Youth-ful Youthfully Youth-ful-ly Z Zealous Zea-lous Zadok Za-dok Zion Zi-on Zachary Za-cha-ry Zebulon Ze-bu-lon Zephaniah Ze-pha-ni-ah Zorobabel Zo-ro ba-bel
A CATECHISM. 1 Quest. WHat Religion do you profess? Answer, The Christian Religion, commonly called the Protestant, in opposition to Popery. 2 Q. What Miracles is your Re∣ligion confirmed by? A. By Divine Miracles; as I read in Mark 16.17, 18, 20. These Signs shall follow them that believe; in
my name shall they cast out Devils they shall speak with new Tongues, they shall take up Serpents, and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them. And they went forth and preached every where. The Lord working with them, and Confirming the Word with Signs following. 3. Q. What Confirmation hath the Popish way? A. Devilish, 2 Thess. 2.9. After the working of Satan, with all pow∣ers, and Signs, and lying Wonders 4. Q. Is the Scripture sufficient for us without unwritten Traditi∣ons? A. Yes 2 Tim. 3.16, 17. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine for Reproof, for Correction, for In∣struction
in Righteousness: that the Man of God may be perfected throughly furnished unto all Good Works. 5 Q. Is it for the Common People to read the Scripture? A. Yes Act. 17.11, 12. These were more noble than those in Thessa∣lonica, in that they received the Word with all readiness of mind, and search∣ed the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. Therefore many of them believed. 6 Q. Are we bound to own the Popes Interpretation of Scripture? A. No. 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private interpre∣tation: for the Prophecy came not in old time by the will of Man! but
holy Men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 7 Q. Are all things, necessary for Salvation, plainly to be found in Scripture? A. Yes, 2 Tim 3.15. From a Child thou hast known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make the wise unto Salvation. 8 Q. Is the Church of Rome Mo∣ther and Mistriss of all Churches? A. No, Gal. 4.26. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the Mother of us all. 9 Q. Ought we firmly to receive and embrace all customs and constitu∣tions of the Roman Church? A. No, Act 15.28, 29 For it seemed good unto the holy Ghost, and to us, to lay upon you no great∣er
burden than these necessary things: that they abstain from Meats offered to Idols, and from Blood, and from Things strangled and from Fornication. 10. Q. Is outward Prosperity a note of the true Church? A- No. 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. 11. Q. Do you not dread the, Popes Bulls. A. No. Mar. 16.16. He that be∣lieveth and is baptized shall be saved. 12. Q. Hath the Pope Authority to depose Kings? A. No 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15, Sub∣mit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake: whether it be to the King as supream, or unto
Governours, as unto them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For so is the Will of God. 13. Q. May the Pope absolve us from our Oath of Allegiance? A. No, Eccles. 8.2. Keep the Kings commandement, and that in regard of the Oath of God. 14. Q. May the Pope dispence with Gods Commands? A. No, Mat. 5.19. Whosoever shall break one of these least Com∣mandements, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the King∣dom of Heaven. 15. Q. Have Peter-pence their O∣riginal from Peter? A. No, Act. 3.6. Peter said, Silver and Gold have I none.
16 Q. Is the Prelate of Rome Pe∣ter's Successor? A. No, Gal. 2.7, 8, 9 But contra∣riwise, when they saw that the Gos∣pel of the Uncircumcision was com∣mitted unto me, as the Gospel o the Circumcision was unto Peter: (for he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the Cir∣cumcision; The same was mighty in me towards the Gentiles.) And when James, Cephas, and John, who see∣med to be Pillars, perceived the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship, that we should go to the Heathen, and they unto the Circumcision. 17. Q. Is there one Visible Head of the Church?
A. No. Eph. 4.4, 5, 6. There is one Body and one Spirit, even as you are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all. 18. Q. Is the Popedom an Ofice, in the Ministry? A. No. Ephes. 4.11, 12. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pa∣stors and Teachers; for the perfect∣ing the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ. 19. Q. Is the Pope rightly term∣ed his Holiness? A. No. 2 Thes. 2.3. That man of Sin 20 Q Is the Pop's Power from God or from Satan? A. Satan. Rev. 13.2. The Dragon gave him his Power, and his Seat, and great Authority.
21 Q. Is it fit that Ministers should be married? A. Yes, 1 Tim. 3.2, 4. A Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, having his Children in Subjection. 22 Q. Are the Popish Festivals to be approved? A. No, Gal. 4 9, 10. How turn you again to the weak and beggerly Ele∣ments, whereunto ye desire again to be in Bondage? Ye observe Dayes, and Months, and Times, and Years. 23 Q Do you forbear Flesh Meats on the Popish Fasting Dayes? A. Nay, 1 Tim. 4.4, 5 For every creature of God is good, and no∣thing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctifi∣ed by the Word of God, and Prayer.
24. Q May we Worship Angels? A. No. Rev. 22.8, 9. I fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel, which shewed me, these things. Then saith he unto me, See thou do it not: for I am thy fellow Servant, and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the Sayings of this Book: Worship God. 25. Q Is it Lawful to pray to an Image? A. No. Is 45.20. They have no knowledg, that set up the Wood of their graven Image, and pray un∣to a God that cannot save. 26. Q. Is it Lawfull to worship Images. A. No. Ex. 20.4, 5, Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven I∣mage,
or any likeness of any thing that is in Heaven a bove, or that is in the Water under the Earth. Thou shalt not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them: For I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the Fathers upon the Chil∣dren, unto the third and fourth Ge∣neration of them that hate me. 27 Q Do the Papists do well in leaving out the Second Command∣ment? A No. Deut. 4.13. He declared un∣to you his Covenant, which he com∣manded you to perform; even Ten Commandments: and he wrote them upon Two Tables of Stone. 28 Q. Is, Thou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Wife, the Ninth Commandment?
A. No. Exod. 20.17. Thou shalt ot covet thy Neighbours House, ou shalt not covet thy Neighbours Wife, nor his Man servant, nor his said servant, nor his Oxe, nor his ss, nor any thing that is thy Neigh∣ours. 29 Q. Are the Relicks of Saints o be Worshipped? A. No. Acts 14.15. Sirs, why de e these things? We also are Men of ke passions with you, and Preach nto you, that you should turn from ese Vanities unto the Living God. 30. Q. May I worship a Cruci∣r? A. No. Luk. 4.8. For it is writ∣n, Thou shalt worship the Lord y God, and him only shalt thou rve.
31. Q. May we pray to the Vir∣gin Mary? A. No, Luk. 11.2. When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in Hea∣ven. 32. Q. May we pray to Saints? A. No, Acts 10.25, 26. As Pe∣ter was coming in, Cornelius met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshipped him. But Peter took him up, saying, stand up. I my self al∣so am a Man. 33. Q. Are Latine Prayers to be used in a Congregation that under∣stand not that Language? A. No, 1 Cor. 14.14, 15. For if I pray in an unknown Tongue, My Spirit prayeth, but my Understanding is unfruitful. What is it then? will pray with the Spirit, and wil
pray with Understanding also. 34. Q. May a Christian be in this Life assured of Salvation? A. Yes, 1 Joh 3.14. We know that we have passed from death to life, be∣cause we love the Brethren. 35. Q. Is Salvation to be attained by the Merits and Grace of Saints departed? A. No, Gal. 6.4, 5. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoycing in himself a∣lone, and not in another. For every man shall bear his own burden. 36. Q Is the Virgin Mary our Saviour? A. No, Act. 4.10, 11, 12. Jesus Christ is become the Head of the Cor∣er, neither is there Salvation in anyther.
37 Q. Can we deserve Salvati∣on? A. No, Rom. 3.27, 28. Where is boasting then! It is excluded. By what law? of Works? Nay, by the Law of Faith. Therefore we con∣clude, that a man is justified by Faith, without the Deeds of the Law. 38 Q. May Pardons be bought? A. No, 1 Pet. 1.28. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeem∣ed with corruptible things, as Silve and Gold. 39 Q. Is the Mass a Sacrifice fo the Quick and the Dead? A. No, Heb. 10.14. For by one Of∣fering he hath perfected for ever then that are Sanctified.
40 Q Ought they which have right to the Lords Table, to par∣take of the Cup as well as of the Bread? A. Yes. Matt. 26.26, 27. As they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and Blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to the Disciples, and said, Take, Eat, this is my Body. And he took the Cup, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. 41. Q. Doth the Bread in the Communion remain Bread after the Words of Consecration? A. Yes. 1 Cor. 11.26, 27, 28. For as often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do shew the Lords death till he come: wherefore, who∣soever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and bloo of the Lord. But let a man Examin himself, and so let him Eat of tha Bread, and drink of that Cup. 42. Q Is Rome stiled Babylo in the Revelation? A. Yes. Rev. 17.3, 5, 9, 18. I saw a Woman sit upon a Scarlet-coloure Beast, full of names of Blasphemy having seven Heads: and upon he Fore-head was a Name written My∣stery, Babylon the great, the Mother of Harlots and Abomination of the Earth. The seven Heads are seve Mountains, on which the Woman sitteth: and the Woman which tho sawest, is that great City which reig∣neth over the Kings of the Earth.
43. Q. May we joyn with Rome? A. No. Rev. 18.4, 5. I heard a Voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my People, that ye be not parta∣kers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues. For her sins have reach∣ed unto Heaven, and God hath remem∣bred her iniquities.
A Little Book of MARTYRS, OR, The HISTORY of the KINGS of ENGLAND, with an Account of the Cru∣elties exercised by the POPE and his Clergy, for several Hundred Years. I Sing their Deaths, who dying made Death yield. By Scriptures Sword and Faiths unbattered Shield. Whom Satan, Men, nor Monsters, could not tame, Nor force them to deny their Saviours Name; Evangelists that did the Gospel write, Apostles and brave Martyrs, that did fight
'Gainst Death and Hell, and all the Powers of Sin, And boldly dy'd Eternal Life to win. John Baptist by an Herod lost his Head. Who to the World, Repentance published. Our Blest Redeemer in his Love did follow, And conquer'd Death, Mans sinful soul to hallow. He was the death of Death and he did quell The Sting and Power or Satan, Sin and Hell: And under his great Standard valiantly A number numberless have dar'd to die: Through Bondage, Famine, Slavery, Sword & Fire, Through all devised Torments they conspire Victoriously to gain th' Immortal Crown Of never ending Honour and Renown. Saint Stephen was the third that lost his Breath, And for his Masters sake was ston'd to Death. And after him in History we may read Th' Apostle James was brain'd and butchered. Saint Mark th'Evangelist in fire did burn, Saint Bartholomew was flea'd yet would not turn. Saint Andrew like a valiant Champion dy'd, And on a Cross was sadly crucified. Matthias, Philip, Peter, and Saint Paul, Ston'd, Crucifi'd, Beheaded; Martyrs all.
Th'Apostles of their Lives no reckoning make, And think them well lost for their Saviours sake. The Tyrant Emperours in number Ten, (Most cruel, barbarous, and inhumane men) More Christians by their Bloody Laws did slay, Than for a year Five thousand to each day. And many Roman Bishops in those days Were martyr'd to their high Creators praise: And though each day so many thousands bleed Yet doubly more and more they daily breed. As Camomile grows better, being trod, So death and Tortures draw more unto God. Grace, like the Vine that's cut and prun'd, bears more In one year, than it did in three before. This Bloody Persecution did out-wear After Christs death the first three hundred year. This did the Primitive, first Church endure, Being Catholick, Apostolick, and Pure. And over all the VVorld 'twas truly known, The Romish Bishops claimed but their own. In their own Diocess to be Chief Pastors. And not to be the worlds great Lords & Masters. And now of Britain's Glory will I sing, From Lucius Reign, the VVorld's first Christian King:
Unto these Gospel days, the Cruel Fate Of Valiant Saints and Martyrs, I'll relate. First Ursula, and Eleven thousand with her, All Virgins; for Christ's Faith did die together. Then Hengist, with the Saxons hither came, Who many kill'd with Sword and furious flame. Besides Eleven hundred Monks were kill'd, At Bangor Abbey all their blood was spill'd. And when the Saxons Race to end was run, The Danes came in, and all the Kingdom won, Before whose Swords did many thousands fall, VVho on the name of Jesus Christ did call. Then William Conquerour, with a multitude, Unto the Normans Yoke this Land subdu'd. The Pope then caus'd all Priests to leave their VVives To lead foul, Sodomitick, single Lives, Then afterward in Second Henry's Reign VVas that proud Prelate Thomas Becket slain; A Popish Saint, and Martyr made, because He dy'd a Traitor to his Soveraign's Laws. King Henry and King Richard dead and gone, Their Brother John doth next ascend the Throne; VVhom all his life the Pope of Rome did vex, And with Oppressions all the Realm perplex;
With Candle, Book, and Bell, he curst and blest, And Bulls and Legates did the King molest. Till such time as he on his knees fell down, And to the Pope surrendred up his Crown. At last because he durst the Pope with-stand, He dy'd impoison'd by a Friars hand. When thus by Treason they had kill'd King John, Then the three Henry's, England's Crown put on, T en England bought the Romish Doctrine dear, It cost her Threescore thousand Marks a year, For Agnus Dei's, Pardons, Peter-pence; For which the Pope had all this Coin from hence. King Henry dead, then Edward bore the sway, His Son and Grand-son England did obey. The first of them (call'd Long-shanks) Conquests won, Lost by Carnarvan his unhappy Son; Who by his Queen was in a Dungeon cast, And there was killed and sadly breath'd his last. Edward the Third a brave Victorious King, Did Frenchmens pride into Subjection bring. Richard the Second then to reign began, Who lost more than his Royal Graudsire wan. And now John Wickliff boldly did begin To preach 'gainst Antichrist, that Man of Sin:
VVho many Troubles stoutly did abide. Yet spight o'th Pope, he naturally dy'd: And being dead, from out the Grave was turn'd; And had his martyr'd Bones to Ashes burn'd. VVhich Ashes they did cast into a Brook, Because he had the Romish Faith forsook. Yet whil'st the Second Richard here surviv'd, No Martyrs were of life by Fire depriv'd, Henry the Fourth was in the Throne invested, In whose Reign many were too much molested. And William Sawtrey first his life did give, Through Flames of Fire, who now in Heaven doth live. The next John Badly in the furious Flame And William Thorp both won Immortal Fame. Then the Fifth Henry, a Victorius Prince, The Realm of France did conquer so long since. The good Lord Cobham then Old castle nam'd, (By Popish Priests an Heretick proclaim'd) Was hang'd and burned by the Cruel Doom Of Satan's Servants Slaves to Hell and Rome. And after him one nam'd John Brown Esquire, And Beverly a Preacher, dy'd by Fire. Besides a number from the Lollards Tower Racks, Tortures, Hakers, and the Flames devour.
John Hus, a glorious Martyr of the Lord, Was in Bohemia burned for Gods Word. And Reverend Jerom did to Constance come From Prague and stoutly suffer'd Martyrdom. In Smithfield one John Cleydon suffered death, And with him Richard Turning lost his breath. At this time sixteen godly Men in Kent, The Anti-christian Vassals did torment. Then Death cut off the Fifth King Henry's reign, The Crown the Sixth King Henry did obtain; And William Taylor, a true zealous Priest, Diss pass through Fire unto his Saviour Christ. Good Richard Hoveden, with him William White, Went through the Fire into Eternal Light. Duke Humphrey (though no Martyr) dy'd in's Bed, And Richard Wych a Priest, burned dead. The Saint-like good King Henry was depos'd By the Fourth Edward, and ith' Tower inclos'd. Then Edward fled, and Henry once again, By Warlike Power the Kingdom did attain. Thus did the various State of humane things, Make Kings of Captives, and of Captives Kings, Until at last King Edward coming back, Brought Henry's Royalty to fatal Rack.
In whose Reign one John Goose, as the story saith, Was the First Martyr burned for Christs Faith. King Henry in the Tower was stab'd to death, And Edward yielded up his Life and Breath, His Son Young Edward, of that name the Fifth, Whom the Third Richard from his life did lift. VVho by foul Murders, Blood, and Tyranny, Usurp't the Throne of Englands Monarchy, Till valiant Henry of that name the Seven, Kill'd him, and made uneven England even. Then first Joan Boughton, & a Man call'd Babram, By Faith, thro Fire went to old Father Abraham. An Old Man was in Smithfield burnt, because He did resist against the Roman Laws. One Jerom hang'd and burned on the Gallows, In Florence with two others of his Fellows: And William Tiksworth, Thomas Bernard, and James Morton, cause he did the Pope withstand. Burnt all, with Father Rogers and Old Rem, Did die by Fire a better Life to gain. One Thomas Norrice, and one Thomas Chace, Di'd constant Martyrs by the Heavenly Grace. A VVoman, and a Man call'd Lawrence Guest. By death gain'd Everlasting Life and Rest:
Besides a number past mans Reckoning up, For Jesus sake drank of Afflictions Cup. Some carryed Faggots thro a VVorld of Mocks, Some rackt some starv'd some fetter'd in the Stocks. Some naked stript, and scourged with the lash, For their abhorring of the Romish Trash. Some branded in the Cheek, did always bear The Mark and Badg of their Redeemer dear. Thus the Insulting Tyrannizing Pope With Cursings, Torture, Fire, and Sword, & Rope, Did force the Souls and Consciences of Men, To run dispairing to Damnations Den. And those who Valiantly his power withstood, Did seal their Resolution with their blood. Before his Triple, Treble, Trouble Crown, In Adoration Emperours must fall down, VVere they as high as any Cesar born, To kiss his Feet they must not think it scorn. Henry the Sixt the Emperour did fall down, Whom with his Feet Pope Celestine did crown. Henry the Fourth his Empress and young Son, All Three to Rome bare-foot were forc'd to run, And three days space these Three did all attend His Holiness a godless ear to lend,
VVhich afterward was granted, on Condition That he should give his Crown up in submission, Pandulphus the Popes Legate with a Frown, Did make King John of England yield his Crown. King Henry of that name the Second, he Kneel'd down and kist the Romish Legates Knee. The Emperour, when Pope Adrian was to ride, His stirup chanc't to hold on the wrong side, For which his Holiness most furiously Did check the Emperour disdainfully. And when the Pope did ride in Cope of Gold, Kings, like to foot-men, must his Bridle hold; In Pomp he must be born upon Mens Shoulders, With Glorious Shew amazing the Beholders; VVhilst Kings and Princes must before him go, To usher him in this Vain-glorious Show, This being True, as no man can deny. Those that will not be blind may plainly spy This proud Insulting Domineering Priest, Is Absolute and only Antichrist. Exalts himself above all called God, Upon the Emperours Necks hath proudly trod, He is th' Abomination, void of Grace, That mounts himself into the Holy Place:
He makes the Princes of the Earth drink up The filthy poyson of his Cursed Cup: Who being drunken with the dregs Sin, They have his Sworn & Forsworn Servants been. Bewitched with his foul Inchanted Charms, 'Gainst one another they have rose in Arms, By Forreign and Domestick bloody Broils, VVhilst he hath fill'd his Coffers with their Spoils, His double dealing too to plain appears In setting Christian Princes by the Ears, VVhilst he into his Avaritious hands Hath seiz'd their Persons, Treasures, & their Lands; And as the Christian Kings themselves made weak, The Turks into their Kingdoms gan to break. And thus the Turk and Pope join'd with the Devil, Have been the Authors of all Christian Evil. VVhen the Seventh Henry in the Grave was laid, And the Eighth Henry Englands Scepter Sway'd, Rome's bloody Persecution raged more In England then in Ten Kings Reigns before, And therefore Reader in this little Book, For every Martyrt name thou must not look. But Men of Chiefest Note, Respect, and Fame, That dy'd in England; only these I name.
And first the Papists Tyranny began In Murthering Richard Hun, a Zealous Man; For being kept in Prison by their Power, They closely hang'd him in the Lollards Tower: And afterward among themselves agreed To give it out, himself had done the deed. And sixteen days after this fact was done, They burnt the Murdered Corps of Richard Hun. Then to the number of full thirty five, The furious Flames did all of Life deprive In several places of this woful Land, Because they did the Pope of Rome withstand. After which Thomas Bilney did begin To teach and preach against the Man of Sin, And in St. Georges Church in Ipswich Town, The Papists from the Pulpit pluckt him down. And as in doleful Prison he did lye. He put his Finger in the Flame to try, He tri'd, and God did give him Strength to bear His death, to live with his Redeemer dear. The next in time was one John Wroth, a Man Of Learning great, a Martyrs Fame he wan. Then lived Luther, and Grave Zuinglius, With Calvin, Beza, Oecolampadius,
All Glorious, Gracious, Reverend, Lamps of Light, Were Instruments to clear blear'd Englands Sight. In Flanders, William Tyndal, for Gods VNord, VVas Sacrific'd to Glorify the Lord. John Lambert valiantly his death did take, And dy'd in Smithfield for his Saviours sake. About this time that Honourable Man Lord Cromwells Rise and timeless falls began, He like an Earthquake made the Abbies fall The Frieries and Nuneries, and all: This Famous, Noble, VVorthy Essex Earl, This Gem, this Jewel, this most Orient Pearl, VVas for his Truth from all his height discarded, And with his Heads loss, had his Faith Rewarded. The next of worthy Note by Fire that di'd, VVas Good Ann Askew who did strong abide, Racks, Tortures, and the Cruel Raging Flame, To magnifie her High Creators Name. Then 'gan the Kings Eyes to be opened quite, Enlightened by the Everlasting Light, He banisht Superstitious Idle Fables, And pack't the Papists hence, with all their baubles Then Bonner, Gardner, brethren both in Evil, Factors and Actors, Blood-hounds for the Davil,
Their burning Fame to infamy soon faded, They graceless, godless, were disgrac't, degraded. The King thus having this good work begun, He di'd and left the Kingdom to his Son Then reign'd young Edward that sweet Princely Child, By whom all Popery was clean exil'd; But He too good to live, 'mongst wicked men, Th' Almighty took him hence to Heaven agen, No sooner Edward was laid in his Tomb, But England was the Slaughter House of Rome, Gardner and Bonner, now from Prison turn'd. And whom they pleas'd were either sav'd or burn'd. Queen Mary imitating Jezabel, Advanc't again the Ministers of Hell; Then Tyranny began to Tyrannize, Tortures and Torments then they did devize; And Master Rogers with a Faith most fervent, A Martyr di'd in Smithfield, Gods true Servant: Next unto him did Laurence Saunders die By Fire, for Jesus sake in Coventry; He did embrace, and kindly kiss the Stake, To gain Heavens Glory did the world forsake. Good Bishop Hooper was in Gloster burn'd, 'Cause he against the Romish Doctrine spurn'd.
And Dr. Taylor a true Zealous Man, At Hadly burn'd, Eternal Glory wan, Then Bishop Farrar next his Life did spend On Fire, to gain the life shall never end. Next William Fowler first did lose his Hand, Then burnt because he did the Pope withstand. In Essex, Thomas Hawks with Faith Victorious, Did die by Fire to gain a life most Glorious. Master John Bradford for his Saviours sake, In Smithfield burnt, a bloudy end did make. Two Reverend Bishops, Father Latimer, And Ridley, each of them an heavenly Star, Liv'd in Gods Fear, and in his Favour di'd At Oxford burn'd, and now are glorifi'd, John Philpot freely did the Fire Embrace, Now lives and reigns in his Redeemers Grace. Then that grave Father and Religious Man, Arch-bishop Cranmers Troubles first began, His Pomp, his State, his Glory, and his Pride, VVas to know Jesus and him Crucifi'd: He lived a godly Preacher of Gods VVord, And di'd a Glorious Martyr of the Lord, John Careless in close Prison chearfully, Did change his cares for Joy Eternally.
But this small Volumn cannot well contain One quarter of the Saints in England slain, In Henries Reign and Maries, Cruel Queen, Eight hundred Persons there have slaughtered Some by the sword, some hang'd, some put in fire, Some starv'd to Death, in Prison did expire: Twelve thousand and seven hundred more beside, Much persecuting troubles did abide, Some rackt, some whipt, some tortur'd, some i'th' stocks, Some doing Penance with a world of mocks; Some with an Iron in their Faces burn'd, Some out of all their Goods were turn'd. Some mockt and bearing Faggots on their shoulders, VVere made a laughing-stock to the Beholders. All this and more much more they did endure, Because they would not yield to live impure, But now to speak the lawful cause wherefore These People were afflicted then so sore, Because they would not make their plaint & mones To senseless Images, dead stocks and stones: Because they said the Sacramental Bread Is not the Lord who shall judge quick and dead Because they would not own Purgatory, And held the Popes Decrees an Idle story.
Because they would not creep unto a Cross, And change Gods Sacred Word for humane dross; Because they thought the Mass an Idol foul, Which at once pick't the Purse, & damn'd the Soul. 'Cause they defied the Pope and all his Crew, Hell hounds which Heavens (in rage) on earth did spue. And in a word they thus were under trod, Because they truly served the Living God. This was the cheif and only cause of all. Because they would not offer unto Baal. The Popes Outragious and Couragious Hector Was Bishop Bonner, Hell's most Trusty Factor, Romes Hang-man, & the Fire brand of this Realm, That with a flood of Blood did overwhelm The true Believers of Gods Holy-Truth, He butchered, all Aged as well as Youth: VVith him was joyn'd a man almost as ill, VVho took delight Gods Servants Blood to spill, Call'd Stephen Gardner, Englands Chancellor, The Bishop of the See of Winchester. These two did strive each other to excel VVho should do greatest Service unto Hell, Until at last God heard his Servants cry, And one of them did die immediately.
Thus when Jehovah heard the just complaints Of his Beloved poor Afflicted Saints Then this too Cruel Pope defending Queen The bloodiest Princess that this Land hath seen) She did decease, and Persecution ceast And tired woful England purchast rest. Queen Mary being dead, her welcome death Renew'd our Joys in blest Elizabeth. Innumerable were her woes and cares Abundance were the subtil wiles and snares VVhich Satan and his Ministers oft laid To take the Life of this most Harmless Maid. She was accus'd, abus'd, revil'd, miscall'd; She was from Prison unto Prison hall'd; Long in the Tower she was close Prisoner shut, Her loving servants all away were put. From thence to Windsor, thence to Woodstock sent, Closely shut up from all the VVorlds content: But God, whose Mercy ever did defend her Did in her greatest sorrows comfort send her. He did behold her from his Throne on high, And kept her as the Apple of his Eye. Let Hell and Hell-hounds still attempt to kill, Yet the Almighty guards his Servants still.
And he at last did hear her sighs and moan, And rais'd her to a high triumphant Throne. This Royal Deborah, this Princely Dame, Whose Actions made the World admire her Name, As Judiths Fame was in Bethulia spread, For cutting off great Holofernes Head; So our Elizabeth bravely did begin, To conquer and o'rthrow the Man of Sin. She purg'd the Land of Popery agen. She liv'd belov'd of God, admired of men, She made the Anti-Christian Kingdom quake, She made the Mighty Power of Spain to shake, As far almost as the Sun spreads his Rays Her Glory's spread, to her immortal Praise: She was at home, abroad in every Part, Load-star, and Load-stone to each Eye & Heart: Supported onely by Gods Powerful Hand, She four and forty Years did Rule this Land, And then she left the Royal Princely Seat, And chang'd Earths Glory to be Heavenly Great. Thus did this Western Worlds Great Wonder die, She fell from Height to be advanc't more High. Terrestrial Kings and Kingdoms all must fade, Then blest is she, that is immortal made.
Her Death fill'd woful England full of fears, And Papists long'd for change with itching Ears. For by her death they now had mighty hope To raise again the Power of the Pope. But he whose Power is Omnipotent, Did their unhappy, hopeless hope prevent, Succession Lawfully did leave the Crown, Unto King James a Prince of great Renown, For he against the Pope did oft defend The Protestant Religion, and did bend His Power against the Tyranny of Rome, And Peace and Unity preserved at home. Yet all the Noble Vertues so transparent And so well known to be in him inherent, Could not perswade the Papists, but still they By treason striv'd to take his Life away. For when their disputations help them not, They would dispute in a damn'd Powder Plot. In which the Papists went beyond the Devil. VVho could have found out a Plot so evil!
The Threefold State of a Christ¦an Discovered, viz. By Nature by Grace, and in Glory. Thy Threefold State here thou may'st see, What thou hast been, art, and shalt be. 1. BY Nature, I was born of the flesh, Joh. 3.6. By Grace I am born of the Spirit, Joh. 3.6. In Glory, I shall have all Spiritual Priviledges, Joh. 1.12. 2. By Nature I wa all flesh, Joh. 3.6 Gen. 6.5. & 8.21. By Grace, I a flesh and spirit, Rom 7.20, 23, 25. Gal. 5 17. In Glory, I shall b all spiritual, 1 Cor 15.44, 50.
3. By Nature, I walk∣ after the flesh,  Cor. 10.3. Rom.  4. By Grace, I walk  the spirit, Gal. 5.6. Rom. 8.4. In Glory, I shall be ickened by the irit, Rom. 8.11. 4. By Nature, I did ind wholly the ings of the flesh, om. 8.5. By Grace, I do ind chiefly the ings of the spirit, om. 8.4. In Glory, I shall mind only things spiritual. 5. By Nature, I was dead in sin, Eph. 2.1. 1 Tim. 5.6. By Grace, I am quickened from sin, Eph. 2.5. In Glory, I shall be quite freed from sin. 6. By Nature, I did lie in iniquity, 1 Joh. 5.19. By Grace, I do live in all piety, Tit. 2.12. 2 Tim. 3.12.
In Glory, I shall en∣joy perfect purity, Rev. 21.4. 7. By Nature, I was under the Law of sin and death, Rom. 8.2. By Grace, I am made free by the Law of the Spirit of Life, Rom. 8.2. In Glory, I shall tri∣umph over sin and death; 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. 8. By Nature, I did hate God, and his Law, Psal. 15.21. and 18.15. and 3. Rom. 1.30. By Grace, I do lo God and his Law Psal. 116.1. an 11.26, 27. 1 Jo 4.59. In Glory, I shall f ever delight i God, and do h Law. 9. By Nature, I de¦spised all Instru¦ction, Prov. 1.7. By Grace, I desir all Information Prov. 11.25. Psal 86.11. In Glory, I shall at∣tain
clear appre∣hension, 2 Cor. 3.6. 10. y Nature, I com∣municated with he vilest sinners; Psal. 1.1. Mat. 24.49. y Grace, I kept  company with the est Christians, Cant. 1.7. Act. 9.6. 1 Joh. 1.3. Glory, I shall know all Saints nd live with hem, Luke 13.8. Mat. 27.53. nd 15.28. 1 Thes. .15. 11. By Nature, I per∣secuted Godli∣ness, Act. 26.14, 15. By Grace, I profess it in power, 1 Tim. 6.12. In Glory, I shall have the price; Ph. 3.14. 12. By Nature, I was one of the world, Joh. 15.18, 19. By Grace, I am cho∣sen out of the world, Joh. 15.19. In Glory, I shall be separated from the world, Mat.
13.49. & 25.3, 33. 13. By Nature, I was in darkness: 1 Pet. 2.9. Eph. 5.8. By Grace, I walk in the Light, Joh. 8.12. 1 Thes. 5.4. In Glory, I shall dwell with the light 1 Tim. 9.16. 14. By Nature, I was naked and bloody, Jer. 6.15. Ezek. 16.7. By Grace, I am array'd with the robe of Innocen∣cy, Rev. 29.8. In Glory, I sha be cloathed wi Immortality, 2 Co 5.3. 15. By Nature, I wa a stranger, Eph. 2 12. By Grace, I a Gods friend, Isa. 4 8. Joh. 15.10. In Glory, I sha be his favourite fo ever, Prov. 3.4. an 8.25. 16. By Nature, I wa an Enemy, Rom. 5 10.
By Grace, I am econciled, Col. 1.21. In Glory, I shall be aved, Rom. 5.10. 17. By Nature, I was condemned, Joh. 3.18. By Grace, I am ustified, Act. 13.39. Rom. 3.24. In Glory, I shall udge, 1 Cor. 6.2. Mat. 19.28. 18. By Nature, I de∣parted from God, Jer. 17.5. By Grace, I draw near to God, Heb. 7.19. In Glory, I shall abide with God, Joh. 8.34. 19. By Nature, I was Sathan's slave, 1 Tim. 2.26. By Grace, I am the Lords Free-man; 1 Cor. 7.22. Gal. 4.31. 1 Pet. 2.26. In Glory, I shall be a Citizen of Zi∣on, Eph. 2.19. 20. By Nature, I was free from righte∣ousness,
Rom. 6.20. By Grace, I am free through righte∣ousness, Rom. 3.25. 2 Pet. 1.1. In Glory, I shall reign in righteous∣nese, Rom. 5.21. 21. By Nature, I lived in fear, Heb. 2.15. Gal. 4.15. Rom. 8.15. By Grace, I live by Faith, Gal. 2.20. 2 Cor. 5.7. In Glory, I attain the end of my Faith, 2 Pet. 1.9. 22. By Nature, I wa without hope, Ep 2.12. By Grace, I rejoyc in hope, Rom. 5.2. In Glory, I shall nee no hope, 1 Cor. 13 13. 23. By Nature, I wa without all th promises, 2 Cor. 1 20. By Grace, I am un∣der all the pro∣mises, 2 Cor. 1 20. In Glory, I shall par∣take of all things
promised. 24. y Nature, I was the child of the Devil & of Hell, 1 Joh. 3.10. Mat. 23.15. y Grace, I am a hild of God and  stranger unto he world, Gal. 3.6.29. glory, I shall be n heir of God nd of Heaven, om. 8.17. Heb. 1.7. 25. Nature, I was in onstant danger, Mat. 5.22. By Grace, I am in continual safety, Psal. 4.8. Joh. 10.28, 29. In Glory, I shall be in an Impregna∣ble sanctuary, Isa. 45.17. 26. By Nature, I sought to go to heaven by my own righ∣teousness, Rom. 10.3. By Grace, I seek to go to Heaven without my own Righteousness, Ph. 3.9.
In Glory, I shall be in Heaven absolute∣ly righteous, Eph. 5.27. Jud 8.14. 27. By Nature, I sought my self only, Phil. 2.21. 2 Tim. 3.5. By Grace, I seek Gods glory chiefly, Phil. 1.11. 1 Cor. 10.31. In Glory, I shall give it to him whol∣ly, Rev. 5.12, 14. 28. By Nature, I was lost, Luk. 19.10. 1 Pet. 2.25. By Grace, I am found, Luk. 15.24 In Glory, I shall b at home, 1 Cor. 2. 29. By Nature, I kne nothing 1 Cor. 8.2 Rom. 3.11. By Grace, I kno in part, 1 Cor. 1 12. In Glory, I sha know even as I a known, 1 Cor. 12. 30. By Nature, M services were ab¦minable, Prover 15.8.
By Grace, My ser∣vices are accepta∣ble; 1 Pet. 2.5. In Glory, My ser∣vices shall be re∣warded, Mat. 6.4. nd 10.41. 31. By Nature, I was ike a beast, Psal. 73.22. and 45.12. By Grace, I am ike a Prince, Gen. 23.6. Rev. 1.6. In Glory, I shall be ike an Angel, Luk. 20.36. 32. By Nature, My Body was the tem∣ple of sin, Rom. 6.12. By Grace, My Bo∣dy is the Temple of the holy spirit, 1 Cor. 6.19. In Glory, My Bo∣dy shall be raised spiritual, 1 Cor. 15.44. 33. By Nature, I did glory in my shame, Phil. 3.19. By Grace, I am ashamed of my sin, Rom. 6.21. In Glory, I shall be without sin and shame, Heb. 9.28.
34. By Nature, I was like the dirt and mire, most filthy, Isa. 57.20. and 10.6. By Grace, I am like the Moon in beauty, Cant. 6.10. In Glory, I shall be like the Son in glo∣ry, Mat. 10.43. 35. By Nature, I sa in the shadow death, Luk. 1.79. By Grace, I do virtually in th Kingdom of Lif Eph. 2.6. In Glory, I shall s on his Throne Ete¦nally, Mat. 19.4 Rev. 3.31.
A short Account of the Varieties of Popish Tortures practised by those Bloody Idolaters upon poor Protestants. 1. CHildren have been cast to Dogs and Swine, to be devoured by them. 2. Women great with Child have been hanged up, and their Bellies ripped open, that the Infant has drop∣ped out, and been thrown into a Ditch. 3. Youths have had their Brains dasht out against Trees, and some have been Trampled to death. 4. Some Infants have been found Sucking the Breasts of their dead Mothers: 5. The Duke of Alva in Flanders took great delight to flea off the skins of Men, and to head his Drums with them. 6. Some have
been driven to a River where the Bridge has been broken down, and there drowned in vast Numbers: If any of them could Swim, they either shot at them with Muskets, or knockt them on the Head as they came near the Land. 7. Some were put into nasty filthy Dungeons full of Mire and Dirt, and having Bolts put on their Leggs, there Perisht with Cold and Hunger. 8. Some have had their Eyes pluckt out, and their hands cut off, and so let go to Pine away in Misery. 9. Many have been Stoned to Death. 10. Some have been stript stark Naked, and driven into the Woods and Mountains in the extremity of Frost and Snow, and there Starved. 11. Some have been compelled to carry their own Parents to Execution, others to give Fire to the Wood that Burnt
them, Mothers have been forced to throw their own Children into the wa∣ter, Wives to hang their own Hus∣bands, Children to hang up their Pa∣rents; and when they have done all this in hope, and upon Promise of Life, they themselves were barbarously Murder∣ed. 12. Some have been boyled to Death in Cauldrons. 13. Some have been put into a whole in the ground all but the head, and there forced to con∣tinue till they died. 14. Some have been driven through the streets Naked, and if through weakness they did not march as fast as was desired, they were prickt forward with Spears and Swords. 15. Some have been so Rackt and Tormented, that Worms have bred in their Putrifying Sores. 16. Infants have been closed again in their Mothers
Bellies (which the Villains had ript up) and there strangled. 17. Some have been wounded deadly, and then hung upon Tenter-hooks. 18. Some have been hanged by the Arms that the Sol∣diers might try their Valour, and the strength of their Swords upon them. 19. Others have been ript up, and their Guts let out to trail about their Heels. 20. Some have been dragged with Wyths and Ropes about their necks through the water, Bogs, Woods, and Streets, to inforce them to confess their Treasure, which when they had gotten, they were basely Murthered. 21. Some have sheltred themselves in Caves, and by Smoak made with wet Straw at the Mouths thereof, have been Smothered. 22. Some have been croud∣ed into great Houses and Barns in great
Numbers, and there burnt altogether, and if any endeavoured to escape, they were shot, or run through. 23. Others have had their Feet held frying against the Fire till they died. 24. In the Spa∣nish Inquisition they are forced to lie Naked in their nasty Prisons, and all the Filth and Vermin are swept upon them. 25. Some have been tempted with hopes of Life, and threats of Death, to renounce their Religion and turn Papists, and when they have so done, have Murdered them; the scof∣fing Papists telling them, it was the safest way to dispatch them while they were in a good Humour.
Brief Remarks upon the Wicked Lives of several Popes of Rome, and of di∣vers ill Accidents that have happened to some of them. IN the time of Pope John the 23, there was a Council holden at Rome, where, when they were Sate, a dread∣ful ugly Owl flew too and fro amongst them, making an hideous noise, and at last setled upon a Beam, and stared the Pope directly in the Face, which much troubled them all, and the Pope especi∣ally, and looking upon it to be Ominous, he dismissed the Council for that time, and after a while they sate again, where the Owl without a Summons appeared again, and stared the Pope in the face as before, and would not be forced from
the place where she sate with all the shouts and hallowings they could make, till with Clubs and Sticks thrown at her she fell down dead before them all. This John the 23 was made Pope by force, and not by choice; and was so no∣torious a Villain, that he was deposed by the Council of Constance upon seventy scandalous Articles, That he was a Liar, a Symonist, a Pagan, an Incarnate Devil, an Heretick that denied the Souls Im∣mortality and Eternal Life, he caused his Predecessor and his Physitian to be Poysoned; committed Incest with his Brothers wife, counted Whoredom and Adultery Venial Sins, and yet he was the Infallible head of the Papists Holy Church. Sir Thomas Bullen an Englishman, be∣ing sent Ambassador to the Pope, in the
time of King Henry the Eight, kissed his Holiness Toe, which he had no sooner done, but his Spaniel in Imitati∣on of his Master, sought to do the like, but instead of a gentle salute, gave him a bite, enough to have made him been Cursed with Bell, Book, and Candle: Another Gentleman being admitted in∣to the Popes presence, had the honour to kiss his Toe, which his Servant tak∣ing notice of, made all the hast possible out of the Room, but being stopt, and demanded the reason, he desired them to let him go, For if (said he) they make my Master, who is a man of so great an Estate to kiss his Toe, I am sure they will certainly make me, who am but his Servant, to kiss his Breech. Pope John the Thirteenth was accu∣sed for using Witchcraft and Magick;
He came to the Popedome by Bribery, and was given up to all manner of De∣bauchery, Perjury, and Sacriledge: He Dismembred divers of his Cardi∣nals, by plucking out their Eyes, cut∣ting off their Hands, and gelding them; He made Priests in his Stables among his Horses, and for Money made Bi∣shops of Boys; he Ravished a Wid∣dow, put out the Eyes of his Ghostly Father, brake Windows in the Night, set Houses on Fire, and drank a Health to the Devil; At last being taken in Adultery with another Mans wife, he received such a deadly wound from her Husband, as sent him, it is feared, not into Purgatory, but down-right into Hell. Silvester the second was a great Con∣urer, and before he came to be Pope,
he contracted with the Devil to be his own, Body and Soul, if we would assist him with Dignities in the Church, and by his help, and some wicked Arts of his own, he attained at last to be Pope, and was then assured by his Privy Coun∣sellor, that he should live till he said Mass in Jerusalem. This made him con∣fident, being resolved never to come there, but the Devil catcht him saying Mass one day at the Church of St. Cross in Rome, which was otherwise called Jerusalem, and their seized upon, and destroyed him. The true Name of Pope Joan was Mrs. Gilbert, a Dutch-woman, who put her self into Mans Apparel, Tra∣velled to Athens, and there made a shift to get as much Latin as would make a Dunce Mass-Priest to say th
old Mumpsimus, at last she crept up to be Pope, by the name of John the Eight, as she went in Procession, she was deli∣vered of a Bastard which she Murdered, and thereby proved her self (both in a Literal and Mystical Sense) to be, The Whore of Babylon: It is pity she lived not to bring forth another Litter, that the Church of Rome might have had a Pig of her own Sow. Pope Pius the fifth would often say, When he was a Bishop, he was pretty sure f his Salvation, when he was a Cardi∣nal, he began to doubt it, bu when he was  Pope, he utterly despaired of it. And well he might, who Excommunicated ur Famous Queen Elizabeth, freed nd Absolved her Subjects from their Allegiance, and gave her Kingdom o the Spaniards, that is, as far as he
could give what was none of his own. Pope Julius the second was more Souldier than a Scholar, he threw Sain Peters Keys (as they call them) into th River Tyber, with this huffing Bravado If Saint Peters Keyes will not Defend us, Saint Pauls Sword shall: He Excom∣municated the French King, but th King in Defiance of him, coyned Mony with this Inscription on it, Perdam Ba∣bylonem, I will destroy Babylon. Most Historians give this Character of Pope Boniface the Eight, That h came in like a Fox, reigned like a Lyon and died like a Dog. Pope Sergius, his true Name wa Bocco de Porco, or Hogs-face, which being ashamed of, he changed into Ser∣gius, since which time all Popes have taken up Names by the rule of Contra¦ries,
The most Cruel, being called Cle∣ment or Merciful; The most Wicked, nnocent; The most cursed Popes, Be∣edict or Blessed; The greatest Clowns, Ʋrban or Courteous; and the Vilest Wretches, Pius. A Prayer for Children in the Morning. O Lord God, thou art the Father of Heaven and Earth, and the Father of all Mercies, by whom alone I live, ove, and have my being, who tookest e out of my Mothers Womb, and ast ever since preserved me to this day, Blessed be thy Name; I bless thee that hou hast preserved me this Night, nd that thou hast brought me safe to he beginning of another day, I beseech hee protect me this day that I fall not to Sin, and keep me safe from the
Temptations of Satan; Bless my Pa∣rents, Friends, and Acquaintance, De∣fend our Soveraign Lord the King, thy Church, and the true Protestant Reli∣gion, from Popery and Idolatry, and grant that when this Mortal life is end∣ed, I may live and Reign with thee for ever in Glory, Amen. A Prayer for Children in the Evening. HOly and Glorious Lord God, I thy poor Child, prostrate my self before thy blessed Majesty this Evening, humbly beseeching thee, for Jesus Christ his sake, to Pardon all my Sins and Iniquities, bless my Parents in their Bodies and Souls, in∣struct them, O Lord, that they may in∣struct me in thy True Religion, that I may not be insnared with the Idolatry and false Doctrines of Popery: Be with me
this Night in my lying down, let me sleep in thy fear, that whether sleeping or waking, living or dying, I may be always thine, through Jesus Christ my Lord and Saviour, Amen. Grace before Meat. O Lord Bless us, and bless these good Creatures provided for us, give us grace to receive them as from thine hand, and to use them soberly, as in thy Sight, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Grace after Meat. THe King of Eternal Glory, who hath at this time fed our Bodies, make us Partakers of thy heavenly Table, grant hy Gospel a free passage, confound Anti∣christ and all his abominable Idolatries, and finish these days of Sin, and bring us o everlasting Peace, Amen.
Grace before Meat. O Lord, lift up our hearts to look unto thee for a blessing upon our Meats, that we may comfortably use thy Crea∣tures as pledges of thy Favour, through Jesus Christ, Amen. Grace after Meat. AS thou hast filled our Bodies, O Lord with thy good Creatures, so b pleased to endue our Souls with all spiri∣tual blessings in heavenly things, throug Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Now Glory be to God above, And likewise to the Son, And to the blessed Spirit of Love, The like of us be done, As it in the beginning was, From all times heretofore, And as it now is, and shall be, Henceforth for Evermore, Amen FINIS.
