p56 99833791 38269
The Loyal Subjects hearty Wishes To King CHARLES the Second. He that did write these Verses, certainly, Did serve his Royal Father faithfully; Likewise himself he serv'd at Worcester Fight, for his Loyalty was put to flight: But had he a head of hair like Absolom, And every hair as strong as was Samson, I'de venture all for Charles the second's sake, And for his Majesty my life forsake. To the Tune, When Cannons are roaring. TRue Subjects all rejoyce after long sadness, And ow wi eart and voice shew forth your gladness, That to King Charles were true, and Rebels hated, This Song onely to you is Deditated. Fr Charles our Sovergn dear is safe returned, True Subjects as hearts to chear, that long have mourned. Then let us give God prai, that doth defend him, And pray with heart and voice, Angels attend him. The dangers he hath past from vild Vsupers, Now brings him jy at last, although some Lkers Did seek his blood to spill by actions evil; But God we sée is still above the Devil; Though many Serpents hiss him to devour, God his defender is, by his strong power: Then let us give him praise that doth defend him, And sing with heart and voice, Angels attend him. The joy that he doth bring, if true confessed, The tongues of mortal men cannot express it; He cures out drooping fears, being long tormented, And his true Cavaliers are well contented: For now the Protestant again shall flourish, The King our nursing Father, he will us cherish: Then let us give God praise that did defend him, And sing with heart and voice, Angels attend him. Like Moses he is méek, and tender hearted, And by all means doth seek to have foes converted, But like the Israelites there are a number That for his love to them against him doth murmur: Read Exodus, 'tis true the Israelites rather Yield to the Egyptian crew, then Moses their Father: So many Phanaticks th hearts disloyal Th ghts an minds do fix ag our King Royal. The second Part, to the same Tune. LIke holy David, he past many Troubles; And by his constancy his Ioyes redoubles: For now he dot ear sway, by God appointed; For holy Writ doth say, Touch not mine Anointed. He is Gods Anointed sure, who still doth guide him, In all his wayes most pure, though some deride him. Then let us give God praise, that doth defend him And sing with heart and voice, Angels attend him. Many there are we know within this Nation, Lip-love to him do shew in dissimulation; Of such vilde Hereticks there are a number, whose hearts & tongues we know are far assunder: Some do pray for the King. being constrained Who lately against him greatly complained; They turn both Coat and seam, to cheat poor Taylors, But the  place for them is under strong Iaylors. Let the Kings Foes admire, who do reject him; Séeing God doth him inspire, and still direct him, To heal those evil Sores, and them to cure, By his most gracious hand, and prayers pure; Though simple people say, Doctors do as much: None but our lawful King can cure with a touch, As plainly hath been séen since he returned; Many have cured been, which long have mourned. The poorest wretch that hath this Evil, sure May have ease from the King, and perfect cure; H Grace is meek and wise, loving and civil, And to his enemies doth good for evil: For some that are his foes were by him healed, His liberal hand to those is not concealed; He heals both poor and rich by Gods great power, And his most gracious touch doth them all cure. Then blush you Infidels, that late did scorn him, And ou that do rebel crave pardon of him; With spéed turn a new leaf for your transgresses, Hear what the Preacher sayes in Ecclestastes; The Scriptures true, and shall for ever be taught, Curse not the King at all, no not in thy thought: And holy Peter two Commands doth bring, Is first for to fear God, and then honour the King. When that we had no King to guide this Nation, Opinions up did spring by tolleration: And many Heresies were then advanced, And cruel Liberties by old Noll granted. Some able Ministers were not esteeme, Many false Prophets, good Preachers were déeme The Church some hated, a Barn, House or Stable, Would serve the Quakers, with their wicked Rabble. And now for to conclude, the God of power, Preserve and guide our King both day and hour: That he may rule and reign, our hearts to cherish: And on his Head, good Lord, let his Crown flourish. Let his true Subjects sing, with Hearts most loyal, God bless and prosper still▪ Charles our King Royal. So now let's give God praise, that doth defend him: And sing with heart and voice Angels attend him. FINIS. London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion near Pye-Corner.
