Q94 R6261 12636809 64892
ENCHIRIDION MISCELLANEUM. Spare Houres Improv'd in MEDITATIONS Divine Contemplative Practical Moral Ethical Oeconomical Political From the Pietie & Learning of Fr: Quarles & Ar: Warwick Gent: By it They being dead, yet Speak (Heb. XI. 4) The 12 Impression. Amsterdam, Printed by Stephen Swart Book∣seller, at the Crowned Bible, on the West-seide of the Exchange. 1677.
ENCHIRIDION. Cent. I. CHAP. I. PIety and Policy are like Martha, and Mary, Sisters: Martha fail's, if Mary help not: and Mary suffers, if Martha be idle: Happy is that Kingdom where Martha com∣pla of Mary; but most happy where Mary complies with Martha: Where Piety and Policy go hand in hand, there Warr shall be just; and Peace ho∣nourable. CHAP. II. LEt not civil discords in a forreign Kingdom encourage thee to make invasion. They that are factious among themselvs, are jealous of one another, and more strongly prepar'd to encounter with a common Enemy: Those whom civill commotions set at variance, for∣reign Hostility reconciles. Men rather affect the possession of an inconvenient
Good, than the possibility of an uncer∣tain Better. CHAP. III. IF thou hast made a Conquest with thy Sword, think not to maintain it with thy Scepter: Neither conceive, that new favours can cancell old injuries: No Conquerer sits secure upon his new∣got Throne, so long as they subsist in power, that were dispoyl'd of their pos∣sessions by his Conquest. CHAP. IV. LEt no price nor promise of Honour bribe thee to take part with the Ene∣my of thy naturall Prince: Assure thy self who ever wins, thou art lost: If thy Prince prevail, thou art proclaimed a Rebell, and branded for death: If the Enemy prosper, thou shalt be reckoned but as a meritorious Traytor, and not secure of thy self: He that loves the Treason hates the Traytor. CHAP. V. IF thy strength of parts hath rais'd thee to eminent place in the Common∣wealth,
take heed thou sit sure: If not, thy fall will be the greater: As Worth is fit matter for Glory; so Glory is a fair mark for Envy. By how much the more thy Advancement was thought the Reward of Desert; by so much thy fall will ad∣minister matter for disdain: It is the ill fortune of a strong brain, if not to be dignifi'd as meritorious, to be deprest as dangerous. CHAP. VI. IT is the duty of a Statesman, espe∣cially in a free State, to hold the Com∣mon-wealth to her first frame of Go∣vernment, from which the more it swervs, the more it declines: which being declin'd is not commonly reduced with∣out that extremity, the danger whereof rather ruines than rectifies. Fundamen∣tall Alterations bring inevitable perils. CHAP. VII. THere be three sorts of Government; Monarchicall, Aristocraticall, De mocraticall; and they are apt to fall three severall ways into ruine: The first, by Tyranny; the second, by Ambition;
the last, by Tumults. A Common-wealth grounded upon any of these is not of long continuance; but wisely mingled, each guard the other, and make that Go∣vernment exact. CHAP. VIII. LEt not the proceedings of a Captain, though never so commendable, be confin'd to all Times: As these alter, so must they: If these vary, and not they, ruine is at hand: He lest fails in his de∣sign, that meets Time in its own way: And he that observes not the Altera∣tions of the Times, shall seldom be victo∣rious but by chance: but he that can ot alter his course according to the Altera∣tions of the Times shall never be a Con∣querour: He is a wise Commander, and onely He, that can discover the change of Times, and changes his Proceedings according to the Times. CHAP. IX. IF thou desir'st to make warr with a Prince, with whom thou hast formerly ratified a league; assail some Ally of his, rather than himself: If he resent it, and
come, or send in ayd, thou hast a fair Gale to thy desires: If not, his infidelity in not assisting his Ally, will be discoverd: Hereby thou shalt gain thy self advan∣tage, and facilitate thy designs. CHAP. X. BEfore thou undertake a War, let thine Eye number thy forces, and let thy judgement weigh them: if thou hast a rich Enemy, no matter how poor thy Souldiers be, if couragious and faith∣full: Trust not too much the power of thy Treasure, for it will deceive thee, being more apt to expose thee for a Prey then to defend thee: Gold is not able to find good Souldiers; but good Soul∣diers are able to find out Gold. CHAP. IX. IT the Territories of thy Equall Ene∣my are situated far South from thee, the advantage is thine, whether he make offensive, or defensive war; If North, the advantage is his: Cold is less tole∣rable then heat: This is a friend to Na∣ture; that, an Enemy.
CHAP. XII. IT is not onely uncivill, but danger∣ous for Souldiers, by reproachful words, to throw disgrace upon the Ene∣my. Base Terms are Bellows to a slaking Fury, and Goads to quicken up revenge in a fleeing Foe: He that ob∣jects Cowardize against a failing enemy, adds spirit to him, to disprove the asper∣sion, at his owne cost: It is therefore the part of a wise Souldier to refrain it; or of a wise Commander, to punish it. CHAP. XIII. IT is better for two weak Kingdoms rather to compound an injury (though to some loss) than seek for satifaction by the sword; lest while they two weak∣en themselvs by mutual blows, a third decide the Controversie to both their Ruines. When the Frog and the Mouse could not take up the quarrell, the Kite was Umpire. CHAP. XIV. LEt that Common-wealth which de∣sires to flourish, be very strict, both
in her punishments, and Rewards, ac∣cording to the merits of the Subject, and offence of the Delinquent: Let the Ser∣vice of the Deserver be rewarded, lest thou discourage worth; and let the Crime of the offender be punish't, lest thou encourage Vice: the neglect of the one weakens a Common-wealth; the omission of both ruines it. CHAP. XV. IT is wisdom for him that sits at the Helm of a setled State, to demean himself toward his subjects at all times, so, that upon any evill accident, they may be ready to serve his occasion: He that is onely gracious at the approach of a danger, will be in danger, when he expects deliverance. CHAP. XVI. IN all designs, which require not sud∣den Execution, take mature delibera∣tion, and weigh the convenients, with the inconvenients, and then resolve; after which, neither delay the execution, nor bewray thy intention. He that dis∣covers himself, till he hath made him∣self
Master of his desires, lay's himself open to his own Ruine, and makes him∣self prisoner to his own tongue. CHAP. XVII. LIberality in a Prince is no Vertue, when maintained at the Subjects unwilling Cost. It is less reproach, by miserableness, to preserve the popular love, then by liberality to deserve the private thanks. CHAP. XVIII. IT is the excellent property of a good and wise Prince, to use War as he doth Physick, carefully, unwillingly, and seasonably; either to prevent ap∣proaching dangers, or to correct a pre∣sent mischief, or to recover a former loss. He that declines Physick till he be accosted with the danger, or weakned with the disease, is bold too long, and wise too late. That Peace is too pre∣cise, that limits the justness of a War to a sword drawn, or a Blow given.
CHAP. XIX. LEt a Prince that would beware of Conspiracies, be rather jealous of such whom his extraordinary Favours have advanced, then of those whom his pleasure hath discontented: These want means to execute their pleasures; but they have means at pleasure to exe∣cute their desires: Ambition to rule is more vehement, than Malice to Re∣venge. CHAP. XX. BEfore thou undertake a War, cast an impartiall Eye upon the Cause: If it be just, prepare thy Army; and let them all know, they fight for God and thee: It adds fire to the spirit of a Soul∣dier, to be assured, that he shall either prosper in a fair War, or persh in a just Cause. CHAP. XXI. IF thou desir'st to know the power of a State, observe in what correspondence it lives with her neighbouring State: If She make Alliance with the Contri∣bution of Money, it is an evident
sign of weakness: If with her valour, or repute of forces, it manifests a na∣tive strength: It is an infallible sign of power, to sell friendship; and of weak∣ness to buy it: That which is bought with Gold, will hardly be maintained with Steel. CHAP. XXII. IN the Calms of Peace it is most re∣quisite for a Prince, to prepare against the storms of Warr, both Theorically, in reading Heroick Histories; and prac∣tically, in maintaining Martiall disci∣pline: Above all things, let him avoid Idleness, as the Bane of Honour; which in Peace, indisposes the Body; and in Warr, effoeminates the Soul: He that would be in War victorious, must be in Peace laborious. CHAP. XXIII. IF thy two neighbouring Princes fall out, shew thy self, either a true Friend, or a fair Enemy: It is indis∣cretion, to adhere to him whom thou hast least cause to fear, if he vanquish: Neutrality is dangerous, whereby thou
becomest a necessary Prey to the Con∣querour. CHAP. XXIV. IT is a great argument of a Princes wisdom, not onely to chuse, but also to prefer wise Councellors: And such are they, that seek less their own ad∣vantages, than his; whom wise Princes ought to reward, lest they become their own Carvers; and so, of good Servants, turn bad Masters. CHAP. XXV. IT much conduces to the dishonour of a King, and the ilfare of his King∣dom, to multiply Nobility, in an over-proportion to the Common people: Cheap Honour darkens Majesty; and a numerous Nobility brings a State to ne∣cessity. CHAP. XXVI. IT is very dangerous, to try experi∣ments in a State, unless extream necessity be urgent, or popular utility be palpable: It is better for a State to connive a while, at an inconvenience,
too suddenly to rush upon a Reforma∣tion. CHAP. XXVII. IF a valiant Prince be succeeded by a weak Successour, he may, for a while, maintain a happy State, by the re∣maining vertue of his glorious Prede∣cessour: But if his life be long; ordying he be succeeded by one less valiant then the first, the Kingdom is in danger to fall to ruine. That Prince is a true Fa∣ther to his Countrey, that leaves it the rich inheritance of a brave Son. When Alexander succeeded Philip, the world was too little for the Conquerour. CHAP. XXVIII. IT is very dangerous for a Prince, or Republick, to make continuall prac∣tice of cruell exaction: For where the Subject stands in sense, or expectation of evill, he is apt to provide for his safe∣ty, either from the evill he feels, or from the danger he fears; and growing bold in Conspiracy, makes Faction, which Faction is the Mother of Ruine.
CHAP. XXIX. BE carefull to consider the good or ill disposition of the people towards thee upon ordinary occasions: if it be good, labour to continue it; if evill, provide against it: As there is nothing more terrible then a dissolute Multitude without a Head; so there is nothing more easie to be reduc'd; (if thou canst en∣dure the first shock of their fury;) which if a little appeas'd, every one begins to doubt himself, and think of home, and secure themselvs, either by flight, or Agreement. CHAP. XXX. THat Prince who stands in fear more of his own people, than strangers, ought to build Fortresses in his Land: But he that is more afraid of Strangers than his own People, shall build them more secure in the Affections of his Sub∣jects. CHAP. XXXI. CArry a watchfull Eye upon dan∣gers before they come to ripeness,
and when they are ripe, let loose a speedy hand: He that expects them too long, or meets them too soon, gives advantage to the evill: Commit their beginnings to Argus his hundred Eyes, and their ends to Briareus his hundred Hands, and thou art safe. CHAP. XXXII. OF all the difficulties in a State, the Temper of a true Government most felicifies and perpetuates it: Too sud∣den Alterations distemper it. Had Nero turned his Kingdom as he did his Harp, his Harmony had been more honoura∣ble, and his Reign more prosperous. CHAP. XXXIII. IF a Prince, fearing to be assaild' by a forreign Enemy, hath a well-arm'd people, well addrest for War, let him stay at home, and expect him there: But if his subjects be unarm'd, or his King∣dom unacquainted with the stroke of War, let him meet the enemy in his Quarters. The farther he keeps the Warr from his own Home, the less danger. The Seat of War is always mi∣serable.
CHAP. XXXIV. IT is a necessary wisdom for a Prince to grow in strength, as he encreases in Dominions: it is no less vertue to keep, than to get: Conquests not having power answerable to their greatness, in∣vite new Conquerors to the ruine of the old. CHAP. XXXV. IT is great prudence in a Statesman, to discover an inconvenience in the birth; which, so discovered, is easie to be supprest: But if it ripen into a Cus∣tom, the sudden remedy thereof is often worse than the disease: in such a Case, it is better to temporize a little, than to struggle too much. He that op∣poses a full-ag'd inconvenience too sud∣denly, strengthens it. CHAP. XXXVI. IF thou hast conquerd' a Land, whose Language differs not from thine, change not their Laws and Taxes, and the two Kingdoms will in a short time incorporate, and make one body:
But if the Laws and Language differ, it is difficult to maintain thy Conquest; which that thou maist the easier do, ob∣serve three things: First, to live there in person, (or rather send Colonies:) Secondly, to assist the weak inhabitants, and weaken the mighty: Thirdly, to ad∣mit no powerfull Forreigner to reside there: Remember Lewis the thirteenth of France; How suddenly he took Mi∣lain, and how soon he lost it. CHAP. XXXVII. IT is a gracious wisdom in a Prince, in civill Commotions, rather to use Juleps, then Phlebotomy; and better to breath the distemper by a wise delay, then to correct it with too rash an Onset: it is more honorable, by a slow prepara∣tion to declare himself a gracious Fa∣ther, than by a hasty Warr to appear a furious Enemy. CHAP. XXXVIII. IT is wisdom for a Prince in fair wea∣ther to provide for Tempests: He that so much relies upon his peoples faith, to neglect his own preparation, discovers
more Confidence than wisdom: He that ventures to fall from above, with hopes to be catch't below, may be dead ere he come to ground. CHAP. XXXIX. HE that would reform an ancient State in a free City buy's conve∣nience with a great danger: To work this Reformation with the less mischief, let such a one keep the shadows of their ancient Customs, though in substance they be new: Let him take heed when he alters the natures of things, they bear at lest the ancient names. The Common people, that are naturally im∣patient of innovations, will be satisfied with that which seems to be, as well as that which is. CHAP. XL. UPon any difference between for∣reign States, it is neither safe nor honorable for a Prince, either to buy his Peace, or to take it up at interest: He that hath not a Sword to command it, shall either want it, or want Honour with it.
CHAP. XLI. IT is very requisite for a Prince, not onely to weigh his designs in the flower, but likewise in the fruit: He is an unthrift of his honour that enter∣prizes a design, the failing wherein may bring him more Disgrace, than the success can gain him Honour. CHAP. XLII. IT is much conducible to the happi∣ness of a Prince, and the security of his State, to gain the hearts of his Sub∣jects: They that love for fear, will seldom fear for love: it is a wise Go∣vernment which gains such a Tie upon the Subject, that he either cannot hurt, or will not: But that Government is best and most sure, when the Subject joy's in his obedience. CHAP. XLIII. LEt every Souldier arm his mind with hopes, and put on courage: Whatsoever disaster falls, let not his heart sink. The Passage of providence lyes through many crooked ways; Ades∣pairing
heart is the true Prophet of approaching evil: his actions may weave the webs of fortune, but not break them. CHAP. XLIV. IT is the part of a wise Magistrate to vindicate a man of power or State-imployment from the malici∣ous scandals of the giddy-headed mul∣titude, and to punish it with great se∣verity; Scandall breeds Hatred; Hatred begets Division; Division makes Fac∣tion, and Faction brings Ruine. CHAP. XLV. THe strongest Castles a Prince can build, to secure him from Do∣mestick commotions, or forraign In∣vasions, is in the hearts of his Sub∣jects; And the means to gain that strength is, in all his actions to ap∣pear for the publick good, studious to contrive, and resolute to perform.
CHAP. XLVI. A Kingdom is a great building, whose two main supporters are the Go∣vernment of the State, and the Govern∣ment of the Church: It is the part of a wise Master to keep those Pillars in their first posture, irremovable: If ei∣ther fail, it is wisdom rather to repair it, than remove it: He that pul's down the old, to set up a new, may draw the roof upon his head, and ruine the foun∣dation. CHAP. XLVII. IF is necessary wisdom in a Prince to encourage in his Kingdom, Ma∣nufacture, Merchandize, Arts, and Arms. In Manufacture lie the vitall spirits of the body politique: In Merchandize, the spirits naturall: In Arts and Arms, the Animall: If either of these languish, the Body droops; As these flourish, the Body flourishes. CHAP. XLVIII. TRue Religion is a setler in a Sta∣te, rather then a Stickler; While
she confirms an establisht Govern∣ment, she moves in her own Sphere. But when she endeavours to alter the old, or to erect a new, she works out of her own Vineyard: When she keeps the Keys, she sends showers of Milk: But when she draws the Sword, she sayls in Seas of Bloud: Labour there∣fore to settle Religion in the Church; and Religion shall settle Peace in thy Land. CHAP. XLIX. IF thou entertain any forraign Soul∣diers into thine Army, let them bear thy Colours, and be at thy Pay, lest they interest their own Prince: Auxilia∣ry Souldiers are the most dangerous: A forreign Prince needs no greater invita∣tion to seiz upon thy City, then when he is required to defend it. CHAP. L. BE cautious in undertaking a design, upon the report of those that are ba∣nished their Countrey, lest thou come off with shame or loss, or both. Their end expects advantages from thy Actions, whose miseries lay hold of all opportu∣nities, and seek to be redrest by thy Ruine.
CHAP. LI. IF thou endeavourest to make a Re∣publique in a Nation where the Gen∣try abounds, thou shalt hardly pro∣sper in that design: And if thou would∣est erect a Principality in a Land, where there is much equality of people, thou shalt not easily effect it. The way to bring the first to pass, is to weaken the Gen∣try: The means to effect the last, is to advance and strengthen ambitious, and turbulent spirits; so that being placed in the midst of them, their forces may maintain thy power; and thy favour may preserve their Ambition: Other∣wise there shall be neither proportion nor continuance. CHAP. LII. IT is more excellent for a Prince to have a provident Eye for the pre∣venting future mischiefs, than to have a potent Arm for the suppressing present evils: Mischiefs in a State are like Hectique Feavers in a body: In the beginning hard to be known, but easie to be cured; but, let it alone a
while, it becomes more easie to be known, but more hard to be cured. CHAP. LIII. IF a Kingdom be apt to Rebellion, it is wisdom to preserve the Nobili∣ty and Commons at variance: Where one of them is discontented, the dan∣ger is not great: The Commons are slow of motion, if not quickned with the Nobility; the Nobility is weak of power, if not strengthened by the Com∣mons: Then is danger, when the Com∣monalty troubles the water, and the Nobility steps in. CHAP. LIV. IT is very requisite for a Prince to have an Eye that the Clergy be elect∣ed and come in, either by collation from him, or particular Patrons, and not by the People; and that their power hold dependance upon home, and not forreign Authority: It is dangerous in a Kingdom, where the Crosiars receive not their power from the Regall Sword.
IT is a perillous weakness in a State, to be slow of resolution in the time of Warr: To be irresolute in determina∣tion is both the sign, and the ruine of a weak State: such affairs attend not Time: Let the wise Statesman there∣fore abhor delay, and resolve rather what to do, than advise what to say: Slow deliberations are symptoms, either of a faint courage, or weak Forces, or false Hearts. CHAP. LVI. IF a Conquerour hath subdued a Countrey, or a City abounding with pleasures, let him be very circumspect to keep himself and his Souldiers tem∣perate. Pleasures bring effoeminacy; and effoeminacy fore-runs ruine: such conquests, without blood or sweat, sufficiently do revenge themselvs upon their intemperate Conquerours. CHAP. LVI. IT is an infallible sign of approaching ruine in a Republick, when Reli∣gion is neglected, and her establish't ceremonies interrupted: let therefore
that Prince that would be potent, be pious; and that he may punish loosness the better, let him be religious: the joy of Jerusalem depends upon the peace of Sion. CHAP. LVIII. LEt that Prince that desires full so∣vereignty, temper the greatness of too potent a Nobility: a great and po∣tent Nobility quickens the people, but presses their fortunes: it adds Majesty to a Monarch, but diminishes his power. CHAP. LIX. IT is dangerous for a Prince to use ambitious Natures, but upon neces∣sity, either for his Warrs, or to be instruments for the demolishing inso∣lent greatness: and that they may be the less dangerous, let him chuse them ra∣ther out of mean births then noble; and out of harsh natures, rather then plausi∣ble. And always be sure to ballance them with those that are as proud as they.
CHAP. LX. LEt Princes be very circumspect in the choyce of their Councellours, chusing ueither by the greatness of the beard, nor by the smoothness of the face: let him be wise, but not crafty: active, without private ends: coura∣gious, without malice: religious, without faction: secret without fraud; one better read in his business, than his Nature: and a riddle only to be read above. CHAP. LXI. IN a mixt Monarchy, if the Hierarchy grow too absolute, is is wisdom in a Prince, rather to depress it then sup∣press it: all altertions in a fundamen∣tal Government bring apparent dangers; but too sudden alteration threatens inevitable ruine: when Aaron made a molten Calf, Moses altered not the Government, but reproved the Gover∣nour.
CHAP. LXII. BEfore thou build a Fortress, con∣sider to what end: if for resistance against the Enemy, it is useless; a va∣liant Army is a living Fortress: if for suppressing the subject, it is hurtfull: it breeds Jealousies, and Jealousies be∣get hatred: if thou hast a strong Army to maintain it, it adds nothing to thy strength: if thy Army be weak it con∣duces much to thy danger: the surest Fortress is the hands of thy Souldiers, and the safest Citadel is the hearts of thy subjects. CHAP. LXIII. IT is a Princely Alchymie, out of a necessary Warr to extract an honoura∣ble Peace, and more beseeming the Majesty of a Prince to thirst after Peace, than conquest: blessedness is promis'd to the Peace-maker; not to the con∣querour: it is a happy State, whose Prince hath a peaceful Hand, and a Martial Heart, able both to use Peace, and to manage Warr.
CHAP. LXIV. IT is a dishonourable thing for a Prin∣ce to run in debt for State-service; but to pay it in the pardon of a Criminall Offence, is most dangerous. To can∣cell the faults of subjects, with their de∣serts, is not onely the symptom of a di∣sordered Common-wealth, but also of her Ruine. CHAP. LXV. LEt not a Commander be too for∣ward to undertake a Warr, without the person of his Prince: it is a than∣kless employment, where mischief at∣tends upon the best success; and where (if a Conquerour) he shall be in danger, either through his onwn Ambition, or his Princes suspition. CHAP. LXVI. IT is great oversight in a Prinnce, for any respects, either Actively, or Passively to make a forreign Kingdom strong: he that gives me∣ans to another to become powerfull, weakens himself, and enables him to
take the advantage of his own weak∣ness. CHAP. LXVII. WHen the humours of the people are stirr'd by discontents, or popular grief, it is wisdom in a Prince to give them moderate liberty to evaporate: he that turn's the humour back too hastily makes the wound bleed inwardly, and fils the body with malignity. CHAP. LXVIII. IF having levyed an Army, thou fin∣dest thy self too weak, either through the want of men or money; the lon∣ger thou delay'st to fight, the greater thy Inconvenience grow's: if once thy Army falls asunder, thou certainly loo∣sest by thy delay: where hazarding thyfortunes betimes, thou hast the ad∣vantage of thy men, and may'st by fortune win the day: it is less disho∣hour to be overcome by force than by flight.
CHAP. LXIX. IT is the part of a wise Commander in Warrs, eether Offensive or Defen∣sive, towork a necessity of Fighting in∣to the breasts of his Souldiers: Neces∣sity of action takes away the fear of the Act, and makes bold Resolution the favorite of Fortune. CHAP. LXX. CLemency and mildness is most pro∣per for a Principality, but reser∣vedness and severity for a Republique; but moderation in both: Excess in the one breads contempt: in the other, Hatted; when to sharpen the first, and when to sweeten the last, let Time and Occasion direct thy judgment. CHAP. LXXI. IT is very requisite for a Prince that desires the continuance of Peace, in time of Peace to encourage, and re∣spect his Commanders: When brave Spirits find neglect to be the effect of quiet times, they devise all means to remove the Cause, and by suggesting
inducements to new Warrs, disturb and unsettle the old Peace, buying pri∣vate honour with publique danger. CHAP. LXXII. BE not covetous for priority in ad∣vising thy Prince to a doubtful At∣tempt, which concern's his State; if it prosper, the Glory must be his; if it fail, the dishonour will be thine: When the Spirit of a Prince is stopped in the discharge, it will recoyl and wound the first Adviser. CHAP. LXXIII. IF being the Commander of an army, thou espiest a gross and manifest er∣rour in thine Enemy, look wel to thy self, for treachery is not farr off: He whom desire of victory binds too much, is apt to stumble at his own Ruin. CHAP. LXXIV. IT is the heigh of a provident Com∣mander not onely to keep his own de∣signs indiscoverable to his Enemy; but likewise to be studious to discover his: He that can best do the one, and nearest
guess at the other, is the next step to a conqueror. But he that fail's in both, must either ascribe his Overthrow to his own Folly, or his victory to the Hand of Fortune. CHAP. LXXV. IF thou be ambitious of Honour, and yet fearfull of the Canker of Honour, Envy; so behave thy self, that Opi∣nion may be satisfied in this, that thou seekest Merit, and not Fame; and that thou attributest thy Preferment rather to Providence, than thy own Vertue: Honour is a due debt to the deserver; and who ever envyed the paymēt of a debt? a just advancement is a providen∣tiall act of Providence. CHAP. LXXVI. IT behoves a Prince to bee very cir∣cumspect before he make a League; which, being made, and then broke, is the forfeiture of his Honour: He that obtain's a Kingdom with the rupture of his faith, hath gain'd the Glory of a Con∣quest, but lost the honour of a Con∣querour.
CHAP. LXXVII. LEt States that aim at greatness, be∣ware lest new Gentry multiply too fast, or grow too glorious; Where there is too great a disproportion be∣twixt the Gentry and the common Sub∣ject, the one grow's insolent; the o∣ther slavish When the body of the Gentry grow's too glorious for a Cor∣slet, there the heads of the vulgar wax too heavy for the Helmet. CHAP. LXXVII. UPon the beleaguering of a city, let the Commander endeavour to take from the Defendants, all scruples which may invite them to a necessity of defen∣ce: Whom the fear of slavery necessi∣tates to sight, the boldness of their re∣solution will disavantage the assaylants, and dissicilitate their design: Sense of necessity justifies the Warr; and they are hopefull in their arms, who have no other hope but in their ams.
CHAP. LXXIX. IT is good for States & Princes (if thy use ambitious men for their ad∣vantage) so to order things, that they be still progressive, rather than retrogra∣de: When ambitious men find an open passage, they are rather busie than dan¦gerous; and if well watcht in their pro¦ceedings, they will catch themselvs in∣their own snare, and prepare a way for their own destruction. CHAP. LXXX. OF all Recreationis, Hunting is most proper to a Commander; by the frequency whereof he may be instructed in that necessary knowledge of situati∣on, with pleasure; which, by earnest experience, would be dearly purchas'd. The Chase is a fair Resemblance of a ho∣pefull Warr, proposing to the Pursuer a flying Enemy. CHAP. LXXXI. EXpect the army of thy Enemy on plain and easie ground, and still a∣voyd mountainous and rocky places,
and straight passages, to the utmost of thy power: it is not safe to pitch any where thy forces cannot be brought to∣gether: He never deserv'd the name of good Gaimster, that hazards his whole Rest, upon less than the strength of his whole Game. CHAP. LXXXII. IT matters not much whether in go∣vernment, thou tread'st, the steps of severe Hannibal, or gentle Scipio, so thy actions be honourable, and thy life vertuous: Both in the one, and the o∣ther, is both defect and danger, if not corrected, and supported by the fair Re∣pute of some extraordinary Endow∣ments: No matter, whether black or white, so the Steed be good. CHAP. LXXXIII. IT is the safest way in a Martiall expe∣dition, to commit the main charge to one: Companions in command beget confusion in the Camp: When two able Commanders are joyned in equall Com∣mission, each is apt to think his own way best, and by mutuall thwarting each
other, both give opportunity to the Ene∣my. CHAP. LXXXIV. IT is a high point of Providence in a Prince to observe popular Sects in their first Rise, and with a severe hand, to nipp them in the Budd: But being once full ag'd, it is wisdom not to op∣pose them with too strong a hand; lest in suppressing one, there arise two: a soft Current is soon stopped; but a strong stream resisted, breaks into many, or overwhelm's all CHAP. LXXXV. IT makes very much to thy advantage to observe strictly the Nationall ver∣tues, and vices and humours of for∣rein Kingdoms, whereby the times past shall read usefull Lectures to the times present: He that would see what shall be, let him consider what hath been. CHAP. LXXXVI. IF, like Manlius, thou commandest stout and great things, be like Man∣lius stout to execute great commands:
it is a great blemish in Sovereignty when the Will rores, and the Power whispers: if thou canst not execute as freely as thou commandst, command no more than what thou maist also freely execute. CHAP. LXXXII. IF one Prince desire to obtain any thing of another, let him (if occasi∣on will bear it) give him no time to advise: Let him endeavour to make him see a necessity of sudden resolution, and the danger either of Deniall, or De∣lay; Hee that gives time to resolve, gi∣ves leasure to deny, and warning to pre∣pare. CHAP. LXXXVIII. L Let not thine army at the first en∣counter be too prodigall in her strength for a dead lift: When the ene∣my hath abated the fury of his first heat, let him then feel thou hast reserved thy forces for the last blow; So shall the ho∣nour he hath gained by his valour encre∣ase the glory of thy victory: Fore-ga∣mes when they prove are speediest, but after-games, if wisely play'd, are surest.
CHAP. LXXXIX. IT is very requisite for a Prince to keep the Church always in proportion to the State. If the Government of the one be Monarchicall, and the other Democra∣ticall, they will agree, like Metall joy∣ned with clay, but for a while. Dura∣ble is that State, where Aaron commands the people, and where Moses commands Aaron: But most happy in the continu∣ance, where God commands both. CHAP. XC. LEt not the Covetousness of a Captain purloyn to his own use, or any way bereave his souldiers of any profit due unto their service, either in their means or spoyls: Such injuries (being qui∣ckn'd by their dayly necessities) are ne∣ver forgot: What Souldiers earn with the hazard of their lives, (if not enjoy'd) prophesies an overthrow in the next Battell. CHAP. XCI. IF a Prince expect vertuous Subjects, let his Subjects have a vertuous prin∣ce;
So shall he the better punish the vi∣ces of his degenerate Subjects; So shall they trulier prize vertue, and follow it, being exemplified in their Prince. CHAP. XCII. IT is the property of a wise Comman∣der, to cast an eye rather upon Acti∣ons, than upon persons; and rather to reward the merits of men than to read the Letters of Ladies: He that for fa∣vour, or reward, preferr's a worthless Souldier, betray's a Kingdom, to ad∣vance a Traytor. CHAP. CXIII. WHere Order and Fury are well ac∣quainted, the Warr prospers, and Souldiers end no less men then they be∣gun: Order is quickened by Fury, and Fury is regulated by Order: But where Order is wanting, Fury runs her own way, and being an unthrift of its own strength, failing in the first assault, cra∣vens; and such beginning more than men, end less than women.
CHAP. XCIV. IT is the quality of a wise Comman∣der, to make his Souldiers confident of his wisdom, and their own stren∣gth: if any danger be, to conceal it; if manifest, to lessen it: Let him possess his army with the justness of the Warr, and with a certainty of the victory. A good cause makes a stout heart, and a strong arm. They that fear an overth∣row, are half conquered. CHAP. XCV. IT is requisite in a Generall to mingle love with the severity of his Discipli∣ne: they that cannot be induced to fear for love, will never be inforced to love for feare: Love opens the heart, Fear shuts it: That encourages, This compell's: And victory meets encou∣ragement, but flees Compulsion. CHAP. XCVI. IT is the part of a well advised State never to entrust a weighty service, un∣to whom a noted injury or dishonour hath been done; He cannever be zea∣lous
in performance of Service, the height of whose expectation can rather recover a lost name, than gain a fresh honour. CHAP. XCVII. THree ways there be to begin a Re∣pute, and gain dignities in a Com∣mon-wealth: The first by the vertue of glorious Parents, which, till thou dege∣neratest too much, may raise thee upon the wings of Opinion: The second is by associating with those, whose actions are known to be eminent: The third, by acting some exploit, either publique or private, which in thy handhath proved honourable. The two first may miss, be∣ing founded on Opinion: the last seldom fail'es, being grounded upon Evidence. CHAP. XCVIII. IF thou art cal'd to the Dignity of a Commander, dignify thy place by thy Commands: and that thou maist be the more perfect in com∣manding others, practice upon thy self: Remember, thou art a servant to the publick weal and therefore forget all private respects, either of kin or
friend: Remember thou art a Cham∣pion for a Kingdom; forget therefore all private affections either of Love or Hate: He that would do his Countrey right, must not be too sensible of a per∣sonall wrong. CHAP. XCIX. IT is the part of a wise Commander to read Books, not so much as Men; nor men so much as Nations: He that can discern the inclinations, conditi∣ons, and passions of a Kingdom, gain's his Prince a great advantage both in Peace and Warr. CHAP. C. ANd you most High and Mighty Princes of this lower World, who at this intricate and vatious game of Warr, vie Kingdoms, and win Crowns; and by the death of your renowned Sub∣jects, gain the lives of your bold-hear∣ted Enemies; Know there is a Quo War∣ranto, Whereto you are to give account of vour Eye-Glorious actions, accord∣ing to the righteous rules of Sacred Ju∣stice: How warrantable it is to rend
imperiall Crowns from off the Sovera∣ign heads of their too weak possessours; or to snatch Scepters from out the con∣quer'd hand of heaven-anointed Maje∣sty, and by your vast ambitions still to enlarge your large Dominions, with Kingdoms ravisht from their naturall Princes, judge you. O let your brave designs, and well-weighed actions, be as just as ye are glorious; and consider, that all your Warrs, whose ends are not to defend your own Possessions, or to recover your dispossessions, are but Princely injuries, which none but hea∣ven can right. But where necessity strikes up her hard Alarms, or wrong'd Reli∣gion beats her zealous Marches, Go on, and let both Swords and Stratagems pro∣claim a victory, whose nois'd renown may fill the world with your eternall Glory. The End of the first Century.
ENCHIRIDION. The Second Book. Cent. 2. CHAP. I. APromise is a child of the un∣derstanding and the under∣standing begets it, the will brings it forth: he that per∣forms it, delivers the mo∣ther: he that brerks it, murthers the child. If he be begotten in the absence of the understanding, it is a Bastard; but the child must be kept. If thou mi∣strust thy understanding, promise not; if thou hast promised, break it not: it is better to maintain a Bastard then to mur∣ther a child. CHAP. II. CHarity is a naked child, giving ho∣ney to a Bee without wings: naked, because excuseless and simple; a child,
because tender and growing: giving honey, because honey is pleasant and comfortable: to a Bee, because a Bee is laborious and deserving; without win∣gs, because helpless, and wanting. If thou deniest to such, thou killest a Bee; If thou giv'st to other than such, thou preserv'st a Drone. CHAP. III. BEfore thy undertaking of any de∣sign, weigh the glory of thy action with the danger of the attempt: if the glory ontweigh the danger, it is cowar∣dize to neglect it: if the danger exceed the glory, it is rashness to attempt it: if the Balances stand poiz'd, let thy own Genius cast them. CHAP. IV. WOuldest thou know the lawfulness of the action which thou desirest to undertake? let thy devotion recom∣mend it to divine blessing: if it be law∣full, thou shalt perceive thy heart en∣couraged by thy prayer: if unlawfull, thou shalt find thy prayer discourag'd by thy heart. That action is not warran∣table,
which either blushes to beggs blessing, or having succeeded, dares not present thanksgiving. CHAP. V. IF evill men speak good, or good men evill of thy conversation, examin all thy actions, and suspect thy self. But if evill men speak evill of thee, hold it as thy honour, and by way of thankful∣ness, love them, but upon condition, that they continue to hate thee. CHAP. VI. IF thou hope to please all, thy hopes are vain; if thou fear to displease so∣me, thy fears are idle. The way to please thy self is not to displease the best; and the way to displease the best, is to please the most: if thou canst fashion thy self to please all, thou shalt displease him that is All in All. CHAP. VII. IF thou neglectest thy love to thy neigh∣bour, in vain thou professest thy love to God: for by thy love to God, the love to thy neighbour is begotten,
and by the love to thy neighbour, thy love to God is nourisht. CHAP. VIII. THy ignorance in unrevealed Myste∣ries, is the mother of a saving Fa∣ith; and thy understanding in revealed Truths, is the mother of a sacred Know∣ledge: understand not therefore that thou maist believe, but beleeve that thou maist understand: understanding is the wages of a lively Faith, and Faith is the reward of an humble ignorance. CHAP. IX. PRide is the ape of charity, in shew not much unlike; but somwhat ful∣ler of action. In seeking the one, take heed thou light not upon the other: they are two Paralells; never but asunder: charity feeds the poor, so does pride: charity builds an Hospitall, so does pri∣de: in this thy differ: charity gives her glory to God; pride takes her glory from man.
CHAP. X. HAst thou lost thy money, and dost thou mourn? another lost it before thou hadst it; be not troubled: perchance if thou hadst not lost it, now it had lost thee for ever: think therefore what thou rather hast escaped then lost: perhaps thou hadst not been so much thy own, had not thy money beene so little thine. CHAP. XI. FLatter not thy self in thy faith to God, if thou wantst charity for thy neighbour; and think not thou hast cha∣rity for thy neighbour, if thou wantest faith to God; where they are not both together, they are both wanting; they are both dead, if once divided. CHAP. XII. BE not too slow in the breaking of a sinfull custom: a quick couragious resolution is better then a graduall de∣liberation: in such a combate, he is the bravest souldier that lay's about him wi∣thout fear or wit. Wit pleads; fear dis∣heartens; he that would kill Hydra, had
better strike off one neckthen five heads: fell the Tree, and the Branches are soon cut off. CHAP. XII. BE carefull rather of what thou do'st, then of what thou hast: for what thou hast is none of thine, and will leave thee at thy death, or thou the pleasure of it, in thy sickness. But what thou do'st, is thine, and will follow thee to thy grave, and plead for thee or against thee at thy Resurrection. CHAP. XIV. IF thou enjoyest not the God of love, thou canst not obtain the love of God, neither untill then canst thou enjoy a desire to love God, nor relish the love of God: thy love to God is nothing but a faint reflection of Gods love to thee: till he please to love thee, thy love can never please him. CHAP. XV. LEt not thy fancy be guided by thine eye; nor let thy will be gover∣ned by thy fancy: thine eye may be de∣ceived
in her object; and thy fancy may be deluded in her subject: let thy under∣standing moderate between thine eye, and thy fancy; and let thy judgement arbitrate between thy fancy and thy will; so shal thy fancy apprehend what is true: so shall thy will elect what is good. CHAP. XVI. ENdeavour to subdue as well thy iras∣cible, as thy concupiscible affecti∣ons: to endure injuries with a brave mind, is one half of the conquest; and to abstaine from pleasing evils with a couragious spirit is the other: the summ of all humanity, and height of morall perfection, is Bear and Forbear. CHAP. XVII. IF thou desire not to be too poor, de∣sire not to be too rich: He is rich, not that possesses much, but he that covets no more: and he is poor, not that en∣ioy's little, but he that wants too much: the contented mind wants nothing which it hath not: the covetous mind wants not onely what it hath not, but likewise what it hath.
CHAP. XVIII. THe outward senses are the common Cinque-ports where every subject lands towards the understanding: The ear hear's a confused noise, and presents it to the common sense. The common sense distinguishes the severall sounds, and convey's it to the fancy: the fancy wildly descants on it: the understanding (whose object is truth) apprehending it to be Musick, commends it to the jud∣gement: The judgement severally and joyntly examines it, and recommends it to the will: the will (whose object is good) approves it, or dislikes it; and the memory records it, And so in the other senses according to their subjects. Observe this progress, and thou shalt ea∣sily find where the defect of every acti∣on lies, CHAP. XIX. THe way to subject all things to thy self, is to subject thy self to Reason, thou shalt govern many, if Reason go∣vern thee: wouldst thou be crowned the Monarch of a little world? Command thy self.
CHAP. XX. THough thou givest all thou hast for charity sake, and yet retainest a sec∣ret desire of keeping it for thy own sake, thou rather leavest it then forsakest it: He that hath relinquisht all things, and not himself, hath forsaken nothing; he that sets not his heart on what he pos∣sesses, forsaketht all things, though he keep his possessions. CHAP. XXI. SEarch into thy self before thou ac∣cept the ceremony of honour: if thou art a Palace, honour (like the Sun beams) will make thee more glorious: if thou art a Dunghill, the Sun may shine upon thee, but not sweeten thee. Thy Prince may give thee hononr, but not make thee honourable. CHAP. XXII. EVery man is a King in his own King∣dom. If Reason command, and passion obey, his government speaks a good King: if thine inordinate affection rules, it shews a proud Rebell; which,
if thou destroy not, will depose thee: there is no mean between the death of a Rebell, and the life of a Prince. CHAP. XXIII. AVouw, promise, and a resolution, have all one object, onely differ in respect of the persons to whom they are made; the first, is between God and man. The second, between man and man; the third, between man and his own soul; they all bind, if the object be lawfull, to necessity of performance: if unlawfull, to the necessity of sin: they all take thee prisoner: if the object be lawfull, thy performance hath redeem'd thee; if unlawfull, blood and tears must ransom thee. CHAP. XXIV. IF thou hast any business of Conse∣quence in agitation, let thy Care be reasonable, and seasonable: continuall standing bent weakens the Bow: too hasty drawing breaks it. Put off thy ca∣res with thy colaths: so shall thy Rest strengthen thy labour; and so shal thy labour sweeten thy Rest.
CHAP. XXV. WHen thy inordinate affections do flame towards transitoty happi∣ness, quench them thus: think with thy self; if my Prince should give me what honour he hath to bestow, or bestow on me what wealth he hath to give, it could not stay with me, because it is transitory; nor I with it, because I am mortall: then revise thy affections, and weigh them with their object, and thou wilt either confess thy folly, or make a wiser choice. CHAP. XXVI. WIth three sorts of men enter no se∣rious friendship: the ingratefull; man; the Multiloquious man; the Co∣ward: the first cannot prize thy favours; the second cannot keep thy Counsell; the third dare not vindicate thy Honour. CHAP. XXVII. IF thou desire the time should not pass too fast, use not too much pastime: thy life in Jollity blazes like a Ta∣pour in the wind: the blast of honour
wasts it, the heat of pleasure melts it; if thou labour in a painfull calling, thou shat be less sensible of the flux of Ti∣me, and sweetlier satisfied at the time of Death. CHAP. XXVIII. GOd is Alpha and Omega, in the gre∣t world; endeavour to make him so in the little world; make him thy eve∣ning Epilogue, and thy morning Pro∣logue; practice to make him thy last though at night when thou sleepest; and thy first, thought in the morning when thou awakest; so shall thy fancy be san∣ctified in the night, and thy understan∣ding rectified in the day; so shall thy rest be peacefull, thy labours prosperous, thy life pious, and thy death glorious. CHAP XXIX. BE very circumspect in the choise of thy company. In the society of thi∣ne equals thou shalt enjoy more pleasu∣re; in the society of thy superiours thou shalt find more profit: to be the best in the company, is the way to grow worse: the best means to grow better, is to be the worst here.
CHAP. XXX. THink of God (especially in thy de∣votion) in the abstract, rather then the concrete: if thou conceive him good, thy finite thoughts are ready to termi∣nate that good in a conceiv'd subject; if thou think him great, thy bounded con∣ceit is apt to cast him into a conpre∣hensible figure: conceive him therefo∣re, diffused goodness without quality, and represent him an incomprehensible greatness without quantity. CHHP. XXXI. IF thou and true Religon be not as yet met; or met, unknown; by these marks thou shalt discove it. First, it is a Religion that takes no pleasure in the expence of blood. Secondly, it is a Re∣ligion whose Terents cross not the book of Truth. Thirdly, it is a Reli∣gion, that takes most from the creatu∣re, and gives most to the creatout: if such a one thou meet with, assure thy self it is the right, and therefore pro∣fessit in thy Life, and protect it to thy Death.
CHAP. XXXII. LEt anothers passion be a lecture to thy reason, and let the Shipwrack of his understanding be a Seamark to thy passion: so shalt thou gain strength out of his weakness; safty out of his dan∣ger; and raise thy self a building out of his ruines. CHAP. XXXIII. IN the height of thy prosperity expect adversity, but fear it not; if it come not, thou art the more sweetly possest of the happiness thou hast, and the mo∣re strongly confirmed; if it come, thou art the more gently dispossest of the hap∣piness thou hadst, and the more firmly prepared. CHAP. XXXIV. TO tremble at the sight of thy sin, makes thy faith the less apt to trem∣ble: the Devils beleeve, and tremble, because they tremble at what they be∣leeve; their belief brings trembling: thy trembling brings belief.
CHAP. XXXV. AUthology is the way to Theology: untill thou seest thy self empty, thou wilt not desire to be fil'd: he can never truly relish the sweetness of Gods mercy, that never tasted the bitterness of his owne Misery. CHAP. XXXVI. IS any outward affliction fallen upon thee, by a temporary loss? advise with thy self, whether it be recoverable, or not: if it be, use all such lawfull and speedy means (the violence and unsea∣sonableness whereof may not disadvan∣tage thee in the pursuit) to recover it; if not recoverable, endure with patien∣ce what thou canst not recure with pa∣ins: he that carnally asslicts his soul for the loss of a transitory good, casts away the kernell, because he hath lost the shell. CHAP. XXXVII. NAturall anger glances into the breasts of wisemen, but rests in the besom of fools: in them, it is infirmity;
in these, a sin: there is a naturall anger; and there is a spirituall anger; the com∣mon object of that, is the person; of this, his vice: he that is always angry with his sin, shall seldom sin in his an∣ger. CHAP. XXXVIII. IF any hard affliction hath surprized thee, cast one eye upon the hand that sent it; and the other, upon the sin that brought it; if thou thankfully receive the message, he that sent it will discharge the messenger. CHAP. XXXIX. ALl passions are good or bad, accor∣ding to their objects: where the object is absolutely good, there the gre∣atest passion is too little: where absolu∣tely evill, there the lest passion is too much: where indifferent, there a little is enough. CHAP. XL. WHen thou dost evil that good may come thereby, the evill is surely thine: if good should happen to ensue
upon the evill which thou hast done; the good proceeds from God; if there∣fore thou do evill, thereby to occasio∣nate a good, thou laist a bad foundati∣on for a good building; and servest the Devill that God may serve thee: where the end of evill is good in the intention, there the end of that good is evill in the extention. CHAP. XLI. BE as farr from desiring the popular love, as fearfull to deserve the po∣pular hate: ruine dwels in both: the one will hug thee to death; the other wil crush thee to destruction: to escape the first, be not ambitious; to avoid the se∣cond, be not seditious. CHAP. XLII. WHen thou seest misery in thy bro∣thers face, let him see mercy in thine eye; the more the oyl of mercy is powr'd on him by thy pity, the more the oyl in thy Cruse shall be encreased by thy Piety.
CHAP. XLIII. REad not books alone, but men, and amongst them chiefly thy self: if thou find any thing questionable the∣re, use the Commentary of a severe fri∣end, rather then the gloss of a sweet∣lipt flatterer: there is more profit in a distastfull truth, then deceitfull sweet∣ness. CHAP. XLIV. IF the opinion of thy worth invite any to the desire of thy acquaintance, yeeld him a respect sutable to his qua∣lity: too great a reservation will expose thee to the sentence of Pride; too easie access will condemn thee to the censure of Folly: things too hardly endeavour'd, discourage the seeker: too easily ob∣tain'd, disparage the thing sought for: too easily got, is lowly priz'd; and quic∣kly lost, CHAP. XLV. WHen conveniency of time hath ri∣pen'd your acquaintance, be cau∣tious what thou say'st, and courteous in
what thou do'st: observe his inclinati∣on: if thou find him weight, make him thine own, and lodg him in a faithfull bosom: be not rashly exceptious, nor rudely familiar: the one will breed con∣tention; the other contempt. CHAP. XLVI. WHen Passion is grounded upon Fan∣cie, it is commonly but of short continuance: Where the foundation is unstable, there the building is not last∣ing, He that will be angry for any Cause, will be angry for no Cause; and when the understanding perceives the cause vain, then the judgement proclaims the the effect voyd. CHAP. XLVII. IF thou desire to purchase Honour with thy wealth; consider first how that wealth became thine: if thy labour got it, let thy wisdom keep it: if Op∣pression found it, let Repentance resto∣re it: if thy parent left it, let thy vertues deserve it: Solet thy vertues deserve it: So shall thy honour be safer, better, and cheaper.
CHAP. XLVIII. SIn is a Basilisk whose eyes ar full of Venom, if the eye of thy soul see her first, it reflects her own poyson and kills her: if she see thy soul, unseen, or seen too late, with her poyson, she kills thee: Since therefore thou canst not escape thy Sin, let not thy Sin escape thy ob∣servation. CHAP. XLIX. IF thou expect'st to rise by the means of Him, whom thy Fathers greatness rais'd'from his service to Court prefer∣ment, thou wilt be deceiv'd: For the more in esteem thou art, the more sensi∣ble is He of what he was, whose former servitude will be Chronicled by thy ad∣vancement, and glory obscured by thy greatness: However he will conceive it a dead service, which may be interpre∣ted by thee, as a merited Reward, ra∣ther than a meritorius benefit. CHAP. L. TRust not to the promise of a com∣mon swearer, for he that dare sin
a gainst his God, for neither profit nor pleasure, will trespass against thee for his own advantage. He that dare break the precepts of his Father, will easily be perswaded to violate the promise unto his Brother. CHAP. LI. LEt the greatest part of the news thou hearest be the lest part of what thou beleevest, lest the greatest part of what thou beleevest be the lest part of what is true. Where lies are easily ad∣mitted, the Father of lies will not easily be excluded. CHAP. LII. DEliberate long, before thou con∣secrate a Friend; and when thy im∣partiall judgement concludes him wor∣thy of thy bosom, receive him joy fully, and entertain him wisely: impart thy se∣crets boldly, and mingle thy thoughts with his: He is thy very self; and use him so: if thou firmly think him Faithfull, thou mak'st him so.
CHAP. LIII. AS there is no worldly gain, with∣out some loss; so there is no world∣ly loss without some gain. If thou hast lost thy wealth, thou hast lost some trou∣ble with it: if thou art degraded from thy Honour thou art likewise freed from the stroke of envie; if sickness hath blurr'd thy beauty, it hath deliver'd thee from pride; Set the allowance against the loss, and thou shalt find no loss gre; He loses little or nothing, that reser∣ves himself. CHAP. LIV. IF thou desire to take the best advan∣tage of thy self (especially in matters where the Fancy is most imploy'd) keep temperate diet, use moderate exercise, observe seasonable, and set hours for Rest; Let the end of thy first sleep raise thee from thy Repose: Then hath thy Body the best temper; Then hath thy Soul the lest incumberance: Then no noise shall disturb thy Ear; No object shall divert thine Eye: Then, if, thy sprightly Fancie transport thee not be∣yond
the common pitch, and shew thee not the Magazin of high invention, re∣turn thee to thy wanton Bed, and there conclude thy self more fit to wear thy Mistresses Favour, then Apollos Bayes. CHAP. LV. IF thou art rich, strive to command thy money, lest she command thee: if thou know how to use her, she is thy Servant: if not, thou art her Slave. CHAP. LVI. BRing thy daughter a husband of her own Religion, and of no hereditary disease; Let his wisdom outweigh his wealth: Let his parentage excell his person, and let his years exceed hers: Let thy prayers recommend the rest to providence: if he prove, thou hast found a Son: if not, thou hast lost a Daugh∣ter. CHAP. LVII. SO use Prosperity, that Adversity may not abuse thee: if in the one, Securi∣ty admits no fears; in the other, Despair will afford no hopes: He that in Prospe∣rity
can foretell a danger, can in adver∣sity foresee deliverance. CHAP. LVIII. IF thy faith have no doubts, thou hast just cause to doubt thy faith; and if thy doubts have no hope, thou hast just reason to fear despair; When there fore thy doubts shal exercise thy faith, keep thy hopes firm to qualifie thy doubts; So shall thy Faith be secured from doubts: So shall thy doubts be pre∣served from despaire. CHAP. LIX. IF thou desire to be truly valiant, fear to do any injury: He that fears not to do evill, is always afraid to suffer evill: He that never fears is desperate: And he that fears always, is a Coward: He is the true valiant man, that dares no∣thing but what he may, and fears no∣thing but what he ought. CHAP. LX. ANger may repast with thee for an hour, but not repose for a night: The continuance of Anger is Hatred,
the continuance of Hatred turns Mali∣ce. That anger is not warrantable, which hath seen two Suns. CHAP. LXI. IF thou standest guilty of oppression, or wrongfully possest of anothers Right; see, thou make Restitution before thou givest an Alms: if otherwise, what art thou but a Thief, and makest God thy Receiver? CHAP. LXII. WHen thou pray'st for spirituall Gra∣ces, let thy prayer be absolute; When, for temporall Blessings, add a Clause of Gods pleasure: in both, with Faith and Humiliation: So shalt thou undoubtedly receive what thou desi∣rest, or more, or better; Never prayer rightly made, was made unheard, or heard, ungranted. CHAP. LXIII. HEe that gives all, though but lit∣tle, gives much; because God looks not to the quantity of the Gift, but to the quality of the Giver; He
that desires to give more then he can, hath equall'd his Gift to his desire, and hath given more then he hath. CHAP. LXIV. BEe not too greedy in desiring Riches, nor too eager in seeking them: nor too covetous in keeping them; nor too passionate in losing them: the first will possess thy soul of discontent; The second will dispossess thy body of Rest; The third will possess thy wealth of thee; The last will dispossess thee of thy self: He that is too violent in the con∣cupiscible, will be as violent in the ira∣scible. CHAP. LXV. BE not too rash in the breaking of an inconvenient custom: As it was gotten, so leave it by degrees. Danger attends upon too sudden Alterations: He that pulls down a, bad building by the great, may be ruin'd by the fall: But he that takes it down Brick, by Brick, may live to build a better.
CHAP. LXVI. IF thou desire that inestimable Grace of saving Faith, detest that insatiable vice of damnable Covetousness: it is impossible, one heart (though never so double) should lodge both: Faith pos∣sesses thee of what thou hast not; Cove∣tousness dispossesses thee of what thou hast: Thou canst not serve God, unless Mammon serve thee. CHAP. XLVII. BEware of him that is slow to Anger: Anger when it is long in coming, is the stronger when it comes, and the lon∣ger kept. Abused patience turns to fu∣ry: When Fancy is the ground of pas∣sion, that understanding which compo∣ses the Fancy qualifies the passion; But when judgement is the ground the Me∣mory is the Recorder. CHAP. LXVIII. HE that professes himself thy open enemy, arms thee against the evill he means thee, but he that dissembles himself thy secret Friend, strikes bey∣ond
Caution, and wounds above Cure: From the first, thou maist deliver thy self: From the last, good Lord deli∣ver thee. CHAP. LXIX. IF thou hast wrong'd thy brother in thought, reconcile thee to him in thought; if thou hast offended him in words, let thy reconciliation be in words: if thou hast trespassed against him in deeds, by deeds be reconciled to him: That Reconciliation is most kindly which is most in kind. CHAP. LXX. NOt to give to the poor is to take from him: Not to feed the hungry, if thou hast it, is the utmost of thy po∣wer to kill him: That therefore thou maist avoid both Sacriledg and Mur∣ther, Be Charitable. CHAP. LXXI. SO often as thou remembrest thy sins without Grief, so often thou repecaest those sins by thy not grieving: He that will not mourn for the Evill which he
hath done, gives earnest for the Evill he means to do; Nothing can asswage that fire which Sin hath made, but one∣ly that Water which Repentance hath drawn. CHAP. LXXII. LOok well before thou leap into the chair of Honour: The higher thou climbest the lower thou fallest, un∣lesh Vertue preserve thee: if Gold or Favour advance thee, thy Honour is pinn'd upon the wheel of Fortune: When the wheele shall turn, thy Ho∣nour falls, and thou remain'st an ever∣lasting Monument of thy own ambiti∣ous folly. CHAP. LXXIII WE are born with our temptations: Nature somtimes presses us to e∣vill, somtimes provokes us unto good, therefore thou givest her more then her due, thou nourishest an enemy; if less then is fufficient, thou destroyest a friend: Moderation will prevent both.
CHAP. LXXIV. IF thou scorn not to serve Luxury in thy Youth, Chastity will scorn thy service in thy Age; and that the Will of thy green years thought no Vice in the acting, the necessity of thy gray hairs makes no Vertue, in the forbearing: Where there is no Con∣flict, there can be no Conquest; where there is no Conquest, there is no Crown. CHAP. LXXV. THou didst nothing towards thy own Creation, for thou wert created for thy Creators glory; Thou must do som∣thing towards thy own Redemption, for thou wert redeemed for thy own good: He that made thee without thee, will not save thee without. thee. CHAP. LXXVI. WHen thy tongue and heart agree not in confession, that confession is not agreeable to Gods pleasure: He that confesses with his tongue, and wants confession in his heart, is either a vain
man, on an Hypocrite: He that hath confession in his heart, and wants it in his tongue, is either a proud man, or a timerous. CHAP. LXXVII. GOld, is Caesars Treasure, Man is Gods: Thy Gold hath Caesars ima∣ge, and thou hast Gods; Give therefo∣re those things unto Caesar which are Caesars; and unto God, which are Gods. CHAP. LXXVIII. IN the Commission of evill, fear no man so much as thy own self: Ano∣ther is but one witness against thee: Thou art a thousand: Another thou maist avoid, but thy self thou canst not; Wickedness is its own punishment. CHAP. LXXIX. IN thy Apparell avoyd Singularity, Profuseness, and Gaudiness; Be not too early in the fashion; nor too late: Decency is the half-way between Affe∣ctation and Neglect: The Body is the shell of the Soul; Apparell is the Husk of that Shell; The Husk often tels you what the Kernell is.
CHHP. LXXX. LEt thy recreation be manly, mode∣rate, seasonable, lawfull; if thy life be Sedentary, more tending to the ex∣ercise of thy Body; if active, more to the refreshing of thy mind: The use of Recreation is to strengthen thy Labour, and sweeten thy Rest. CHAP. LXXXI. BEe not censorious, for thou know'st not whom thou judgest; it is a mo∣re dextrous errour to speak well of an evill man, then ill of a good man. And safer for thy judgement to be misled by simple Charity, then uncharitable Wis∣dome: He may tax others with privi∣ledge, that hath not in himself, what others may tax. CHAP. LXXXII. TAke heed of that Honour, which thy wealth hath purchased thee, for it is neither lasting, nor thine own. What, money creates, money preserves: if thy wealth decays, thy Honur dies; it is but a slippery happiness which For∣tunes
can give, and Frowns can take; and not worth the owning which a nights Fire can melt, or a rough Sea can drown. CHAP. LXXXIII. IF thou canst desire any, thing not to be repented of, thou art in a fair way to Happiness; if thou hast attain'd it, thou art at thy ways end; He is not happy who hath all that he desires, but that desires nothing but what is good; if thou canst not do what thou need'st not repent, yet endeavour to repent what thy necessity hath done. CHAP. LXXXIV. SPend a hundred years in Earths best pleasures; and after that, a hundred more; to which being spent, add a thousand; and to that, ten thousand more; the last shall as surely end, as the first are ended, and all shall be swallowed with Eternity: He that is born to day, is not sure to live a day; He that hath lived the longest, is but as he that was born yesterday: The Happiness of the one is, That he hath
liv'd; the Happiness of the other is, That he may live; and the lot of both is, That they must die: it is no hap∣piness to live long, nor unhappiness to die soon: Happy is he that hath liv'd long enough, to die well. CHAP. LXXXV. BE carefull to whom thou givest, and how: He that gives to him that deserves not, loses his gift, and betrays the giver. He that conferrs his gift upon a worthy receiver, makes many deb∣tors, and by giving, receives. He that gives for his own ends, makes his gift a bribe, and the receiver a prisoner: He that gives often, teaches requittance to the receiver, and discovers a crafty con∣fidence in the giver. CHAP. LXXXVI. HAth any wronged thee? Be bra∣vely reveng'd: Sleight it, and the work's begun; Forgive it, and 't is finisht: He is below himself that is not above an injury.
CHAP. LXXXVII. LEt not thy passion miscall thy Child, least thou prophesie his fortunes: Let not thy tongue curse him, last thy curse return from whence it came: Curses sent in the room of blessings are driven back with a double vengeance. CHAP. LXXXVIII. IN all the Ceremonies of the Church which remain indifferent, do accor∣ding to the constitution of that Church where thou art: The God of Order and Unity, who created both the Soul and the Body, expects Vnity in the one, and Order in both. CHAP. LXXXIX. LEt thy religious Fast be a voluntary abstinence, not so much from Flesh, as Fleshly thoughts: God is pleased with that Fast which gives to another, what thou deniest to thy self; and when the afflicting of thy own Bo∣dy, is the repairing of thy Brothers. He fasts truly that abstains sadly, griev's really, gives cheerfully, and forgives charitably.
CHAP. XC. IN the hearing of Mysteries keep thy tongue quiet: five words cost Zacha∣rias forty weeks silence: In such he∣ights, convert thy Questions into Won∣ders; and let this suffice thee, The Rea∣son of the Deed, is the power of the Doer. CHAP. XCI. DEride not him whom the looser world cals Puritan, lest thou offend a little one: if he be an Hypocrite, God, that knows him, will reward him; if zealous, that God that loves him, will revenge him: if he be good, he is good to Gods Glory: if evill, let him be evill at his own charges: He that judges, shall be judged. CHAP. XCII. SO long as thou art ignorant, be not asham'd to learn: He that is so fond∣ly modest, not to acknowledge his own defects of knowledge, shall in time, be so fondly impudent to justifie his own ignorance: ignorance is the greatest of
of all infirmities; and, justified, the chie∣fest of all Follies. CHAP. XCIII. IF thou be a Servant, deal just by thy Master, as thou desirest thy Servant should deal with thee: Where thou art commanded, be obedient: where not commanded, be provident: Let dili∣gence be thy Credit; Let faithfulness be thy crown: Let thy Masters credit be thy care, and let his welfare be thy con∣tent: Let thine Eye be single, and thy heart humble: Be Sober, that thou maist be circumspect: He that in Sobri∣ety is not his own man, being drunk, whose is he? Be neither contentious, nor Lascivious: The one shew's a tur∣bulent Heart; The other an idle Brain. A good Servant is a great Master CHAP. CXIV. LEt the Foundation of thy Affection be Vertue, then make the Buil∣ding as rich, and as glorious as thou canst: if the Foundation be Beauty, or Wealth, and the building Vertue the
Foundation is too weak for the Buil∣ding; and it will fall: Happy is he, the Pallace of whose affection is founded upon Vertue, wal'd with Riches, glaz'd with Beauty, and Roof'd with Honour. CHAP. XCV. IF thy mother be a widow, give her double honour, who now acts the part of a double Parent. Remember her nine moneths burthen, and her tenth moneths travell: forget not her indul∣gence, when thou didst hang upon her tender breast. Call to mind her prayers for thee before thou cam'st into the world; and her cares for thee when thou wert come into the world. Re∣member her secret Groans, her affectio∣nate tears, her broken slumbers, her dayly fears, her nightly frights. Relie∣ve her wants; cover her imperfections; comfort her age: and the widows hus∣band will be the Orphans Father. CHAP. XCVI. AS thou desirest the love of God & man, beware of Pride: it is tumor in
thy mind that breaks and poysons all thy actions; it is a worm in thy treasure which eats and ruines thy estate: it lo∣ves no man; is beloved of no man; it disparages vertue in another by detra∣ction; it disrewards goodness in it self, by vain glory: the friend of the flatterer, the mother of envy, the nurse of fury, the baud of luxury, the sin of devils, and the devill in mankind: it hates su∣periours, it scorns inferiours, it owns no equals: in short, till thou hate it, God hates thee. CHAP. XCVII. SO behave thy self among thy chil∣dren, that they may love and honour thy presence: be not too fond, least they fear thee not: be not too bitter, least they fear thee too much; too much familiarity will embolden them; too little countenance will discouragethem: so carry thy self, that thy may rather fear thy displeasure, than thy correction; when thou reprov'st them, do it in sea∣son; when thou correct'st them, do it not in passion: as a wise child makes a
happy father, so a wise father makes a happy child. CHAP. XCVIII. WHen thy hand hath done a good act, ask thy heart if it be well do∣ne: the matter of a good action is the deed done; the form of a good action is the manner of the doing: in the first, another hath the comfort, and thou the glory; in the other, thou hast the com∣fort, and God the glory: that deed is ill done wherein God is no sharer. CHAP. XCIX. WOuld'st thou purchase Heaven? advise not with thy own ability. The prize of Heaven is what thou hast? examin not what thou hast, but what thou art: give thy self, and thou hast bought it: if thy own vileness be thy fears, offer thy self and thou art pre∣cious.
CHAP. C. THe Birds of the air die to sustain thee; Beasts of the field die to nou∣rish thee; the Fishes of the Sea die to feed thee. Our stomacks are their com∣mon Sepulcher. Good God! with how many deaths are our poor lives patcht up! How full of death is the miserable life of momentany man! The end of the second Century.
THE Third Century. CHAP. I. IF thou take pains in what is good, the pains vanish, the good remains: if thou take pleasure in what is evil, the evil remains, and the pleasure vanishes: what art thou the worse for pains, or the better for plea∣sure, when both are past? CHAP. II. IF thy fancy, and judgement have agreed in the choice of a fit wife, be not too fond, least she surfeit, nor too peevish, least she languish: love so, that thou mayst be fear'd; rule so, that thou mayst be honour'd: be not too dif∣fident, least thou teach her to deceive thee, nor too suspicious, least thou teach her to abuse thee: if thou see a fault, let
thy love hide it; if she continue it let thy wisdom reprove it: reprove her not openly, least she grow bold: rebuke her not tauntingly, least she grow spitefull: proclaim not her beauty, least she grow proud: boast not her wisdom, least thou be thought foolish; shew her not thy imperfections, least she disdain thee: pry not into her Dairy, least she despise thee: prophane not her ears with looss communication, least thou defile the sanctuary of her modesty: an understan∣ding husband makes a discreet wife; and she, a happy husband. CHAP III. WRinkle not thy face with too much laughter, least thou become ridi∣culous; neither wanton thy heart with too much mirth, least thou become vain: the suburbs of folly is vain mirth, and profuseness of laughter, is the City of fools. CHAP. IV. LEt thy tongue take counsell of one eye, rather then of two ears; let the news thou reportest be rather stale then
false, least thou be branded with the name of lyer. It is an intolerable disho∣neur to be that which onely to be call'd so, is thought worthy of a Stab. CHAP. V. LEt thy discourse be such as thy jud∣gement may maintain, and thy company may deserve. In neglecting this, thou losest thy words; in not ob∣serving the other, thou losest thy self. Give wash to swine, and wort to men; so shalt thou husband thy gifts to the ad∣vantage of thy self, and shape thy dis∣course to the advancement of thy he∣arer. CHAP. VI. DOst thou roar under the Torments of a Tyrant? weigh them with the suf∣ferance of thy Saviour, and they are no plague. Dost thou rage under the Bon∣dage of a raving Conscience? compare it to thy Saviours passion, and it is no pain. Have the tortures of Hell taken hold of thy dispairing soul? compare it to thy Saviours torments, and it is no punishment: what sense unequally com∣pares,
let faith enterchangeably apply, and thy pleasures have no comparison. Thy sins are the Authors of his suffe∣rings; and his hell is the price of thy heaven. CHAP. VII. ARt thou banisht from thy own Co∣untry? thank thy own folly: hadst thou chosen a right home, thou hadst been no Exul: hadst thou commanded thy own Kingdom, all Kingdoms had been thy own: the fool is banisht in his own Countrey; the wiseman is in his owne Countrey, though banisht: the fool wanders, the wiseman traruls. CHAP. VIII. IN seeking vertue, if thou find pover∣ty, be not ashamed: the fault is none of thine. Thy honour, or dishonour is purchased by thy own actions. Though vettue give a ragged livery, she gives a golden Cognizance: If her service ma∣ke thee poor, blush not. Thy poverty may disadvantage thee, but not disho∣nour the.
CHAP. IX. GAze not on Beauty too much, least it blast thee; nor too long, least it blind thee; nor too near, least it burn thee: if thou like it, it deceives thee; if thou love it, it disturbs thee; if thou lust after it, it destroys thee: if vertue accompany it, it is the hearts paradise, if vice associate it, it is the souls purga∣tory: it is the wisemans Bonefire, and the fools Furnace. CHAP. X. IF thou wouldst have a good servant, let thy servant find a wise master: let his food, rest, and wages be seasonable; let his labour, recreations, and atten∣dance depend upon thy pleasure: be not angry with him too long, least he think thee malicious; nor too soon, least he conceive thee rash; nor too often, least he count thee humorous. Be not too fierce least he love thee not; nor too re∣miss, least he fear thee not; nor too fa∣miliar, least he prize thee not. In brief, whil'st thou giv'st him the liberty of a servant, beware thou losest not the Ma∣jesty of a Master.
CHAP. XI. IF thou desirest to be chast in Wed∣lock, keep thy self chast before thou wedd'st: he that hath known pleasu∣re unlawfully, will hardly be restrained from unlawfull pleasure. One woman was created for one man. He that strays beyond the limits of liberty, is brought into the verge of Slavery. Whe∣re one is enough, two are too many, and three are too few. CHAP. XII. IF thou would'st be justified acknow∣ledge thy injustice: he that confesses his sin, begins his journey towards sal∣vation: he that is sorry for it, mends his pace: he that forsakes it, is at his journeys end. CHAP. XIII. BEfore thou reprehend another, take heed thou art not culpable in what thou goest about to reprehend. He that cleanses a blot with blotted fingers, makes a greater blur.
CHAP. XIV. BEware of drunkenness, lest all good men beware of thee; where drun∣kenness reigns, there reason is an Exul; vertu a stranger; God an Enemy; Bla∣sphemy is wit, Oaths are Rhetorick, and Secrets are Proclamations. Noah disco∣ver'd that in one hour, drunk, which sober, he kept secret six hundred years CHAP. XV. WHat thou givest to the poor, thou securest from the Thief, but what thou withhold'dst from his necessity, a Thief possesses. Gods Exchequer is the poor mans Box: when thou strik'st a Tally, he becomes thy debtor, CHAP. XVI. TAke no pleasure in the folly of an Idiot, not in the fancy of a Lunatick nor in the frenzie of a Drunkard. Make them the object of thy pity, not of thy pastime; when thou behold'st them, be∣hold how thou art beholding to him that fuffered thee not to be like them There is no difference between thee and them, but Gods favour.
CHAP. XVII. IF being in eminent place, thou hast incurr'd the Obloquy of the multitu∣de, the more thou endeavourest to stop the stream, the more it overflow's; wisely rather divert the course of the vulgar humour, by divulging and spre∣ading some ridiculous noveltie, which may present new matter to their various fancy, and stave their tongues from off thy worried name. The first subject of the common voice, is the last news. CHAP. XVIII. IF thou desire to see thy child vertu∣ous, let him not see his fathers vices: Thou canst not rebuke that in them, that they behold practis'd in thee; till reason be ripe, examples direct more then precepts: Such as thy behaviour is before thy childrens faces, such commonly is theirs behind their parents backs. CHAP. XIX. USe Law and Physick onely for ne∣cessity; they that use them otherwi∣se,
abuse themselvs into weak bodies, and light purses: they are good reme∣dies, bad buisnsses, and worse recre∣ations. CHAP. XX. BE not over curious in prying into mysteries; lest, by seeking things which are needless, thou omittest things which are necessary: it is more safe to poubt of uncertain matters, then to di∣spute of undiscover'd Mysteries. CHAP. XXI. IF what thou hast received from God thou sharest to the poor, thou hast gained a blessing by thy hand; if what thou hast taken from the poor, thou gi∣vest to God, thou hast purchased a Cur∣se into the Bargain. He that puts to pious uses, what he hath got by impious Usury, robs the Spittle to raise an Hos∣pitall; and the cry of the one, will out-plead the prayers of the other. CHAP. XXII. LEt the end of thy argument be rather to discover a doubtfull Truth, than
a commanding Wit; In the one, thou shalt gain substance; in the other, Froth: that flint strikes the steel in vain, that propagates no sparkles; covet to be Truths champion, at lest to hold her co∣lours: he that pleads against the truth, takes pains to be overthrown; or, if a conquerour, gains but vainglory by the conquest. CHAP. XXIII. TAke no pleasure in the death of a creature, if it be harmeless or use∣less, destroy it not: if usefull, or harm full destroy it mercifully: He that mer∣cifully made his Creatures for thy sake, expects thy mercy upon them for his sake. Mercy turns her back to the un∣mercifull. CHAP. XXIV. IF thou art call'd to the dignity of a Priest, the same voice calls thee to the honour of a Judge; if thy life and doctrin be good, thou shalt judge o∣thers: if thy doctrin be good, and thy life bad, onely thy felf: if both be good, thou teachest thy people to escape con∣demnation:
if this be good, and that bad, thou teachest God to condem thee. CHAP. XXV. IF thou be not a Prometheus to advise before thou do'st; be an Epimetheus to examine when thou hast done: when the want of advise hath brought forth an improvident act, the act of ex∣amination may produce a profitable Re¦pentance. CHAP. XXVI. IF thou desire the happiness of thy soul, the health of thy body, the pro∣sperity of thy estate, the preservation of thy credit, converse not with a Harlot: her eyes run thy reputation in debt; her lips demand the payment; her breasts arrests thee; her arms imprison thee; from whence, beleeve it, thou shalt hardly get forth till thou hast either en∣ded the days of thy credit, or pay'd the utmost farthing of thy Estate. CHAP. XXVII. CAarry a watchfull eye upon those familiars that are either silent at thy faults, or sooth the in thy frailties, or
excuse thee in thy follies; for such are either cowards, or flatterers, or fools: if thou entertain them in prosperity, the Coward will leave thee in thy dangers, the Flatterer will quit thee in thy adver∣sity: but the fool will never forsake thee. CHAP. XXVIII. IF thou hast an Estate, and a son to inherit it, keep him not too short, least he think thou livest too long; what thou allowest him, let him receive from thy hand, as gift; not from thy Tenants, as Rent: keep the reins of thy Estate in thy own hand, least thou forsaking the soveraignty of a father, he forget the reverence of a child: let his liberty be grounded on thy permission, and keep him within the compass of thy instruction: let him feel, thou hast the Curb, though occasion urge thee not to check. Give him the choise of his owne wife, if he be wise. Counsell his affection rather than cross it, if thou beest wise; least his marriage-bed be made in secret, or depend upon thy gra∣ve. If he be given to lavish company,
endeavour to stave him off with lawfull recreations: be cheerfull with him, that he may love thy presence; and wink at small faults, that thou maist gain him: be not always chiding, least thou hard∣en him: neither knit thy brow too of∣ten, least thou dishearten him: remem∣ber the discretion of a father oft times prevents the destruction of a child. CHAP. XXIX. IF thou hide thy Treasure upon the Earth, how can'st thou expect to find it in Heaven? Can'st thou hope to be a sharer where thou hast reposed no stock? What thou givest to God's glory, and thy soul's health, is laid up in Heaven, and is onely thine; that alone, which thou exchangest, or hidest upon Earth is lost. CHAP. XXX. REgard not in thy Pilgrimage how difficult the passage is, but whi∣ther it tends; nor how delicate the jour∣ney is, but where it ends: If it be easie, suspect it; if hard, endure it: He that
can not excuse a bad way, accuseth his own sloth; and he that sticks in a bad passage, can never attain a good jour∣ney's end. CHAP. XXXI. MOney is both the generation and corruption of purchas'd honour: honour is both the child and stave of po∣tent money: the credit which honour hath lost money hath found: When honour grew mercenary, money grew honourable. The way to be truly No∣ble, is to contemn both. CHAP. XXXII. GIve not thy tongue too great a liber∣ty, lest it take thee prisoner: A word unspoken is like the sword in thy scab∣berd, thine; if vented, thy sword is in anothers hand: if thou desire to be held wise, be so wise as to hold thy tongue. CHAP. XXXIII. IF thou be subject to any great vanity, nourish it not: if it will be entertai∣ned, encourage it not: if it grow strong, more strongly strive against it; if too
strong, pray against it; if it weaken not, joyn fasting to thy Prayer; if it shal continue, add perseverance to both; if it decline not, adde patience to all, and thou hast conquered it. CHAP. XXXIV. HAth any wounded thee with Inju∣ries? meet them with patience; hastie words ranckle the wound, soft language dresses it, forgiveness cures it, and oblivion takes away the scarr. It is more noble, by silence to avoid an in∣jury, then by argument to overcome it. CHAP. XXXV. BE not instable in thy resolutions, nor various in thy actions, nor in thy affections: so deliberate, that thou maist resolve; so resolve, that thou maist perform; so perform, that thou maist persevere: Mutability is the badg of Infirmity. CHAP. XXXVI. LEt not thy good intention flatter thee to an evill action; what is essentially evill, no circnmstance can
make good; it matters not with what mind thou did'st that, which is unlaw∣full, being done: if the act be good, the intention crown's it; if bad, it de∣poses thy intention: no evill action can be well done. CHAP. XXXVII. LOve not thy children too unequal∣ly; or, if thou do'st, shew it not; least thou make the one proud, the o∣ther envious, and both Fools: if Na∣ture hath made a difference, it is the part of a tender Parent to help the wea∣kest. That triall is not fair, where af∣fection is the judge. CHAP. XXXVIII. IN giving of thy alms, enquire not so much into the person, as his necessi∣ty: God looks not so much upon the merits of him that requires, as in∣to the manner of him that releiv's: if the man deserve not, thou hast given it to Humanity.
CHAP. XXXIX. IF thou desirest the Eucharist should be thy Supper, let thy life be thy Chaplain; if thy own worthiness in∣vites thee, presume not to come; if the sorrowfull sense of thy own sins forbid thee, presume not to forbear; if thy faith be strong, it will confirm it; if weak, it will strengthen it: He onely that wants Faith is the forbidden guest. CHAP. LX. WOuldst thou traffick with the best advantage, and Crown thy ver∣tues with the best return? Make the poor thy Chapman, and thy purse thy Factor: So shalt thou give trifles which thou coul'st not keep, to receive treasure which thou canst not lose: There's no such Merchant as the charitable man. CHAP. LXI. FOllow not the multitude in the e∣vill of sin, lest thou share with the multitude in the evill of punishment:
The number of the Offenders dimi∣nisheth not the quality of the offence: As the multitude of Suiters draw's mo∣re favour to the Suit; So the multitude of Sinners draw's more punishment on the Sin: The number of the Faggots multiplies the fury of the Fire. CHAP. XLII. IF thou be angry with him that repro∣ves thy Sin, thou secretly confesseth his reproof to be just: if thou ac∣knowledg his Reproof to be just, thou secretly confessest thy anger to be unjust He that is angry with the just Repro∣ver, kindles the fire of the just Reven∣ger. CHAP. XLIII. DOe well while thou maist, lest thou do evill when thou wouldst not: Pe that takes not advantage of a good Hower, shall lose the Benefit of a good Will. CHAP. XLIV. LEt not mirth be thy profession, lest thou become a Make-sport. He
that hath but gain'd the Title of a jester, let him assure himself, The Fool's not farr off. CHAP. XLV. IN every Relative action, change con∣ditions with thy brother; Then ask thy conscience what thou woudest be done to; Being truly resolved exchan∣ge again, and doe thou the like to him, and thy Charity shall never err: it is in∣justice to do, what without impatience thou canst not suffer. CHAP. XLVI. LOve thy neighbour for Gods sake, and God for his own sake, who cre∣ated all things for thy sake, and redee∣med thee for his mercy sake: If thy love have any other Object, it is false love: if thy object have any other end, it is self-love. CHAP. XLVIII. LEt thy conversation with men, be sober and sincere: Let thy devo∣tion to God be dutifull and decent: Let the one be hearty, and not haughty; Let
the other be humble, and not homely: So live with men, as if God saw thee; So pray to God, as if men heard thee. CHAP. XLVIII. GOd's pleasure is the wind our acti∣ons ought to sayl by: Man's will is the Stream that Tides them up and down; if the wind blow not, thou maist take the advantage of the Tide; if it blow, no matter which way the Stream runs, if with thee, thy voyage will be the shorter; if against thee, the Sea will be the rougher: it is safer to strive aga∣inst the Stream, then to sail against the Wind. CHAP. XLIX. IF thou desire much Rest, desire not too much: there is no less trouble in the preservation, then in the acquisition of abundance; Diogenes found more rest in his Tub than Alexander on his Throne. CHAP. L. WOuld'st thou multiply thy riches? Diminish them wisely: Or wouldst
thou make thy Estate entire? divide it charitably: Seeds that are scattered, en∣crease; but hoarded up, they perish. CHAP. LI. HOw cam'st thou by thy Honour? By Money: How cam'st thou by thy Money? By Extortion: Compare thy penny worth with the price, and tell me truly, how truly Honourable thou art? It is an ill purchase that's encum∣bred with a curse, and that Honour will be ruinous that is built on Rui∣nes. CHAP. LII. IF thy Brother hath priyately offen∣ded thee, reprove him ptiyately, and having lost himself in an injury, thou shalt find him in thy forgiuness: He that rebukes a private fault openly, betray's it, rather then reproves it. CHAP. LIII. WHat thou desirest, inspect through∣ly before thou prosecute: Cast one eye upon the inconveniences,
as well as the other upon the Conveniences. Weigh the fulness of the Barn with the Charge of the Plough: Weigh Honour with her Burden, and Pleasure with her Dangers; So shalt thou undertake wisely what thou desi∣rest; or moderate thy desires in under∣taking. CHAP. LIV. IF thou owest thy whole self to thy God for thy Creation, what hast thou left to pay for thy Redemption, that was not so cheap as thy Creation? In thy Creation, he gave thee thy self, and by thy self to him: In thy Redemption he gave himself to thee, and through him restor'd thee to thy felf: Thou art given and restor'd: Now what owest thou unto thy God? if thou hast paid all thy debts, give him the Surplusage, and thou hast merited. CHAP. LV. IN thy discourse take heed what thou speakest, to whom thou speakest, how thou speakest, and when thou speakest: What thou speakest, speak
speak truly; when thou speakest, speak wisely. A Fools heart is in his Ton∣gue; but a Wise mans Tongue is in his heart. CHAP. LVI. BEefore thou act a Theft, consider what thou art about to do: if thou take it, thou losest thy self; if thou keep it, thou disenablest thy Redemption: Till thou rest or'st it, thou canst not be restored; When it is restor'd, it must cost thee more pain, and sorrow, than ever it brought thee pleasure or profit. It is a great folly to please the Palate with that which thou knowest must ei∣ther be vomited, or thy death. CHAP. LVII. SIlence is the highest wisdom of a Fool, and Speech is the greatest tri∣al of a Wise man, if thou would'st be known a Wise man, let thy words shew thee so; if thou doubt thy words, let thy silence feign thee so. It is not a grea∣ter point of Wisdome to discover knowledg, then to hide ignorance.
CHAP. LVIII. THe Clergy is a Copy book, their Life is the Paper, whereof some is purer, some Courser: Their Doctrine is the Copies, some written in a plain Hand others in a Flourishing Hand, some in a Text Hand, some in a Roman Hand, others in a Court Hand, others in a Bastard Roman: if the choice be in thy power, chuse a Book that hath the finest Paper, let it not bee too straight nor too loosely bound, but easie to lye open to every Eye; follow not every Copy, least thou be good at none: A∣mong them all chuse one that shall be most Legible and usefull, and fullest of Instructions. But if the Paper chan∣ce to have a Blot, remember, the Blot is no part of the Copy. CHAP. LIX. VErtue is nothing but an act of lov∣ing that which is to be beloved, and that act is Prudence, from whence not to be removed by constraint is For∣titude; not to be allur'd by entice∣ments is Temperance; not to be di∣verted
by Pride is justice. The decli∣ning of this act is Vice. CHAP. LX. REbuke thy Servants fault in priva∣te: publique reproof hardens his shame: if he be past a youth, strike him not: he is not fit for thy service, that after wise reproofs will either deserve thy strokes, or digest them. CHAP. LXI. TAke heed rather what thou recei∣vest, then what thou givest; What thou givest leaves thee, what thou ta∣kest, sticks by thee: He that presents a gift buys the Receiver; he that takes a gift sells his liberty. CHAP. LXII. THings Temporal, are sweeter in the Expectation: Things Eternal are sweeter in the Fruition: The first shames thy Hope, the second crown's it: it is a vain Journey, whose end af∣fords less pleasure then the way.
CHAP. LXIII. KNow thy self that thou maist Fear God: Know God, that thou maist Love him; in this, thou art initiated to wisdom; in that, perfected: The Fe∣ar of God is the beginning of Wisdom: The Love of God is the fulfilling of the Law. CHAP. LXIV. IF thou hast Providence to foresee a danger, let thy Prudence rather pre∣vent it, than fear it. The fear of fu∣ture evils brings oftentimes a present mischief: Whilst thou seek'st to pre∣vent it, practise to bear it. He is a wise man that can avoyd an evill; he is a pa∣tient man that can endure it; but he is a vailiant man can conquer it. CHAP. LXV. IF thou hast the place of a Magistrate, deserve it by thy Justice, and digni∣fie it with thy Mercy: Take heed of early gifts: an open hand makes a blind eye: be not more apt to punish Vice, then to encourage Vertue. Be not too
severe, least thou be hated, nor too re∣miss, least thou be sleighted: So execu∣te Justice, that thou mayst be loved: so execute mercy, that thou mayest be feared. CHAP. LXVI. LEt not thy Table exceed the fourth part of thy Revenu: Let thy pro∣vision be solid, and not farr fetcht, ful∣ler of substance than Art: Be wisely fru∣gall in thy preparation, and freely cheer∣full in thy entertainment: If thy guests be right, it is enough; if not, it is too much: Too much is a vanity; enough is a Feast. CHAP. LXVII. LEt thy apparell be decent, and sui∣ted to the quality of thy place and purse: Too much punctualitie, and too much morositie, are the two Poles of Pride: Be neither too early in the Fashion, nor too long out of it, nor too precisely in it: what custom hath civi∣liz'd, is become decent, till then, ridi∣culous: Where the Eye is the Jury, thy apparell is the evidence.
CHAP. XLVIII. IF thy words be too luxuriant, con∣fine them, least they consine thee: He that thinks he never can speak enough, may easily speak too much. A full ton∣gue, and an emty brain, are seldom parted. CHAP. LXIX. IN holding of an argument, be nei∣ther cholerick, nor too opinionate; The one distempers thy understan∣ding; the other abuses thy judgement: Above all things decline Paradoxes and Mysteries: Thou shalt receive no ho∣nour, either in maintaining rank falshoods, or medling with secret truths? as he that pleads against the truth, makes with the mother of his Errour: so he that argues beyond warrant, makes wisdom the midwife of his folly. CHAP. LXX DEtain not the wages from the poor man that hath earn'd it, least God withhold thy wages from thee: If
he complain to thee, hear him, least he complain to Heaven, where he will be heard: if he hunger for thy sake, thou shalt not prosper for his sake. The poor mans penny is a plague in the rich mans purse. CHAP. LXXI. BE not too cautious in discerning the sit objects of thy Charity, least a soul perish through thy discretion: What thou givest to mistaken want, shall re∣turn a blessing to thy deceived heart: Bet∣ter in relieving idleness to commit an accidental evil, then in neglecting mi∣sery to omit an essential good: Better two Drones be preserv'd, then one Bee perish. CHAP. LXII. THeology is the Empress of the world; Mysteries are her Privy Covncell; Religion is her Clergy; The Arts her Nobility; Philosophy her Secretary: The Graces her Maids of Honour; The Moral vertues, the Ladies of her Bed-chamber; Peace is her Chamberlain; True joy, and endless plea∣sures
are her Courtiers; Plenty her Treasurer; Poverty her Exchequer; The Temple is her Court: If thou de∣sire access to this great Majesty, the way is by her Courtiers; if thou hast no po∣wer there, the common way to the So∣vereign is the Secretary. CHAP. LXXIII. IT is an evill knowledg to know the good thou shouldst embrace, unless thou likewise embrace the good thou knowest: The breath of divine know∣ledg, is the bellows of divine love, and the flame of divine love, is the perfecti∣on of divine knowledg. CHAP. LXXIV. IF thou desire rest unto thy soul, be just: He that doth no injury, fears not to suffer injury: The unjust mind is always in labour: It either practises the evill it hath projected, or projects to avoid the evill it hath deserved. CHAP. LXXV. ACcustome thy palate to what is most usuall: He that delights in rariti∣es,
must often feed displeased, and som∣times lie at the mercy of a dear market: common food nourishes best, delicates please most: The sound stomack pre∣ferr's neither. What art thou the worse for the last years plain diet, or what now the better for thy last great Feast? CHAP. LXXVI. WHo ever thou art, thou hast done more evill in one day, than thou canst expiate in six; and canst thou think the evill of six days can require less then one? God hath made us rich in days, by allowing six, and himself poor by reser∣ving but one; and shall we spare our own flock, and shear his Lamb? He that hath done nothing but what he can justifie in the six days, may play the se∣venth. CHAP. LXXVII. HOpe and Fear, like Hippocrates Twins, should live and die toge∣ther: If hope depart from fear, it travels by security, and lodges in presumption; if fear depart from hope, it travels to insidelitie, and Inns in despair the one
shuts up heaven, the other opens hell; the one makes thee insensible of Gods frowns, the other, incapable of Gods favours; and both teach God to be un∣mercifull, and thee to be most misera∣ble. CHAP. LXXVIII. CLose thine ear against him that shall open his mouth secretly against an∣other: If thou reeive not his words, they ie back, and wound the Report: If thou receive them, they flee forward, and wound the receiver. CHAP. LXXIX. IF thou wouldst preserve a sound bo∣dy, use fasting and walking; if a healthfull soul, fasting and praying; Walking exercises the body, praying exercises the soul, fasting cleanses both. CHAP. LXXX. WOuld'st thou not be thought a fool in anothers conceit? Be not wise in thine own: He that trusts to his own wisdom, proclaim's his own folly: He is truly wise, and shall
appear so, that hath folly enough to be thought not worldly wise, or wisdom enough to see his own folly. CHAP. LXXXI. DEsir'st thou knowledg? know the end of thy desire: Is it only to know? Then it is curiosity: Is it be∣cause thou mayst be known? then t'is vanity: If because thou may'st edifie, it is charity: If because thou may'st be edified, it is wisdom. That knowledg turns to meer excrement, that hath not some heat of wisdom to digest it. CHAP. LXXXII. WIsdom without innocency is kna∣very; Innocency without wis∣dom is foolery: Be therefore as wise as serpents, and innocent as doves: The subtilty of the serpent, instructs the innocency of the dove: The inno∣cency of the dove, corrects the subtilty of the serpent: What God hath joyn'd together, let no man seperate.
CHAP. LXXXIII. THe more thou imitatest the vertues of a Saint departed, the better thou celebrat'st that Saints day. God is not pleased with surfeiting for his sake, who with his fasting so often pleas'd his God. CHAP. LXXXIV. CHuse not thy serviceable souldier out of soft apparell, lest he prove effoeminate, nor out of a full purse, lest he grow timorous: They are more fit for action, that are fiery to gain a fortu∣ne abroad, then they that have fortunes to lose at home. Expectation breeds spirit; Fruition brings fear. CHAP. LXXXV. GOd hath given to mankind a com∣mon Library, his creatures; and to every man a proper book, Himself, being an abridgement of all the other: If thou read with understanding, it will make thee a great master of Philosophy, and a true servant to the divine Authour. If thou but barely read, it will make thee thy own Wise man, and the Au∣thours fool.
CHAP. LXXXVI. DOubt is a weak child lawfully be∣gotten between an obstructed judg∣ment, and a fair understanding. Opi∣nion is a bold bastard gotten between a strong fancie, and a weak judement; it is less dishonourable to be ingenuosly doubtfull, then rashly opinionate. CHAP. LXXXVII. AS thou art a morall man, esteem thy self not as thou art, but as thou art esteem'd. As thou art a Christian, e∣steem thy self as thou art, not as thou art esteem'd: Thy price in both rises and fals as the market goes. The mar∣ket of a morall man is wild opinion. The market of a Christian is a good consci∣ence. CHAP. LXXXVIII. PRovidence is an exercise of reason; experience an act of sense: by how much reason excel's sense, by so much providence exceeds experience. Pro∣vidence prevents that danger, which experience repents: Providence is the
rational daughter of wisdom: experi∣ence the Empirical mistress of fools. CHAP. XXXIX. HAth fortune dealt thee ill Cards? let wisdom make thee a good Game∣ster: in a fair Gale, every fool may sail; but wise behaviour in a storm com∣mends the wisdom of a Pilot: To bear adversity with an equal mind, is both the sign and glory of a brave Spirit. CHAP. XC. IF any speak ill of thee, flee home to thy own conscience, and examin thy heart: if thou be guilty, 't is a just cor∣rection: if not guilty, 't is a fair instru∣ction: make use of both, so shalt thou distill Honie out of Gall, and out of an open enemy, create a secret friend. CHAP. XCI. AS the exercise of the body natural is moderate recreation, so the ex∣ercise of the body politick, is military discipline: by that the one is made mo∣re able; by this, the other is made mo∣re active: Where both are wanting,
there wants no danger to the one, through a humorous superfluity; to the other, by a negligent security. CHAP. XCII. GOd is above thee, Beasts are bene∣ath thee: acknowledg him that is above thee, and thou shalt be acknow∣ledg'd by them that are under thee: Whil'st Daniel acknowledg'd God to be above him, the Lions acknowledg'd Daniel to be above them. CHAP. XCIII. TAke heed whil'st thou shewest wis∣dom in not speaking, thou betrayest not thy folly in too long silence: if thou art a fool, thy silence is wisdom; if a wise man, too long silence is folly; As too many words from a fools mouth, gives a wise man no leave to speak; so too long silence in a wise man, gives a fool the opportunity of speaking, and makes thee guilty of his folly. CHAP. XCIV. COnsider what thou wert, what thou art, what thou shalt be: What's
within thee, what's above thee, what's beneath thee, what's against thee: what was before thee, what shall be after thee; and this will bring to thy self humility, to they neighbour charity, to the world contempt, to thy God obedience: He that know's not himself Positively, can not know himself Relatively. CHAP. XCV. THink not thy love to God merits Gods love to thee: his acceptance of thy duty crowns his own gifts in thee: Mans love to God is nothing but a faint reflection of God's love to man. CHAP. XCVI. BE always less willing to speak then to hear; what thou hearest thou re∣ceivest; what thou speakest thou gi∣vest. It is more glorious to give, more profitable to receive. CHAP. XCVII. SEest thou good dayes? prepare for evil times: No Summer but hath his Winter: He never reap'd comfort in adversity, that sow'd it not in prosperity.
CHAP. XCVIII IF being a magistrate, thou connivest at vice, thou nourishest it; if thou sparest it, thou committest it: What is not, by thee, punisht in others, is ma∣de punishable in thee. He that favours present evils, en tails them upon his po∣sterity: He that excuses the guilty, condemns the Innocent. CHAP. XCIX. TRuth haunts no corners, seeks no by-ways: If thou profess it, do it openly: if thou seek it, do it fairly: he deserv's not to profess Truth, that pro∣fesses it fearfully he deserv's not to find the Truth that seeks it fraudu∣lently. CHAP. C. IF thou desire to be wiser yet, think not thy self yet wise enough: and if thou desire to improve knowledg in thy self, despise not the instructions of another: He that in∣structs him, that thinks himself wise enough, hath a fool to his schollar: He that thinks himselfe wise enough to instruct himself, hath a fool to his master. The end of the Third Century.
THE Fourth Century. CHAP. I DEmean thy self more warily in thy study, then in the street. If thy public acti∣ons have a hundred witnes∣ses, thy private have a thou∣sand. The multitude look's but upon thy actions: Thy conscience look's into them: the multitude may chance to excuse thee, if not acquit thee, thy con∣science will accuse thee, if not con∣demn thee. CHAP. II. OF all vices take heed of Drunken∣ness; Other vices are but fruits of disordered affections: this disorders, nay, banishes reason: Other vices but impair the soul, this demolishes her two chief faculties; the Understanding, and the Will: Other vices make their own way; this makes way for all vices: He that is a Drunkard is qualified for all vice.
CHAP. III. IF thy sin trouble thee, let that trou∣ble comfort thee; as pleasure in the remembrance of sin exasperats Ju∣stice, so sorrow in the repentance of sin mollifies mercy: it is less danger to com∣mit the sin we delight in, than to delight in the sin we have committed. CHAP. IV. THe way to God is by thy self, The way to thy self is by thy own cor∣ruptions: he that balks this way, err's; he that travels by the creatures, wan∣ders. The motion of the Heavens shall give thy soul no rest: the vertue of Herbs shall not encrease thine. The height of all Philosophy, both natural and moral, is to know thy self, and the end of this knoweledg is to know God. CHAP. V. INfamy is where it is receiv'd: if thou art a Mudd-wall, it wil stick:
if Marbl, it will rebound: if thou storm at it, 'tis thine: if thou contemn it, 't is his. CHAP. VI. IF thou desire Magistracy, learn to forget thy self; if thou undertake it, bid thy self farewell; he that looks upon a common cause with private eyes, looks through false Glasses. In the exercise of thy politic office, thou must forget both Ethicks and Oecono∣micks. He that puts on a public Gown, must put off a private Person. CHAP. VII. LEt the words of a Virgin, though in a good cause, and to as good purpose, be neither, violent, many, nor first, nor last: it is less shame for a Virgin to be lost in a blushing silence, then to be found in a bold Eloquence. CHAP. VIII. ARt thou in plenty? give what thou wilt: Art thou in poverty? give what thou canst: as what is receiv'd, is receiv'd according to the manner of
the receiver; so what is given, priz'd according to the measure of the giver: he is a good workman that makes as good work as his matter will permit. CHAP. IX GOd is the Author of Truth; the Devill, the Father of Lies: If the telling of a truth shall endanger thy life, the author of Truth will protect thee from the danger, or reward thee for thy dammage. If the telling of a Lie may se∣cure thy life, the father of Lies will be∣guil thee of thy gains, or traduce the security. Better by losing of a life to sa∣ve it, then by saving of a life to lose it. However, better thou perish than the Truth. CHAP. X. Consider not so much what thou hast, as what others want: what thou hast, take heed thou lose not. What thou hast not, take heed thou covet not: if thou hast many above thee, turn thy eye upon those that are under thee: If thou hast no Inferiours, have patience a while, and thou shalt have no Supe∣riours. The grave requires no marshal.
CHHP. XI. IF thou seest any thing in thy self, which may make thee proud, look a little further, and thon shalt find e∣nough to humble thee; if thou be wise, view the Peacock's feathers with his feet, and, weigh thy best parts with thy imperfections. He thar would rightly prize the man, must read his whole Story. CHAP. XII. LEt not the sweetness of contempla∣tion be so esteem'd, that action be despis'd, Rachel was more fair, Lea more fruitfull: as contemplation is more delightfull, so is it more dangerous: Lot was upright in the City and wicked in the Mountain. CHAP. XIII. IF thou hast but little, make it not less by murmuring: if thou hast e∣nough, make it not too much by un∣thankfulness: He that is not thankfully contented with the lest favour he hath receiv'd, hath made himself incapable of the lest favour he can receive.
CHAP. XIV. WHat thou hast taken unlawfully, restore speedily, for the sin in ta∣king it, is repeated every minute thou keep'st it: if thou canst, restore it in kind: if not, in value; if it may be, restore it to the party; if not, to God: the Poor is Gods Receiver. CHAP. XV. LEt the fear of a danger be a spur to prevent it: He that fears other∣wise, gives advantage to the danger: It is less folly not to endevour the pre∣vention of the evil thou fearest, then to fear the evil which thy endeavor can∣not prevent. CHAP. XVI. IF thou hast any excellence which is thine own, thy tongue may glory in it without shame; but if thou hast re∣ceiv'd it, thy glory is but usurpation; and thy pride is but the prologu of thy shame: Where vainglory commands, there folly counsels; where pride Ri∣des, there shame Lacquies.
CHAP. XVII. GOd hath ordained his creatures, not onely for necessity, but de∣light; since he hath carv'd thee with a bountifull hand, fear not to receive it with a liberal heart: He that gave thee water to allay thy thirst, gave thee wine to exhilarat thy heart. Restore him for the one, a necessity of thanks, return him for the other, the chearfulness of prais. CHAP. XVII. IF the wicked flourish and thou suf∣fer, be not discourag'd: thy are fatted for destruction; thou art Dieted for health; they have no other Heaven but the hopes of a long Earth; thou hast no∣thing on Earth but the hopes of a quick Heaven: if there were no journeys end, the travell of a Christian were most com∣fortless. CHAP. XIX. IMp not thy wings with the Churches feathers, least thou flie to thy own Ruine: impropriations are bold Me∣taphors;
which continued, are deadly Allegories: one foot of land in Capite, encumbers the whole estate: The Ea∣gle snatcht a coal from the Altar, but it fired her Nest. CHAP. XX. LEt that table which God hath ple∣as'd to give thee, please thee: He that made the Vessell knows her bur∣then, and how to ballast her; He that made all things very good, cannot but do all things very well; If thou be con∣tent with a little, thou hast enough: if thou complainest, thou hast too much. CHAP. XXI. WOuld'st thou discover the true worth of a man? Behold him na∣ked: dis-treasure him of his ill-got We∣alth, degrade him of his dear bought honour dis-robe him of his purple Habit. Discard his pamper'd body; then look upon his soul, and thou shalt find how great he is: Naturall sweetness is never sented but in the absence of artificiall.
CHAP. XXII. IF thou art subject to any secret folly blab it not, last thou appear impu∣dent; nor boast of it lest thou seem insolent: Every mans vanity ought to be his greatest shame: and every mans folly ought to be his greatest secret. CHAP. XXIII. IF thou be ignorant, endeavour to get knowledg, least thou be beaten with stripes: if thou hast attain'd know∣ledg, put it in practice, least thou be beaten with many stripes: Better not to know what we should practise, then not to practise what we know; and less danger dwell's in unaffected ignorance, then unactive knowledg. CHAP. XXIV. TAke heed thou harbour not that vice call'd Envy, least anothers hap∣piness be thy torment, and God's bles∣sing becom thy Curse: vertue corrup∣ted with vain-glory, turn's Pride: Pride poyson'd with malice, becoms En∣vy: joyn therfore Humility with thy
Vertu, and Pride shall have no foo∣ting, and Envy shall find no entrance. CHAP. XXV. IF thy endeavour cannot prevent a Vice, let thy Repentance lament it: the more thou remembrest it without heart's grief the deeper it is rooted in thy heart: take heed it please thee not, especially in cold blood: Thy pleasure in it makes it fruitfull, and her fruit is thy destruction. CHAP. XXVI. THe two knowledges, of God, and thy self, are the high way to thy Salvation; that breeds in thee a filial love; this a filial fear: The ignorance of thy self is the begining of all sin, and the ignorance of God is the perfection of all evil. CHAP. XXVII. RAther do nothing to the purpose, then be idle, that the Devil may find thee doing: the Bird that sits is easily shot, when fliers' scape the Fowler: idle∣ness is the dead Sea that swallow's
all Vertues, and the Self-made Sepul∣cher of a living man: the idle man is the Devils hireling; whose livery is rags whose diet and wages are famin, and diseases. CHAP. XXVIII. BE not so mad as to alter that Coun∣tenance which thy Creatour made thee: Remember it was the work of his Hands; if it be bad, how dar'st thou mend it? If it be good, why dost thou mend it? art thou asham'd of his work, and proud of thy own? he made thy face to be known by, why desirest thou to be known by another: it is a shame to adulterate modesty, but more to adul∣terate nature. Lay by thy art, and blush not to appear what he blushes not to make thee. It is better to be his Picture than thy own. CHAP. XXIX. LEt the ground of all thy Religious actions be obedience, examine not why it is commanded, but observe it, because it is commanded. True obedience neither procrastinates, nor questions.
CHAP. XXX. IF thou wouldst buy an inheritance in Heaven, advise not with thy Purs, least in the mean while thou lose thy purchase: The Widow bought as much for two mites, as Zaccheus did for half his estate: the prize of that purchase is what thou hast, and is not lost for what thou hast not, if thou desire to have it. CHHP. XXXI. WIth the same height of desire thou hast sinn'd, with the like depth of sorrow thou must repent: thou that hast sinn'd to day, deferr not thy repentance till to morrow: he that hath promised pardon to thy Repentance, hath not promised life till thou repent. CHAP. XXXII. TAke heed how thou receivest prais from men: from good men nei∣ther avoid it, nor glory in it. From evil men, neither desire it, nor expect it: To be praised of them that are evil, or for that which is evil, is equal disho∣nour:
He is happy in his worth, who is praised by the good, and imitated by the bad. CHAP. XXXIII. PRoportion thy chatity to the strength of thy estate, least God pro∣portion thy estate to the weakness of thy charity: Let the lips of the poor be the trumpet of thy gift, least in seeking ap∣plause, thou lose thy Reward: Nothing is more pleasing to God than an open hand, and a close mouth. CHAP. XXXIV. DOst thou want things necessary? Grumble not: perchance it was a necessary thing thou should'st want: Endeavour lawfully to supply it; if God bless not thy endeavour, bless him that knoweth what is fittest for thee. Thou art Gods Patient: Prescribe not thy Physician. CHAP. XXXV. IF anothers death, or thy own de∣pend upon thy confession, if thou canst, say nothing: if thou must, say
the Truth: it is better, thou lose thy life, than God his Honour: it is as ea∣sie for him to give thee life, being con∣demn'd; as repentance, having sinn'd: it is more wisdom to yeeld thy Body, than hazard thy Soul. CHAP. XXXVI. CLoath not thy language, either with Obscurity, or affectation: in the one thou discover'st too much dark∣ness, in the other, too much lightness: He that speaks from the understanding, to the understanding, is the best inter∣preter. CHAP. XXXVII. IF thou expectest death as a friend, prepare to entertain it: If thou ex∣pectest death as an enemy, prepare to overcom it: Death has no advantage, but when it coms a stranger. CHAP. XXXVIII. FEar nothing, but what thy industry may prevent: Be confident of no∣thing but what fortune cannot defeat: it is no less folly to fear what is impossi∣ble
to be avoided, then to be secure when there is a possibility to be depriv'd. CHAP. XXXIX. LEt not the necessity of Gods decree discourage thee to pray, or dishear∣ten thy prayers; doe thou thy duty, and God will do his pleasure: if thy prayers make not him sound that is sick, they will return, and confirm thy health that art sound: If the end of thy prayer be to obtain thy request, thou confinest him that is infinite: if thou hast done well, because thou wert commanded, thou hast thy reward in that thou hast obeyed. Gods pleasure is the end of our prayers. CHAP. XL. MArry not too young, and when thou art too old, marry not, least thou be fond in the one, or thou dote in the other, and repent for both: let thy liking ripen before thou love: let thy Love advise before thou choos; and let thy choice be fixt before thou marry: Remember that the whole happiness or unhappiness of thy life depends upon
this one Act. Remember nothing but death can dissolve this knot. He that weds in haste, repents ofttimes by lei∣sure: And he that repents him of his own act, either is, or was a fool by con∣fession. CHAP. XLI. IF God hath sent thee a Cross, take it up and follow him: use it wisely, least it be unprofitable; Bear it pa∣tiently, least it be intolerable: Behold in it Gods anger against sin, and his love towards thee; in punishing the one, and chastening the other: if it be light, sleight it not; if heavy, murmur not: Not to be sensible of a judgement is the symptom of a hardned heart; and to be displeas'd at his pleasure, is a sign of a rebellious will. CHAP. XLII. IF thou desirest to be magnanimous, undertake nothing rashly, and fear nothing thou undertak'st: Fear no∣thing but infamy: Dare any thing but injury; the measure of magnanimity is, neither to be rash, nor timorous.
CHAP. XLIII. PRactise in health, to bear sickness, and endeavour in the strength of thy life to entertain death: He that hath a will to die, not having power to live, shew's necessity, not vertue: It is the glory of a brave mind to embrace pangs in the very arms of pleasure: What name of vertu merits he, that goes when he is driven? CHAP. XLIV. BE not too punctual in taking place: If he be thy superiour, 'tis his due; if thy inferiour, 'tis his dishonour: It is thou must honour thy place; thy Pla∣ce, not thee: It is a poor reward of worth that consists in a right hand, or a brick-wall. CHAP. XLV. PRay often, because thou sinn'st always: Repent quickly, lest thou die suddenly. He that repents it, be∣cause he wants power to act it, repents not of a sin: for He that wants power to actuate his sin, hath not forsaken his sin, but his sin him.
CHAP. XLVI. MAke Philosophy thy journey, Theology thy journeys end: Phi∣losophy is a pleasant way, but dangerous to him that either tires or retires: in this journey it's safe, neither to loyter, nor to rest, till thou hast attained thy journeyes end: He that sits down a Philosopher, rises up an Atheist. CHAP. XLVII. FEar not to sin, for God's sake, but thy own? Thy sin overthrow's not his glory, but thy good: He gain's his Glory not onely from the salvation of the Repentant, but also from the con∣fusion of the Rebellious: There be vessels for honour, and vessels for disho∣nour, but both for his honour. God is not grieved for the glory he shall lose for thy improvidence, but for the horror thou shalt sind for thy impenitence. CHAP. XLVIII. INsult not over misery, nor deride infirmity, nor despise deformity. The first, shews thy inhumanity:
the second, thy folly; the third, thy pride: He that made him miserable, made thee happy to lament him: He that made him weak, made thee strong to support him: He that made him de∣form'd, gave thee favour to be hum∣bled: He that is not sensible of ano∣thers unhappiness, is a living stone; but he that makes misery the object of his triumph is an incarnate Devil. CHAP. XLIX. MAke thy recreations, servants to thy business, least thou become slave to thy recreations: When thou goest up into the Mountain, leave this servant in the Valley: When thou goest to the City, leave him in the Suburbs. And remember, The servant must not be greater than his Master. CHAP. L. PRaise no man too liberally before his face, nor censure him too la∣vishly behind his back; the one savours of flattery; the other, of malice; and both are reprehensible: The true way to advance anothers vertue, is to fellow
it; and the best means to cry down anothers vice, is to decline it. CHAP. LI. IF thy Prince command a lawfull act, give him all active obedience: if he command an unlawfull act, give him passive obedience. What thy well gro∣unded conscience will suffer, do chear∣fully without repining; where thou maist not do lawfully, fuffer couragi∣ously without Rebellion: Thy life and livelihood is thy Princes, Thy consci∣ence is thy own. CHAP. LII. IF thou givest, to receive the like, it is Exchange: if to receive more, it is covetousness: if to receive thanks, it is vanity: if to be seen, it is vain-glo∣ry; if to corrupt, it is Bribery; if for Example, it is formality; if for com∣passion, it is Charity; if because thou art commanded, it is obedience: The affection in doing the work, gives a name to the work done.
CHAP. LIII. FEar death, but be not afraid of Death. To fear it, whets thy ex∣pectation: To be afraid of it, dulls thy preparation: if thou canst endure it, it is but a sleight pain; if not, it is but a short pain: to fear death is the way to live long; to be afraid of Death, is to be long a dying. CHAP. LIV. IF thou desire the love of God and man, be humble; for the proud heart, as it loves none but it self, so it is beloved of hone, but by it self: The voice of humility is God's music, and the silence of Humility is Gods Rheto∣ric: Humility enforces, where nei∣ther verrue nor strength can pravail, nor Reason. CHAP. LV. LOok upon thy burning Taper, and there see the Emblem of thy Life: The slame is thy Soul; The wax, thy Body, and is commonly a span long; The wax, (if never so well tempered)
can but last his length; and who can lentghen it? If ill tempered, it shall wast the faster, yet last his length; an open window shall hasten either, an Extinguisher shall put out both: Hus∣band them the best thou canst, thou canst not lengthen them beyond their date: leave them to the injury of the Wind, or to the mercy of a wastfull, hand, thou hastnest them, but still they burn their length: But puff them out, and thou hast shortned them, and stopt their passage, which else had brought them to their appointed end: Bodies according to their constitutions, stron∣ger or weaker, according to the equa∣lity or inequality of their Elements, ha∣ve their dates, and may be preserv'd from shortning, but not lengthened. Neglect may wast them, ill diet may hasten them unto their journe's end, yet they have liv'd their length; A violent hand may interrupt them; a sudden death may stop them, and thy are short∣ned. It lies in the power of man, ei∣ther permissively to hasten, or actively to shorten, but not to lengthen or ex∣tend the limits of his naturall life. He
only, (if any) hath the art to leng∣then out his Taper that puts it to the best advantage. CHAP. LVI DEmean thy self in the presence of thy Prince with reverence and chearfulness: That, without this, is too much sadness; This without that is too much boldness: Let thy wisdom endeavour to gain his opinion, and la∣bour to make thy loyalty his confiden∣ce: Let him not find thee false in words, unjust in thy actions, unseasonable in thy suits, nor careless in his service: cross not his passion, question not his pleasures, Press not into his Secrets; Pry not into his Prerogative: Displease him not, lest he be angry; appear not displeas'd, lest he be jealous: the an∣ger of a King is implacable: the jealou∣sie of a Prince is incurable. CHAP. LVII. GIve thy heart to thy Creator, and Reverence to thy Superiors: Give diligence to thy Calling, and ear to good Counsel: Give Alms to the poor,
and the Glory to God: Forgive him that ignorantly offends thee, and him that having wittingly offended thee, seeks thee: Forgive him that hath for∣cibly abused thee, & him that hath fraudulently betray'd thee: Forgive all thine enemies, but lest of all, thy self: Give and it shall be given thee: Forgive, and it shall be forgiven thee. The sum of all Christianity is, Give and Forgive. CHAP. LVIII. BE not too great a niggard in the commendations of him that profes∣ses thy own quality: if he deserve thy praise, thou hast discovered thy Judg∣ment; if not, thy modesty: Ho∣nour either returns to, or reflects on the Giver. CHAP. LIX. IF thy desire to raise thy Fortunes enco∣urage thee to place thy delights a'midst the casts of Fortune, be wise betimes, lest thou repent too late; What thou gettest, thou gainest by abused Providence; what thou losest, thou losest by abused
Patience; What thou winnest is pro∣digally spent; what thou losest is pro∣digally lost: it is an evill trade that pro∣digality drives: and a bad voyage where the Pilot is blind. CHAP. LX. BE very wary for whom thou beco∣mest Security, and for no more then thou art able to discharge, if thou lovest thy liberty. The borrower is a slave to the lender: The Security is a slave to both: Whilst the Borrower and Len∣der are both eased, the Security bears both their burdens: He is a wise secu∣rity that secures himself. CHAP. LXI. LOok upon thy affliction as thou doest upon thy Physick: Both im∣ply a disease; and both are applyed for a Cure; That, of the Body; This of the Soul: If they work, they promise health: if not, they threaten death: He is not happy that is not asslicted, but he that finds happiness by his affliction.
CHAP. LXII. IF the Knowledg of Good whet thy desire to good, it is a happy Know∣ledg: if by thy ignorance of Evill, thou art surpriz'd with Evill, it is an unhappy ignorance. Happy is he that hath so much Knowledg of Good, as to desire it, and but so much Know∣ledg of evil, as to fear it. CHAP. LXIII. WHen the flesh presents thee with delights, then present thy self with dangers Where the world possesses thee with vain Hopes, there possess thy selfe with true fear: When the Devill brings thee Oyl, bring thou Vineger. The way to be safe, is never to be secure. CHAP. LXIV. IF thy brother hath offended thee, forgive him freely, and be reconci∣led: To do Evil for Evil, is hu∣man corruption: To do Good for Good is civil retribution: To do Good for Evil is Christian perfection: The act of Forgiveness is Gods Precept: The
manner of Forgiveness is Gods Presi∣dent. CHAP. LXV. REverence the Writings of holy Men, but lodg not thy Faith upon them, because but men: They are good Pools, but no Fountains: Build on Paul himself no longer then he builds on Christ: if Peter renounce his Master, renounce Peter: The word of man may convince Reason; But the word of God alone can compell conscience. CHAP. LXVI. IN civil things follow the most; in matters of Religion, the fewest; in all things follow the best: So shal thy ways bee pleasing to God; so shal thy behaviour be plausible with men. CHAP. LXVII. WHat counsel thou administrest to thy Brother under any loss or miserie, register carefully and when the Case is thine, follow it: So shall thy own Reason convince thy passion, or thy
passion confess her own unreasonable∣ness. CHAP. LXVIII. WHen thou goest about to change thy moral Liberty into a Christi∣an Servitude, prepare thy self to be the world's laufing-stock: if thou over∣comest her Scoffs, thou shalt have dou∣ble Honor: if overcome, double Shame: He is unworthy of a good Master, that is asham'd of a bad Livery. CHAP. LXIX. LEt not the falling of a Salt, or the crossing of a Hare, or the crying of a Cricket trouble thee: They por∣tend no evil, but what thou fearest: He is ill acquainted with himself that know's not his own Fortunes more then they: If evill-follow it, it is the punish∣ment of thy Superstition; not the ful∣filling of their Portent: All things are lucky to thee, if thou wilt, nothing but is ominous to the Superstitious.
CHAP. LXX. SO be have thy self in thy course of life, as at a banquet: Take what is offer'd with modest thankfulness: And expect what is not as yet offer'd with hopefull patience: let not thy rude Appetite press thee, nor a sleight care∣fulness indispose thee, nor a sullen dis∣content deject thee; Who desires mo∣re than enough, hath too much: And he that is satisfied with a little hath no less than enough: Benè est cui Deus ob∣tulit parcâ, quod satis est, manu. CHAP. LXXI. IS thy Child dead? He is restor'd, not lost: is thy treasure stol'n? it is not lost, it is restored: He is an ill debtor, that counts repayment loss: But it was an evill chance that took thy child, and a wicked hand that stole thy Treasure: What is that to thee? it mat∣ters not by whom he requires the things from whom he lent them: What goods are ours by loan, are not lost when willingly restored, but when un∣worthily receiv'd.
CHAP. LXXII. CEnsure no man, detract from no man: Praise no man before his fa∣ce; traduce no man behind his back: Boast not thy self abroad, nor flatter thy self at home: if any thing cross thee, ac∣cuse thy self: if any one extoll thee, humble thy self: Honour those that instruct thee, and be thankfull to those that reprehend thee: Let all thy desires be subjected to Reason, and let thy rea∣son be corrected by Religion: Weigh thy self by thy own Ballances, and trust not the voice of wild opinion: Obser∣ve thy self as thy greatest enemy, so shalt thou becom thy greatest friend. CHAP. LXXIII. ENdeavour to make thy discourse such as may adminster profit to thy Self, or Standers by, least thou incurr∣the danger of an idle Word: Above all Subjects, avoid those, which are Scur∣rilous, and obscean; Tales that are impertinent, and improbable; ard dre∣ams.
CHAP. LXXIV. IF God hath blest thee with a son, bless thou that son with a lawfull calling: choos such employment, as may stand with his Fancie, and thy Judgment: His countrey claim's his ability toward the building of her honour. If he can∣not bring a Cedar, let him bring a shrub. Hee that brings nothing usurps his life, and robs his countrey of a Servant. CHAP. LXXV. AT the first entrance into thy Estate, keep a low sail; Thou maist rise with Honour; Thou canst not decline without shame: He that begins as his Father ended, shall end as his Father begun. CHAP. LXXVI. IF any Obscure Tale should chance to slip into thine Ears, among the varie∣ties of Discourse (if opportunity ad∣mit) reprove it: if otherwise, let thy silence, or change of countenance in∣terpret thy dislike: the attentive Ear is Baud to the lascivious Tongue.
CHAP. LXXVII. BE more circumspect over the works of thy Brain, then the Actions of thy Body: These have infirmity to plead for them: but they must stand upon their own bottoms: These are but the objects of few; They, of all: These will have Equals to defend them: they have Inferiours to envie them; Supe∣periours, to deride them; all to censure them: It is no less danger for these to be proclaim'd at Paul's Cross, then for them to be protested in Pauls Church∣yard. CHAP. LXXVIII. USe Common place-books, or Col∣lections, as Indexes to light thee to the Authours, lest thou be abus'd: He that takes Learning upon trust, ma∣kes him a fair Cup-board with anothers Plate. He is an ill advised purchaser, whose title depends more on Witnesses than Evidences.
CHAP. LXXIX. IF thou desire to make the best advan∣tage of the Muses, either by Reading, to benefit thy self, or by Writing, others; keep a peacefull soul in a temperate bo∣dy: A full belly makes a dull brain; and a turbulent Spirit, a distracted Judg∣ment: The Muses starve in a Cooks shop, and a Lawyers Study. CHAP. LXXX. WHen thou communicatest thy self by Letters, heighten or depress thy stile according to the quality of the par∣ty and business; That which thy ton∣gue would present to any, if present, let thy Pen represent to him, Absent: The tongue is the minds Interpreter, and the Pen is the Tongues Secretary. CHAP. LXXXI. KEep thy soul in exercise, lest her faculties rust for want of motion: To eat, sleep, or sport too long, stops the natural course of her natural acti∣ons: To dwel too long in the employ∣ments of the body, is both the cause, and sign of a dull Spirit.
CHAP. LXXXII. BE very circumspect to whose Tuiti∣on thou committ'st thy child: Eve∣ry good Schollar is not a good Master: He must be a man of invincible patien∣ce, and singular observation: he must study children that will teach them well, and reason must rule him that would rule wisely: he must not take advantage of an ignorant father, nor give too much ear to an indulgent Grandmother: the common good must outweigh his private gains, and his cre∣dit must out-bid Gratuities: he must be deligent, and sober, not too familiar, nor too reserv'd, neither amorous nor phantastick: Just, without fierceness, mercifull, without fondness: if such a one thou meet with, thou hast found a Treasure, which, if thou know'st how to value, is invaluable. CHAP. LXXXIII. LEt not thy laughter handsell thy owne jest, least whilst thou laugh at it, others laugh at thee: neither tell it often to the same hearers, least thou
be thought forgetfull, or barren: There is no sweetness in a Cabage twice sod, or a tale twice told. CHAP. LXXXIV. IF opinion hath lighted the Lamp of thy Name, endeavour to encourage it with thy own Oyl, lest it go out and stink: The Chronical disease of Popu∣larity is shame: If thou be once up, be∣ware: From Fame to Infamy is a bea∣ten Road. CHAP. LXXXV. CLeans thy morning soul with pri∣vate and due Devotions; till then admit no buisness: The first-born of thy thoughts are God's, and not thine, but by Sacriledg: think thy self not ready till thou hast prais'd him, and he will be always ready to bless thee. CHAP. LXXXVI. IN all thy actions think God sees thee; and in all his actions labour to see him; that will make thee fear him; this will move thee to love him; The fear of God is the beginnining of
Knowledg, and the Knowledg of God is the perfection of Love. CHAP. LXXXVII. LEt not the expectation of a rever∣sion entice thy heart to the wish of the possessours death, lest a judgement meet thee in thy expectation, or a Curse overtake thee in thy fruition: Every wish makes thee a murtherer, and mo∣ves God to be an Accessory; God often lengthens the life of the possessour with the days of the Expectour. CHAP. LXXXVIII. PRize not thy self by what thou hast, but by what thou art; hee that va∣lues, a Jewell by its golden frame, or a Book by its silver clasps, or a man by his vast estate, errs: if thou art not worth more then the world can make thee, thy Redeemer had a bad penny worth, or thou an un-curious Redeemer. CHAP. LXXXIX. LEt not thy Father's, nor The Fa∣thers, nor the Church, thy Mother's beleef, be the ground of thine: The
Scripture lies open to the humble heart, but lockt against the proud Inquisitour; he that beleeves with an implicit Faith is a meer Emperick in Religion. CHAP. XC. OF all sins, take greatest heed of that which thou hast last, and most re∣pented of: He that was last thrust out of doors, is the next readiest to croud in again: and he that thou hast forest baf∣fled, is likeliest to call more help for a revenge: it is requisite for him that hath cast one devill out, to keep strong hold least seven returne. CHAP. XCI. IN the meditation of divine Mysteries, keep thy heart humble, and thy thoughts holy; let Philosophy not be asham'd to be confuted, nor Logick blush to be confounded; what thou canst not prove, approve; what thou canst not comprehend, beleev; and what thou canst beleev, admire; so shall thy ignorance be satisfied in thy Faith, and thy doubts swallowed up with wonders: the best way to see
day-light, is to put out thy candle. CHAP. XCII. IF opinion hath cried thy name up let thy modesty cry thy heart down, lest thou deceive it; or it thee; there is no less danger in a great name than a bad; and no less honor in deserving of praise, then in the enduring it. CHAP. XCIII. USe the holy Scriptures with all reverence; let not thy wanton fan∣cy carve it out in jests, nor thy sinfull wit make it an advocate to thy sin: it is a subject for thy faith, not fancy; where Wit and Blasphemy is one Trade, the understanding's Banckrupt. CHAP. XCIV. DOst thou complain that God hath forsaken thee? it is thou that hast forsaken him: 'tis thou that art muta∣ble: in him there is no shadow of chan∣ge, in his light is life; if thy Will drive thee into a Dungeon, thou mak'st thy own darkness, and in that darkness dwels thy death; from whence, if he
redeem thee, he is mercifull; if not, he is just; in both, he receiv's glory. CHAP. XCV. MAke use of Time, if thou lov'st Eternity: know, yesterday can∣not be recall'd, to morrow cannot be assured: to day is only thine, which if thou procrastinate, thou losest; which lost, is lost for ever: One to-day, is worth two to morrows. CHAP. XCVI. If thou be strong enough to encounter with the times, keep thy Station; if not, shift a foot to gain advantage of the Times: He that acts a Begger to prevent a Thief, is never the poorer; it is a great part of wisdom, somtimes to seem a fool. CHAP. XCVII. IF thou intend thy writings for the public view, lard them not too much with the choice lines of ano∣ther Authour, lest thou lose they own Gravy: what thou hast read and dige∣sted being delivered in thy own Stile
becoms thine: it is more decent to wear a plain suit of one entire cloth, then a gaudy garment checquer'd with divers richer fragments. CHAP. XCVIII. IF God hath blest thee with inheritan∣ce, and children to inherit, trust not the staff of thy family to the hands of one: Make not many Beggers in the building up of one great heir, lest if he miscarry thro a prodigal Will, the rest sink thro a hard necessity. Gods allowance is a double portion: when heigh bloud, and generous breed∣ing break their fast in plenty, and dine in poverty, they often sup in Infamy: if thou deny'st them Faulcons wings to prey on Fowl, thou givest them Kites stomachs to seiz on Garbage. CHAP. XCIX. BE very vigilant over thy child in the April of his understanding, least the frosts of May nipp his Blossoms. While he is a tender Twig, streighten him; whilst he is a new Vessell, season
him; such as thou makest him, such commonly thou shalt find him. Let his first lesson be Obedience, and the se∣cond shall be what thou wilt. Give him Education in good Letters, to the utmost of thy ability, and his capacity. Season his youth with the love of his Creatour, and make the fear of his God the beginning of his knowledg: If he have an active spirit, rather rectifie then curb it; but reckon idleness a∣mong his chiefest faults: Above all things, keep him from vain lascivious and amorous Pamphlets, as the Prim∣mers of all Vice. As his judgement ri∣pens, observe his inclination, and ten∣der him a Calling, that shall not cross it: Forced Marriages and Callings sel∣dom prosper; shew him both the Mow, and the Plough; and prepare him as well for the danger of the Skirmish, as possess him with the honour of the pri∣ze: If he chuse the profession of a Schol∣lar, advise him to study the most prosi∣table arts: Poetry, and the Mathema∣ticks, take up too great a latitude of the Soul, and moderately used, are good Recreations, but bad Callings, being
nothing but their own Reward: if he chuse the profession of a Souldier, let him know, withall, Honour must be his greatest wages, and his enemies his surest Paymaster: Prepare him against the danger of a Warr, and advise him of the greater mischiefs of a Garnison; let him avoid Debauchedness, and Duels to the utmost of his power, and remem∣ber he is not his own man, and (being his Countries servant) hath no estate in his own life: If he chuse a Trade, teach him to forget his Fathers House, and his Mothers Wing: Advise him to be conscionable, carefull, and constant: This done, thou hast done thy part, leave the rest to Providence, and thou hast done it well. CHAP. C. COnvey thy love to thy Friend, as an Arrow to the Mark, to stick there, not as a Ball against the Wall, to rebound back to thee: that friend∣ship will not continue to the End that is begun for an End.
MEditation is the life of the soul; Action is the soul of Medita∣tion; Honour is the reward of acti∣on: So meditate, that thou maist do; So do, that thou mai'st purchase Ho∣nour: For which purchase, give God the Glory. FINIS.
Spare-Minutes; Or RESOLVED MEDITATIONS And REMEDITATED RESOLUTIONS. Written by ARTHUR WARWICK. —Ego cur acquirere pauca Si possim invidetur. The sixt Edition. AMSTERDAM, Printed by Stephen Swart, Bookseller, at the westside of the Exchange, at the Crouned Bible. 1677.
Resolved MEDITATIONS And Premeditaded RESOLUTIONS. IT is the over curious ambi∣tion of many, to be best or be none: if they may not doe so well as they would, they will not doe so well as they may. I will doe my best, and what I want in power, supply in will. Thus whils I pay in part, I shall not bee a deb∣tor for all. Hee owes most that payes nothing. CHAP. I. PRide is the greatest enemy to rea∣son, and discretion the greatest opposite to pride. For whils wisedome makes art the ape of nature, pride ma∣kes nature the ape of art. The Wiseman shapes his apparell to his body, the proud
man shapes his body by his apparell. 'Tis no marvell then, if hee know not him∣self, when he is not to day, like him he was yesterday: and less marvell, if good men will not know him, when he for∣gets himself, and all goodness. I should fear, whil'st I thus change my shape least my Maker should change his opi∣nion: and finding me not like him Ho made mee, reject me, as none of his ma∣king. I would any day put off the old cause of my apparell, but not every day put on new fashioned apparell. I see great reason, to bee ashamed of my pri∣de, but no reason, to bee proud of my shame. CHAP. II. The reason that many men want their desires, is, because their desires want reason. He may doe what hee will, that will doe but what hee may. CHAP. III. I Should marvell that the Covetous man can still be poor, when the Rich man is still covetous, but that I see, a poor man can bee content, when the
contented man is onely rich: the one wanting in his store, whiles the other is stored in his wants. I see then, wee are not rich or poor, by what we possess, but by what we desire. For hee is not rich that hath much, but hee that hath enough: nor hee poor that hath but little, but hee that wants more. If God then make mee rich by store, I will not impoverish my selfe by cove∣tousness: but if hee make mee poor by want, I will enrich my selfe by con∣tent. CHAP. IV. HYpocrisie desires to seem good ra∣ther than to be so honestie desires to be good rather than seem so. The world∣lings purchase reputation by the sale of desert, wisemen buy desert, with the hazard of reputation. I would doe much to heare well, more to deserve well, and rather loose opinion then merit, I shall more joy mee, that I know my selfe what J am, than it shall grieve me to hear what others report mee. J had rather deserve well without praise, than doe ill with commendation.
CHAP. V. ACoward in the field is like the Wise∣mans fool, his heart is at his mouth, and he doth not know what he does pro∣fess: but a Coward in his faith, is like a fool in his wisdome; his mouth is in his heart, and hee dares not profess what he does know. I had rather not know the good I should doe, than not do the good I know. It is better to bee beaten with few stripes, than with many. CHAP. VI. Each true Christian is a right traveller: his life his walk, Christ his way, & Heaven his home. His walk painfull, his way perfect, his home pleasing. I will not loyter, least I come short of ho∣me: I will not wander, least I come wide of home, but bee content to travell hard, and be sure I walk right, so shall my safe way find its end at home, and my painfull walk make my home welco∣me. CHAP. VII. AS is a wound to the body; so is a sin∣full body to the soul: the body in∣dangered
till the wound be cured, the soul not sound till the bodies sin bee healed, and the wound of neither can bee cured without dressing, nor dres∣sed without smarting. Now as the smart of the wound, is recompensed by the cure of the body: so is the punishment of the body sweetned by the health of the soul Let my wound smart by dressing, rather than my body die; Let my body smart by correction, rather than my soul perish. CHAP. VIII. IT is some hope of goodnes not to grow worse: it is a part of badnes not to grow better. I will take heed of quench∣ing the spark, and strive to kindle a fire. If I have the goodnes I should, it is not too much; why should I make it les? If I keep the goodnes I have 'tis not enough: Why doe I not make it more? Hee ne're was so good as he should be, that doth not strive to be better than he is: He ne∣ver will be better than he is, that doth not fear to bee worse then hee was. CHAP. IX. Health may be enjoyed; sicknes must be endured: one body is the object
of both, one God the Author of both. If then hee give me health, I will thankful∣ly enjoy it, and not think it too good, since it is his mercy that bestowes it: if hee send sicknes, I will patiently endure it, and not think it too great, since it is my sinn that deserves it. If in health; I will strive to preserve it by praising of him: if in sicknes; I will strive to remo∣ve it, by praying to him. Hee shall bee my God in sicknes and in health, and my trust shall bee in him in health and in sicknes. So in my health, I shall not need to feare sicknes, nor in any sicknes de∣spaire of health. CHAP. X. IT is the usuall plea of poverty to blame misfortune, when the ill finished cause of complaint is a worke of their owne forging. I will either make my fortunes good, or bee content they are no worse. If they are not so good, as I would they should have bine, they are not so bad, as I know they might have bine. What though I am not so happy as I desire? 'Tis well I am not so wretched as I de∣serve.
CHAP. XI. THere is nothing to be gotten by the worlds love, nothing to be lost (but its love) by its hate. Whey then should I seeke that love that cannot profit me, or feare that malice that cannot hurt mee? If I should love it, for loving mee, God would hate me, for loving it, If I loath it for hating mee, it cannot hurt mee for loathing it. Let it then hate me, and I will forgive it, but if it love me, I will never requite it. For since its love is hurtfull, and its hate harmeles, I wil contemn its hate, and hate its love CHAP. XII. AS there is a folly in wit, so there is a wisdome in ignorance. I would not be ignorant in a necessary knowledge, nor wise above wisedome. If I know enough I am wise enough, if I seecke more I amfoolish. CHAP. XIII. IT's no marvell that man hath lost his rule over the creature, when he would not be ruled by the will of the Creator.
Why should they feare man, when man would not obey GOD? I could wish no creature had power to hurt mee, I am glad so many creatures are ordained to helpe me. If GOD allow enough to serve me, J will not expect that all shoult fea∣re me. CHAP. XIV. NO affliction (for the time) seemes joyous, all time in afiliction seemes tedious. J will compare my miseries on earth with my joyes in Heaven, and the length of my miseries, with its eternity, so shall my journey seeme short; and my burthen easie. CHAP. XV. THere is nothing more certain than death, nothing more uncertain than the time of dying. I will therefore be prepared for that at all times, which may come at any time, must come at one time or another. I shal not hasten my death by being still ready, but sweeten it. It ma∣kes me not die the sooner, but the better.
CHAP. XVI. THe commendation of a bad thing, is it's shortnes, of a good thing its con∣tinuance: it were happy for the damned, if their torments knew end, 'tis happier for the Saints that their joyes are eternall. If man, that is born of a woman, be full of misery, 'tis well that he hath but a short time to live: if his life be a walk of pain, its a blessing, that his dayes are but a spann long. Happy miseries that end in joy: happy joyes that know no end: happy end that dissolves to eternity. CHAP. XVII. HAd I not more confidence in the truth of my Saviour, than in the tra∣ditions of men, poverty might stagger my faith, and bring my thoughts into a perplexed Purgatory. Wherein are the poore blessed, if pardon shall be purcha∣sed onely by expense? Or how is it hard for a rich man to enter into Heaven, if money may buy out the past, presend & future sinnes of himself, his deceased and succeeding progeny? If heaven bee thus fold, what benefit has my poverty, by
the price already paid? I find no happi∣nes in Room on earth. 'Tis happines for me to have Room in Heaven. CHAP. XVIII. THere is no estate of life so happy in this world, as to yeeld a Christian the perfection of content: & yet there is no state of life so wretched in this world, but a Christian must be content with it. Though I can have nothing here that may give mee true content, yet I will learn to bee treuely contented here with what I have. What care I though I have as much as I desire, if I have as much as I want, I have as much as the most, if I have as much as I desire. CHAP. XIX. IT is the greatest of all sins alway to continue in sin. For where the cou∣stome of sinning waxeth greater the con∣science for sin growes the less: it is easier to quench a spark, then a fire; I had rather breake the Cockatrices egg, then kill the Serpent. O daughter of Babylon, happy shall hee bee that taketh thy chil∣dern
whilest they are young and dasheth them against the stones. CHAP. XX. NAture bids me love my selfe and hate all that hurt me, Reason bids me love my friends and hate those that envie me, Religion bids me love all and hate none. Nature sheweth care, Rea∣son wit, Religion love. Nature may in∣duce me, Reason perswade me, but Re∣ligion shall rule me. I will hearken to Nature in much, to Reason in more, to Religion in all. Nature shall make me carefull of my self, but hatefull to none; Reason shall make me wise for my self, but harmeles to all; Religion shall make me loving to all, but not carles of my self. I may heare the former, I will hear∣ken onely to the later. I subscribe to some things in all, to all things in Reli∣gion. CHAP. XXI. Abundance is a trouble, want a misery, honour a burthen, baseness a scor∣ne, advancements dangerous, disgrace
odious. Onely a competent estate yeelds the quiet of content. I will not climbe, least I fall, nor lye in the ground, least I am trod on. I am safest whiles my leggs beare me. A competent heate is moast health full for my body, J would desire neither to freez nor to burn. CHAP. XXII. A Large promise without performan∣ce is like a false fire to a great Peice, which dischargeth a good expectation with a bad report. J will fore-think what J will promise, that J may promise but what J will doe. Thus whilest my words are led by my thoughts, and followed by my actions, J shall be carefull in my pro∣mises, and just in their performance. J had rather doe and not promise, than promise and not doe. CHAP. XXIII. THe good meaner hath two ton∣gues, the Hypocrite a double ton∣gue. The good mans heart speaks wit∣hout his tongue, the Hypocrites tongue, without his heart. The good man hat
oftentimes God in his heart, when in his mouth there is no God mentioned: the Hypocrite hath God often in his mouth, when the fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. I may soonest heare the tongue, but safest the heart, the ton∣gue speaketh lowdest, but the heart truest. CHAP. XXIV. THe speech of the tongue is best known to men: God best under∣stands the language of the heart: the heart without the tongue may pierce the eares of heaven, the tongue without the heart speaks an unknowne language. No marvell then if the desires of the poore are heard, when the prayers of the wicked are unregarded. I had rather speak three words in a speech that God knows, then pray three houres in a language he un∣derstands not. CHAP. XXV. MEditation is the womb of our acti∣ons, action the midwife of our Me∣ditations. A good & perfect conception,
if it want strength for the birth, perisheth in the womb of the mind, and, if it may be said to be born, it must be said to be stillborn: a bad and imperfect concep∣tion, if it hath the happines of a birth, yet the mind is but delivered of a burthen of imperfections, in the perfection of de∣formity, which may beg with the criple at the gate of the Temple, or perish through imperfections. If I meditate whats's good to be done, and doe not the good I have meditated, I loof my labour, and make curst my knowledg. If I doe the thing that is good, and intend not that good that I doe, it is a good action, but not well done. Others may enjoy some benefit, I deserve no commenda∣tions. Resolution without action is a sloathfull folly, Action without resolu∣tion is a foolish rashnes. First know whats good to be done, then do that good being known. If forecast be not better than labour, labour is not goot without forecast. I would not have my actions done without knowledge, nor against it.
CHAP. XXVI. IT is the folly of affection not to repre∣hend my erring friend, for feare of his anger: it is the abstract of folly, to be angry with my friend for my errors re∣prehension. I were not a friend, if I should see my friend out of the way, and not advise him: I were unworthy to have a friend, if hee should advise me (being out of the way) and I bee angry with him. Rather let me have my friends anger than deserve it; rather let the righteous smite me friendly by reproof, than the pretious oyle of flattery, or connivence, breake my head. It is a folly to flie ill will, by giving a just cause of hatred. I think him truer friend that deserves my love, than he that desires it. CHAP. XXVII. WHen children meet with primro∣ses, nuts, or apples in their way, I see those pleasures are oftimes occasions to make them loyter in their errands, so that they are sure to have their parents dis∣pleasure, & oftimes their late returne fin∣des a barr'd entrance to their home, whe∣reas
those who meete with dangers in the way, make haste in their journey, and their speed makes them welcomed, with commendation. Nature hath sent me a∣broad into the world, and I am every day travelling homeward: If I meet with store of miseries in my way, discretion shall teach me a religious haste in my journey: And if I meet with pleasures, they shall pleasure me onely by putting me in minde of my pleasures at home, which shall teach me to scorne these, as worse than trifles. I will never more rekon a troublesome life, a curse, but a blessing. A pleasant journey is deere bought with the losse of home. CHAP XXVIII. WHen I see the fisher bait his hook. I think on Satans subtile malice, who sugars over his poysoned hookes with seeming-pleasures. Thus Eves Ap∣ple was canded with divine knowledge, ye shall be as God, knowing good and evill. When I see the fish fast hang'd, I thinke upon the covetous Worldling, who leapes at the profit without considering the danger. Thus Achan takes the gold
and the garment, and ne're considers that his life must answer it. If Satan be∣such a fisher of men, its good to look before wee leape. Honey may bee ea∣ten, so that wee take heed of the sting: I will honestly enjoy my delights, but not buy them with danger. CHAP. XXIX. I See, when I have but a short journey to travell, I am quickly at home, soone out of the paine of my travell, soone in∣to the possession of my rest. If my life bee but my walk, and Heaven my home, why should I desire a long journey? In∣deed knowing my home so pleasand, I would not bee weary with a long walk, but yet the shorter my journey, the soo∣ner my rest. CHAP. XXX. I Cannot see two sawyers work at the pit, but they put mee in minde of the Pharisee and the Publican: the one casts his eye upward, whiles his actions tend to the pit infernal: the other standing with a dejected Countenance, whiles his hands and heart move upward. 'Tis
not a shame to make shew of our pro∣fession, so wee truely profes what wee make shew of: But of the two, I had ra∣ther bee good, and not seeme so, than seeme good, and not bee so. The Publican went home to his house rather justified then the Pharisee. CHAP. XXXI. WHen I thinke on the Eagls carying up of the shel fish into the ayre, onely to the end he may brak him by his fall, it puts me in minde of the divels costly courtesies, who out of the bounty of his subtilty, is still ready to advance us to de∣struction. Thus more then once he dealt with my Redeemer, no sooner had hee rais'd him to the top of an high pinacle, but straight followes, cast thy selfe down; and having placed him on an high mo∣untaine, let him fall downe and he shall be largely rewarded with his own. If ad∣vancement be so dangerous, I will take heed of being ambitious. Any estate shall give me content: I am high enough if i can stand upright.
CHAP. XXXII. WHen i se leavs drop from their trees, in the beginning of Autumne, just such thinck I, is the friendship of the world. Whiles the sap of maintenance lasts, my friends swarm in abundance, but in the winter of my need, they leave me naked. He is an  happy man that hath a true friend at his need: but he is more truly happy that hath no need of his friend. CHAP. XXXIII. I Should wonder, that the unsatiable de∣sires of ambition can finde no degree of content, but that I see they seeke a per∣fection of honour on earth, when the full∣nesse of glory is onely in Heaven. The honour on earth is full of degrees, but no degre admits a perfection: Whereas the glory of Heaven admits of degrees, but each degre affords a fullnes. Here, one may be lower then another in honour, and yet the highest want a glory: There, though one Starre differs from another in glory, yet in the fullnes of glory they all shine as Starres. Here the greatest
may want, there the least hath enough: Here, all the earth may not be enough for one; There, one Heaven is enough for all Lord let me rather be least there, without honour here, then the grea∣test here, without glory there. I had ra∣ther be a dorekeeper in that house, then a ruler in these tents. CHAP. XXXIV. When I see the heavenly Sunn buried under earth in the evening of the day, & in the morning to find a resurrec∣tion to his glory, Why (think I) may not the Sonnes of heaven buried in th' earth, in the evning of their daies, expect the morning of their glorious Resurrection? Each night is but the pastdayes funerall, and the morning his resurrection: Why then should our funerall sleep bee other then our sleep at night? Why should we not as well awake to our Resurrection, as in the morning? I see night is rather an intermission of day, then a deprivation, and death rather borrows our life of us then robbs us of it. Since then the glory of the Sunn findes a Resurrection, why should not the sonnes of glory? Since a
dead man may live againe, I will not so much look for an end of my life; as wait for the comming of my change. CHAP. XXXV. I See, that candle yeelds me small bene∣fit at day, which at night much steeds me: and I know, the cause is not because the candles light was les at day, but be∣caus the daies light is les in the evening. As my friends love to me, so mine to my friend may be at all times alike; but we best se it, when we most need it: and that, not because our love is then greater, but our want Though then i welcome a courtesie according to my want, yet i will value a courtesie according to its worth. That my fortunes need not my friends courtesie, is my happiness: should my happiness sleight my friends courte∣sie, 'twere my folly. CHAP. XXXVI. I See that candle makes small shew in the day which at night yeelds a glo∣rious lustre, not becaus the candle has then more light, but becaus the ayre hath then more darkness. How prejudiciall
then is that ambition, which makes me seem less then Jam, by presuming to make me greater then I should be. They whose glory shines as the sparks a∣mongst stubble, loos their light, if com∣pared to the Sonne of glory. I will not seat my self higher then my place, least J should be disgraced to an humility, but if J place my self lower then my seat, J may be advanced to the honour of, Friend sit up higher. I had rather be ex∣alted by my humility, then be brought low by my exaltation. CHAP. XXXVII. I See that candle which is as a Sunn in the darknes, is but as a darknes in the Sunn: the candle not more lightning the nights darknes, then the Sunn dar∣kening the candles light. I will take heed then of contention, especially with great ones. As J may be to strong for the weaker; so J must be to weak for the stronger. I cannot so easily van∣quish mine inferiors, but my superiors may as easily conquer me: I will doe much to be at peace with all men, but suffer much ere J contend with a mighty man.
CHAP. XXXVIII. I See when J follow my shadow it flies me, when I flie my shadow it follows me: I know pleasures are but shadows, which hold no longer then the sun shine of my fortunes. Least then my pleasures should forsake me, J will sorsake them. Pleasure most flies me when J most fol∣low it. CHAP. XXXIX. It is not good to speak evill of all whom we know bad: it is worse to judge evill of any, who may proove good. To speak ill upon knowledg, shewes a want of charity: to speak ill upon suspition shewes a want of honesty. I will not speak so bad as J know of many: I will not speak worse then J know of any. To know evill by others, and not speak it, is sometimes discretion: to speak evill by others, and not know it, is alway dishonesty. Hee may be evill himselfe who speaks good of others upon know∣ledg, but he can never be good himself, who speaks evill of others upon suspi∣tion.
CHAP. XL. A Bad great one is a great bad one. For the greatnes of an evill man, makes the mans evill the greater. It is the unhap∣py priviledg of authority, not so much to act, as teach wickednes, and by a liberall cruelty, to make the offenders sin not more his owne then others. Each fault in a leader is not so much a crime, as a rule for error: And their vices are made, (if not warrans, yet) presidens for evill. To sin by prescription, is as usuall as damnable: and men run post in their journey, when they goe to the divell with authority. When then the vices of the rulers of others, are made the rules for vices to others, the offences of all great ones must needs be the greatest of all offences. Either then let me be great in goodnes, or else it were good for me to be without greatnes. My owne sinns are burthen too heavie for mee why then should I lade my self with others offences. CHAP. XLI. TO speak all that is true, is the pro∣perty of fools, to speak more the
is true, is the folly of too many. He that spends all that is his own, is an un∣thrifty prodigall: He that spends more then his own, is a dis-honest unthrift: I may sometimes know what I will not litter, I must never utter what I doe not know. I should be loath to have my tongue so large as my heart, I would scorn to have my heart les then my ton∣gue. For if to speak all that I know, shews too much folly, to speak more then I know shews to little honesty. CHAP. XLII. It is the ambitious folly of too manny, to imitate rather greatnes then good∣nes. They will sooner follow the exam∣ple of their Lord, then the precepts of their God. I will alway honour greatnes, I will onely imitate goodnes: & rather doe good without a pattern, then com∣mit evill in imitation. 'Tis better to be sived without a president, then to be damned by example. CHAP. XLIII. THere is no security in evill socie∣ty, where the good are often made
worse, the bad seldom better. For it is the peevish industry of wickednes, to find, or make a fellow. 'Tis like, they will be birds of a feather, that use to flock toge∣ther. For such commonly doth their conversation make us, as they are with whom we use to convers. I cannot be certain, not to meet with evill compa∣ny, but I will be carefull, not to keep with evill company. I would willingly sort my self with such, as should either teach, or learn goodnes: and if my com∣panion cannot make mee better, nor I him good, I will rather leave him ill, then hee shall make me worse. CHAP. XLIV. TO teach goodnes is the greatest prai∣se, to learn goodnes, the greatest pro∣fit. Though hee be wisest that can teach, yet he that doth learn is wiser. I will not therefore be unwilling to teach, nor a∣shamed to learn. I cannot be so ignorant, but I may teach somewhat, nor so wise but I may learn more. I will therefore teach what I know, and learn what I know not. Though it bee a greater prai∣se to teach, then to learn, yet it is a lesser shame to learn then to be ignorant.
CHAP. XLV. AS there is a misery in want, so there is a danger in exces. I would therfore desire neither more nor less, then enoug. I may as well die of a surfet as of hunger. CHAP. XLVI. IT is the apish nature af many, to fol∣low rather example then precepts: but it would bee the safest course of all, to learn rather by precept then example. For ther's many a good Divine that can∣not learn his owne teaching. It is easier to say this doe, then to doe it. When therefore I see good doctrine with an e∣will life. J may pitty the one, but I will practise onely the other. The good say∣ings belong to all, the evill actions only to their authors. CHAP. XLVII. THere are two things necessary for a traveller, to bring him to the end of his journey; a knowledg of his way, a per∣severance in his walk. If hee walk in a wrong way, the faster he goes the farther hee is from home: if hee sit still in a right
way, he may know his home, but ne're come to it: Discreet stayes make speedy journeyes, I will first then know my way ere I begin my walk the knowledg of my way is a good part of my journey. He that faints in the execution looseth the glory of the action. I will therefore no only cnow my way, but also goe on in my way: I had rather my journey should want a beginning, then come to an un∣timely end. If Heaven be my home an Christ my way, I will learn to know my way, ere I haste to travell to my home Hee that runs hastily in a way hee kno∣wes not, may come speedily to an hom he loves not. If Christ be my way, an Heaven my home, I will rather endur my paine full walk, then want my pe∣fect rest. I more esteem my home the my journey; my actions shall bee led b knowledg, my knowledg be followe by my actions. Ignorance is a ba mother to devotion, and idlenesse a ba steward to knowledg. CHAP. XLVIII. I Cannot but wonder at the folly  those hearts, who are like to kill them∣selves
with the feare of dying, making the newes of an insuing mischief, a wor∣se mischief then that they have newes of: whereas the foreknowledg of an appro∣ching evill, is a benefit of no small good. For if it cannot teach us to prevent it by providence, it may shew us how to sustain it by patience. I may grieve with the smart of an evill, as soon as I feeld it: But I will not smart with the grief of an evill as soon as I heare of it. My evill when it commeth may make my grief too great, whey then should my grief before it comes make my evill greater? CHAP. XLIX. AS J see in the body, so I know in the soul, they are oft most desperatly sik, who are least sensibl of their diseas: whe∣reas he that feares each light wound for mortall, seeks a timely cure, and is hea∣led. I will not reckon it my happiness, that J have many sores, but since I have them, J am glad they greve me. I know the cure is not the more dangerous, be∣cause my wounds are more grievous; J should be more sick if J plained less.
CHAP. L. IT is one, not of the least evils, not to avoid the appearance of evill, which oft makes the innocent justly punished with undeserved suspicion. I would desi∣re to be thought good, but yet J had ra∣ther bee so. It is no small happiness to bee free from suspicion, but a greater to bee void of offence. I would willingly be neither evill nor suspected: but of the two J. had rather be suspected and not deserve it, then deserve evill and not be suspected. CHAP. LI. I Know but one way to Heaven, I ha∣ve but one Mediator in Heaven, even one Christ: and yet I heare of more wa∣yes, more Mediators. Are there then more Christs? Are the Lords waies as your waies that wee must goe to the King of Heaven as unto a King on earth? Or if wee must, yet if my King bid me co∣me shall J send an other? If he bid me come unto him, shall J goe unto ano∣ther? If hee bid me ask for peace onely in the name of the Prince of peace, why
should J mention the Lady Mary? If J shall be heard onely in the name of his Sonn, why should J use the name of his servants? Were it a want of manners, or a want of obedience to come when J am bid? Is another better, or am J too good to goe-in-mine owne errants to the Almighty? Because the Sonn was worse used then the servants on earth, shall the servants therefore be sooner heard then the Sonn in Heaven? The∣re are still unjust Husband-men in the Lords vineyard, who not onely a∣buse the servants, but kill againe the Sonn, and rob him of his due inheri∣tance. When the Lord therefore of the Vineyard commeth, what will he doe to these Husbandmen? J doe not envie your glory yee Saints of God, yet J will not attribute the glory of my God to his Saints. How shall my God glorifie me, if J should give his glory to another? CHAP. LII. TO be without passion is worse then a beast, to be without rea∣son, is to be lesse then a man. Since J
can be without neither, J am blessed, in that J have both. For, if it be not a∣gainst reason to be passionate, J will not be passionate against reason. J will both grieve and joy, if J have reason for it, but not joy nor grieve above rea∣son. J will so joy at my good as not to take evill by my joy: so grieve at any evill as not to increase my evill by my grief. For it is not a folly to have pas∣sion, but to want reason. J would be neither senseless, nor beastly. CHAP. LIII. IT is the folly of wit in some to take paines to trim their labours in ob∣scurity. Jt is the ignorance of learning in others, to labour to devest their pain by bluntness; the one thinking hee ne∣ver speaks wisely, till he goes beyond his owne, and all mens understandings: the other thinking hee never speaks plai∣nely, til hee dive beneath the shallowest apprehension, J as little affect curiosity in the one, as J care for the affectation of baldness in the other. J would not have the pearl of Heavens Kingdome so curiously set in gold, as that the art
of the workeman should hide the beau∣ty of the jewell: nor yet so sleightly val∣ued, as to bee set in lead: or sobeastly used as to be slubbered with durt. I know the pearl how ever placed) still retaines its vertue, yet J had rather haveit set in gold, then seeke it in dung-hill. Neat apparel is an ornament to the body, but a disgrace, if either proud or slovenly. CHAP. LIV. I See corruptionr so largely rewarded, that J doubt not, but J should thrive in the world, could J get but a dispensa∣tion of my conscience for the liberty of trading. A little flattery would get me a great deale of favor, and I could buy a world of this worlds love, with the sale of this little trifle Honesty. Were this world my home, I might perhaps be trading: but alas, these merchandiz yeeld les then nothing in heaven. I would willingly be at quiet with the world, but rather at peace with my conscience. The love of men is good, whiles it lasteth, the love of God is better being everlasting. Let me then trade for those heavenly merchandiz if, J finde these other in my
way, they are a great deale more then J look for, and (a little) more then J care for. CHAP. LV. AS faith is the evidence of things not seen: so things that are seen are the perfecting of faith. J believe a tree will be green, when J see him leaveles in winter: J know he is green when J see him flourishing in summer. It was a fault in Thomas not to believe till he did see. Jt were a madness in him not to be∣lieve when hee did see. Belief may som∣time exceed reason, not oppose it, and faith be often above sense not against it. Thus whiles faith doth assure mee that J cat Christ effectually, sense must assu∣re me that J tast bread really. For though J oftentimes see not those things that J believe, yet I must still believe tho∣se things that I see. CHAP. LVI. THere is none so innocent as not to be evill spoken of, none so wic∣ked as to want all commendation. The∣are are too many who condemn the just
and not a few who justifie the wicked. J oft hear both envy & flattery speaking false-hoods of my self to my self, and may not the like tongues perform the li∣ke taskes of others to others? J will know others by what they doe themsel∣ves, but not learn my selfe by what J hear of others. J will be carefull of mine own actions, not credulous of others re∣lations. CHAP. LVII. THe Cross is but a signe of Christ Crucified, Christ Crucified the substance of this Cross. The sign wit∣hout the substance is as nothing, the substance without the sign is all things. J hate not the sign, though J adore but the substance. J will not blaspheme the Cross of Christ, J will not but worship Christ Crucified. J will take up my Cros, J will love my Cros, J will beare my Cros, J will imbrace my Cros, yet not adore my Cros. All knees shall bend in reverence to his name, mine never bow in Idolatry to his image.
CHAP. LVIII. IT is the nature of man to be proud, when man by nature hath nothing to be proud of. Hee more adorneth the Creature, then he adoreth the Creator: & makes, not onely his belly his god, but his body, J am ashamed of their glo∣ry, whose glory is their shame. If nature will needs have me to be proud of som∣thing. I wil be proud only of this; that J am proud of nothing. CHAP. LIX. AS the Giver of all things, so each receiver loveth a cheerfull giver. For a bargain is valued by the worth of the thing bought, but a gift by the mind of the party giving: which ma∣de the widows mite of more worth, then the riches of superfluitie. J see then, he gives not best that gives most, but hee gives most, that gives best. If then J cannot give bountifully, yet J will give freely, and what J want in my hand, sup∣ply by my heart. Hee gives well, that gives willingly.
CHAP. LX. I See at a Feast, that others feed hear∣tily on that dish which perhaps would not suit with my appetit, whilest I make as good a meale on'those cates, that per∣haps their palats could not relis. I will not therefore think I doe well becau∣se my actions please not others, nor bee confident that my actions are good, because my doings please my self: but bee more carefull to provide what is good at a feast, then what's de∣lightfull: and more study to expres what is honest in my actions, then what  leasing. So, if sick stomacks cannot relish my sound meats, the fault shall light on their ill appetits: and if unsea∣soned judgements like not my honest intentions, the fault shall fall on their ill relished apprehensions. It would please mee well to have praise when J deserve it; but joy mee more to deserve praise when J have it. FINIS.
Resolved MEDITATIONS And Premeditated RESOLUTIONS. The Second part. CHAP. I. WHen one ascends from the ground to an higher room, I observe with what contempt he insults and tramples on the staires by which he ri∣seth, and how he first and most durteth that step by which he first stepped from the durt. Which putteth me in mind of the practice of the aspiring ambitious, who, to get up to their wished height of honor, bedurt with scorn, and neglect those by whose shoulders they were first mounted, and exalted, J hate that am∣bition which inforceth ingratitude; which, being the beasest of vices, can not but soyle and disgrace a
man graced with such honours, J am not preferr'd with honour, if debased with ingratitude. CHAP. II. HE that will not be perswaded to leap downe from an high chamber at once, commeth willingly downe by the stayres: and yet the declining de∣grees of his winding descent make it not les down ward to him, but les perceived of him. His leap might have brought him down sooner, it could not have brought him down lower. As J am then fearefull to act great sinns, so J will be carefull to avoid small sinns. He that contemn's a small fault commits a great one, J fee many drops make a shower: and what difference is it, whether J be wet either in the rain, or in the river, if both be to the skinn? There is small be∣nefit in the choyce, whither we go dow∣ne to Hell by degrees or at once. CHAP. III. THe gentle and harmeles sheep being conscious of their owne in∣nocency, how patiently, how quietly,
doe they receive the kneif, either on the altar, or in the shambles? How silently and undaunted doe they meet death and give it entrance with small resistance? When the filthie loathsome and harme∣full swine roare horribly at the first handling, and with and hideous crying reluctancy, are haled, and held to the slaughter. This seems some cause to me, why wicked men (conscious of their fil∣thy lives, and nature) so tremble at the remembrances, startle at the name, and with horrour roare at the approach of death: when the godly quietly uncloath themselves of their lives, and make small difference twixt a naturall nights short sleep, and the long sleep of nature. J will pray not to come to an untimely violent death, J will not violently resist death at the time when it cometh. J will expect and wait my change with patience, im∣brace it with cheerefullnes, and never feare it as a totall privation. CHAP. IV. IT is no small fault to be bad, and seem so: it is a greater fault to seem good, & not bee so: The cloak of dissimulation is
a main part of the gearment spotted with the flesh. A vice thus covered is worse then a naked offence. There is no divell to the Hypocrite. CHAP. V. WHen J see the Larkers day-net spread out in a faire morning, and himselfe whirling his artificiall mo∣tion, and observe how by the reflecting lustre of the Sunne on the wheeling in∣strument, not onely the merry larke, and fearefull Pigeon are dazled, and drawn with admiratiō; but stouter birds of prey, the swift Merlin, and towring Hobbie are inticed to stoop, and gazing on the out∣ward form, lose themselves Me thinks J see the divels nightnets of inticing har∣lots fully paraleld, spread out for us in the vigour of our youth; which with roeling eyes draw on the lust fullnes of affection, and betray the wantonnes of the heart, and with their alluring glances often make to stoop within danger of their fatall nets, not onely the simple and careles, but others also, men otherwise wary and wise: who comeing within the pull of the net lie at the mercy of
that merciles fowler, to their certain de∣struction. Hence J resolve when J see such glasses, to shunne such motions, as assured that those glasses have nets ad∣joyning; those nets a fowler attending; that fowler a death prepared for me, then which J cannot die a worse J may by chance, J must by necessity, at sometime come within their view: J will at no time come within their danger. J cannot well live in this world, and not see them at all, J cannot live well in this world, nor at all in the better world, if J bee caught in their fatall nets. CHAP. VI. THere bee that make it their glory to feed high, and fare deliciously eve∣ry day, and to maintain their bodies ele∣mentary, search the elements, the earth, sea, and aire, to maintain the fire of their appetits. They that thus make their bellies their gods, doe make their glory their sha∣me. J distaste a sordid diet as unwholso∣me, J care not to taste and feed on varie∣ty of delicates as unhealthfull. Nature conted with a few things, is cloyed, and quelled with overmany: and digestion
her cooke imployed in the concoction of so much variety at once, leaves the stomack too foule a kitchin for healt to abide in. Since then so to feed may the sooner end my life, and the end of my life is not so to feed, J will bee taught by Grace not to live to eat, but eat to live; and maintain health by a competent diet, not surfet with exces. CHAP. VII. HE that too much admires the glo∣ry of a Princes Court, and drawn up thither (by his ambition) thinks high places to be the highest happines; let him view the foggie mists, the moist vapours, and light exhalations drawne up from the earth by the attractive power of the glorious Sunn-beames: which when they are at highest, either spend them∣selves there in portnding metors, to others terrour and their owne consump∣tion; and either by resolution are turned into rain, or congelation unto hayle or snow, which sink lower into the earth at their fall, then they were at their ascen∣ding. For my part, J may admire such a glowing coale. J will not with the Satyr
kis it. As J think it not the least and last praise to please Princes; so, J know, it is not the least danger of times to live with them, procul a Iove, procula fulmine. Hee presumes too much of his owne bright∣nes that thinks to shine cleere neere the Sunn; where, if his light be his owne, it must be obscured by comparison; if borrowed from the Sunn, then is it not his, but an others glory. A candle in the nights obscurity shews brighter than a torch at noone-day. And Caeser thought it a greater glory to bee the first man in some obscure town, than the se∣cond man in Rome the head City of the world. CHAP. VIII. IT is a common custome (but a lewd one) of them that are common lewd ones, by custome, to wound the fame, and taint the reputation of their neigh∣bours with slanders; and having no les impotency in their tongues, than impu∣rity in their hearts, form both opinions and censures according to the mould of evill in themselves. And this they doe, either with the Lapwing to divert, by
their false cries, the travelling stranger from finding the nest of their filthines, or with the curtald Fox in the Fable, to have all foxes cut-tayld: or, with the fish Sepia, to darken with the pitchie ink of aspersions, all the water of the neigh∣bourhood, that so themselves may scape the net of Censure, justly cast to cath them. Or els, to have themselves thought as good as any other, they will not have any thought good, that dwells neere them. I will therefore suspect him as scarce honest, who would (with a slan∣der) make me suspect an other as disho∣nest. I will not presently disrespect him as dishonest, whom a lewd person disho∣nesteth with suspicion. The divell is not more black-mouth'd then a slande∣rer; nor a slanderer lesse malcious then the divell. CHAP. IX. WHen I see the Sun rising from the East in glory, like a gyant ready for the course, within an houres space obscured with mists, darkned with clowds, and sometimes eclipsed with the Moones inferiour body: and however,
without these, after noon declining, cli∣ning descending, setting, & buried under our horizon; I seem to se an earthly King mounting his throne in glory, yet soon clouded with cares, and seare of dangers: sometime darkned in honour by the malicious envry of his subjects; someti∣mes eclipsed in his dominions by the in∣terposition of forreigne powers; and ho∣wever, without these, in a short time de∣sending and setting at the evening of his life, and seldome passing the whole day thereof in perfect continuall glory. Then thinke I, O the odds of comfort in that heavenly and these earthly king∣doms; O the comfort of this odds: There each Saint is a glorious King each King hath his incorruptible Crown; each Crown a boundles, feareles, endles king∣dome. Let me strive for the glory of such a kingdom onely, which is a kingdom of such glory. Felices animae quibus haec cognoscere sola, Inque domos superûmse scandere, cura fuit.
CHAP. X. THe Laws in themselves are the scales of justice, the wronged poo∣re-mans shelter, the pillars of the Com∣mon-wealth: but the abused practice makes those scales unequall, that poore∣mans shelter a mans poore shelter for his wrongs. The proof of this, appeares with the Juries at the Assises in their proofs: when one may often discern per∣jury usher in the evidence to the jury, and injury follow with the verdict. I ad∣mire with reverence the justice and wisedome of the Laws: I deplore with compassion the abused practice of the Laws, and resolve, rather to bear with patience and hayleshower of injuries, than to seek shelter at such a thicket, where the brambles shall pluck of my fleece, and doe mee more hurt by schratching, than the storm would have done by hayling. I care not for that phy∣sick, where the remedy is worse then the disease.
CHAP. XI. HOw cunningly doth the Prince of darknes take on him the form of an Angell of light? How often have seeming saints prooved divels? even in those things (lightly) most faulty, which they make a shew of being most free from: Some more proud of being thought plain, then a flaunting gallant in his new fashion. Others refusing a de∣served commendation, onely with a de∣sire to be commended for refufing it: The one hating pride with a more proud hatred, the other shunning praish with a greater vaine-glory. It is bad to have vices, worse to dissemble them. Plato possessed his rich bed with lesse pride then Diogenes trampled on it. CHAP. XII. I Meet sometimes with men whose crazed braines seem soldered with quicksilver; the strains of whose Acti∣ons run only in odd crotchets; whose judgments being hood-winkt with their owne opinion, and passion, admit of
I will not therefore ambitiously begg their voices for my preferment; nor weigh my worth in that uneven ballance, in which a feather of opinion shall be moment enough to turne the scales, and make a light peece goe currant, and a currant peece seem light. CHAP. XV. THere are a sort of men which are kind men to me, when they expect some kindness from me: who have their hands down to the ground in their salu∣tations, when the ground of their salu∣tations is to have a hand at me in some commodity. But their own ends once served, their kindness hath its end a once: And then it seems strange to me, how strange they will seem to grow to me; as if the cause (their desire) being removed, the effect (their courtesie) must straight cease. I will not acknow∣ledg such my friends but their own; and when ever J see such insinuating palpa∣tion, I will betink me what the author would have of me. And with a thrif∣ty discretion, rather deny such their re∣quests,
then in a prodigall kindnes be∣come their friend, more then mine own. CHAP. XVI. I See a number of gallants every whe∣re, whose incomes come in yearely by set numbers, but runn out daily, sans number. I could pitty the cases of such brave men, but that I see them still in brave cases. And when I see them often foxed; me think the Proverbe sutes, those sutes, What is the fox but his case? I should thinke them to be Eutrapelus his enemies whom he cloathed richly to make them spend freely, and grow deboshed. I will doe those men right, and wonder at them, because they desire it. J will not wrong my self to envie at them, because they deserve it not, nor to pit∣ty them, because they scorn it. I know that gorgeous apparell is an ornament to grace the Court, for the glory of the Kingdom, but it is no ornament usefull in the Kingdom of Grace, nor needfull in the Kingdom of Glory. A rich coat may bee commendable in the Accidents
of armory onely, but it is not the onely substance of a commendable Gentlemā, J will value the apparell, by the worthi∣nes of the wearer; J will not value the worthines of the wearer, by the worth of his apparell. Adam was most gallantly appareled, when he was innocently na∣ked. CHAP. XVII. THE men of most credit in our time, are the Usurers. For they credit most men: And though their greatest study bee security, yet is usually their fortune to be fullest of care. Time is pretious to them: For they thinke a day broke to them, is worth a broke-age from their Creditor. Yet this they find by use, that as they have much profit by putting out, so must they have much care to get it in For debtors are of The∣mistocles his minde, and take not so much care how to repay all, as how they may not pay at all their creditors, and make this their first resolution, how they may make no resolution at all. J envy not therefore the Usurers gains, but consi∣dering
they (as Merchant-adventurers) send abroad their estates in uncertain vessels, sometime into the bankrupt ri∣vers of prodigality, and unthriftines, so∣metimes into the sea of casualties, and misfortunes, that manny times their principall comes short home, J think, with my self, Let them gain much by the adventure, that adventure so much to gain. J will make this use of those uses, as to claim no interest in their gains, nor to owe any thing to any man but love. If I lend where need is, and receive my principall again, I will accompt that my principall gain, and think my cour∣tesie but a commanded charity. CHAP. XVIII. INgratitude is the character of an ill nature in our selves, a canker of friendship with others, and the very poy∣son that kills charity in the embrio, be∣ing but newly conceived in the preg∣nant minds of good men, and causing an abortion of liberality, e're it comes to its intented birth. For who will sow those barren sands, where hee knows he must
not only not expect a good harvest, but be sure to lose his seed and labour? Yet in these times what is more common or more practised then this ingratitude? For in receiving benefits, who will not (with Euclio in Plautus) find a third hand to reach out to take them? But in requi∣ting, who is not more maymed then the statua's of Mercury, which Alcibiades so mangled that hee scarce left them a fin∣ger to point out the way to travellers? It is ten to one, but wee all desire to be cu∣red of the leprosies of our wants: yet scarce one of ten of us returnes to give thankes for the cure. I will not think my self so inriched by receiving a courtesie, as ingaged to bee thankfull for it. I am not left a free man at my liberty, by taking a mans free liberality: but I sell my freedom for his benefits. I cannot deserve to be gracious with my friend, if, with the Graces, I look not with two faces back to requite, as well as with one forward to receive:
CHAP. XIX. I Will not much commend others to themselves, I will not at all commend my self to others, So to prais any to their faces, is a kind of flattery: but to prais my self to any is the height of fol∣ly. He that boasts his own praises, speaks ill of himself and much derogates from his true deserts. It is worthy of blame to affect commendation. CHAP. XX. MErrily and wittily said Plautus, that was one of the merry Wits of his time, I would (said hee) by my will have tale bearers and tale-hearers puni∣shed; the one hanging by the tongue, the other by the eares. Were his will a law in force with us, many a tatling gossip would have her vowels turned to mutes, and be justly tongue tied that de∣sires to be tyed by the teeth at your table; where with Thominus his tooth, she gna∣weth on the goodname of her neigh∣bour: And many hungry Parrat, who∣se
belly is his arts-master, would cease to second his ave to his Lord with depra∣ving tales called newes, and make his grace after dinner the disgrace of some innocent: And most men would give them course entertainment, that come to entertain their ears with discourse of defamative reports. I will be silent and barren of discourse when I chance to heare a tale, rather then go with cild the∣rewith, till anothers ears be my mid-wi∣fe, to deliver me of such a deformed monster. I may heare a tale of delight, and perhaps smile at an innocent jest, I will not jest, nor joy at a tale disgra∣cing an innocent person. CHAP. XXI. WHen I see a gallant ship well rig∣ged, trimmed, tackled man'd and munition'd with her top and top∣gallant, and her spread sayles proudly swelling with a full gale, infaire wea∣ther putting out of the haven in∣to the smooth maine and drawing the spectators eyes, with a well-wishing admiration, and shortly heare of the sa∣me ship splitted against some dange∣rous
rock, or wracked by some disaste∣rous tempest, or sunck by some leake sprung in her by some accident, mee see∣meth J see the case of some Court-fa∣vourite, who to day like Sejanus daze∣leth all mens eyes with the splendour of his glory, and with the proud and po∣tent beak of his powerfull prosperity cutteth the waves and ploweth through the pres of the vulgar, and scorneth to feare some remora at his keel below, or any cros-winds from above, and yet to morrow on some stormes of unex∣pected disfavour, springs a leak in his honour, and sinks on the Syrtes of dis∣grace, or dashed against the rocks of displeasure is splitted and wrack'd in the Caribois of infamy, and so concludes his voyage in misery and misfortune. I will not therefore adventure with the greedy shepheard to change my sheep into a ship of adventure, on the sight of a calme sea. Vt pelago suadetuo etiam retinacula solvas Multa tamen latus tristia pontus habet. I will study to deserve my Princes fa∣vour, I will not desire to bee a Princes
favourite. If I fall whence I am, I can raise my selfe, but to be cast down then∣ce were to be crushed with a desperate down-fall. I prefer a mediocrity, though obscure, yet safe, before a greater emi∣nency with a farre greater danger. CHAP. XXII. WHen a storm drives me to shel∣ter me under a tree, I find that if the storm be little, the tree defends me, but if the storm bee great, the tree not onely not defends me, but powreth on me that wet which it self had recei∣ved, and so maketh me muth wetter. Hence instructed, I resolve that if im∣providently I fall into some small dan∣ger of the laws, I will presume to seek shelter under the arms of some potent friend, but if the tempest of my trouble be too potent for my friend, I will rather beare all my self, then involve my friend in the danger. It would bee bad enough for me to be drencht with or distrest by the storm of the laws anger only; It would be worse to be drowned with the anger of my storming friend also. My
conscience of my ill deserving toward the laws would inforce a patience: my remembrance of my well-deserving to my friend would make the just addition of his anger intollerable. CHAP. XXIII. COntent is the marke wee all ayme at, the chiefe good and top of felicity, to which all mens actions strive to ascend: But it is solely proper to Gods wisedome to ingros all true content into his owne hand, that he may sell it to Saints by retaile, and inforce all men to buy it of him or want it. Hence is it that a godly man in his mean estate, enjoyes more content in God, then a King or Emperour in his earthly glory and ma∣gnificence. I will then strive to purchase me a patent of content from him that hath the monopolie thereof: and then, if I have little in estate, I shall have much in content Godlines shall bee my great riches, whiles I am contented with what I have.
CHAP. XXIV. AS in the greater world for man, so in the little world of man, as in the outward riches of the one, so in the inner treasures of the other, many posses much and enjoy but litle, many have much, and use but little, others use much, and but little well. J shall not so much endevour to have much where∣withall to doe, as to doe much, with that little J have. Jt shall not so much greeve me, that I am a poore treasurer, as joy mo, if I have been a good steward. I could wish I had more to use well, but more wish well to use that I have. If he were so blamed that imployed not one talent well, what would become of me, if I had ten, and abused them? CHAP. XXV. POpular applaus, and vulgar opinion may blow up and mount upward the bubbl of a vaine glorious mind, till it burst in the ayre, and vanish: But a wise man builds his glory on the strong foun∣dation
of virtue, without expecting or respecting the slender props of vulgar opinion. J will not neglect what every one thinks of me; For that were impudent dis∣solutenes. J will not make it my com∣moncare, to hearken how J am cared for of the common sort, and be over-solli∣citous what every one speakes of me, For that were a toylesome vanity. J may doe well, and heare ill: And that's a Kingly happines. I may doe ill, and heare well: and that's an hypocrites best felicity. My actions shall make me harmony in my hearts inner chamber: I will not borrow the Voyces of the vulgar to sweeten my Musick. CHAP. XXVI. THe rancor of malice is the true na∣ture of the devill, and the soule pos∣sessed therewith is his dearest darling. For where envy, hate, and revenge take up the whole heart, there God hath no room at all lest to bee in all his thoughts. I may meet a mad man, and avoid him, I may move a cholericke man, and pa∣cifie him, I may cros a furious drunkerd,
and shunn him, but a malicious man is more dangerous, implacable, and inevi∣table then they all. Malice omits no oc∣casion to doe mischief: and if it mis thy body & substance, it prosecutes thy sha∣dow, Visam fera saevit in umbram. My soul come not thou into their secrets, unto their assemblie, mine honour bee not thou united. I must not turn anger out of my nature, I must not turn my nature into anger, I must give place to Wrath, but not a re∣sting place, but a place to let it pas-by, that I may let goe displeasure. I may give entrance to anger on just cause, I may not give it entertainement on any cause, till it sower with the leaven of malice. I must be angry with sinn, but I must be angry and sinn not. CHAP. XXVII. WHen I plant a choyse flower in a fertil soyl, I see nature presently to thrust up with it, the stinging nettle, the stinking hemlocke, the drowzie poppie, and many such noysome wee∣des, which will either choak my plant with excluding the Sunn, or divert its
nourishment to themselves: But if I weed but these at first, my flower thrives to its goodnes and glory. This is also my case when I endeavour to plant grace in the fertill soyl of a good wit. For luxuri∣ous nature thrusts up with it, either stin∣ging wrath, or stinking wantonnes, or drowzie sloath or some other vices, which robb my plant of its desired flou∣rishing. But these being first pluckt up, the good with produceth in its time, the faire flower of vertue. I will not there fore thinck the best wits, as they are wits fittest to make the best men, but as they are the best purged, best wits. The ground of their goodnes is not the good∣nes of their wits ground, but the good weeding and clensing it. I must first eschew the evill, ere I can doe good, sup∣plant vices, ere I can implant virtue. CHAP. XXVIII. AS it is never too soon to be good: so is it never too late to amend. I will therefore neither neglect the time present, nor despair of the time past. If I had been sooner good, I might perhaps
have been better. If I am longer bad, I shall (I am sure) be wors. That I have stayed long time idle in the marketplace deserves reprehension, but if I am late sent into the vineyard, I have encoura∣gement to worke, I will give onto this last as unto thee. CHAP. XXIX. WHen I see the Husbandman wel contented with the cold of frost and snow in the Winter, because, though it chilleth the ground, yet it killeth the charlock, though it check the wheat so∣mewhat in growing, yet it choaketh the weeds from growing at all: Why should I bee moved at the winter of affliction? Why vexed at the quaking fit of a quar∣tan ague? Why offended at the cold change of affection in my Summer∣friends? If as they seem bitter to my mind or body, they prove healthfull to my bettered soul. If my wants kill my wantonnes, my poverty check my pri∣de, my disrespected sleighting quell my ambition and vaine-glory, and every weed of vice being thus choaked
by afflictions winter, my soul may grow fruitfull for heavens harvest, let my win∣ter be bitter, so that I be gathered with the good corn at reaping time into the Lords barn. CHAP. XXX. AS oft as I heare the Robin-red-brest chaunt it as cheerefully in Septem∣ber, the beginning of Winter, as in March the approach of the Summer, why should not wee (think I) give as cheerefull entertainement to the hoary-frosty hayres of our ages winter, as to the Prim-roses of our youth's spring? Why not to the declining sunn in adversity, as (like Persians) to the rising sunn of pro∣sperity? I am sent to the Ant, to learn industry; to the Dove, to learn innocen∣cy; to the Serpent, to learn wisedom; And why not to this bird to learn equanimity and patience; and to keepe the same te∣nour of my minds quietnes, as well at the approach of calamities winter, as of the spring of happines? And, since the Ro∣mans constancy is so commended, who changed not his countenance with his
changed fortunes, Why should not I, with a Christian resolution, hold a sted∣dy course in all weathers, and though I be forced with cros-winds, to shift my sails, and catch at side-winds, yet skil fully to steer, and keep on my cours, by the Cape of good hope, till I arive at the haven of eternall happines? CHAP. XXXI. THe same water which being liquid is penetrated with an hors-haire, will beare the hors himselfe when it is hard frozen. I muse not then that those pre∣cepts and threats of God's judgements enter not into the hardned hearts of so∣me old men, frozen by the practice of sinn, which pierce and penetrate deep into the tender hearts and melting con∣sciences of yonger folks thawed with the warmth of God's feare. Hence see I the cause why the sword of the Word so sharp that it serveth in some to divide the joynts and marrow, in others glaunceth or re∣boundeth without dint or wound, from their cristall frozen and adamantin hearts. I cannot promise my selfs to be
free from sinn, I were then no man; but I will purpose in my self to be free from hardnes of heart, by costum and con∣tinuance in sinn, I may err in my way, I will not persist & goe on in my errours, till I cannot returne againe into my way. I may stumble, I may fall, but I will not lye still when I am fallen. CHAP. XXXII. WHen I see two game-cocks at first sight, without premeditated mali∣ce fight desperatly and furiously, the one to maintain the injury offered, the other to revenge the injury received by the first blow, and to maintain this quarrell, not onely dye the pit with their blood, but die in the pit with their mutuall bloudy wounds, me thinks I see the suc∣ces of those duëllers of our time; which being ambitious of Achilles his praise, Pe∣lidis juvenes cedere nescij, desperatly and furiously adventure their lives here, and endanger their souls hereafter onely for the vain terms of fals honour. I will not say but that being flesh and blood I may be careles of my flesh and blood to re∣venge
injurious indignities offered me: yet since as a tenant my soul must an∣swer her Land lord for reparations of the house she dwels in, and I have no warrant of God or man for such reven∣ge, I will not kill my own soul to kill an other mans body. I will not pull the house of my body on my souls head in a fury, that God may make them both fuell for the fury of hell fire. CHAP. XXXIII. When I view the heavens declaring the glory of God, and the firma∣ment shewing his handy work, and consi∣der that each little numbred star even of the sixth magnitude, containeth the earths dimension 18. times in bignes by Astronomers conclusions, I easily des∣cend to consider the great difference of earthly mens glory, and that weight of glory afforded the Saints in heaven. For what a poor ambition is it to be the best man in a City? What's a City to a Shire? What a Shire to the whole Island? What this Island to the Continent of Europe? What Europe to the whole
Earth? What that Earth to a Star? What that Starr to Heaven? and that to the Heaven of Heavens? And so by a re∣trogradation how little? How nothing is this poor glory. J find many which say, hoc nihil est aliquid: J find in my selfe cause to say, hoc aliquid nihil est. Jf J needs will bee somebody by my ambiti∣on, J will bee ambitious to bee ranged with the Saints in Heaven rather then ranked with the Kings on earth: since the least in the Kingdome of Heaven is gre∣ater then they. CHAP. XXXIV. I Saw once a Jerfalcon let fly at an He∣ron, and observed with what clamour the Heron entertain'd the sight and ap∣proach of the Hawk, and with what winding shifts he strove to get above her, labouring even by bemuting his ene∣mies feathers to make her slaggwinged and so escape: but when at last they must needs come to a necessitated en∣counter, resuming couroge out of ne∣cessity hee turned face against her, and striking the Hawk thorough the gorge
with his bill fell downe dead together wihth is dead enemie. This fight see∣med to me the event of a great sute i Law, where one trusting to his cause potency more then his causes equity endeavours to disinherit his stubbor neighbour by colourable titles to hi land. Here may you heare the clamo∣rous obloquies of the wronged and se the many turnings and winding Mean∣ders in the Law sought out to get above his adversary. And lastly when the issue must come to tryall, oftentimes in the grapple they both sink to beggery by the Law whiles lawfully they seek to get a∣above each other. Hence warned against potent enemies I will alway pray, Lord make me not a prey unto their teeth, and against an equal or inferiour I will not borrow the lawes extream right to doe him extream wrong: nor fall to law with any body till I fall by law, to be nobody. I will not doe that to have my will, which will undoe my selfe of what I have, by my willfullnes.
CHAP. XXXV. THe Psalmist doth not slander the slanderers, when in a good descrip∣tion of their bad natures, he saith, their throat is an open sepulcher, &c. the poyson of Asps is under their lips. For what more loathsome stench, and noisom smells can a new opened sepulcher belch out, then these venomous open throated slande∣rers? And well may their lips contain the poyson of Asps, of which Lucan saith, in nulla plus est serpente venent when a few words of theirs shall (like a Witches spell) charme and strike dead a mans deerest reputation. I will therefore inde∣avour to make my actions of that vertu, that as an antidote of Mithridates his best confection, they may repell the worst in∣fection those Serpents shall spit at me. And albeit I cannot bee free from their assaults (from which none is freed) yet I will not with Cleopatra set those Asps so neer my heart that they may stop my vi∣tall spirits with their poyson. And since I must pas thorough this Africa of mon∣sters and harmefull beasts, I will carefully
feare and shunn the worst of tame beasts the flatterer, and of wild beast the slan∣derer. CHAP. XXXVI. MEditation is a busie search in the store-house of fantasie for some Idea's of matters, to be cast in the moulds of resolution into some forms of words or actions; In which search when I have used my greatest diligence, I find this in the conclusion, that to me∣ditate on the Best is the best of Meditati∣ons: and a resolution to make a good end is a good end of my resolutions. FINES.
