R1044 15038317 103086
Man's greatest Concernment movingly press'd; His chiefest Happiness plainly opened; his many Hinderances and Intanglements disco∣vered and removed; the Indispensible and absolute Need he hath of a Saviour, and the fulness of Christ considered. The great Length a Man may come, and yet be void of Saving Grace, together with the Clear Marks and Evidences of a Saving Interest in Christ! Motives pressing to Self Examination; with many Excellent Christian Directions; held forth in a Letter written by that worthy Man of God, that highly honoured Witness, Minister and Martyr of Jesus Christ, Mr. James Renwick, to two Gentlewomen, August 13. 1687. Much Honoured Ladies, THE Zeal which I desire to have for the Ad∣vancement of the Kingdom of Christ, the Love which I bear to your Souls, and my Sense of the Ob∣ligations which I stand under unto you in particular, have moved me, to take upon me to salute you with this Line. There is not a rational Creature, that doth not propone unto it self some chief Good, the obtaining and enjoying whereof, is the great Intent and End of all its Actions; Who will shew us any Good? But, the woful Evil among Men is, their setting up to themselves some nug vain and petty Nothing; and despising that wherein their real and chief Hap∣piness
doth only ly; rejecting the Counsel of God a∣gainst themselves: This Mistake is deplorable, for Man is an infinite Loser by it; It is desperate, for he refuses to be Instructed. Hence, so many diffe∣rent prevailing natural Inclinations, and predomining Lusts, as there are among the Children of Adam; so many different chief Goods; There be Gods many, and Lords many. I am sad, to think upon the Folly and Madness of the poor Creature, that thus doth forsake its own Mercy; But, let the World choose and follow what they please, To us there is but one Lord. I am hopeful (much honoured Ladies) that ye are turning your Backs upon created and carnal Delights, and setting your Faces towards Christ, seeking after Union and Communion with him. It is my Soul's earnest Desire, that it should be so; and if the comfortless and distracting Vanities of a present pe∣rishing World, shall wheedle and bewitch you, that ye study not the Wisdom of God; It shall bring great Grief and Sorrow of Heart unto me. I say, I am carried betwixt Hope and Fear; I hope the Lord will work a good Work in you; I hope it will be; for, I would have it to be, and there are some Ap∣pearances of it. And, I fear, that the pleasant and easy Yoke of Christ, be looked upon as irksom and wearisome by you, when I consider your Temptations, and the (seemingly) promising Beginnings, and fair Blossoms that I have seen in many, which have fal∣len away without bringing forth mature Fruit. Do not take my Freedom in ill Part, neither be offend∣ed with it, for it cometh from Affection, and my ar∣dent Desire, that ye should not neglect the great Salvation. Religion is a great Mystery, and a far other Thing, than even the professing World taketh it to be. There are many Hinderances in the Way of flying to Christ, and closing with him. The na∣tural Blindness that is in Man, whereby he neither sees his Sin and Danger, nor his Saviour, is a great Hindrance, Rev. iii. 17, 18. His natural Unwil∣lingness
and flat Aversation to the Way of Salvation laid down in the Covenant, and held forth in the Gospel, John v. 40. His hard-hearted Misbelief, whereby he giveth no Assent to the Righteousness of Scripture Precept and Doctrine, and Justice of Scripture Threatning; nor Consent to Scripture Pro∣mises, making fiducial Application of them, John vi 38. Heb. xi. 6. His whorish Addictedness to his Lusts, Idols and carnal Intanglements, whereby he doth not quite his Prophanity, nor leave the Honour, Applause, Profit and Pleasure of this World, Psal xlv. 10, 11. Song iii. 11. Chap. iv. 8. His mistaking the Govern∣ment of Christ, counting it hard, melancholick and unpleasant, Matth. xi. 28, 29, 30. His judging Re∣ligion but a Fancy, and a politick Invention, to a∣maze and amuse the Minds of Men, Matth. xxii. 5. His conceiving a Facility in Religion, thinking there needeth not be so much ado about it, and that he can do all that is needful, when he pleaseth, Matth. viii. 19. John vi. 44. His postponing the Business of Life eternal from Time to Time, leaving that last in do∣ing, which ought to be first done, resolving to amend e're he end; whereby his vain Heart deceives him, and Satan justles him out of all Time, Luke ix. 61. His peevish and foolish Impatience, whereby he doth not forsake a present imaginary Good, for a future real Happiness. A Man may think it is a good Thing to enjoy everlasting Life; but because that is an here∣after Happiness, and lieth now only in Promise, he cannot wait for it, and take it as his Portion, but grasps at what is present, tho' it be neither coment∣ing nor constant, Psal. iv. 6. 2 Tim. iv. 10, I say, all these are great Hinderances; see that ye get over these, and all other Obstructions, and lay hold upon Christ. O that I could bewail the lamentable Con∣dition of Man, who is held in so many Chains, rom this Work of great Concern and eternal Mo∣ment! O, much honoured Ladies, consider the indispen∣sible and absolute Need we have of a Saviour; con∣sider
the awful Commands, full Promises, free Offers, hearty Invitations, and serious Requests given forth in the Word, all crying aloud with one Voice unto you, to match with the Lord of Glory: Consider the Assurance that his own Testimony hath given you, of dwelling with him throughout Eternity, in his heavenly Mansions, where ye shall see him as he is, have a full Sense of his Love, and a perfect Love to him again; and ever drink of the Rivers of Plea∣sures that flow at his right Hand, it ye shall embrace him upon his own Terms. Consider the peremptory Certification of everlasting Destruction, of dwelling with continual Burnings, and lying under the Bur∣den of his Wrath; a Curse running always out upon you in the overflowing Flood, if ye shall neglect to make your Peace with him, and reject his Salvation. I say, consider those Things, and give all Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure; and see well that ye be not deceived, for there are many Mistakes, and a great Mystery in this Business. Many think themselves to be something, when as yet they are no∣thing, and so deceive themselves, and come short of the Grace of God; instead of founding upon the immov∣able Rock of Ages, they build upon the Sand of their own Attainments: For Folk may go a great length, and yet be void of true saving Grace; they may have a great speculative Knowledge of the Matters of God, and Mystery of Salvation, and strong Gifts, 1 Cor. xiii. 2. They may abstain from many Pollutions, and the gross Evils that others are given unto, Luke xviii. 11, 12, 13, 14. They may externally perform many Du∣ties, as Reading, Prayer, and be very much in these, Luke xviii. 11, 12, 13, 14. They may have very great Sorrow for Sin, not because of the Dishonour done to God, but the Hurt to themselves; not because they are polluted, but because they are destroyed by it, Matth. xxvii. 3. Heb. xii. 17. They may have a Desire after Grace, which yet is not for Grace's sake, but for Heaven's sake, Matth. xxv. 8. They may have an
Historical Faith, and give the Assent of the Mind to all that is revealed in the Word, yea to the spiritual Meaning of the Law, Mark xii. 32, 33, 34. They may have big Hopes, and that in the Mercy of God, which nevertheless is but Presump∣tion; for they forget that he is just, and neglect to lay hold upon Christ for Satisfaction of his Justice; whereas, he is merciful to none out of Christ, John viii. 13, 14. They may have the common Operati∣ons of the Spirit, and a Taste of the heavenly Gift, and of the Powers of the World to come, Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6. They may be convinced that it is good to close with Christ, and comfort themselves as if they had done it; whereas, they are still in their natural State, Hos. viii. 2, 3. They may suffer many Things materially for the Cause of God, and toil much in following Ordinances, undergoing the same out of Respect for their own Credit, 1 Cor. xiii. 3. I say, People may, and many do, arrive at all these and such like Attainments, and notwithstanding remain in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. It may make us all tremble, to think what a Length Folk may go, and yet never have gone out of themselves, and passed through the Steps of Effectual Calling. Many will say to him in that Day, We have eaten and drunken in thy Presence, and thou hast taught in our Streets: Have we not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works? whom he will chase awa from his Presence, with that fearful Sentence, Depart Ye, professing unto them, that he never knew them. Let this alarm you to make sure Work in this great Concern, and not deceive your selves, with a Counter∣eit, in stead of a Reality, with a Flash in stead of Con∣version, and a Delusion instead of Christ. But, get ye  Sight of your sinful and miserable Sate, a Sense and Feeling thereof, putting you in a Perplexity, and dis∣couraging you from resting in it; a Conviction of your Inability to help your selves, and of your Un∣worthiness that God should help you out of it; and
look unto Christ, as your alone Saviour, receiving him wholly, in his Threefold Office, of King, Priest and Prophet, welcoming him, and taking up his Cross, against the World, the Devil, and the Flesh, and rest∣ing upon him alone for Salvation: And then, the Busi∣ness will be done, and all will be sure; Then ye may defy Devils and Men, for plucking you out of his Hand. And if ye have thus closed the Bargain with him, then ye will find in-you a War, declared and main∣tained against all Sin, Rom. vii. 15. Ezek. xviii. 21. 1 John iii. 9. A Respect to all the Commandments of the Lord, Ezek. xviii. 21. A liking of the Way of Happiness, as well as of Happiness it self, John iii. 14.15. An high Esteem of Justification and Sanctification, Psal. xxxii. 2. A Prizing of Christ, and a longing to be with him. Phil. i. 23. And an admirable Change wrought in you; a new Judgment, new Will, new Conscience, new Memory, new Affections: In a Word, all the Faculties of the Soul will be new, in regard of their Qualifications; and all the Members of the Body, in regard of their Use, 2 Cor. v. 17. Now, if ye have attained to a Saving Interest in Christ, ye may find these, and the like Marks and Evidences of it. O halt not in this great Matter, rest not in an Un∣certainty, and satisfie not your selves with a May-be; But Examine your selves, whether ye be in the Faith; prove your own selves; know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be Reprobates? In setting your Faces toward Zion, ye may expect that Satan will raise all his Storms against you; but fear him not, for the Grace of GOD is sufficient for you. Give your selves wholly to the LORD, to serve him, and to love his Name, to choose and follow the Things that please him: Your greatest Honour lieth in this, your greatest Duty, your greatest Profit, and your greatest Pleasure. Count the Cost of Religion; God is a liberal Dealer, deal not niggardly with him, prig not with him about your Estates: Who in Heaven is like unto him? and who in the Eart is to be desired like him; Lay down to him your Names, your Enjoy∣ments,
your Lives, and your All at his Feet; for he is only Worthy to have the Disposal of them; and the Sufferings of this present Time are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be revealed. Think not much to quit the vain and carnal Delights of the World; they cannot satisfy your Senses, and much less your Souls: The Earth is Round, and the Heart of Man Three-nooked; therefore, This cannot be filled by That: And tho' ye could find Content in them, yet how vain were it, because unconstant? and how unsolid, because uncertain? Regard not Mens Reproach, for so reproached they our LORD and the Prophets; Yea, there can be no Contempt or Calumny cast upon you, for the Gospel's Sake, but what hath been cast upon the Faithful in all Ages. Remember Moses, who esteemed the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Trea∣sures of Egypt: And go ye forth without the Camp bearing his Reproach; Christ's new Name will more than enough compense the World's Nick-name. Ad∣vance resolutely in the Way of Godliness; your Guide is faithful, your Victory certain, your Reward sure, and your Triumph everlasting: Stumble not, because Religion is mocked at; for it is not the worse that Man thinketh so little of it. Count it not a Fancy, because many desert it; but Taste and See that GOD is good. Follow no Man further than he follows Christ; Divide not from the Head, to unite with any professed Members: Walk not with them, who renounce their Dependence upon Christ; Or, who are carrying on a Course of Defection, pressing a re∣linquishing of the present Testimony, and casting Re∣proaches upon the Way of GOD. Keep your selves from the Pollutions of this Time, and partake not with other Men in their Sins; But study to have a good Conscience; and a good Conscience will be a peaceable Conscience, and a peaceable Conscience will be a fat Feast. Shun so much as ye can the Com∣pany of carnal and vain Persons: Ye will not get this wholly evited, but ye may avoid unnecessary Con∣verse,
Frequency and Familiarity with them: We are obliged to carry our selves with Courtesy, Hu∣manity and Pity towards All; but not with Friendli∣ness and Familiarity: Ye know, Evil Company and Comunication corrupteth good Manners. O! what shall I say? Watch always, be much in secret Prayer, Self-examination, Spiritual-meditation; Read the written Word of GOD; Seek to have your Minds understanding it, your Hearts affecting it, and your Consciences and Actions guided by it: Get his Spirit to dwell in you, by directing you into all Truth, reproving you for Sin, and bringing every Thought in Obedience to Christ, and leading you into Sup∣plication. Lay aside every Weight, and run the Race that is set before you with Cheerfulness and Alacrity; Despise every Opposition and Obstruction in the Way, and keep your Eyes still upon the Prize, having a Respect to the Recompence of Reward. Now, The very God of Peace sanctify you wholly, and I pray GOD, your whole Spirit and Soul and Bo∣dy be preserved Blameless, unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. I am, Much honoured Ladies, Your assured and obliged Friend and Servant in the LORD, JA. RENWICK. FINIS.
