R2057 12669988 65477
THE RED-SHANKES SERMON: Preached At Saint Giles Church in Edenburgh, the last Sunday in April, by a Highland Minister. Ierem. 30. Sion is wounded, and I will heale her, saith the Lord. LONDON, Printed for T. Bates. 1642.
The Redshanks Sermon. JEREM. 30. Sion is wounded and I will heale her saith the Lord. I Need not trouble you to set forth who is meant by Sion, yee all know well enough that it is the poore Church of Scotland, who is now wounded in her head, in her heart, in her hands, and in her feet. In her head by government, in her heart by doctrine, in her hands by discipline, and in her feet by worship. First she is wounded in her head, where she hath got such a clash as hath made all her braines clatter again, and almost put her beside her five senses. First in her seeing; for she could have seen as wel as any Christian Kirk, but now she cannot distinguish betweene blacke and white, for bring plaine Popery before her and she cannot discerne between that and true Religion. Secondly, she is wounded in her hearing; she could have distinguished the sound of the Gospell and the rigor of the Law, but now since the Or∣ganes came in, she is growne as deafe as a doore naile. Thirdly, she could have smelled as well as any other Kirk, but now she hath smelt the whore of Babilon, she is so senselesse, as bring the stink∣ing Popish trash under her nose, and it will seeme as sweet as a Rose. Fourthly, she could have tasted as well as the best, but now she hath so tasted of the Popes Idolatrie she cannot rellish her former food. Lastly, she was so pure and tender as shee would not touch any thing which had been corrupted, but now she hath toucht some Popish pitch, and how can she but be defiled? the application followes. You see how she hath almost lost her senses, and you that are old men have seene her Ministers, going in good old short cloakes, with round black velvet capes, which little cloakes, turned more soules to God then ever the long gownes did. You have heard such good Ministers expound the law and apply the Gospell in their Pulpits, but now you may heare the proud Prelates rum∣bling
up and downe the streets in their Coaches, in their long gownes, and if you would heare them speake, follow them to the Councell Table and there you shall heare more then you will be content to followe. For her smelling, I am sure she smels better then ever she did, for shee can smell a Bishoprick, ten yeares before it fall; but it may be those that smell best shall never lay their fingers ends on it now. The Kirke tastes better then ever she did; for in old time shee would have beene content with a messe of milke and bread and such homely fare; but now they must feed on the finest, and take a licke of the best liquor. Lastly, she touches now better then ever she did, for where she would touch nothing formerly but spirituall matters, now she will take upon her to handle the temporall businesse first, and leave the other till they have leasure. I have now shewed you that the Kirk is wounded in her head, and de∣cay of her sences, and I will returne to show you the rest of her wounds. Secondly, she is wounded in her heart, which is by the doctrine of the Kirk through the aboundance of Popery and Arminianisme, now com∣mon in our Kirks and Schooles. The Kirck of Scotland was once a bonny grammer school, and then shee was skilled in Regimen & concordantia, and could have made a pretty peece of Latin, for everie thing she did was forced dare regulum, and when she offended, was pandere manum, but afterward when she went to the Colledge shee either had, or would take more liberty unto her, and then first of all shee began her Rhetorick, and instead of true and proper speaking, shee learned nothing but alegories and hyperbolies; then she came to the logicke and instead of the true demonstration shee learned nothing but Homogenes and Syllogismes; afterward she came to the Ethicks, but she did not much trouble her selfe with them, but studied the Politicks where she prospered so well as she turned true religion into state pollicy, and for the Metaphysicks ye know their ends, which should be unum utrum & bonum; so true religion must be one true and good reli∣gion, ut this was too high & honest for them, too hard to learn, wherfore she studied no more the Physick but turned true religion into materia pri∣ma, and made it capable of any forme they pleased to impose upon it. So that yee see our Kirke is wounded in her heart, by the doctrine of the Kirk and teaching of the Schooles, which have beene such, as I am sure that many of you that heare me at this time have wished a hundred times to have beene out of the Kirk, when you heard such paultry stuffe as came from them. Thirdly, the Kirk is wounded in her hands, which is the discipline of the Kirk, once famous by her reformation, after she ran away from Rome:
but hard did they follow her, faine would they have overtaken her, and if they had gotten her they had given her the largest lash, but (God be thanked) shee ran too fast for them. But nowe of late shee hath gon a pilgrimage to Rome, where shee was taken stealing of some of their trumperie, yet when they knew her mind, and saw it was but onlie a booke of Common prayer, and the Canons of high Commission which they saw made much for their matter, therefore they let her goe and flatterred her to follow the order of the Mother Kirke in other King∣domes, which shee promising to doe, then they bound her hands with a silken Cord of Canonicall obedience to the Ordinarie, and shee tooke much delight to be bound with so bonny a band, but after they got her fast, they made that silken band a Cablerope, with which they have gir∣ded her so hard as shee cannot stirre, and so they will force us either to a blinde obedience, and to accept of such Idolatrous & superstitious Ce∣remonies on the one side, or els to be all forsworne fellowes on the other side, by which meanes the Kirke of Scotland hath beene so woun∣ded and bound in her hands as this 20. yeares by-past the poore Kirke of Scotland could not have a meeting of her members in a lawfull assem∣blie. Now I come to tell you how shee is wounded in her feet, that is in the worship of the Kirke; the office of the feet is to travell withall, and they have made a verie hackney of Religion▪ the Kirke was once a bonny Nag, and so pretty as every man thought it pitty to ride her, till at last the Bishops, those ranke riding Lowns, got on her back, and then she trotted so hard as they could hardlie at the first well, ride her, yet at last they so crosse legd her and hopshackled her, that shee became a pretty pacing beast, and so easie that they tooke great pleasure to ride upon her. But now what with their riding her, up and downe betweene Edenburgh and London (and one Iourney to Rome too they had given her sick a sore heate that wee have beene this twelve moneth walking her up and downe to keep her from foundering. Nay they have not onlie made a horse but an Asse also of the Kirke of Scotland▪ yea an Asse worse then Balaam wa; Balaam ye ken was gan∣ging a great way, and the errand ye ken too, to curse where the Lord had blessed, and the Angell first met him in a broad way, and the Asse bogled and startled, but Balaam beate the Asse and got by the Angell, and so was our, Kirke beaten unreasonablie when Episcopacie came riding on her Asse amongst us. Afterwards Balaam met the Angell againe in a straiter way, and then the Asse startled more then before; Balaam beat her againe worse then he did before, so was our Kirke kickt and verie shrewdle wounded when the Bishops brought in the 5. Articles of Faith amongst us.
The third time the Angell met Balaam in so strait a way as the Asse could not passe by, and Balaam beate the Asse againe, but the Lord made the Asse to speake and reprove him for beating her, and then God opened Balaams eyes. So the Bishops (being as blind as Balaam) have ridden and beaten our Kirke so long, and taken us at such a strait, as wee were even ready to be destroied. But God hath heard our cry, and wee pray him also open the eyes of our adversaries who were even as blind as Balaam, and were going as unlucky a way as hee; for they were posting to Rome with a Poakmantie behind them, and what was in their Poakman∣tie (trow ye?) marry even the book of Common praier, the book of Can∣nons, and orders of the High Commission. Now as sone as the Asse saw the Angell, shee falls to flinging and over goes the Poakmantie, and it hung on the one side of the Asse by one string, and the Bishops hang by the hamme on the other side, so as they hang crosse the Asse (like a paire of paniers) stuft full of Popish trash and trinkets. Faine would the blind Carle have beene on the saddle againe, but hee could not; nay so he might be but set to ride againe he would be content to leave his Poakmanty amongst us. But let me exhort yee (deare Brethren) not to let such a swin∣ger ride any more on your Religion, for if he doe he will be sure one time or other to get the Poakmantie behind him againe. They have not onlie wounded the Kirke of Scotland, as I have tolde you, and made an horse & an Asse of it, but they have betrayed it also for a some of money, as Iudas did Christ; yee ken, who betraid our Saviour, not onlie hee that tooke money to betray him, but also those that were silent in so good a cause, those that accuse him, those adjudged him, and those that forsookehim. And I feare me wee have them that betray our Religion in all these waies, as I shall touch anon. But now I will see if I can find out the false Judas that takes money or promotion to betray our Religion. And I must now tell you a metaphoricall tale, I dare not say it is true, but you shall have it as I had it. When I was a little lad at Schoole, there was a young hopefull Theo∣logue and expectant who is now another manner of man (not such ano∣ther in the land,) And he being to preach of those words of Iudas, Quid mihi dabit is &c. what will you give me and I will deliver him in∣to your hands? The young man loved his Text so well, as he tolde over and over againe, both in Latine and Scottish; There was a good olde man sitting neare him and hearing him still upon that Text, thought to give him his answer; and so standing up and looking upon him the next time that he said what will yee give me and I will deliver him unto you? the old man answered, marry thou shalt have a good fat Bishoprick; and then I am sure thou wilt betray him indeed. Nowe yee may find out by this who hath betraied the Kirke of Scotland.
My Brethren the comparison betweene Christ and our Kirke holds well together, and their troubles have beene in some things alike: for Christ is the head the Kirke is the body; ye ken our Savior when he entred first into the Ministrie he was carried by Satan (God save us) into the wil∣dernes, where he was tempted forty long daies of a mckle Devill, in which time he endured many temptations, but as soone as he began to worke his miracles, then he was carried into Ierusalem with great triumph, where there was nothing but Hosanna in their mouthes, blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lord: the next newes ye heare of him they came with Halberts, and feathered staves, and troups of Soul∣diers, from the high Priest to apprehend him. So the Kirke of Scotland for almost 40. yeares by-past hath sate de∣solate in the wildernes, by you contemned and rejected of all, and en∣dured manie temptations, and nowe in the end having overcome them, shee is riding to Ierusalem in Triumph. For now there is nothing in all mens monthes but Hosanna, crying, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. But in the last place ye remember when Christ was betraied, how they came to betray him; therefore take heed when they come with swords, and staves, and bands, of men from the high Priests against you, that you doe not with Peter denie your Master and your Religion, and like the rest of the Apostles shewe a faire pair of heeles, and forsake him. Now poore fooles yee have all seen your Church wounded, where shee lyes a wofull spectacle, but what shall wee doe for to heale her? marry pray unto the Lord who hath promised to heale his wounded Sion and we must put to our helping hands also; for such as put their hands to the Plough (as ye have done) and turne back againe, are not fit for the Kingdome of heaven. After his Sermon was ended, his prayer said, and a Psalme sung, he stood up to give the blessing: but first said thus, I know it is not the custome in this place to say any thing after Sermon, yet because I had much to say, and one thing drave another out of my, head therefore I must crave leave to ad a word or two by way of exhortation. First I will speake to such Noble men as have not subscribed the Co∣venant, to know their reason, yee will say yee are Noli me tangere, howsoever I will give you a touch, and it may be ye will answer, yee must goe in a Parliamentary way, the meanest first, and the best last: yee would be angry if yee were told the poore must enter heaven before you. You have a fashion here in the Southerne parts of Scotland, that when yee come to the Foord of a River, the poore Post man must first venture over upon his little Nag, to see whether it be deepe or no, and then the
Laird comes mounted on his gay steed and he passes over. This is no good fashion where ever you had it, wee that are Highlanders have a better then that our selves; wee usuallie goe on foote, and when wee come to a foord wee are loth to lose a man, therefore wee joine Arme in Arme, and hand in hand, and all goe in together, so that the strong suports the weake, and drowne one drowne all, so put your hand to the Covenant and either live or die with the rest. In the second place yee that are of the Colledge of Iustice yee excuse your subscribing because yee are imployed by his Majestie and so cannot stand with your honors to doe it: heers a brave reason but a bad example; for so may the very meanest man in the Kingdome that gathers up, but 20. s. per annum, for the King, have such a hole to goe out at, well there is but one man betwixt God and you, get by him and goe to God. In the third place I must speake to you that are of this City Coun∣cell, although I see that there are fowre of your chiefest Chaires emptie: you excuse your selves because you are in office, and when yee are out you will Subscribe: heers a brave reason indeed; nowe yee ought to be ringleaders to the rest in this Citie, as in all other affaires; who dares subscribe in the City till yee have done it. And if God get his worke done ere that time, where be your thanks? Let our chiefe Register looke over his bookes and see if ever the Towne of Edenburgh suffered for joyning with the Kirke of Scotland. Lastly I must speake a word to you that are Strangers: then turning himselfe to the Provost, Baylives, and Doctors of Aberden who sate in a Gallerie by themselves hee said, it may be that yee doe not subscribe the Covenant, because when ye came hither on your Civill affaires, you promised not to subscribe it, remember your owne proverb in buying and selling (an Aberden man may recant his first bargaine if he please) therefore let me advise you to play Aberden mens parts, and take your word againe, and goe home and drink a Cup of Bon-accord, and joine with the Kirke of Scotland, and subscribe the Covenant. FINIS.
